C. H..
Representative I.
There's.
Since.
Right.
For
yes.
Your.
Yes.
Tax.
This
is.
Thanks
Yes has been similar here's
hawks.
It
is.
Right.
Is.
It seems that.
Yes yes.
Again I apologize.
Hopefully we'll get it all
figured out.
Project
to get trying to be over to get
ahead of legislative action is a
size with.
But as I got scared by the
number of bills we well you
cities away well as strong means
Lansing so you're right to do
it.
Thank you very much.
Just.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay it sounds like we had a
problem member's perspective.
I think we're ready to go and
will give the folks who ran to
the bathroom another couple
minutes but we should be ready
to start again.
And maybe this is a good time to
bring up your expert witness on
soon.
Yes the name is Rebecca birch
and I did forward her email
address to.
So.
Hoping you you're able to find
Senator Katie responded by
millions as she received okay so
is there a way to know if she's
on we have heard raise your
hand.
All of.
She's on the phone.
The Texas coast.
Thank but just.
Rebecca birch Rebecca birch
asked.
Will ask her to a new page.
We'll see.
Good morning can you hear me
there was.
Can you hear me.
To
be here this we are not hearing
you so they're working on them.
They're working on getting it
fixed so give us a.
Hopefully it just a second or
two but who knows.
However had the square the poll
that said nothing would work
right using.
We're getting there so one of
my.
Constituents informed me that
she can hear Rebecca understand
that's what she says.
I can hear Rebecca.
It's it's it's like.
All the kids with doctors that
need learn to roll with.
Are you go.
Eight eight yes.
Representative Chandler street
station on the staff members.
She's very thorough this one
constituent.
You have.
Rebecca can you go ahead and
speak.
In the now.
Good morning.
Good morning.
Or is it too hot in here always
okay all.
Okay of.
Share yes if we can't get this
for John I'm happy to just
proceed that would be
Your preference I I think she's
she will of course offer some
helpful information because the
foundation has been involved in
promoting this type of
legislation and I have a feeling
that is what she would say and
the reasons of course are
similar to those that I
expressed in my so we want to go
ahead Representative Chandler in
if we get hurt we will.
Allow for area and I don't see I
don't want I know we're all this
there's some we're all adjusting
today and getting up to speed so
I'm happy to entertain questions
okay whatever you okay it was
best chair okay any.
Anybody have questions Hey
Representative Vincent Madam
chair of Representative Miller
well this ultimately lead to a
rate increase for people health
care insurance at all I'm madam
chair and representative I think
of that that concept is
overblown I understand that the
that's an argument the insurance
companies may but I submit to
you madam chair and
representative that long term it
will keep costs down because
we're addressing health issues
early when they're more easily
treated it will have better
outcomes in the long run excuse
me I'm out of practice I was
supposed to go to public comment
before we would question thank
you cared for keeping me so just
with the shorthand who is here
in support of this bill.
Anyone in opposition.
Okay so we'll start with the
opposition so if eight keep it
brief but
You can make a public comment
thank you madam chair members of
the committee a lot of shows
where this is this for us this
year Mexico.
And it's always difficult to
have to stand in opposition to
something that will hardly
support.
Prevention and supplemental
testy well that diagnostic tests
you
We stand and and strong support
that the issue that we have it
we curse our members.
Consistently how to access.
Is absolutely correct all of
those same costs down the line
when you can when you can have
issues health issues early on
the issue that we're going to be
throughout this legislative
session is we are talking about
not no longer having costsharing
so we are talking about cost
shifting yes it will raise
premiums cost is the cost of
healthcare is not free cannot
decrease it somebody has to pay
someone this is far as I
understand is not apply to the
Medicaid population who
currently does not to the cost
of K. so what is going to affect
is are are very fragile
commercial market the state of
New Mexico
the small businesses.
And so so yes prevention does
say costs down the line but.
The it is important for members
to have an idea of what the cost
of services are it copays that
nine hi I'm not.
Us and asked what our copays are
for these funds Texas services
with our members but you know
they're fifteen dollars twenty
dollars never thousand dollar
copay but I will go back and
check because of course that
that that I that is that the
code is.
Is.
Well that verified that.
but just to the state that will
will.
Premiums.
Some costs down.
And let's let's try to keep your
comments brief we're already
behind go ahead madam chair
members
of the state director of the
national federation of
independent business
Representative thousands of the
street palm offices process New
Mexico and if we do so is to
have concerns about these
insurance mandates as wild noted
we are now at the downstream
users of the regulated
commercial market is about
seventy percent of New Mexico
and small business.
Small businesses really covers
insurers so although we do a lot
of recall policies all wanting
to expand this preventive
services we are downstream uses
of programs the small businesses
are started already you know I
transferred into continuous is
high and and we do want to hop
legislation last couple of years
with the health care for ability
act really was.
Whether the legislature the
offices sharks and their goal is
to really get stamped offices by
ten percent and we just look at
models like this one.
The potential to increase small
business small business health
insurance thank anyone want to
speak in support.
Up next that okay.
What was it whatever you're
comfortable with
thank you madam chair members of
the committee on the
Representative Chandler I stand
in support of the access to.
Be able to
obtain additional testing of.
Proficio the primary Medicare
secondary Medicare not Medicaid
I am disabled I'm also had now
have Medicare's primary
Blue Cross blue shield a
supplement plan.
By has not those plans I I might
not.
Of.
Secretary testing for suspicious
background does that on a
routine basis.
The short you is that will save
money in the long view the staff
excuse me.
In short term it may be a
savings of money in the long
term it would be a greater
acceptance of service
intervention is cages survival
and prevention and my mother is
that was a survivor of internet
professionals very good staff.
Additional magnifications or
using laughing.
Higher expense forms of the gene
for breast cancer screening
thank you madam chair members of
the city and Representative
anyone else yes.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is still in her hands and I just
wanted to the registered
lobbyist as well and American
head of the Rocky Mountains
since thank you okay chair.
Karen candidate with the
national association of social
workers Mexico chapter in in the
interest of time distance from
support of thank you.
Anyone else in the audience I
understand we have some of
those.
That's figures crossed
everybody.
So we have Nancy partridge asked
to and okay.
Can you yes yes we hear you.
Of you madam chair Thompson
thank you for allowing me to
speak today on house bill twenty
seven
I'm a native New Mexico and and
for generations of my family are
here in New Mexico.
According to the CDC breast
cancer has the highest treatment
cost of any cancer.
According to the national
institutes of health and I quote
treating advanced versus early
stage breast cancer is
associated with significant
increases in incremental cost
knowledge of the relevant stage
specific costs data provides
support for strengthening
programs such as breast cancer
screening that are designed to
shift breast cancer diagnosed
early stages.
madam chair as you may know the
survival rate for early
diagnosed breast cancer is
ninety nine percent.
But the study of twenty ten
insurance allowed treatment
costs show that early stage
breast cancer to allow would
cost to seventy two thousand is
less than half of what it is for
stage three hundred and fifty
nine thousand or stage for a
hundred and eighty two thousand
and of course as we all know
medical costs have increased
exponentially since that.
I'd like to tell you what house
bill twenty seven could mean for
my last.
I'm what's known as a pre by
which means I don't have breast
cancer yet but I will.
In nineteen ninety nine.
I was diagnosed with pleomorphic
lobular carcinoma in situ LCS
yes which is a known risk factor
for the development of invasive
breast cancer at the time I had
a lumpectomy and know whether
treatment.
According to studies recently
published on cancer rates in
individuals with LCS I currently
have a twenty nine percent
chance of developing invasive
breast cancer.
According to the Mayo Clinic and
the Cleveland Clinic the
recommended regimen for
monitoring someone with LC I
asked for the possibility of
developing invasive breast
cancer is annual screening
mammograms supplemented by
magnetic resonance imaging MRI.
Unfortunately my insurance will
not authorize the breast MRI's
prescribed by my doctor and
without an authorization the
imaging center will not schedule
an appointment they won't even
schedule an appointment so that
I could pay out of pocket.
I am allows diagnostic
mammograms and ultrasounds
however last year's imaging bill
was over one thousand six
hundred and sixty dollars.
House bill twenty seven would
greatly reduce the financial
burden of checking to see if I
have developed breast cancer and
it would allow me to have the
MRI screening that is
recommended for individuals who
as L. CIO.
Please give this bill a do pass
recommendation thank you thank
you anyone else who is madam
chair a woman named Nancy um C.
O. B. S. should be on and if she
doesn't show she told me that
look for a participant named
Chris Adams for Marguerite
sisterhood if they can't then it
brings it to the top okay.
Okay more of the sisterhood of
the.
hello yes we can start and yes I
I apologize for that name.
My name is Nancy combs I've been
in New Mexico resident since
nineteen ninety I am grateful to
not have not had any type of
cancer but I'm here to talk
about the cost of diagnostic
imaging breast cancer is in my
family my sister had it seven
years ago my maternal
grandmother had it twice once at
the age of fifty and once at the
age of seventy five and my
maternal aunt in her seventies.
I I had my annual mammogram last
October and was notified to
return for further imaging
another mammogram plus
ultrasound the testing took
three hours because the
technicians both a trouble
distinguishing the area to view
and kept leaving the room to
check with the radiologist the
results were great except that I
am asked to return for imaging
region what it told me I am
pleased to inform you that after
review of all available studies
the results of your recent
breast imaging showed an area
that has an extremely likely
high likelihood of being the
line my recommendation is to
follow this area closely to
establish stability over a two
year period.
However.
I got a bill for one thousand
four hundred twenty six dollars
and ninety cents so you know you
can't really look at copays it
wasn't a copay it was because of
having a deductible I'm a member
of I'm insured through Blue
Cross blue shield through the
New Mexico health insurance
exchange and unfortunately they
tend to have very high out of
pocket expenses or deductible
expenses it was my deductible
that led to that the full cost
was about seventeen hundred
dollars.
So I was pretty shocked later I
received two other bills that
shows my portion is seventy
dollars and thirty dollars for
the matching so apparently that
is probably the radiologist fee
although the bill doesn't just
state that
because the recommendations to
get diagnostic imaging every six
to every six months for the next
two years I have to look forward
to having that kind of a payment
twice a year right now my income
is I have one thousand four
hundred my pension from the New
Mexico educational retirement
board was educated for many
years and then worked in
nonprofits so that covers my
mortgage and utilities I'm
working I have time job as a
church parish administrator
which brings in eleven to twelve
hundred dollars per month so you
can see that that fourteen
hundred twenty dollar bill is is
really a stretch for me I am
lucky to have been putting money
into four three bees in my whole
life but now I have to take
money out to pay medical bills
which which worries me that I
will run out of money if I live
to a ripe old age I haven't paid
the bill yet I will pay it from
my investments but it worries me
about that so I also support
this bill I can tell you that on
the New Mexico health exchange
they're very helpful but
if you're looking to pay a
little bit out of pocket you end
up having a very very large.
Deductible and
That's not always the best thing
for people that are living on
limited resources so thank you
very much for giving me the
opportunity to talk thank you
anyone else on.
Okay I have okay I'm sorry I'm
I'm getting up to speed again
too so Representative and thank
you still have the four.
If.
Okay anyone else with questions
yes Representative Lord okay
madam chair and Representative I
have some questions what is it
right it is not a member of self
and fortunate that I have
private insurance cover my
premium keeps going up every
time I turn around two fifty
five hundred one year.
The cost extremely expensive so
my big concern is.
Yes we all want to get members
by concern is how much is going
to raise my rates how much is
going to raise everybody's rates
and I understand that there is a
cost and and there's benefit
because we want to have
preventive care will import that
but it is not clear is.
How much this is going to raise
our rates to have a answer for
that it's my contention it will
not raise any your rates it's my
contention that early detection
of this horrible disease what
the rates should remain stable
because individuals are getting
prompt treatment and as you
heard from one of the witnesses
if it's if it's diagnosed later
in the
the disease the the costs are
much higher double triple you
heard the numbers from one of
the witnesses who provided that
information Madam chair
representative I I actually grew
that I understand what you're
saying I I just always know in
the back of my head that how
life works out is that somehow
some way.
The more we add more that's
going to raise the deductible
somewhere along the line
somebody's going to have to pay
for that that's my only
contention with this because I
don't see anything specifically
spelled out I'm.
So do you know madam chair and
representative
so do Medicaid how does this
affect Medicaid and the Medicare
patients will have a copay still
press.
madam chair I research that
before I filed the bill Medicaid
there are no copays will not
affect the Medicaid program and
states expenses related.
Thank you Madam chair
representative are there any
limitations on this like let's
say I think for Monica going
once a year to get mammograms
other gonna be any limitations
like for healthy person you get
phone once you're you're
diagnose or your
there's potential you have
breast cancer into family it's
going to be who's going to
dictate how many times they can
go get breast exam Madam chair
clarify This bill relates to
things other than preteens.
Mammogram screenings those are
are ready
those already do not have
costsharing if it's an annual
under the American thanks for
looking at here so we're not
talking about that madam chair
what we're talking about our
other diagnostic exams that are
deemed by the physician to be
medically indicated or necessary
that is what this bill addresses
people don't go in
As a routine practice for M. our
eyes and other imaging exams
these are dictated by the doctor
who just determined that there's
something about the patient that
warrants this confessional
examination perhaps family
history as we heard from some of
the witnesses perhaps they have
it they've already had cancer
perhaps they have dense breasts
and it's very hard image those
press you need a more precise
way of examining the patient
that's what will dictate when
the test is done thank you madam
chair so yeah I know from
working in health care of our
work in the insurance side of
billing and it's it's never if
there is a medical necessity
however there's always going to
be some sort of fight back on we
don't want to cover X. amount of
services so there's some sort of
limitation so Under Secretary
madam chair representative so
there's no coverage for people
with a high deductible secretary
correct madam chair and
representative that's right and
that is a member of federal law.
All right so the people that
have as their manager
Representative they're still
going to have to cover their own
costs for that
Contaminated because of trying
to fix that so much information
here at the very end
I think that's the only
question.
Anyone else questions.
Okay and I I will just quickly
say I'm a breast cancer survivor
I had my mammogram and two weeks
later from the law and they said
oh it's nothing and I said I
don't feel like that so I just
worked my way into a pile C.
indeed it was cancer and so and
I'm a twenty plus year survivor
but I was young and I with a
typical usually it's in the
upper our part of the president
money within the lower inner
part of the forecast so I'm
things happen it's just now all
of my sisters and my nieces are
at because now we have a history
of breast cancer the family so
so I will entertain a motion.
The difference of.
Representative Penske on a
motion for to pass and.
Right for the second as amended
thank you we're a team.
If your call the roll Monica.
Representative Kate.
Do passed.
Representative Thomas yes.
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Kamil yes
Representative Jones yes
Representative Lord yes
Representative said PED's yes
Representative.
Yes ma'am vice chair years.
Yes.
That's a good way to start.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you
Representative okay next we have
house bill twenty nine.
which is integrated substance
use disorder programs.
Representative from one
educators.
Thank you madam chair.
Members of the committee will
one of the other the US.
Madam chair house bill twenty
nine.
Makes an appropriation of one
point three million dollars
from the attorney general's
consumer settlement fund.
For integrated substance use
disorder programs make it County
and northern northeast New
Mexico and madam chair for the
last three years I have
coordinated with the attorney
general's office on identifying
quality substance use disorder
projects for funding from the
attorney general's consumer
settlement fund.
Which is starting to be enraged
by settlement monies from opioid
manufacturers for their over
prescription of opioids Senator
oxycontin this over
prescriptions led to tens of
thousands of overdose deaths
throughout the US madam chair
the HSD is focusing the use of
these funds to opioid and
substance use treatment basement
and recovery projects in our
state and madam chair of house
bill twenty nine drivers
consumer settlement funds to a
state of the art integrated use
disorder program anchored in the
state has home and he called the
manager I'd like to yield to my
experts to further elaborate on
the significance of the
legislation first of all I have
math props
Trump's approach strips from
center and he's a licensed
physician assistant and he's one
of our top notch to kind of care
advocates in our state so then.
Thank you madam chair.
What a pleasure to be here with
you in person it's.
Summers ago that we were
together in Las Vegas New Mexico
and and yes I was here virtually
some last session but for the
pleasure for those of you that.
a couple years ago we had quite
a few presentations of Kelly K.
K. presentations in Las Vegas
New Mexico talking about
creation.
Integration of hair and very
timely the bill you just heard
and and more to come later in
front of you today I described
health care like the river it's
all connected.
Upstream primary prevention for
tributaries and and in those
streams in in the in the
mountains ours are our little
fire district right now in our
area but it is very important
primary prevention in all here
whether we're talking about
breast cancer we're talking
about substance use.
Middle of the river we focus a
lot of our our our attention
there help patient care and also
very important integrating those
services not just for this
within some you get healthier
one agency what are called
collaborative throughout the
region.
And downstream a residential
treatment center the largest gap
in our gap analysis and again
not only for dust the cemex
course on the gate County but of
our work that we've done as a
collaborative looking at what we
need most on the side of the
mountain range in northern New
Mexico is residential treatment
services this funding allows for
integration all three of those
areas and.
Something that the whole state
needs as well which is where
force development and expanding
capacity we had to end this
without expanding our capacity
workforce the program that I'm
most proud of city is this a new
you've heard about before
growing our own health
professionals and the specific
program that we have our other
youth centered in Las Vegas New
Mexico is the priest program
greasy that goes was of uniform
state champion nineteen year old
victim of that demo.
And we lost her memory lives on
the program the program that we
have to suddenly get County is
about growing future workforce
not only for health coverage how
to means but also for our first
responders we've expanded out
with the counties were forced to
include fire personnel EMTs as
well as law enforcement and
corrections to build that
capacity job training and youth
mentoring buyers are
professionals that we have in
the town to help grow them is
our future workforce so I'm
proud of the whole program in
the inauguration thank you very
much for considering this.
Thank you madam chair Matt next
chair I have a real Garcia whose
some good county commissioner.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee.
My name is Ben Garcia and these
on the go on the.
Commission chairman thank you
for having us here this morning
San Miguel County took this
project on two years ago we
decided that we would become the
fiscal agent for this project it
had been a project I've been
ongoing for about seven years
before that and we have since
been able to secure enough funds
to build the first phase of this
project which is rate at four
point eight million dollars
gonna still be they're still
going to be a need for expansion
because the drug treatment
center this is solely that you
know we were using other
recovery centers as the tool for
us to be able to develop our
project and there's one recovery
center where there's quite a
quite a bit of service or if
there's.
Craftsmanship going on there is
a cultural going on and then
there's also
The they're they're also working
with
And so the the component of our
project does not include that
yet but we would like to
incorporate that stage two of
our four of our program San
Miguel County is very limited as
copes and then I would request
force.
and these types of services
require special
people that are qualified to run
the services.
So in order to be able to do
that we're looking at expanding
so come allow for housing of the
staff is necessary if it started
to come in from out of town they
can come and and and work here
within the complex and then
we're also looking at.
Thank you for creating some
structures outside in the in the
playground area or crop top for
areas there will be additional
third third to the
Situations or or or programs
within the property and so we're
we're looking at using this
software million dollars to
expand on the on the services
and to be able to finish the
project thank you for having us
thank you madam chair thank you
hurl them with that we sent
questions chair okay let's go to
the audience.
Anyone here in support raise
your hands.
Okay in opposition.
Okay so I guess we only have
support so Taylor do you want to
go first of course thank you
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Taylor
believes I'm here about half the
journey General Motors and the
officer expressed very strong
support and our thanks to a
representative Garcia.
Here for partnering with our
officers respond to the fact
committee.
By the way prices so thank you
so much whatever we can do to
help us with the secretary thank
you anyone else want to comment.
Of.
That I'm here to help.
Representative Garcia maybe I I
said in support of this of their
own and in the interest of time
I've discovered thank you thank
you Mr yeah.
Anyone else okay it's care go
ahead here.
madam chair members of the
committee candidate is not
association of social workers
New Mexico tractor and we stand
strong in the I'm again we stand
from support legislation thank
you.
Is there anyone on their
pantries okay I'm sorry chair
members I'm **** and.
The party of New Mexicos
sectors military family.
We strongly support this.
Okay.
I think that's it so we'll go to
the committee.
She said that was going on
that's helped keep going in the
right direction.
Representative Lord venture hi
good to see you again
Representative I have some
questions on the Senate
curiosity so bear with me okay
so in terms of is this is a new
program to speak builders and
ready established madam chair I
yield to my first.
So as commissioner Garcia
mentioned this is an effort is
taking students it's in effect
seven years and has language in
the bill seeks to it's an
integrated program to the point
here and primary prevention
leveraging our our beauty in our
culture of our of our
communities to to expand on to
the existing project which is
soon to break ground of the
residential treatment center so
so.
Inpatient facility in Las Vegas
New Mexico the other components
the option primary prevention
workforce development
collaboration coordination of
outpatient services with you
complex.
Thank you madam chair
representative I'm just because
I have point comes out very well
two seven I'm very curious about
this program so is this for
opioid addiction only or is just
going to cover.
Senator the.
Senator.
The settlement money is coming
from opioid manufacturers
exclusively for opioid.
In a statement treatment.
thank you Mr thank you
Representative so you said
animals which piqued my interest
million you know how is that
going to be well you know one of
the projects that we're working
on that is going to tie into
this there isn't a a rodeo
facility in San Miguel County
that we can say is going to
attract outside rodeos to come
into Las Vegas we we what we're
currently finishing a study on
the rodeo feasibility for semi
of comedy and it shows that it
would be something strong for
our community that would bring
in
people from other parts of the
state and and the western part
of Texas a southern part of
Colorado into a status but but
we all know that deals are not
going to be the one that
supports the whole project so
we're also looking at
incorporating any question
training facility within the
road facility and if if if we
can do that then we'd like to
incorporate the drug treatment
center where where the plants
are going to a drug treatment
center incorporate any question
of program to the rodeo facility
that'll help
That'll help with the clients
that come so we all know that
that horses and other animals
are very strong as far as
therapeutic for for individuals
that are in dire.
Service such as drugs so we're
hoping that we can incorporate
that the the there's a local
school one of a high school that
that is also incorporating and
they're quick they're of the
program through the the high
school part of the of the
program so we're hoping that we
can have an adult on a young
high school program incorporated
into this.
Thank you Mr thank you
Representative very good because
up.
The point there is huge yes with
rehabilitation how many beds are
going to be at this facility
twenty.
It is going to be fourteen more
than fourteen female and we're
going to have I think to there
are our detox for mail into
their talks with you.
chair representative is this
program based on any other
programs course is going to be
all is based on something
something else maybe had success
in the past or it is kind of the
meeting were putting together.
Madam chair if I may so this
started seven years ago with of
our quarter rural community
opioid response planning grant
from her cell and that went from
a planning grants to a
implementation requests and
before that there was just so
our funding or from the state in
New Mexico so so again the the
breaking ground is the new part
of the plan and getting the
pieces together and getting the
support from not only the the
treatment providers in in Las
Vegas is on the account but
again across the region and and
now more recently really lost
all working together to talk
about what we all need most
property out for us is the
health care of components is
workforce and so of those of the
U. R. pieces but again the
efforts of funding in existence
thank you Madam chair
representative think this is my
last question so who is it
sensors only twenty eight best
and want to see a larger
facility who who's going to be
eligible who proved.
If they get in this program.
Well madam chair what we're
we're going to be doing a
request for proposals for
providers and we would hope that
in their plan they submitted a
proposal to us bill bill tell us
what there will be San Miguel
County is not the expert when it
comes to drug treatment and so
we're hoping that through
visiting with several sites that
we that we've gone to see we can
incorporate some of the language
that the that the other side so
using into the request for
proposals so that it'll be a
multi service.
Building or or facility.
Senator let me ask a question
because I want to know is
there's twenty eight budget how
do you determine which twenty
eight people as it just gonna be
from that counties in the
statewide what we're where those
people going to be coming from
but I'm sure it's it's a
regional facility we have
motor company.
Which is north of us we have
whether the company which is
east of us and then of course
San Miguel County so we're
hoping that it'll be a regional
facility we have we have
resolutions have been adopted by
Modoc county the CLSA visibility
across San Miguel County and
whether county but of course if
there's anyone in Santa Fe
County that would need to come
into our facility or Torrance
County for example if anybody
needs to come to a services then
that will be available for them
as well okay thank you madam
chair thank you representative
Garcia for she time thank you
Representative Sebasti and and
Representative Kate thank you
madam chair I just wanted to
thank you Representative into
our Axford Mr Garcia Mister
Probst we just really need more
treatment in the north and so to
see the effort that's gone in
partnership with the Attorney
General plus a facility that
will be culturally reflective
that's embedded in the community
that houses partnerships is is a
really powerful thing so I just
wanted to say thank you I think
this is long coming back thank
you thank you Representative
Kate thank you madam chair
representative Garcia Mr talk
directly to your ex.
witnesses I I wondered about
workforce development it's
unclear to me are you providing
workforce development for the
clients in which you're treating
or are you providing behavioral
health to to have I I know that
highlands university is located
in your area of which is the pre
near social work
educator and so it is it is a
collaboration to develop
behavioral health workforce or
is built employment and
independence for the clients
that you treat what what is the
workforce development Madam
chair representative K. full so
again with models and and grant
funding we've been able to
develop some of the leading.
models for peer support services
and recovery services a
workforce development within
folks in recovery all I will
piece of workforce within the
healthcare community folks with
experience so that was another
requests and use the S. that
also it's another plan all about
developing care support services
and and that full recovery
eight point four employment for
folks in recovery in addition to
that again with the with the
program that we discussed the
the the components of the coin
that the components that we have
a first responders components
that we have for even locations
we've got pieces in there for
the trades giving those options
for develop for folks in
recovery to also employment
being employable is such an
important vital component of
recovery so there's that piece
and then there is the workforce
development collaboration not
only finds University with the
University of New Mexico New
Mexico State University with the
community college toward their
college on and on combining our
efforts to make sure that we're
growing the medical behavioral
health and in the dental dental
is a very important thing when
it comes to it's as well we do
have a dental assistant program
at a community college but as
you all know we need more dental
services so expanding workforce
what can we do and just and then
the one piece I'm so glad you
asked this question the one
piece that is super in Las Vegas
New Mexico that we have a state
hospital so combining our
efforts and we place tons of the
in in turn sets another piece of
our of our our core
implementation grant is that we
do a lot of clinical rotations
we work with Dr shield and the
child to places many students as
we can without psychiatrists are
and see any in in these
internships to help them through
the pathway of the current
health professions thank you
very much.
Okay.
Representative chaps I don't
have a question about to move to
pass okay we have a second
second okay is there any
opposition.
Okay seeing that to pass.
Thank you very much.
Next we will go with the
Representative Garcia still.
Health care practitioner
existed.
Thank you madam chair.
I think my witness just out of.
Thanks.
They're so.
No that's actually that's a
that's a later one of.
Care that she was going to get
us.
Okay go ahead of
your available cast of
characters
in their position.
Thank you madam chair.
Committee
Thirty eight is a tax bill.
That adds a plan you categories.
To our existing rural health
care practitioner tax act.
The need for categories are that
we're adding our pharmacist.
Services social workers they
were health counselors and
therapists.
And physical therapist madam
chair this is the eighth
straight year that I've been
carrying this legislation.
And three years ago we passed
the past that through the house
by a fifty point zero but it's
not over in the Senate finance
and madam chair the rural health
care practitioners tax credit
act was established in two
thousand and seven.
To the following want to reduce
workers shortages in rural areas
to retain our practitioners in
rural areas and three hands
economic development in these
areas.
I am following these
practitioners and rural
communities and madam chair are
two thousand seven legislative
legislature created the New
Mexico have cared workforce
committee.
and in its last eight annual
reports as recommended
professions that I've identified
house bill thirty eight in terms
of being on the
road healthcare practitioner tax
credit that the manager my
legislation has always been
based on recommendations by the
New Mexico health care workforce
committee.
And not by recommendations of
this wishing for their own
personal professions.
Madam chair the healthcare
workforce committee As You
science of the gentleman.
Work the best address health
practitioner shortages and
payment.
In rural New Mexico the science
needs them and us to believe
that the biggest back for tax
credit dollars lies in expanding
the role health care
practitioner tax credit to
include pharmacists westerners
social workers.
Behavioural health counselors
and therapists and physical
therapists.
The manager I'd like to be able
to
Dr a.
then
racing.
What is vice president of
research at UNM health center.
And madam chair to artists maybe
The place.
Fired Dr Richard Larson.
Well as long time champion of
our rural health care
practitioners and chairman of
the mental health care
workforce committee and who had
been my this up here for rural
caucus.
And I just found out that he had
read.
Last week so so Dr ACS kind of
filling some super big foot
shoes you know.
And the manager I'd be able to
operates.
Thank you regarding
Morning madam chair and members
of the Houston pleasure to be
here
Of the as you heard and my name
is Amy may right see in line to
enter by president company
session there's yeah.
Health Science Center
I have recently taken the role
also includes the Cherry New
Mexico health care workforce
committee says center last night
actually laughs last week or so
what we have been working
together for the last three
months anticipation is.
So I have a short presentation
for you so I would like to get
this other than that because of
the second page.
I'm gonna start with some
background in twenty twelve New
Mexico legislature passed the
law hold health care workforce
the the production it's really
something New Mexico as a leader
in the country to learn about
health report focus on how we
can actually monitor our
workforce in this state there
only half of the state's able to
duplicate what we are doing here
so we are very proud of this
initiative the legislation that
was passed in twenty twelve
basically have three components
and this one is for the
licensing boards to require and
to develop the blind survey for
practice characteristics
previously that every time that
we apply to.
Our our licenses every two or
three years we have lots of a
question regarding your mailing
address but now the question I
actually asked about the
practice how the practice and
the nature of the process so
that gives us more information
that someone actually you
briefly and if previously and
what we would get this a PO box
address so thirty to forty
percent off or providers are
living out of post office so it
gave the have to comprehensive
information with regard to
healthcare workforce and how we
need to improve that.
And it the second thing that was
this was and they taught us the
collective group will be
directed to you one and health
Science Center for as to what
shape and storage under this law
you an empty wires to actually
get the fund that's remains
confident confidential with us
hi if that the report is going
to present it to the public the
end that I sent last part of
this localize to include to stop
issuing Mexico health care
workers what has committee that
includes thirty five members
from different disciplines as
stakeholders including and New
Mexico licenses at hospital
association reports generated
every year attitudes share act
is recommended to LHS I have two
copies of the report here if
anybody would like to see that
as well as Ellie Act would tell
you where you can find after
listening like these.
I will announce Michael I think
that they call from and these
licensing unix that if there's
something going on says is the
supply and house and what this
is is we look at each county
throughout the New Mexico and
the each county home health
professionals we have any
compared As national matrix as I
mentioned we call this a supply
house this kind of analysis is
done by the New Mexico
department of workforce
solutions and that kind of the
whole the man says what they do
is very similar to what the
approval of Major statistics the
US federal level we simply look
at the number of jobs that have
the tools that and and put each
of these counties.
So what I would like to present
to you in the next couple of
slides that simple all that they
thought that we have all of the
calls listening life please.
So the nexus license number for
what you see is that the man
says special this has been done
by forces and what you can see
is how many people are blowing
and how many holes these are
available per month.
And as you can see we can track
our progress or even have a
projected rules I thank you for
this particular table you can
see that will twenty twenty
eight and as you can see it in
twenty twenty eight we are going
to have a shortage of health
professions.
Next slide please.
So this is slide summarizes the
supply supply data indicates
that the have about ten thousand
licensed physician but
interestingly only fifty percent
office of practicing in New
Mexico we see the same kind of a
percentage with our certified
nurse practitioner we have about
thirty six hundred of them I
only fifty percent off at
practice in Mexico AT we can see
these kind of at the top because
of that
posing systems that you have in
place to get to learn more about
each practices affect practices.
Next slide please.
The next slide shows a very
comprehensive report the
shooting you can find in pay for
report and have this candidates
health for all of three
different health professions as
you can see
and we have this we have all the
counties and we have identified
does that mean national fame
mark and that is including and
in those that's it it's a
special George K. and those are
shown in red you can also see
the breaks out put it gender
that is city of our providers
I'm on the right side you can
actually see how many people do
have added last year which is
twenty two and how many
providers physicians we have
lost this case is six and I you
also have the average age of our
providers for you which is fifty
three point one which is much
better than the previous year
the on the on the earth I think
it's important if you press
retirement council so it is
happening so that for the also
basically.
Makes a slide please use the
phone for our registered nurses
and clinical nurses it gives you
some idea as where we meet the
pension I thank mark with
counties we meet at Edgemont
with this application the city
also asked how many universes we
have hired and lost the and how
many we have lots.
Next slide please.
This is slide summarizes the
city hall shortage all the area
the fact for patients again this
is that they help from twenty
twenty one and again clearly
states that every single
profession we are short and
Question is what we can do to
retain and hire more people.
Thanks.
So of those folks may fifth ten
recrimination that comes from
our work and force committee and
one of the recommendation was
that the taxpayer needs to be
and I sent it to she health care
professionals
primary tools with advanced
training this is because of the
CENIC office shortage and as a
representative Garcia mission
this has been an ongoing every
flat surface pop here initially
because that proved to thousand
seven I believe there are two
categories yes Representative
all at taxpayer about three
three thousand dollar and others
for five thousand dollars and if
and if so where fifty fifty
categories and what if there is
some critical health care
professions where they have all
recommendations K. to include
tools for healthcare professions
and emphasis with fashion of
the.
And frontier that's noted the
stand strong support
Representative I see this bill
and I would like to thank the.
And and and not.
Because of the committee for the
opportunity to be here and stand
for questions Representative
currency for the federal
presentation
You know hit a home run for the
first presentation on.
First presentation as a witness
on the staff thanks I also
admitted chair dealtaker the
pharmacist also.
The significance of legislation
that.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm Dale teacher on
the director of the pharmacists
Association and as as you all
for many of you are aware we
have worked on this tax credit
for many years the notice the
list is significantly expanded I
think that's because this
committee and number of tax
credit quests over the years and
Representative work with those
sponsors us right to one.
we have a shortage of everything
we're shortage of every provider
and we need to encourage them to
move out of state we don't have
that much of a shortage for most
providers in Albuquerque Santa
Fe but we do in Los crucis
Alamogordo and Farmington as set
so it is a concern I should also
tell you just because I am that
workforce committee one of those
thirty four participants have
been for many years.
This this shortage is.
Definitely needs to be
corrected.
Las Cruces has almost forty
shortage physicians or
pharmacists.
It is a problem so anything we
can do is encourage moving those
practitioners out of the mostly
Albuquerque area into rural New
Mexico.
We need to do that so we
appreciate your support and.
Thank you very much get up Madam
lastly I have a and with luck
with the social workers.
madam chair members committee
hearing today with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter and we we
agree with everything that has
been sent here but we also take
all.
Into the crisis we have in
social work in many.
Particularly rural counties
hi for example a recount
hospital hospitals cannot
attract or keep social workers
because they you know many times
a show they have to work two or
three jobs even in a rural area
in order to make ends meet and
they just they can't do this so
we we have that we also want to
attract more people to come but
we want to keep the people we
have and once again this would
be and one of you know all of
the above approach one of the
tools in our toolbox so that we
can continue to attract and keep
good social workers in our rural
areas thank you.
Thank you madam chair of that
was that for questions okay
let's go to the audience any.
Anyone here to support.
Okay opposition.
Okay we'll start on the right
side and just kind of figure
yourself out.
Morning and thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee on Deborah Walker and.
Yes he is the executive director
of the New Mexico nurses
association I like the L. I. to
date of.
I want to thirty thousand
roughly thirty thousand nurses.
individuals.
During
the life.
I am not one.
The more sixteen.
Active practice.
We.
The New Mexico legislature did
in the last thirty days.
Were you scared of one time.
Tax.
For the registered nurses work
in all schools in the state.
Hi.
I have to tell you that in the
last two.
I have receipts for most females
and the most phone calls from
listeners throughout New Mexico
about that tax credit.
They had asked that we try to
secure an extension for the tax
credit that if we expanded into
a call for distributors practice
of.
So thank you for what you have
done for what we hope you will
too and the New Mexico your sis
Association firmly believes
that.
Particularly for rural and
frontier New Mexico.
Helps retainer for our own task
force for yes this is our of
course.
Our our and workforce that also
is a recruitment told.
The nation needs the world
needs and this is the part by
doing tax credit thank you very
much.
In the back of.
Chair.
The single Representative nurses
association I.
Rajinder for fishers have the
item in the act since two
thousand six.
For the director for in a rural
area receiving the tax credit as
you know from all over looking
the last session we are at least
six thousand official.
Has given forty five.
This is perhaps one of those.
Of the get the great all I could
see is occurring on.
Good morning thank you
representative madam chair
present like to a representative
Garcia those excuse me my name's
Karen brown I am a current
practicing physical therapist
here in the state of New Mexico
I am also the president of the
American physical therapy
association chapter.
So and if you representative
Garcia for including us on this
important piece of legislation I
also echo everything that every
said forty to the current
workforce report we have five
hundred forty six PTC short here
in the state of New Mexico so I
am here to advocate for anything
and that we possibly could do to
get providers to our rural areas
to keep them to retain and I
agree wholeheartedly that this
is a great recruiting tool as
well as something that would
help us to retain our providers
so a container Mexico stands
people support this legislation.
Kerry.
Morning madam chair members
committee Kerry robin printer
rest of this for the New Mexico
Medical Society we do support
this legislation and we just
workforce report should be the
canaries in the mine alarm bells
that last that we have to be
doing more to invest in all of
our clinicians in New Mexico we
have sent out compete with our
other states in the tractive to
practice here because we know
that not only decision not to
their jobs without the full
spectrum of clinicians in the
state that he sent can not
proceed at here without the full
spectrum of our conditions in
this state we believe that
adding all of these individual
is important the tax credit we
actually do the tax credit
should be work but we'll get
there so we've had full support
of legislation were to pass.
We with us on this Charlie.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative Garcia
one of Charlie Marcus budget or
longest for desert states
physical therapy network
Representative all of the of
privately owned of physical
therapy organizations wrong
state I think everyone should
earn the the rest he said about
this one Representative
worshipers of personal care
since NASA the bringing this
involved so within its of the
central
to bringing care to of rural New
Mexico thank.
Anyone else on the right side
okay let's go to the back in the
left on the left.
Lawyers committee members my
name is Heidi season and the
secretary of the New Mexico
pharmacists Association and vice
chair of the board of social
work examiners ages of time I
just say that I agree with what
is really nice and.
Thank you that all from the
audience I see my good friend
care of Sarah she was a clinical
instructor of by way in the dark
ages this.
Go ahead.
James.
Thank you madam chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Carolyn Senator I'm a physical
therapist and I am also with the
American physical therapy
association of New Mexico and we
do stand in support of this bill
we strongly encourage anything
that helps recruit physical
therapist to rural areas we do
have even hospitals who recruit
service to be on staff in their
hospitals and we have patients
who drive hours to get to a
physical therapist in our
metropolitan area so we need
this we also need more than that
we stand in support of this bill
thank you thank you Karen.
I think that's yes so
Representative Kate thank you
madam chair and and thank you
Representative Garcia it's based
mostly at I I need to I also
want to thank you for your
tenacity on this bill.
And then and I do strongly
supported Representative Garcia
was kind enough to have a
conversation with me before the
committee that I wanted to be
able to bring that into record
the only concerns I had for this
bill is that it doesn't have a
soul P. it doesn't have
behavioral health doesn't have
other medical providers and
they're up Representative Garcia
was kind enough to state that
they were going by the what the
committee recommendations are
and stated they have currently I
will support this bill but I
just wanted to record thank this
is the first step and it's not
the last so and we understand
that all of the medical field it
will need to be represented in
our entire state as we put in
the audience it's a state
international sort of something
thank you thank you.
Representative incentive Jones
thank you thank you madam chair
representative Garcia I have a
comment and a question I just
want to thank everybody that's
in the medical field.
Because we do appreciate to
lower doctors and nurses for
sure but school I have on the
call last night from one of my
constituents and I have a
question on the tax credit why
why do we not put chiropractors
in their why are they not
stated.
As giving tax credit.
Madam chair representative that
sent the.
Let the recommendations on the
house bill thirty eight in terms
of the categories professions.
Come straight out of this entity
that we created to look at.
Prioritization.
To look at shortages repayment
rural areas.
And
all these entities of these
professions that I've identified
at in terms of bringing on board
pharmacists registered nurses
social workers behavioral health
counselors and therapists.
And physical therapists.
Have all been vetted.
They've been coming to the
health and Human Services
interim committee since day one
making the pitch to be on the
credit.
You know
the committee for the longest
time has been making
recommendations of these
professions.
Chiropractors I never seen with
the health and Human Services
Committee making a pitch to be
on this.
You know and much less they're
not on the radar of the
workforce committee.
So I would recommend that to
this group of professionals go
before the health and Human
Services Committee goalie for
the the work force committee and
make the pitch that the more
activity on the.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Garcia.
I don't feel like they should be
left out and nobody wants to be
left out and when they when they
go in they do their licensing
they are under primary care.
And I think that they should be
involved I think they should.
In this tax credit.
And.
I would I would like to make an
of amendment to this if we could
new on new but I would like to
make it an amendment that you
just put chiropractic in there
and then I will talk to my
constituents and have them start
making a showing.
So they don't feel left out.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Jones.
Chair representative Garcia
thank you for trying to get on
this bill I think in any effort
we can make toward
improving rural healthcare New
Mexico is is working at at the
end but I have one concern
about.
The addition of our ends
And it looks like the the hours
at work.
For eligibility for this credit
are based on a forty hour work
week and I think most of the are
is that we need right now Mexico
for on
thirty six hours so if you
calculate out.
That they're at their number of
hours they will only be eligible
for half of this.
Hundred dollars.
It would be nice if we could
change that.
Eligible for.
This happens.
Chair I can't answer that but
the qualifying criteria.
the ours is on page two.
Such.
To qualify for a perfect effects
where an awful health care
practitioners shop provided
health care during the taxable
year for at least two thousand
eighty hours a practice located
at and the prove rural
healthcare underserved area.
And there's also the hours for
taking half of the credit
I don't know if that's a
conflict I'd like to check with
the tax and Representative
Andrew this is that this bill
gets out of this committee and
see if there are some of whether
questions.
You know
and also check that the health
department because of the ones
that kind of patience so I'm not
the kind of.
Kind of.
Verify confirm.
What you're saying.
To the Act creek or for it
doesn't fit.
It I will add on there that I
think part of this bill is kind
of streamline things as opposed
to PED has to work this many
hours in a pharmacist this I
mean that it's kind of just one
comprehensive but I hear what
you're I mean I've always been
concerned that you know the two
thousand and eighty is like no
no vacation no sick time no so
it that concern but but my
understanding is that it's just
trying to keep it.
From being you know this
forecast maps just like crazy
but I think that's something we
can work on yes Representative
Jones I'm not changing that
language that I was already in
the bill I'm just adding the I
need categories so I so we've
we've had this
issue early hours ever since
this bill is that mass thousand
seven and here Representative
Garcia I understand that I in
looking at this I know the world
operates on your work and I and
I just kind of assumed that it
really wasn't considered.
not only our rents a lot of
practitioners who work in
facilities and work on twelve
hour shifts and three twelve
hour shifts is considered a full
time position and so and and so
I just I just feel that we need
to look at that so that these
people that we're adding in are
actually eligible for the full
credit.
Read our recent manager that
that that's something we can do
remember I knew.
Actually what I would suggest is
if you want to do that you do it
totally separate bill as opposed
to putting it in here because
it's been this language for
years and years it what I would
guess that that might.
Kids this bill and we don't want
to do that so if you would you
could do a separate bill and and
I would support that to happen
you know some somewhat fewer
hours so that more people could
qualify but I can feel like we
don't want to mess with this
bill in that way in terms of
adding the car practice to you
could do here your own separate
bills
but this one is already on its
way and and we haven't talked
about amendments and all of that
so generally we don't make
substantive amendments on the
fly Committee you know if you
see that there's a period
missing or something just
misspelled we could do that but
adding or taking out or things
that that gets a little more
coffee.
Madam chair thank you and
representative Garcia I really
appreciate this and I think it's
a great first step forward to
maybe we can get some more maybe
and another bill that will
expand more to really care to
nurses and people who work of
scholarship so thank you.
We have.
Very.
Yes yes okay okay Representative
partly all.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Garcia.
Three speech language
pathologist in a previous life
by of with CEO of an outpatient
facility and I will tell you
that I had an opening for
physical therapy for eight years
and the really did wasn't able
to fill it until like I tried my
child to the school to the.
That leads to gaps so we have
been providing services and in
other rural areas which is not
the nana and in not more and we
still have not been able to fill
that position for twelve years
so I find this incredibly
helpful and wonderful beginning
there are also often times in
rural areas we fund of physical
therapy assistants we have one
P. T. and many physical therapy
assistants because those are
easier to find so thank you for
the beginning of this bill I so
appreciated the number of
practitioner and I can see that
this for the huge difference in
the.
Thank you for.
Service.
Yes go ahead Representative
said.
Madam chair of.
Representative Garcia.
Are we going to be able to do
that amendment for.
Would you entertainment
amendment to put cover
practically in the.
Your bill's Madam chair
representative that's and I see
that as a friendly amendment.
Sure as I said before we we tend
not to want to trick putting
substantive things because the
FIR hasn't considered that all
there's all kinds of you'll
learn of their time but thanks
to just throw something in a
bill my guess is it would doom
this bill and that's not what we
want to do so but you are more
than welcome to go up to Council
services as soon as you have a
minute and ask them to draft a
separate and that's the way
Representative proceeded for or
other folks did it for quite a
few years you know this person
did PED's and this person in
nursing so it's not unheard of
that we have separate bills with
separate professions but that
that would be how I would I
wouldn't allow that big of an
amendment on the fly thank you
madam chair Representative
Garcia.
Anyone else Campos entertain a
motion for a second.
Okay Representative Chavis and
the second for Representative
Kate.
Do we have opposition.
Is there is there any opposition
okay you have a do pass thank
you Mr chairman.
One one of the of the.
Okay and what the next that was
mine and so we're going to get
that.
We were going to go on
Representative Allison with
health bill forty nine since we
since I've got to be here the
whole time.
I can do some other things.
Well we will Representative
health extensible vehicles
bought for this bill and I will
be.
A good time to go to.
No
comment.
Full.
Whenever you're ready
Representative Allison.
Chair and members of the
committee.
Forty nine.
For this.
It is that we I.
The general fund.
Of health to fund.
I will councils.
Watson Kennedy and tribal health
campus Act.
Secondly.
It just for fun.
General fund contracted non with
all the state should provide
assistance with health and to
assist in the development of the
system.
Health care professionals third
base and the complex balance
remaining at the school year
twenty twenty four to reflect
back in federal funds.
That's basically
how.
Fifty eight or forty nine.
This is the second bill.
To read.
One thirty seven that this past
in twenty nineteen.
We
are.
The success of organizations.
He has evolved into some
from that we're asking for more
funding for house bill forty
nine at this point so
With that
Three expert witnesses.
Questions of all my life.
There were a couple.
And all my lead first is
terrorism and.
Process so.
Your presentation to our okay.
If I could just be quick points
have quickly built so okay just
kind of the high points thank
you madam chair members of the
committee
so it will be talking about the
county tribal councils this
morning and I am actually tribal
liaison for other nonprofit so
we work closely with all health
councils and state so I'm gonna
go through our presentation here
briefly on slide four you'll see
just as a quick overview of
house bill forty nine title
county tribal health council
funding and so our requests to
the of these two up you know
inform you about the work of the
health councils.
to get support for more funding
for health council and this
package is five point seven five
million and so this includes a
five point two five million to
support county tribal health
councils and a hundred and
twenty five thousand for health
council per year.
also to contract with a third
party which is the nonprofit to
support the technical assistance
and services to county travel
health councils.
And on slide five I just briefly
once again be quick to have to
R. Sanchez Sanchez resented
Anthony Allison in our foes
Sanchez Representative Thomson
said thank you for your time
today and on the next slide here
slide six it's just a brief
overview of the New Mexico
Alliance of health councils we
were actually established in the
early two thousands our primary
role was to support county
tribal health councils and
essentially we do this through
offering training coordination
of learning and learning
opportunities supporting some
opportunities for collaboration
and advocacy for health councils
in addition to that one of the
more bigger roles that I think
the aligns health promote is the
focus on equity and inclusion
more recently health equity just
because of the pandemic as also
should be priorities from across
the state you know a day after
you've from region to region and
also supporting the capacity
building for health councils we
know that health councils across
the state are all all at very
level very levels of capacity
and we are doing our best to
meet their needs whether at and
really trying to support the
priorities and the outcomes with
each community.
On slide seven we just wanted to
note that we do have forty to
act health councils that
includes thirty three county
health councils across the state
and we do have nine tribal
partners of those nine partners
include eight Pablo's which is
active months coaches number
eighty three percent of the
funds so Santa Clara sentiment
will anticipate we also do have
one Navajo community that we are
currently partnered with which
is the tendency to abandon
Navajos for intellectually New
Mexico.
So the total forty two Senator
there is really awesome amazing
work across the state and really
well connected with one another.
On slide eight as Representative
Allison reference house bill one
thirty seven which was provided
in two thousand and nineteen so
this is this this active
sexually lays out the mandates
and functions of health councils
so these functions
that county tribal health
councils to have is to focus and
identify health priorities do
assessment and planning
deportation within their
jurisdictions but also do some
cross collaboration with other
entities and more specifically
are for example you could be
county tribal collaboration
collaborating with nonprofits
other entities across the state
and some of our other community
partners also to look at the end
because that's also been
something that's been
More recently a priority for
health councils
of just of thinking about the
pandemic in collecting that data
and thinking about how how
services are being offered to
communities health act those
services for how much
information is being
disseminated and in addition to
that
for tribes if they get about
tribal to sharing the results
and a lot of the limitations and
and some of the frustrations
that come with do this
opportunity to justice.
also in addition to some of
those mandates looking at some
of those that community
prioritizing community driven
solutions so planning that
collaboration with a county
tribal leadership and
implementing those at a local
level last is to advise all blue
and state government and so this
depending on the priorities of
the community working in
partnership with with leadership
to advise on policy so this was
a mandated and twenty nineteen
and passed in twenty nineteen
and on slide nine we just want
to reference that New Mexico is
a centralized statewide health
department and this is important
for health councils because they
do play a key role in community
based health assessment planning
and action at the local level I
like to think of health councils
building community driven and
led by community so so local
level is definitely Peterman
offense to Health counties
because a lot of our health
councils or community members
but they also probably have some
sort of rule in the community
that could that does have some
type of influence on leadership
the next a full point I just
want to mention is the frontier
of fundamental function of
health departments and the
criteria for public health
accreditation so health councils
also are part of the New Mexico
department of accreditation
process so they are considered
and also
you know when this is reported
in drafted for accreditation
health councils are considering
the data from health councils
are also integrated into the
public health accreditation
process that the state has.
On slide ten something that's
really important that we want to
reference which is house
memorial two around public
health task force
recommendations so twenty twenty
one this task force was
established to look at our
current public health
infrastructure and made
recommendations for it so this
group had convene to ads the
some of the recommendations that
are related to health councils
is to look at building the
capacity health councils to
fully fund and Health councils
for long term stability to
mobilize diverse community
partnerships and to also treat
each community voice funding I
will point out the and slide is
health councils for one of the
top five recommendations from
this task force and the return
of investment from twenty third
two thousand and three to two
thousand fifteen you can see
here the return of investment
was for every dollar invested in
health taxes yielded a return of
four dollars and much leader
deals in two dollars CDC that
that return of investment of
health councils is there.
on slide eleven something that's
also really important that we
should consider is that history
of under funding so in pre two
thousand and ten we do see
health councils fully funded
here just about a hundred and
twenty five thousand and in two
thousand ten of health councils
were completely deflected SO
zero dollars and at this time
health councils were probably
working and volunteer basis
maybe some an act and we do see
here twenty thirteen of getting
that slowly that funding starts
to increase and
in twenty nineteen house bill
one thirty seven was passed and
so you can see here twenty
twenty one the funding is
different it's not adequate
level funding but there is
funding there to support health
councils and taken you know
currently see here that
health councils are just about a
little into two million but this
is also included one time of a
at one ten federal funds that's
going to end very soon.
So that's on slide twelve it
just kind of breaks down some of
this funding back health
counselor currently getting
through lines as for your team
of twenty twenty two health
councils are each health council
is receiving nine thousand four
hundred and sixty one dollars so
that's per health council and
that's not even enough to
provide a full time position and
cover operating cost so you have
to think about the dedication
and level of commitment health
councils across the state have
on very limited funding with the
house bill that is in statute
and in fiscal year twenty twenty
three health councils did get an
increase the funding which
brings them to just about a
little under thirteen thousand
again which is still not enough
to full time funded full time
position for health councils to
truly carry out this work and so
when they were completely funded
a fan the
Probably on a volunteer basis
and a lot of them doing this
work out of compassion and
dedication and commitment to
their community so I think
that's something we'll have to
really hi councils continue with
work with limited funding on the
right side here we did do a
little analysis of the funding
and so from twenty thirteen to
twenty twenty two
you know the data shows that
what health councils received is
only thirty seven percent of
what would be considered
evidence based adequate level
funding.
Excuse me can you wait we still
have three more bills to go.
This kind of
I'm sorry that's how we work
here.
Hey and the listening side
slides just talk about
priorities from health councils
thanks gonna ship it to Chris to
end here with our testimony but
thank you.
Hello at chair members of the
committee representative Allison
the comparing our bills thank
you all for giving us the time
today I'll be brief mine site
comes at the end and just give
you a little
idea of what health counselors
can do when they are able to to
to utilize the needed their
relationships and partnerships
with other health professionals
throughout the state within the
county they've been able to work
with I'm not only a committee
members so you know partners
throughout the health field and
the substance use to look at
homelessness done health impact
assessment using.
Using community input and
feedback where they actually
we're able to work with us to
develop questions and meaningful
ways to assess the homelessness
crisis that's currently facing
not only our community
committees across state from
that we where to leverage half
toward job funding privacy from
the American recovery funds on
grant Harrison came and and
we're able to secure those two
hundred thousand dollars in
funding for this agency
and the American recovery
funding and economic security
for families with in the in
McKinley county and sini and
Navajo Nation land you're not
going forward with that H. A.
and propose improvements of
those
of actual funding to try and
work on housing first you can
only so you can see how how
councils can come together not
only with community members but
also professionals nonprofits
and then also government to be
able to fund
issues throughout our community
this is just a small example
other ones that we've worked on
in the past including Medicare
by not chair by health care for
the funds permission families
and other coalitions throughout
the state to be able to pass
four and I also became from
along with the coalition of the
committee members and our house
that's being able to bring part
those community members to
explain their health house rules
and also.
Get that passed just a lot more
I could probably explain to you
you have time I see around in
the session yes thank you.
Thank you.
Are you thank you madam chair.
This is okay the way for.
In the audience is.
Anyone here in support.
Opposition.
Okay we'll go with the port but
if you just want to say we
supported we that be appreciated
I'll wait we are supposed to be
on the floor fourteen minutes
but hopefully we will we ate and
just just a reminder to the
members and folks generally we
show you presentations like this
in committee because we just
don't have time so these are the
kind of things we would love to
hear in the interim health and
Human Services Committee so on
this side will start with COVID
if you feel like you have
something to say okay go ahead.
For the Representative Senator
legal health councils and I
would just like to thank my
comments based upon one question
everything that in the state of
legislature in terms of loss
pass how is that the
communicate advocated
implemented at the community
level for tribal level but also
at the county and this is where
the point of the tribe as well
as county health council from
the because of the wonderful
legislation and all the funded
that you approved eventually
gets down to the local how we
interpret advocate actually it's
about those programs these were
the best
team.
Thank you thank you.
impact no.
Go ahead.
Madam chair committee members my
name is camera and I represent
the New Mexico in agriculture
policy council of partition.
Probably full support of this
bill and the need for our kids
to be support level they help us
for example developing our
senior centers the.
Education and also there.
So really.
She complex as well.
Madam chair of the committee
James Robert offices Navajo
Nation president's office.
President's office staff to
support this bill just recently
I was a.
The council health councils do.
Presentations my tree.
We could.
Communities and.
First in the nation we asked to
the state.
The state's health.
madam chair members of the chair
of the national association of
social workers New Mexico we do
support this but my main reason
for being here today is as a
representative of this community
for Grant County community
health councils and transport
thank you for yes.
As a committee made such as I
was The New Mexico Public Health
Association stands on.
Anyone else we have a couple of
On
Your comments in.
Okay I just want that is Joe I'm
calling you know as Do�a that I
just want to make corrections on
the scope of money that they
were she said they were
receiving nine thousand it's
twelve thousand nine fifty two
is what they get.
I just want to make that
correction thank you.
You're welcome.
All I can't pronounce the next
day.
Support measures okay.
You
madam chair members of the
committee.
My name is Secora Nefish and I'm
the registered lobbyist for New
Mexico thrives the state
nonprofit association and I
stand in strong support of H. B.
forty nine.
Health councils are essential to
the well being of our
communities they understand
community needs and work with
communities to identify
priorities health councils and
charitable nonprofits are key
allies and serving our
communities please invest in the
well being of New Mexicos
communities by investing in
public health infrastructure
please support H. B. forty nine
thank you.
We have basically.
There did.
Go ahead.
If you're muted.
Mason.
Your next but there you go go
ahead.
Okay sec Mason I'm policy chair
there Mexico lines of health
councils but I was also co chair
of the Santa Fe county health
council when funding was cut in
twenty ten in just to give you
an idea of the devastation that
because we had a program in
place to try to address the
dentals Crisis dental health
crisis in several Sandoval
County we also at St community
health workers that we're
dealing
with pre natal advice and
everything in the in rural
Sandoval County all of those
programs went away.
When
to cut funding was cut so I can
yes of the good work that the
health counselors do and we at I
stand in strong support of HB
forty nine thank you okay and
Shelly Man Lev.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
My name is Shelly Man Lev I was
a member of the house my **** to
Morial to task force for the
public health infrastructure
this was one of the top.
Okay and then it united now yes
you are this is managed madam
chair members of the committee
thank you so much I stand in
support of HB forty nine I was a
member of the public health
infrastructure task force that
works for a full year authorized
by HM to this is a top priority
of that task force and a
critical part of our public
health system to strengthen our
centralized system and ensure
that the needs of local our
tribal communities are met thank
you so much.
Okay questions from.
Yeah go ahead yes thank you
madam chair and committee
members
my name is going on here with
the New Mexico Alliance of
health councils in support HB
forty nine and I just want to
echo that health councils are
deeply embedded in our community
service in our communities
centering a given voice to the
most vulnerable and underserved
populations across New Mexico so
highly advocates for for this
thank you so much.
Kate a questions from the
committee.
Do I have a motion.
Passengers the second.
Okay so Representative Sebasti
Representative Ferrary with the
second is there any opposition.
I see none do have a due pass.
Okay we will quickly I'm gonna
ask if we can do excuse from a
four sessions to trying to get
through our data but we're
trying to keep things moving so
Representative Hochman Vigil is
here I lost my dad and she
promises she will quit so we
will have our share of ready
now.
It turns.
And then.
The.
This is.
I.
That maybe metals water bottles
are feedback so if you put them
on the floor I think that's
that the real culprit but
Representative Hochman Vigil
still seventy five dollars thank
you very much madam chair
members of the committee hearing
house bill seventy five and what
we're asking for the need to
consider today is that simply
any group health coverage offers
provisions of the private
practice physicians so that was
a copayment or coinsurance on
those are factors positions are
that feeds the copayment
coinsurance of those primary
care services madam chair like
to introduce my experts over
here.
Madam chairman of the committee
thanks for time went into doctor
facing more the vice president
of the New Mexico chiropractic
association and I maintain a
private private practice from
the owner and director of our
practice in sports medicine.
of the the shore house bill
seventy five is very simple and
straightforward with very simple
and straightforward purpose.
Services insurance coverage act
will approve access to
conservative non pharmacologic
Care of musculoskeletal pain I
mean Madam Varrier created by
health insurance policy the
policy designed with the purpose
of reducing opioid prescriptions
and more invasive procedures
The number of recently I
published
Treatment guidelines as well as
federal.
agencies including the American
college of physicians the FDA
CDC all recommend spinal
manipulation as a first line
treatment for acute and sub
acute back pain and as a
strategy to help resolve
prescription drug crisis studies
suggest that patients are
treated with a chiropractic
physician are nearly seventy
percent less likely to fill are
utilized you with restrictions
it's pretty simple more
treatment from chiropractic
physicians and other
conservative providers equals
less opioids and other invasive
treatments unfortunately our
current health care delivery
system and third party payers
create barriers to this access
these barriers come in the form
to visit limitation arduous pre
authorization requirements and
high copays it's not uncommon
and my practice to see patients
that with insurance policies
that require a hundred twenty
dollar Kobe for.
Often times these copays will
exceed the maximum reimbursable
out from the insurance companies
put a hundred percent of the
burden of our treatment on to
the patient when you compare
this to a few dollars that may
cost opioid prescription
unfortunately patients are left
Both seeing making health
decisions on their wealth and
set of their wealthy this bill
is similar to a bill US Senate
bill twenty three which was
presented in twenty twenty one
that bill passed the Senate it
was passed this committee
unopposed and we just ran out of
time on the house floor still in
the state of time I will.
I share thank you for your
consideration.
Anyone in the audience in
support okay in the back.
Whether they'll be more of a
Representative Mexico
acquisition practice and thank
The actors Fund
of her profits youth and and
outcomes are often increase of
you as you may know of our
healthcare system the tax credit
are targeted the primary care
after that they just don't have
the tools of the.
Through
this process.
Correct anyone in opposition.
I I Representative date off of
the hill on the FIR and OSI
noted concerns about the
legislation's interaction with
health savings account federal
law permits the offering of high
deductible plans in conjunction
with health savings accounts I
arrests rules prohibit any
benefits other than ACA mandated
costsharing free preventive care
benefits from being offered at
the coal face level before
insured has paid their
deductible the way this
legislation has been drafted
does not take into account high
deductible health plans with.
Health Security Act eligibility
passage of this legislation
without exemption for H. D. H.
P. HSA plans would invalidate
these plans HSA eligibility per
IRS rules while I was side has
addressed this issue be a
regulatory collected in the past
this is a fix that is without
the force of legislation OSI
recommends that the bill be
amended to exempt H. D. H. the
HSA plans approximately eight
thousand New Mexico the year
enroll in those plans so what I
would suggest is we we if we
after we do our discussions is
that get get I'm sure it's from
you that you will get the
amendment drafted so that this
doesn't that two things that
thank you madam chair yeah and
just saw that in the FIR and we
are on it okay okay all right so
questions from the committee.
Representative Lord thanks every
semester thank you so much for
chiropractors for front.
The bills today always get
exclude for everything I worked
as office manager for a long
time SO many miracles and if so
amazing in the commitment back
pain chiropractic dates back to
work back to be part of society
without opioid so thank you for
bringing this bill forward.
Anyone else.
Actually you can't make the
motion if you're the speaker so
we need the most.
Thank you okay second second.
Okay is there any opposition
with the thing that it will be
amended okay you have a do pass.
Thank you for being
Representative Ferrary one of
those.
Madam chair.
Madam chair.
But we do now.
Okay the work is and we you know
we never start on time but now
we're.
Just just for the new folks when
you go back into the chamber
this morning make sure that the
people up front see you kind of
waiver for Patel impacts of the
back on the board is not excuse
and and while they're getting
ready I got a call from someone
this morning on this bill at
seven three AM.
Just throwing it out there that
we are people and we numbers you
call our cell phones if I was
still was the building I would
have been really cranky but so
please train training respect
time.
Thank you Representative Ferrary
thank you madam chair and we
apologize for that we have some
very
proactive supporters.
this is health bill ninety two
it's a residential treatment
services for people with serious
mental illness and first
episodes psychosis and the bill
opens the door to effective
treatment using an approach
called Soteria and it's an
evidence based approach is very
effective.
improving outcomes.
For people with the most serious
of mental illnesses such as like
schizophrenia bipolar disorder
and participants in this longer
residential treatment approach
have recovery rates of up to
eighty percent of as opposed to
our current recovery rates of
five to twenty percent and
residential treatment using a
Soteria approach changes the
course of people's lives with
huge cost savings over the
course of a lifetime.
I'd like to introduce
My experts LFC al two is of a
doctor and got psychiatrists in
Los crucis also merry white and
I'll let each of them speak a
little bit about their thank
briefly also us is this October
has been our expert in did the
study of course over the
Saturday
so at that you already madam
chairman Representative as you
know two different is of the
very devastating illness of it's
very apparent people struggling
the family's painful experience.
it so it's very apparent and the
we haven't done a good job in
this country of helping people
recover through curry range of
the conventional treatment in
the United States less than
twenty percent so.
This is an approach that act
that reports of recovery it's up
to sixty percent.
Fifty sixty percent of so what
we want we want one of these in
Dona ana county
and the I can tell you that the
the local collaborative has
developed a strategic plan to
build the ideal health behavior
health program Dona Ana County
and our sisters house recalled
SO Terrio.
Our house is one of the game
changing projects in the
strategic plan of and so
Basically that's what I can tell
you this is an effective
treatment for schizophrenia we
don't have a bill New Mexico one
million.
And we.
The.
So we appreciate your support.
Madam chair comparing us this
flight I'm a member of the
community service support from
county working with the healthy
behavioral health collaborative
over the to the last two years
on strategic planning the
secretary of project as well as
to projects that came out of
that strategic planning as a
game changer as L. said.
We need this project to the
community is a community
response to a community of we
know that of the project will
treat a small number of folks
with first episode psychosis
and the recovery rate is very
high it's evidence based there
are some areas elsewhere of
there are many in Israel and so
we hope that you do passed thank
you so much time.
Just so you understand it's it's
only residents were people who
were extractions proces Act call
essentially there provided a
safety support information as
they go through the experience
and typically they stabilized
six weeks eight weeks at that
point your health coverage to of
the community get a job
supported employment think of
class go to school.
Of get their official support
group participate church for
cremation or that kind of thing
so it's really a way of helping
people who are experts in cycles
stated in the community and
connected to the community and
help you move forward with our
lives pretty quickly.
I'd also like to just by
interest in this building so
important to our community is
that
A friend of her son was having
I color
of experiences and was jailed
when he sat in jail for a year
without any type of treatment
because it didn't have a place
to refer him we would have just
Terry at and starting in Los
crucis and other
Point or people could be
referred to also until we met
Cassidy and we'd like to build
from Los crucis area to having
one in Albuquerque eventually
of.
So they finally were able to
find a place to referred this
young man and if we have
something like Soteria house
available then he could have
been referred and not had to
deal for a whole year this line.
So
and we did notice that
behavioral health service says
It's asking for a hundred twenty
nine thousand four oversight
it's I didn't know that are HSD
department and did not have
someone who could over CVS and
develop the the need to develop
the criteria and all the things
in the bill to have a service
like this so that we stand for
said did you want anything six
million for the general manager
to the committee announces new
Sunday Mexico.
I went for of New Mexico for the
vote and the wrong house like
this and I just want to say it
really works people would be in
a hospital setting or jail
sitting and they can go to
school with support they can get
their jobs with support the
state the the these types of
programs work with the families
as well.
And there are others in San Jose
there was of Setaria and Alaska
and they are growing throughout
the nation as well as the world.
This practice evidence based.
Okay in the audience is there
anyone in opposition.
Anyone in support.
Okay quick comments go ahead.
costs with rural caucus as well
as the military families we
strongly strongly support.
Karen.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen was locked with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter from.
Okay.
And I also got a text that nami
National Alliance on mental
illness stands in support of the
forty nine actually I believe
so Patsy go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee can you hear me yes.
my name is Patsy Romero I am the
co chair of the National
Alliance on mental illness our
legislative committee we stand
in strong support of this
legislation madam chair and
members of the committee because
people with mental health issues
really need some living care and
a safe place to heal in New
Mexico the only cautioned that
we would give not only to the
committee but also to to
Representative Ferrary and the
advocates for this particular
service is to ensure that it is
sustainable madam chair we can't
just have it for one year we've
got to have continued
sustainability for these types
of programs in New Mexico so
madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to speak on behalf of this
legislation thank you Patsy
Ellen.
Okay now my coming through yes
you are great thank you so much
Ellen pines representing the
disability coalition we advocate
for the interests of people with
disabilities of all types
including mental illness we are
strong supporters of services in
the community and not in
institutions and therefore we
stand in support of your bills
thank you thank you Elon okay
members of the committee.
Madam chair I just have a quick
question how many of.
People with the server.
Will serve up we're gonna have a
budget will be able to serve.
If they're full forty five
people.
Thank you anyone else up okay so
madam chair representative I
really like this bill as part of
a I have way too many questions
I have the time to time to
question bill road pressed for
time so I I want to support this
but I have way way way too many
questions and I'm getting emails
from my constituents so I'm
gonna vote no on this not
because I don't like it because
I don't have enough information
to both a self test on this one
thank you thank you anyone else
okay a motion.
Over the past in a second.
Representative Penske
Representative with okay going
to take the role.
From the advocates yes.
With the status quo.
Representative huh yes
Representative Johnson.
Representative Lord you know the
expansion.
Yes.
This this.
Yes.
Yes.
Sorry I was listening.
It.
It's nothing propose element
recycled we will support just I
need my constituents are harsh
and they will point to.
Thank you okay by nine one you
have to pass
a pass the gavel over to my very
capable vice chair and receipts
so hopefully this.
Right.
Yes.
The committee.
The fact.
Okay we're on the house bill
forty one developmental
disabilities funding
Representative two thousand
thank you madam chair so this.
Very simple bill and I'm going
to tell you a story very quickly
I said earlier I have an adult
son with autism the six foot
seven.
Has
Intermittent explosive disorder
and is stronger than the men and
has been since he was little so
he is in Paul and when he has
his moments most of the time
he's fun to be around but when
he doesn't it's very scary and
dangerous a couple weeks ago we
got a text I text from his group
home that said he fled the table
another resident through another
resident up in the air and on
the floor and and so that the
people who work there are
working for less than you can
make at McDonald's with the
for so we need to pay these
people for a if it's a tough job
and it's a job that we need done
if you were in a group home I
would be here I mean he's he's a
twenty four seven care person
and those of us who are working
development disabilities have
seen those kind of things were
just and it's really unfair to
ask people to to take on these
high stress I mean there's no
time off with you and you always
have to be paying attention to
whether he's escalating and what
you do to de escalate and
whether you need to see our
inmates and all these other
things so this this is a very
simple feel that ask for more
money to match with federal
money so that we can pay the
people who who have the heart to
do these kind of jobs I mean the
turnover rate is ridiculous my
sense group home is running at
about a fifty percent vacancy
rate in staff so they got there
officers people in that.
doing these kind of things and
just another side we always talk
about getting more money to the
direct service providers and
that's incredibly important but
my son also pulled the toilet
out of the floor he breaks
windshield on a regular basis
the practice holes in walls he
loves to break windows I mean he
just breaks and so the the
agencies also need some extra
money because he's expensive I
mean he was expensive when he
was at my home and he still
expensive so this is just to to
bring up the rates for the
direct service providers and for
the agency so that they can
cover the costs of of things
like my son so I this is typical
he had formerly been that he was
at all to Vera and then where my
son was and then he was the
director of development
disability services division for
the state and now he's doing so
he's just gonna fill in a little
bit.
Good good morning still.
Madam chair members of the
committee chair Jim Copeland and
currently the executive director
of the association of
developmental disabilities
community providers and and as
representative Thompson has said
this bill is basically to to
appropriate seven point six
million dollars to increase
reimbursement rates for our
legislative agencies the last
call studies done in two
thousand and nineteen it wasn't
fully funded until two thousand
twenty two and so what this
money will help do is fill in
some of the gaps that are
providers experience the COVID
pandemic was not included in
this study all of the inflation
rates paid eight dollars for a
dozen eggs is included in this
study there is currently a new
cost any of this being
undertaken now the results of
that cost that you will be
available for rate increases
until fiscal year twenty twenty
five because of the timing of
the cost of the so the
department of health is asking
for ten point two million in
their budget to fund these
provider rate increases were
asking for an additional seven
point six million the cost in
twenty nineteen proved that the
waivers the way the media waiver
medically fragile waiver were
under funded at fifty five
million dollars a year.
With this money with the
department of health and with
with this legislation we will
get close to fully funding the
D. waivers at the twenty
nineteen rates the twenty twenty
to range from the right study
it's going on now we'll have to
deal with those in twenty twenty
five.
Thank you will stand for
questions thank you let's go to
the audience are there it is
there any opposition to this
bill.
Saying that are there any and
support.
Yes please.
Madam chair members of the
committee care care had a with
the process of social workers
New Mexico chapter eight from.
Thank you we'll go to the SLO
first we have Jim Jackson.
Thank you madam chair this is
Jim Jackson on behalf of
disability rights New Mexico I'm
sorry that I can't be there in
person today as the find as the
proponents of noted the provider
network needs sufficient
resources to hire and retain
committed and qualified staff to
the people with disabilities
they serve can receive quality
services and pursue their dreams
house bill forty one helps
provide those needed resources
and disability rights New Mexico
supports this bill thank you.
Thank you Pamela Stafford.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I am Pam Stafford with
New Mexico caregivers and
natural and I stand in support
of this bill in the midst of a
historic labor shortage and with
the super allocation to prove to
them that the the wait list the
system of support is strained
like never before providers
abuse temporary art and money to
increase compensation the direct
care staff but the staffing
shortage continues to leave
individuals without adequate
services what happens when that
are but money ends the only way
to increase provider capacity is
to increase salaries for the
direct care workforce which
cannot happen without increased
funding this bill benefits
providers direct support staff
and individuals and service
thank you for allowing me to
comment.
Thank you.
Supporting actress.
I'm sorry.
Of that era.
Mr chair madam chair and members
of the committee first let me
think of representative Thompson
for bringing this up piece of
legislation before you and also
I'd like to recognize Jim
Copeland for the tremendous work
he's been doing on behalf of the
developmental disability
providers my name is I think I
said my name Patsy Romero but
I'm also the co chair of the
intermediate care task force and
we are all struggling to get
higher rates in order to
maintain the quality of work and
the quality of service that we
need to provide for our
vulnerable populations we stand
in full support at this
legislation and we encourage the
state of New Mexico continue to
look at the current rate range
that we're paying for the
services they're extremely
expensive but extremely
important if we're going to
continue to serve our New
Mexicans thank you Mr chair
members of the committee for
allowing me a few moments of
your time for my comments thank
you for listening.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Secora
nefesh and on the registered
lobbyist for New Mexico thrives
I stand in strong support of HB
forty one for years the fees for
services have not covered the
full cost of providing services
the pandemic the work force
shortage and inflation have
exacerbated the problem the
service providers furnish people
with developmental disabilities
quality of life and
opportunities to engage with
community they provide support
and respite to the to families
often enabling family members to
participate in the work force
there weren't enough spaces
available for people with
developmental disabilities
before the pandemic we can't
afford to lose any more service
providers please support H. B.
forty one thank you thank you LA
times.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee a one
punch representing the
disability coalition we advocate
for the interests of persons
with disabilities of all kinds
and the.
I know that all of you share our
excitement at what we call the
super allocation which is moving
thousands of people off the
waiting list some of whom have
waited as long as thirteen years
for DD waiver services but we
can't successfully do that
unless there are provider
agencies and direct service
workers.
Can do this work and serve those
people and in order to do that
we need to put more money into
the system and ensure that those
services are available so we
support this bill and urge you
to do as well thank you.
Thank you thank you so the best
in.
Thank you I am associated with
the New Mexico caregiver
coalition I live up in the far
northeast corner of New Mexico
what you refer to which the
French here I have a background
in.
Service provision having run by
a local branch of a home care
agency that provided services to
the needy population.
I am presently retired but
engaged we just.
Support for
Recipients of care and most
recently engaged with.
Mental health counseling for
families who are struggling
waiting on the on the waiting
list.
And.
Totally frustrated by the lack
of available staff to take on
assisting them with the care of
their family members.
Due to.
Inadequate pay for the paid care
givers I urge you to pass this
bill and push it forward so
that.
Providers can recruit and train
and make available to the
families and disability
individuals the support that
they need thank you.
Thank you let's go to members of
the committee yes Representative
Lord I stare thank you
Representative okay seven couple
question it sounds like a lot of
people are confuse anything is
recurring and if I understand
this is a nonrecurring one time
payment is that correct no.
Yet if the fiscal impact says
it's recurring okay thank you
manufactures yeah I don't have
the F. R..
If you don't have assistance
okay so this recurring yeah it's
The appropriation of them now
contagious bill is a recurring
expense to the general fund okay
then based here Representative
so how many people are currently
in these programs and how many
people are on the waiting list.
The the.
This month forty two hundred
people of thirty four hundred or
so folks have received their
allocation letters already they
were the department was
allocating six hundred people
every three months or six months
or whatever of those that
receive their allocation letters
of thousand little over a
thousand of them are already in
service it just takes a while
once they get their allocation
letter that have to be medical
and financial eligibility for
Medicaid and that refer you know
requires getting in to see a
doctor in we all know how that
works of and and there are
people that are are still
waiting to get their application
letters but hopefully by the end
of January those allocations
wealthy disbursed and people
will be notified that they are
eligible for the waiver so that
we'll push currently there's
probably a little over five
thousand people getting services
on the on the way and then we'll
add the remainder of those
allocations as they get through
the process and make Medicaid
financial and and the waiting
list was up to fourteen years I
have a friend who waited
fourteen years.
And vice chair and
representative so how much will
each individual project this
Madam chair and Representative
Lord it depends it depends on
their level of care and what
kind of services they need if
there living at home with the
families get paid to take care
if they're in a group home if
there's a whole it's there's a
formula it there's different
levels of care my son is the
highest level obviously some
folks in the much less so it's
hard to say it each each our
individual has basically at a
case manager to committee and
they kind of decide what
services are proprioceptive.
Okay
By checking this other question
to have thank you thank you
representative will go to
Representative Ferrary thank you
madam vice chair
This is really.
A cost great celebration.
This.
We looking forward to having
everyone office the what was for
years and it was quite an
accomplishment that Dr Scrase
and HSD and all the partners
working on this came together so
we need to make sure that we can
support the programs to continue
and not to have this list
created again but be able to
absorb
the costs that are providers
need as well as any new
Of people needing the services
so thank you and madam chair I
started working on this thirty
years ago so it's a long time
coming in fingers crossed.
Thank you thank you for bringing
this.
Of Representative part of the.
And vice chair madam chair.
As a mother of a child
disabilities.
Who has had waited on the waiver
for almost fourteen years.
She is my inspiration and my
heart and I thank you so much
for bringing this to the
forefront and often times.
Our children are the ones who
are overlooked.
Our children are the ones who
are exploited and they have good
supported staff is the necessity
to keep our children safe
through our lifetime but we may
not be there so for their
lifetime so thank you.
Thank you Representative Kate's
I thank you madam chair and
committee and and thank you.
Representative chair I I too am
very grateful for your thirty
year commitment and up with the
Mr Copeland's commitment as well
on this I I've run programs for
waiver individuals where.
We were never fully funded is
always an ongoing deal in only
to have constituents who been on
the waiting list for fourteen
years they just got off in
November and now they don't have
for buyers seeking an increase
of services or because they
don't exist I I just ask this is
to make of providers hold to
make sure that they are able to
an aunt's reoccurring nine
really very much it's very
exciting and appropriately
motional it is we can make this
happen
all right I I ask is is the
funding attacks at all with
providers
I know we've been talking about
this for decades to approve
increase education or
certifications and more
professional
occupations and the size of the
numerous amounts of education
that your rates are requires.
Okay madam chair.
Because of the committee
Representative cakes there is
currently not any of.
Fiscal tied to what providers do
with the money it's we we've got
to have a flexible you know
reimbursement system because
there doesn't exist a dollars
and we all knows is the minimum
wage state minimum wage went up
January first to twelve dollars
none of those things were
figured into the rights of the
health is split into effect July
last year to provide sixty four
hours of paid sick leave to all
employees that's not included in
the rate so providers are
incorporating all of these
additional costs and they got to
have some flexibility we know
that in order to improve our
services and to continue our
provider network being viable
and sustainable we've got to
compete with the local Wendy's
and McDonald's and places to
hire staff and people are paying
their staff now you know
fourteen fifteen dollars an hour
we know that's probably not
enough but it's all we can
squeeze out of the river the
reimbursement rates that we've
been receiving
thank you so.
And madam chair there has been
discussion through the years and
it will continue to actually
make this a career to have a
career ladder where people can
get more but we just want to get
the money to make them whole
right now and we're going to
keep on I promise you tell the
day I die unfortunately I'm
going to keep working.
I thank you very much madam
chair and thank you and and and
I absolutely support your
sentiment and I hear Mr
Hoagland's I just wanted to make
sure that we enter into record
what it is and absolutely the
the the right study is a moving
target.
And and and we most certainly
need to increase our provider
stay cold in the state to make
sure that all of our citizens
are taking here so thank you
very much.
Members.
Representative Jones by
Representative I just like to
say that I'm very supportive of
this as well and then you're
saying careers privilege to
provide care for medically
fragile children in southeast
New Mexico and
that keeping those kids at home
and supporting the families was
I feel like one of the best
things I've ever done and to it
was always heart warming to see
how.
this special the relationships
one and that hello this program
possible so I'm very supportive
thank you.
Thank you Sen no other comments
of representative Thompson to
close well thank you all it's a
wonderful thing to vote yes.
If we can move.
Most of the past Representative
K. second from Representative
auto
Please call the roll are you can
ask there's an is there any
opposition.
The bill would be passed this is
and we are and we are.
Recess.
