Sorry okay Representative Kate
here Representative Travis here
Representative Ferrary.
The you Representative Jones.
Representative Lord.
The representative the pants.
Representative Vincent's.
madam vice chair Herndon.
And
madam chair tops.
Okay so we're going to start
with thirty seven early
childhood department background
checks Representative Serrato is
not here yet so Representative.
Ferrary is going to pinch hit
for.
We have no moments to waste in
this committee.
Thank you.
Introduction to further talking
now that's.
Go ahead and introduce you okay
okay thank you madam chair this
is house bill three thirty seven
and this is for the early
childhood education and care
department providing for
different definitions and
expanding department duties or
conducting background checks
basically this is a fix for FBI
background checks
qualifications and I would like
to introduce
is Shelly strong she is the
general counsel for of early
childhood.
Education and Care Department.
If you would like to go ahead
and make the introduction thank
you so much
chairwoman Thompson members of
the committee this is
a bill that allows early
childhood to continue to conduct
background checks on early
childhood providers and early
childhood Education and Care
Department staff we pass this
humana misli past year under SB
thirty eight and the after the
passage the FBI had determined
that are definitions for a bit
too broad and asked us to
federally define a little more
clearly who would be subject to
those background check
requirements and so that's what
this does it doesn't expand we
do the background checks on it
just has more language on who
they are and the reason you know
and what healthcare licensing
registration it's a term means
and so this is just a fix to
allow us to do those background
checks for those people and
Yeah stand for questions okay we
will go to the audience is there
anyone here in opposition.
Kate anyone on view in
opposition I'm not sure for all
the more not.
Are we okay I don't see it is
there anybody on with that hand
raised in opposition okay we'll
go back to the room in support
please raise your hand.
Okay on zoom anybody.
Okay I guess we will go to
questions from the committee.
Madam.
Representative Kate madam chair
I'd like to make a motion for do
pass.
A second second Representative
Travis is there any opposition.
Seeing none you invest.
I think that I'd like to get
emails.
Okay Representative Gallegos is
here.
That someone up.
Okay so this is house bill three
forty nine nursing practice act
changes.
Good morning.
Good morning everybody.
the morning.
If you can if you'll give me
just a managing.
Hi we can find
it.
That moment of panic.
Okay thank you I think my
witness is looking for me and
I'm here so all my other
witnesses would be this texture.
Usually people have to so we
were going to
run the club.
Okay sent at the text.
Every year ready madam chair
already thank you.
I will start with that.
good morning committee and madam
chair House Bill three forty
nine mins of the next new
sections of the New Mexico
nursing practice act these
changes include technical
changes definition definitional
clarity and licensure fees
the board of nursing reports
that the bill needs needed to be
updated
on current nursing practices and
so House Bill three forty nine
has worked with the nursing
association to get these done I
do have a way with this.
I do have an amendment.
Thank you.
Asked.
I was talking real slow.
we do have an amendment and I
think that was delivered to you
all and
If it because that could be
passed out madam chair.
Okay.
except the motion to
yes the amendment is.
Any opposition okay.
Go ahead for thank you my my
witnesses here Linda Siegel and
If the if we can move on to the
amendment because I think it
would be better to talk to about
the bill as a whole and she can
be she can explain it for.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee the amendment is
fixing some language that we
miss or had to
To change the numbers and the
numbers of nursing nurses on the
board and the
the only significant one is
The last one which creates our
clinical placement process
within the board of nursing
which I can talk about more when
we go through the bill.
Okay.
Anything else and that was and
juvenile and for questions okay
we need to approve the
amendment.
Your and Amanda.
And
okay anything else you want to
that's it and then actually will
stand for questions as far as
the bill is concerned to I've
given a small synopsis
okay Missy if you'd like to
give a.
I thank you thank you madam
chair I'm.
For that I need to take a vote
on the amendment.
Is there any objections for
amending the bills as.
Okay seeing line you have
thank thank you madam chair
members of the committee so the
nursing practice act well first
of all I represent New Mexico
nurses association nurse
practitioner counseling those
midwives and we've been working
over the last months to do some
updates to the nursing practice
act because we haven't brought
this to you successfully brought
this to you for probably fifteen
years and there are just a few
things that that we are
Adding and changing so no more
in the practice act we ever
defined advanced practice
registered nurses and we have
used it within the rules of
nursing and that's a cop that's
sort of an fairly new common
term to refer to all advanced
practice nurses nurse
practitioners nurse midwives
clinical nurse specialists and
and C. RNase so we wanted to
make sure that we had added that
into the act so that the the
reference just was there because
we use that throughout statutes
in New Mexico and yet we have
never defined it within the
nursing practice act we've also
clearly defined anesthesia
because that is what C. R. N.
A.'s do do and we we haven't
defined that we change the
number on the board of nursing
from seven to nine and the
reason we did that is because we
have about eighteen thousand
registered and I eighteen
thousand nurses of all types
that practice in New Mexico and
we have many over that that have
a license here but but don't
practice so we are nurses are
the largest health care provider
group in the country and even
the board of pharmacy has nine
members and and they only have
nineteen hundred licensees so we
thought it would be good to
expand the board some so we can
make sure that we have a good
a representation from the
different types of nursing
advanced practice education L.
P. and and so we've added to
members.
We've also
Clarify some language on page
fourteen that the board of
nursing.
Because of the crisis you all
know there's a crisis in the
number of nurses we have and one
of the problems that the schools
of nursing have.
Is clinical placements because
we're gonna we're trying to
educate all these nurses with
the academic piece with the Sam
labs but they have to go out to
hospitals and clinics and
nursing homes and all kinds of
facilities and it's very hard
with all the competing colleges
and universities to get the
clinical placements right and so
we have given the authority
within the board of nursing to
help coordinate those clinical
placements because no one is
coordinated.
We've also remove some language
that is antiquated and quite
frankly has not been followed by
the board of nursing for years
when the act was changed in
nineteen ninety three to
given the advanced practice
nurses within the act
independent practice in
prescriptive authority there was
a requirement put in that there
formula where he's had to be
approved by the board of
nursing.
Well as as many of you know and
Help of pharmaceuticals have
just exploded and to have to
submit a list of what you're
going to prescribe to have it
approved by the board at this
point is ridiculous and so the
board hasn't even been doing it
for a long time so we're
removing that formula a
requirement language from the
act because it's just not
happening.
We've also changed some of the
language are around diversion to
alternatives for discipline and
we have added disruption about
expungement so that if the nurse
has some kind of issue with her
license and she she gets the
alternative discipline but she
complies with everything she or
he complies with everything at
some point that can be taken off
of the record after they do
everything that they're supposed
to do.
And then the final thing we did
was add title protection
we've had in the past that tax
wanting to change their statutes
so they can be a call the nurse
and we want to keep nurses to
taking care of people so we just
added that title protection that
you only get to use the term
nurses here in our in an LPN or
an advanced practice nurse.
And that's all.
Thank you madam chair with that
will stand for questions.
Madam chair members of the
committee members where is our
money.
Did you tell.
Madam chair members of the
committee on Deborah Walker the
executive director for the New
Mexico nurses association and I
just want to reiterate that this
bill that is before you went
through a process during the
interim where we convene all the
various specialty of nursing
associations and consulted with
the board of nursing afterwards
to present these updates to you
today thank you very much.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Gloria
Doherty I am an advanced
practice registered nurse I am
the immediate past president of
the New Mexico nursing
association and I am the a and
P. regional rep for New Mexico I
am an acute care nurse
practitioner who practices in
rural New Mexico in Santa
regional Medical Center in
critical care.
And the changes that are
occurring that you I we are is
in front of you for
consideration are really needed
to update some antiquated
language and the formula area
itself.
I was a nurse practitioner in
two thousand and one and
practice ten years as a nurse
before that and the formulary I
have not had to turn in in the
past ten years and even if you
turned it in by drug class they
also are getting added very
frequently in fact most of us
would have been able to
prescribe for comment if we had
this formula right in place so
thank you for considering thank
you.
is there anyone else in support
like to speak okay and we don't
have anyone on soon from what we
can tell.
And so we go to the committee.
Or did you want to eight yes.
There is okay.
Sorry.
Yeah they put their hand down
okay so there is no when I zoom
okay is there anything else you
wanted to add before we go to
committee I think we're ready
for our okay thank thank you
Committee anyway Representative
Townsend and.
Representative.
The thank you madam chair and
representative groups appreciate
you all being here I agree it is
time for an update.
So so I like the fact that you
you did I was wondering about
the adding to members and I
really like that we have an LPN
and advanced practice I think
that's really necessary
I did have some questions about
We talked about this at all but
the the licensing.
I know it looks like we're we're
going to increase the licensing
fees.
And was that addressed I I miss
that if it was
yes I'm sorry I didn't mention
that madam chair Representative
Jones we're just we're not
necessarily increasing we're
allowing them to go up if
necessary and the board of
nursing would be the one to
decide that and you know we have
actually been losing.
nurses in New Mexico to
retirement and the cold COVID
thing so we wanted to be sure
that if the board needed to
raise those fees they could I
the board doesn't anticipated
but we have to do it in statute
to enable it so that's why we
put it okay you know I'd like to
go back and look at that do you
have happened I didn't market
where it is an actual bill I
know I've got it on my now.
Do we know where that is I can.
Licensure the.
madam chair representative Joan
page fifteen is the one for.
The fourteen and fifteen.
So you know the board of nursing
relies totally on licensing fees
for operations.
Okay.
And so right now what what is
the current operating budget.
my gosh.
Immunity I think I have some
numbers here
is it about three million a
year.
Madam chair representative Johns
I honestly okay I honestly all
right well it's good to know
that that this is just
Giving the option
to raise it because it looks
like right now if this is
correct you guys have a quite a
balance in in your Fund your
current funds so just giving you
some leeway to do what's
necessary I think it would be a
good thing if we kept those fees
low I mean every little bit
counts and so we need to attract
nurses and
That that's that's all I have
thank you so much.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative office thank you
madam chair representative one
of my questions was just
answered but I do have
one more on page fourteen
Coordinated system.
Regarding corporate so I'm.
Madam chair representative this
absolutely I'm on the board of
Santa Fe community college we
have a big nursing program
absolutely includes some okay
good I'm I'm happy to hear that
and then with regard to you said
that you change the language
with regard to diversion can you
talk about that a little bit
more.
And that I don't know what page
it's on it's on Madam chair
representative Chavez service on
page thirty thirty one thank you
really not changing anything
except the language away from
diversion to alternatives for
discipline.
It doesn't change the process
that's within rules related to
that we're just trying to
call it something else that's
that's probably more accurate
and updating that language.
So when a nurse enters a Madam
chair representative a a program
I guess would be called
alternative to discipline
program now what does that look
like and at the end
you know if that if the nurse
here she complies with all the
requirements do they of are they
allowed to practice again.
Madam chair representative yes I
mean part of the the purpose of
the expungement section it is is
to if you if you will complete
all the things that the board of
nursing told you to do because
you have a drug problem or or
whatever it was
We want to get people practicing
we don't want to take people out
of the of our practice
especially now so that the that
expungement allows them to have
that removed from their record
once you've completed
everything.
So those sort of go together
thank you madam chair
Representative the the last
question.
Let's let's which is the.
Well you lucked out.
That is the.
Thank you madam chair.
I I miss why the.
From the seven to the line on
the board which explains story.
Madam chair representative
events and there are right now
around eighteen thousand nurses
that practice in New Mexico and
about seven thousand more that
have nursing licenses of some
kind in New Mexico and that is
the largest health care practice
in New Mexico and the United
States and and so we looked at
all the the numbers of members
of each board and we look at the
pharmacy board in the pharmacy
board who only licenses nineteen
hundred pharmacists practicing
in New Mexico they had a nine
member board and we wanted to
get greater diversity of the
types of nurses that would be on
the board because we have.
Additionally there's not
clinical nurse specialist
clinical nurse anesthetists we
have nursing educators we have
RN's we have LPNs and we have
them in a diversity of practices
throughout the state so it's to
provide the board with more
opportunity to get the voice of
every kind and type of nurse in
our state thank you very much
and madam chair so.
It looks like to me we're almost
doubling the license fees is
that right or wrong.
Madam chair representative now
where I think we're increasing
number potentially increasing
them by fifty dollars that
doesn't mean the board is going
to do it and probably the board
is not going to do it but if
something happened and we needed
to do it we have to come back to
the legislature to put the cap
on it and that's the only reason
we were doing it none of us at
this table want to have the
nurses fees raised and so when
none of the nurses out there I
want to raise I don't like that
either in the last thing madam
chair representative so this is
just a comment.
Our next nurse practitioners in
our rural communities where
they're at.
Why I wish I we have this this
one practitioner and they call
her by her name.
And most of the people in our
community would rather see her
as they had a doctor why why do
we call them by their name why
can't we call some cool like Dr.
I think they deserve it.
Yes Representative.
To secure madam chair
representative answer there.
Madam chair representative
Vincent thank you for that I am
actually a PhD prepared nurse
practitioner so if I introduce
myself to a patient or member of
the community I say hello and Dr
Doherty I am a nurse
practitioner I would never try
to falsely recognized
Representative myself as a
physician nor would any nurse
practitioner our doctorates are
becoming the baseline but
they're not right now and I
think the relationships that we
have with our patients are a
little bit more homey and close
to home than most physicians and
I don't mean that in a negative
way it's just our training is
very different and I practice as
a nurse for ten years before I
became a nurse practitioner and
so you have that closeness of a
bond I'm not offended if anybody
calls me who are at.
In fact I'm glad they remember
my name.
So well.
Madam chair representative that
it offends me.
I can't even like the nurse
practitioner my wife sees you
won't even see me.
She can't get me and she's got
so many patients and when I when
I see them call her by her name
I don't know why that does
something to me but it does and
I I didn't never know what the
etiquette was on if we could
column a dock or wet to come
something because they deserve
it and I appreciate what you do
thank you thank you maybe angel
of your good work angel.
I would get me in trouble it.
By the end of the questions by
the committee.
If not have a take a motion
this.
There's an.
This.
As amended
all right thank you is there any
opposition.
If not to have a due process
thank you very much appreciated
thank you madam chair.
Our next bill is house bill two
ninety one is life and health
insurance guaranty association.
You have it.
Everybody said.
Thank you Representative you may
perceive an introducer expert
thank you madam chair and
committee this is house bill two
ninety one and it demands The
New Mexico's life and health
insurance guaranty association
act.
Based on our current version of
a model actor developed by the
national association of
insurance commissioners.
And thirty seven states have
already adopted these changes
and H. B. two ninety one adds
additional consumer protection
by expanding guarantee court
granting association membership.
To include H. M. O.'s and
provide coverage to their
subscribers in providers
valuable coverage that will
protect them from lost if their
HMO becomes insolvent and I'd
like to introduce our expert.
the last.
That the okay Mike that is the
administrator for the New Mexico
life insurance of.
Association guaranty association
was saying you're right okay
with that Mr back.
Madam chair members of the
committee
You know when you're if if the
bank becomes insolvent broke of
the federal depositor insurance
corporation will protect your
deposits in the bank.
if any if I live for health
insurance company becomes
insolvent.
No there is no FDIC protection
so in nineteen seventy five the
legislature adopted a model act
on the the the life and health
guaranty association act in we
formed the guaranty association
and that's our purpose is to
protect
policy holders of insurance
companies that become insolvent
we continue the coverage we pay
claims we take care of those
policy holders so that they
don't incur a loss as a result
of the company going broke
it does not occur very often but
when it does occur it can be
amiss since nineteen seventy
five we paid out over thirty six
million dollars on behalf of New
Mexico residents who happened to
be policy holders of insurance
companies that became insolvent.
that's our purpose House Bill to
ninety one updates are model act
to reflect changes in the any
axes model over the years and
does increase consumer
protection importantly to HMO
those who haven't been part of
the association.
So we're expanding coverage to
protect people who have
contracts with H. M. O.'s in
particular providers who have
contracted with the two most to
provide benefits to their
contract holders.
In with that you know I'd be
happy to help.
Stand for questions.
All right thank you very much
well first go to the audience is
there anyone here who is
standing in support of this
bill.
Thank you would you like to
please stand it if you would
like to speak come forth that
you each have.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Brett
more I'm a registered lobbyist
for the American council of life
insurers of the American council
of life insurers worked on the
model.
Point as we have a technical
matter we need to take care of
you can stay there
Committee this is actually a
committee substitute fifteen
ninety one that we are that
we're debating and not the bill
itself and so what we need to do
with a motion to
that sentiment is that's the
process of I move to the topic
that can I can I get a copy of
the first yes.
Something you know what I was
voting you're only voting on the
question the discussion.
The.
So thank you madam presenters so
you have presented the committee
substitute in the we are on that
discussion is there anything
additional listed like to
present with respect to the
substitute yes madam chair if Mr
Pat Woods
go ahead and briefly explain
some of the changes that were
made so
Madam chair this is a.
I think we all.
There are a lot of.
One word modifications and
insertion of phrases
all because we're going from
insurance companies to HMO those
were actually expanding to HMO
coverage and H. M. O.'s
traditionally have not called
their contract holders the
insured's our policy holders and
they don't refer to themselves
as insurers so everywhere in
Iraq that we talked about
insurance and policy holders of
we needed to update the act to
make references also to H. M.
O.'s and contract holders that's
the way we're trying to expand
coverage taken those
we missed some of them the first
time around so this is sensually
trying to get the draft correct
and that's the reason for the
committee substitute.
there were some paragraphs that
were left out that got inserted
and we can we can go through
those specifically if you'd like
but sensually the the key is to
try to try to make sure that
this this bill does track the
any I see mobile and that's
that's what we've attempted to
do and while we have the
committee substitute.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm sorry madam chair I would I
would add that the committee
substitute really does not
change the coverage or the
nature of Senate bill to ninety
one it's still primary goal is
to expand coverage to each
impose it adds a couple of
of members we have proved we
could do we could if we wanted
to add another couple of board
members
there are some of repeal of some
things under the HMO act that
deal with insolvency of H. M.
O.'s that won't be necessary if
this act is passed
the the that's that's
essentially what we do here with
House Bill to ninety one with
the committee substitute.
Is there a motion to adopt the
committee.
Their second.
Thank this bill did seconded to
adopt the committee substitute
is there any opposition to adopt
in the committee substitute can
I have can I ask one quick.
On page three.
Line thirteen.
What it talks about the health
benefits plan does not include.
Current could you explain to me
why it doesn't thank you madam
chair this is the this whole
section called health benefit
plan as a definition is trying
to establish
The essentially a category
called health benefit plan in
what ways it's doing it is by
listing the things that are not
a health benefit plans now that
that doesn't mean those aren't
going to be covered if we get
back into the coverage section
they'll tell you that health
benefit plans get half a million
dollars in coverage and they'll
tell you that some of these
other plans specifically will
get three hundred thousand
dollars in maximum coverage and.
The rest of we're gonna get a
hundred thousand dollars in
maximum coverage in the you can
kind of see what's being
excluded and once being excluded
and
The and and and why they would
have actually different limits
of coverage.
Again this is a section of of of
of definitions and later on the
coverage is more specific on how
we cover an accident only
insurance policy thank you.
While she's talking the only
reason I ask that are phrased as
a question is because.
On the on the biotechnology
stuff that they were doing it
awhile back
one of my colleagues actually
stepped out and and asked her
insurance if she was if she
could receive that benefits you
could.
So there's always some hidden
stuff in there I just want to
make sure that everything's
always covered.
Stand.
Thank you Mr thank you
Representative.
Yes.
Sorry I just.
Seven advance so just trying to
understand.
Madam chair representative
different.
And.
If you if you just might
reference of Representative yes
what we'll do is we're going to
go to the public first and see
if there is an sure that will
come back and debate and discuss
the all substitutes eight thank
you.
So I want to clarify for record
was there any opposition to
adopt and so.
Okay from discussing for
discussion only all right thank
you now we're going back to the
audience please.
Madam chair members the
committee my name is Roy Moore
I'm a registered lobbyist for
the American council of life
insurers a CLI has been a lot of
time working on the updates to
this model act for the guarantee
fund they did that work at the
any I see as a Mr Batt mentioned
it's been adopted in thirty
seven states and the the
guarantee funds are essential
and necessary in all states
because they are the backstop if
you ever have an insolvency of
any particular insurance so they
are there to help take care of
insurance policy holders as Mr
that was mentioning so these are
necessary updates the a CLI is
very much in favor of this bill
and we would urge that you pass
this bill thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyist for Blue Cross blue
shield of New Mexico we
appreciate the sponsor and Mr
about working through this so
that we can also be once one of
the states that has added these
additional protections for
consumers and providers in the
case of an insolvency so we do
stand in support of this
legislation thank you.
Madam chair mark Duran I
represent United healthcare this
is a solvency fund the bill
makes the solvency fund more
solvent.
it protects consumers to protect
providers.
It'll cost us more money but
we're in support of the fund
because of that thank you madam
chairman.
Madam chair members committee
keep guard to register lobbyist
for cigna healthcare we also
stand in support of this piece
of legislation I think it's
important to note here what what
happens is right now you have
folks who have health insurance
policies from standard health
issuers any of folks that the
HMO policies we simply have the
exact same coverage but in the
event of insolvency if it's an
insolvency of a standard health
plan there's a systematic way of
resolving those issues and it
all comes out very cleanly if
that happens through an HMO
policy and there's insolvency
there is no process by which
that occurs in there's a bit of
a chaos of that process with
this really does is protect
everybody in the system both the
insurance companies and the
consumers it's a win win for
everyone we stand and support as
a result thank you madam chair.
Thank you in the audience is
there anyone else speaking in
support thanks in no other hands
I'm going to the zoom is there
anyone of the wishes to speak in
support of this legislation.
Hey I see no hands on zoom I'm
going back to the audience is
there anyone in opposition to
this let's.
Sen no hands there I'm going to
zoom is there anyone else zoom
and opposition to this
legislation.
Okay seeing no hands there are
going to the committee
Representative semansky.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I think I've seen
one of the differences between
the seven the bill.
What we were talking at the
bottom of page thirteen.
The.
Of the substitute bill.
Is language on page fourteen are
the are the changes
Representative just to and
expertise to.
at a technical cleanup.
There were there were some of
the.
I'm kicking.
Regional.
madam chair
This is.
I have a copy thank you.
Madam chair the
again
the difference between the two
is the insertion of the phrase
which for purposes of the life
and health insurance guaranty
association that includes health
make a maintenance organization
subscriber contracts and
certified.
Thank you madam chair
Representative and I think
there's a on page fourteen of
the sub there is.
Some language that was just
moved.
The is it accurate Madam chair
representative to just say that.
The different.
just sort of technical
reformatting kinds of changes
that's you madam chair that's
what we attempted to do with the
committee substitute some
the some paragraphs were left
out that needed to be inserted
And it but most of it was just
technical adjustments to try to
make sure we had described the
coverage of H. M. O.'s versus
insurance companies.
Eight thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Representative.
If any other questions.
I have a couple for you thank
you.
For the a presenter Mister.
Expert we talk about the fact
that the there is this the fund
association for purposes of
insolvency but where do you get
your funding how do you get that
madam chair the the statute has
an entire section called
assessments and it talks about
how we assess our member
insurers
all of the members of the
association these would be
licensed insurers in New Mexico
are required to be members of
our association their benefit of
being a member of the
association is if one of their
colleagues if one of their
competitors becomes insolvent
they are assessed to make up the
difference if there is any
shortfall and assets they are
assessed to make up the
difference.
But this the clarify every
insurance provider.
Is required to be part of the
association those that right
business that's covered by the
association that's correct madam
chair.
He also made a comment if we go
back to the committee set up but
we talk about these a health
benefit plans that are not
included and you also mentioned
that there was a a certain
amount and you talked about a
hundred thousand dollars maybe
percent.
With respect to others but we to
clarify is that per policy per
person so what does that mean in
terms of the coverage madam
chair that would be per policy
so if you have a if you have
actually if you have more than
one policy it's actually the the
limited stated.
Per company per insured life.
So if the insured life is the
the key so if an individual has
three or four policies it all
gets aggregated into the
statutory limit that's in the
coverage section.
This for clarification on the
health benefits plan for example
the accident only insurance
which is not covered but you
indicated there was some
limitation
you madam chair the accident
only policies are covered
they're just not covered areas
health been.
But there's a different there's
a different limit.
There's a different limit for
different types of coverage
there is there's a maximum limit
for a life insurance policy
death benefit may maximum
coverage limit for cash value of
an insurance policy
there's a maximum limit for.
Disability income policies
there's a maximum limit for long
term care insurance policies.
And there is maximum limit
stated for health benefit plans
and then all other covered
health insurance is subject to
another limit so it's they list
specific coverages give it a
maximum limit and then all other
coverages is has a limit.
So just one other question just
for clarification to make sure
that that I understand in fact
the if we look at the vision
only insurance he stated that is
covered this is not covered as a
health benefit plan you talked
about a hundred thousand dollar
limit so I'm just wanted just
for clarification if you have a
vision only plan is that hundred
thousand dollars limited to you
and not to the whole company.
It would be to the individual.
But.
There are.
There is a limit to coverage and
there are of different types of
insurance that are excluded from
coverage.
And so I don't want to
confusion site everything is
covered so if we could maybe we
should go to that section in the
bill where it where it actually
talks about what is not covered
okay.
Or what type of insurance
company is not covered.
The.
It's it should be the definition
of member insurers.
Open and I'm doing.
It's line twelve in the
committee so the.
On page four.
So there there are insurance
companies that are excluded from
membership there are different
operations that are ex still
excluded from membership.
if you go down to line twenty
three.
You see a strike through for
health maintenance organization
that's because it used to be
excluded now it's being
included.
a health care plan whether
profit or non profit is for
nonprofit health care plans
licensed under article forty
seven of the insurance company
we don't have any anymore we've
got I think there's one company
that has a little bit that is
license currently is a not for
profit health care plan and it's
a that it's a dental company
because it's delta dental.
there are this one also would
excluded company this licensed
as a prepaid dental plan our
company that's licensed as a
fraternal benefit society.
And you can go on to see state
pulling plans or excluded from
membership.
And mutual assessment companies
I don't think we have any of
those in New Mexico.
an insurance exchange.
The charitable organizations.
Sills charitable gift annuities.
so there there are people who
are not going to be members of
this association and are not
going to be covered but if you
if you look at those there.
There are probably reasons for
why they're being excluded.
Fraternal benefit societies
don't want to be assessed for
for a life insurance company
insolvency their community
organizations
the that assess their members
for their own benefits and and
don't really want to be involved
in this kind of a insolvency.
Plant.
Thank you for pointing that out
it's for our consumers who may
be listening the purposes of
when they purchase their
policies there would be a
disclaimer so that they would
not be covered under this type
of of under the association if
indeed something happen with
respect to the company madam
chair I'm not aware of any
requirement that they do that
there is a requirement that an
insurance company issue a
summary of our coverage if they
are covered so most people in
New Mexico doesn't even know
about the guaranty association
but if you buy a policy and that
policy is covered you will get a
note in the mail and notice that
tells you about our association
gives our contact information.
Thank you for that additional
information.
Hi
a motion on this yes.
Okay their second Senator could
I it has to be a do not pass on
to ninety one and a do pass on
committee substitute for two
ninety one.
Two ninety one.
Yes and I do pass on committee
substitute for two nine House
Bill to ninety one.
Okay let me try this.
Madam chair I.
Hi make a motion for a do not
pass on the two ninety one
amendment of two ninety one to
ninety one.
And they do pass on the
amendment of the substantive on
the substitute.
But the ninety one to ninety one
very good thank.
Is there second on the motion
thank okay is there any
opposition to the motion.
If not you have a do not pass on
house bill two ninety one and a
do pass of the substance use
House Bill to ninety one
congratulates.
The committee.
Representative Matthews are you
ready.
We are on house bill three
ninety one audiology and speech
language pathology compact.
Thank you madam chair I'm not
used health committee building
is such an incredibly large
facility.
This is quite.
After I left the committee madam
chair it appears that the
committee has just become really
important.
You know if if it's that
important visual.
Madam chair up we're here today
on to.
Four of the five compacts
interstate compacts that time.
Of the sponsoring
Hoping to have New Mexico joined
off I and some of you will
remember that yes money we had
on the prior three in the prior
three were medical licensing
physical therapy and in
psychology today we're here on
two more
the first one is HB three ninety
one speech and the next one will
be HB three ninety two
occupational therapy and I
mention that because some of our
testimony will apply to both
even though they're different
medical specialties
and we will have and with me is
Dr Michael Kaplan who is going
to be the expert on this speech
of and it and
Audiology and speech language
pathology sorry there's a lot of
words there
my co sponsor and this is
said Representative Hermio who
is a.
speech language therapist and.
so.
I think what we would like to do
is start
with that we have a witness on
June.
Who.
Is going to talk about.
Couple things but first before
that let me just kind of like a
basic foundation here.
The reason we're seeking
approval all these contacts is
because is is many of you know
we have a terrible shortage of
health care providers in our
state and you can't grow
healthcare providers overnight
it just these are people with
lots of education and it takes a
long time to do that so in
looking for ways to expand our.
The number of our health care
providers and also the
specialties that they cover
because we lack of our small
state in population and we don't
always have all this the people
with specialties that we might
live.
So these interstate compacts are
a way to.
Allow New Mexicans greater
access to healthcare providers
and we are currently able to
provide in state and a lot of
times quite frankly this is down
to telehealth not all of it but
it's basically a telehealth kind
of process by which
And people are members of the
healthcare providers who are
members of the state as of the
compact in other states are able
to be access by our
People in New Mexico and that it
plans to grow it also allows our
specialist for and our health
care providers to join the
compact would be available to
people in other states but we're
looking at it more from the
standpoint of of growing
the the the number of people we
have available to New Mexicans
and the in the.
So what this is about provider
shortages and it is also about
and this is where those soon
witness is going to come in is
to the United States Department
of Defense is now requiring and
has made it a a a.
Pretty much a condition for
future.
Missions to be assigned it much
less future basis but even just
missions to be assigned to
amount military facilities they
want
they want states to have these
compacts in place and they
really want that for two reasons
one is of because the spouses of
military personnel.
Who come here are able then to
practice and then the second is
because they need the same
access to healthcare providers
as of others so.
Representative Representative do
you have an amendment I'm sorry
yes revenue.
So we should start with that and
the number is point two two five
four five four point one.
I have a motion to adopt the
budget discussion.
Thank you we have the amendment
for discussion would you please
tell us the names of your
witnesses on soon so that we can
recognize them and have an
admission.
I've and we've got to adopted
the amendment.
excuse me go back to doing would
you reset the to go to the
number again for your amendment
point two two five four five
four point one so that is
different than the number that
we have Madam representative yes
because I have it on file on.
It is our place that's an
excellent point two two five
four four three point one thank
you.
You were going to give us the
names of those that are that are
on soon but if you would like to
make sure are you witnesses so
that we open them up on some.
I believe it's Janice burns but
it might be a Paul Cassidy or
Sherman McCorkle.
Hello I'm so sorry.
Mr Ricardo is here we don't have
to do is in.
Is he the only witness nobody on
some on the issue that the
military he's the only witness
doctor Kaplan is here to talk
about speech.
Thank you very much.
Do we have do we have we adopted
the amendment or but we have
adopted the amendment correct
number so thank you very much.
All right well then I would ask
Mr McCorkle to tell you fill you
in on the military piece.
Chair members of the committee.
Three your responses.
Packs.
Opting these call.
Installations hand made pizza.
Thank you madam chair.
That they would like to see all
fifty states adopt these
compacts in order to keep
missions and continue bring.
Before we go further for
clarification and for the record
the motion was made of.
To adopt the minutes for
discussion point two two five
four four three point one and
there was no opposition to adapt
in the amendment for discussion
make sure that our record is
clear all right thank you madam
chair I'm I'm not Representative
we move forward thank you
at this point I would like Dr
Caplan to tell you about the
speech and language audiology
speech and language pathology.
Services in New Mexico and how
this compact will make a
difference.
Thank you good morning madam
chair members of the committee
I'm a speech language
pathologist I'm also the vice
chair of the speech language
pathology audiology and hearing
aid dispensers licensure board
here in New Mexico a long name.
we're we're very much the board
is very much in favor of this
compact this compact full help
as as other people said it will
help address the shortage we
have a huge shortage of
licensed speech language
pathologists and audiologists in
the state especially in our
rural communities and what we've
had in the past I hear this all
the time I get therapists from
Texas calling.
calling our office and saying
we'd like to serve students are
adults and seven part of New
Mexico or eastern New Mexico and
so on and can we do that without
getting a license and I
unfortunately have to tell them
know that they have to be
licensed in New Mexico as well
as being licensed in their home
state so if we pass the compact
that will alleviate that so that
a person was licensed in their
home state and is a member of
the compact would be able to
work across state lines that
would be able to work in New
Mexico there are currently
twenty three states that are
part of this
Interstate compacts in the
American speech and hearing
association there are eight more
states pending Mexico is one of
them along with Texas in New
York in Idaho so there are
several other states that are
now working to get to get
approval so that there you can
join the interstate compact
speech language pathologists and
audiologists are a number of
different types of patients be
set beyond what you see in the
school system I know we hear
always about the shortage of
therapists in the public schools
but you know they serve as a
populations as well they work
with the developmentally
disabled brain injury stroke
swallowing issues whether it be
neonates or the elderly
Parkinson's head and neck cancer
dementia Alzheimers I think you
Paul he these terms before and
of course COVID survivors COVID
survivors to come out of the
hospital and have been on
ventilators need speech
therapist because they either
cannot talk or they cannot
swallow anymore and so they need
to be retort and they benefit
from the services of a speech
language pathologist
so we are in multiple settings.
Are currently about seventeen
hundred plus license speech
pathologist in town in in state
and out at which but we
certainly have a huge opening we
could probably benefit from
having at least three of four
hundred more speech pathologist
eligible to work with the
population that we have in New
Mexico it's very difficult as
you know for health
professionals to see any number
of patients they usually get
overwhelmed by the number of
patients and then can't see find
them at the the services that
the building in the interstate
compacts will help to improve
the licensure process it'll help
improve the continuity of care
and as the department of defense
stated that when military
professionals come into town
that makes their licensure
process a lot easier for them to
be licensed and be able to work
in the state so that I'll stand
for questions.
That did you.
I'm going to the audience is
there anyone standing in support
of this bill please come for.
Madam chair members of the
committee Richard Romero I
represent the New Mexico speech
and hearing association members
as a cancer survivor and the
having the fortune good fortune
of being helped by a speech
pathologist I am
Very much in support of this
bill along with the association
thank you thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico Association for Home
and hospice care that we
students are supported
legislation as was noted really
this does improve the continuity
of care for New Mexicans the New
Mexico legislature should be
doing everything they can to
expand provider access and this
bill will just do that so we
stand strong support.
Madam chair members the
committee Charlie mark is
registered lobbyist for desert
states physical therapy network
Representative approximately
thirty
clinics around the state anyway
we also stand support of this we
believe that compacts are a good
thing it's it is a good way to
expand access and I believe this
is a good measure thank you very
much for your support.
Thank you.
Anyone else in the audience and
support.
Right we're going to the zoom if
you are in support of this
legislation please raise your
hand to be recognized Baquero
your first.
Bob you are muted.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the community my
name's Bob Caroline I'm a member
of that original Terry families
office and Representative.
Representative Matthews over
the.
the points that I was going to
cover and I just want to
emphasize that the these are all
these combat built all five of
the very important thousands of
military service members and to
the apartment yes
and I can tell you from personal
experience I have a son with
cerebral palsy you my wife and I
struggled mightily to services
we need these compacts will
increase providers which we all
recognize seeing that and
finally I just want to add the
states surrounding us joining
these acts and we need to do and
I'm also had it thank you very
much.
Thank you.
Megan Marino.
From the New Mexico association
for home and cost more madam
chair members of the committee I
believe I have a number two on
this I knew that while we are
all here are of this you know
that calm in our home health
providers they would home right
I don't care the Cherokee and
like with all other healthcare
professional there is.
but they need.
Anything that the legislature.
Joining a contract in the wrong
or.
Thank you.
Next we have Susan Adams.
Madam chair members the
committee thank you my name is
Susan Adams and I am here
echoing all the things you Mr I
represent the American speech
language hearing association and
I can also stand with for any
questions that the committee may
have on that technicality.
Thank you very much.
Jason Dunlap.
Jason Dunlap is the expert on
the T. bill the ex.
Yeah I'm I'm talking or in
person support and a New Mexico
occupational therapy association
in our association is and
support us this bill.
I.
I will come back to you we are
on house bill three ninety one.
And so if you would lower your
hand for this one we'll go to
Natalie.
Kalfus.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is not
hauling Health Service I am the
legal counsel for the speech
language pathology and audiology
interstate compacts on the
cooker after that contact I am
also interim legal counsel for
the occupational therapy compact
and did proffer the amendments
was here to answer questions but
obviously to stand in strong
support into a call New Mexico a
for your consideration of these
contacts that do a great deal
for access to competent care
thank you.
Thank you I see no further hands
in support I'm going back to the
this is there anyone in
opposition to this legislation.
I see no hands here I'm going to
propose soon is there anyone
else who and opposition to this
legislation.
I'd say that I'm going to the
committee Representative public
meal.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
to us
am I correct to assume that
everybody in the twenty two
state compact is also certified
through Asha.
Madam chair representative
hiring me know.
It's up to that individual state
as to whether or not they're
licensed members also are
required to be members of Asher
in New Mexico.
In order to apply for a license
you have to be a member of as
**** American speech and hearing
association but then upon
renewal of your license you do
not necessarily have to maintain
the membership in the American
speech and hearing association
we certainly encourage it.
And many school districts look
for folks that are certified by
Asha and licensed in the state
as well so what it would be to
their advantage thank you so
much.
Are there any other questions.
Representative Jones.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I just want to
say I appreciate this bill I
appreciate all the compacts and
to to my
Representative huh
down here who's a speech
therapist I just want to say I
appreciate you as an are in the
ancillary services that that are
provided by these professionals
are.
We rely on you very much for the
health of our patients of I just
appreciate the opportunity
thanks.
Just one question before we go
to the depends
I would like to ask your thanks
for the question in terms of
these contacts no we have
individuals coming in pursuant
to them how do we know that
there are no of.
Adverse actions that are pending
against these individuals so
that we are bringing in people
who are
Are are coming into it it
standing madam chair members of
the committee the interstate
compacts commission and we also
have it in our house bill three
ninety one
the candidate first of all we
recognize that there are members
in good standing in their home
state if they're not a member in
their home of good standing in
their home state then we won't
consider them as part of the
compact
but the compact does require
that there is a criminal
background check on any
candidate and any that wants to
be part of the compact in order
to provide services to other
states and so will be we are
required also at in this state
to make sure that there's a
criminal background check to
make sure that there's no no one
nothing else going on.
Thank you and just for
clarification if we you talked
about the number of patients
that you have sometimes it can
be overwhelming so can we can
you just call for example
Colorado and say we need a
number of assistance here
because we are overwhelmed with
the people who can help us who
we can help and then do they
respond I'm if we.
You know every state of
fortunately has a shortage of
certified speech language
pathologists and you have to be
a master's level or PhD level
speech language pathologist in
order to get the license
originally in New Mexico
but you know and the Interstate
contact as well requires master
level certification from that
individual state to be licensed
as a to be recognized by the
American speech and hearing
association as a license speech
language pathologist you talk
about assistance there is such a
term as speech language
pathology assistants New Mexico
does not license speech language
pathology assistance at this
time
we might come back to the in
another year or two maybe the
New Mexico speech and hearing
association will happen
assistance bill at some point
but at this point we don't
license them here so they we
cannot use assistance in New
Mexico to provide service it has
to be master level or Ph.D level
speech language pathologist who
would be part of the compact in
license in New Mexico to provide
those services thank you of.
Representative.
To pass is there a second also
is there any opposition from
the.
And what are you passing.
The.
The bill as amended.
Care.
Second as thank you all right
you have a due process under the
house bill two ninety one as
amended.
Thank you.
Three ninety five
do think two ninety three I'm
sorry three ninety one is
amended.
Three.
Now.
Well we're on house bill three
ninety two occupational therapy
licensure compact Representative
of would you introduce your bill
in your and your experts and
chair I would be happy to do so
we do have an amendment for this
one also and with me today is
Linda Siegel
who is the master of all trades
as far as I can tell.
Many trades and we do have a of
expert on education Dunlap I
believe on those in.
and
it with that I
that you're not going to.
Three.
Would you please tell us the two
oh two number of the amendment
Representative Cadena is point
two two five four five four
point one madam chair.
Does everyone have a copy of the
amendment.
May I have a motion to adopt the
amendment for purposes of
discussion the move.
Thank you just a second okay.
Then the objection to the
motion.
Right we're on the bill as
amended for discussion.
Then to would you like me to
comment on the if you please
remember the amendment okay it's
just some word to us to be sure
that what we're looking at is
consistent with the actual
compact itself and these things
get updated periodically and we
needed to
we needed to be sure that the
language conformed with the
actual compact.
There's no there's no
substantive change madam chair
it as this is just basically
being sure that the word
tweaking is all correct.
Thank you.
Direct explained the bill okay
chair thank you
and the testimony of Mister
McCorkle and and Megan
Daly Roseanne is we would like
that applied to this compact to
without having to repeat it
but this is the same situation
as we had essentially with
speech therapy which is
because speech therapy that's
not quite right but
Occupational therapy is
we do not have enough
occupational therapist in the
state to meet the needs of our
citizens and so of compact is a
way that we grow the provider
network so that we can provide
better health care services to
our to our
To our citizens and with that I
would just.
Siegel to talk a little bit more
about the occupation.
And the need.
Thank you thank you madam chair
Linda Siegel representing the
New Mexico occupational
therapists association and just
a couple comments on on a
compact since we already have a
nursing compact or was involved
in that when we first tested in
two thousand one and then when
we had to redo it updated and
seventeen and the thing is that.
There was a question about the
discipline.
The the the original licensing
state is the only one who can
discipline a person and so and
that information is in the big
Compact into T. where everybody
has to report those so how this
would work with occupational
therapy as it does with nurses
we have a lot of nurses that
live in Texas and work in New
Mexico because they're on the
border in in in California
Colorado in el Paso on the east
side of the state and since we
are short occupational
therapists as we are short every
single provider we have about
eight hundred and eighty nine
actual licensed occupational
therapists that practice in New
Mexico.
And we are about a hundred and
fourteen short.
Based on on what the last health
care workforce report says and
because we have these benchmarks
for how many.
About different type of health
care providers should be in each
county area and so of course
just like with every other
health care provider group we
are are short on occupational
therapists so this could create
some possibility where a person
living on the border as was
discussed with speech therapy
could be serving our patients
and New Mexico now the thing
about a compact is if you have
your compact license in the
state where you live.
So if a person was to move to
New Mexico they would have to
get a New Mexico compact license
because if you move you're not
supposed to be operating on the
compact license from the state
where you are so this contact is
just like you know as far as how
it functions like all the other
compacts except the site pack
for the psychologist which is
just for telehealth and as as
you all may know in both P. T.
O. T. and speech during the
COVID.
there was a lot of telehealth P.
T. N. O. T. where you could
direct people to certain
exercises and and that sort of
thing so that could happen
across borders obviously if
people during the compact and
Jason Dunlap who is R. O. T.
expert is on this zoom.
Everyone hear me good morning my
name is not on lap madam chair
and members of the committee I
sent New Mexico occasionally
Association I serve as the
legislative committee
chairperson
here in New Mexico the reason
why we support this bill is like
it's been sad is that we have a
shortage of occupational therapy
practitioners especially in the
rural communities with the
passing of this bill this will
improve access to occupational
therapy providers no also
increase choices for
occupational therapy providers
such as for instance we have
spouses who occupational
therapists and their spouse gets
transferred from one case to
here in New Mexico portability
is going to be very easy for
that practitioner
also it's going to preserve our
existing state needs licensure
system so for instance we have a
scope of practice we is
occupational therapy
practitioners have to abide by
and that's going to help
preserve Act system also it's
going to improve our continuity
care within our citizens here in
New Mexico
and then also like it heard it
with this speech pathologist
this is that it's also going to
require
like reasons background checks
that license applies if they're
in a in a member state also
going to ensure that continuing
education is facilitated for
that practitioner and at that if
you have any questions I'll be
happy to answer.
Thank you.
And madam chair that's all the
witnesses we have we stand for
questions thank you I'll go to
the audience first is there
anyone in the audience who
stands in support of this
legislation.
I see no hands I'm going to
assume is there anyone else
still standing in support of
this legislation I would like to
speak.
I see Bob Carroll this to Carol
you have the floor.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I just want to say
that the on behalf of the
veterans and military families
caucus I think it's great that
all five of these contact
details.
Andrea this committee approved
unanimously and I think it'll be
good for veterans and for the
state of New Mexico thank you.
Thank you the next have Amy
Dixon.
Mystics and can you on mute.
Mystics and will come back to
you and we'll go to events.
Moffett.
Chair can you hear me yes we can
hear you.
Okay thank you often own agency
northwest New Mexico based
apartment to New Mexico
providing home health care
hospice care and personal care
services it is time for the vote
for this really we have it this
is several hundred patients and
a cleaning service extremely
difficult especially the
specialties like occupational so
we're I'm I'm very much in
support of this bill.
Thank you.
Anyone else on the listen to
speak in support of this let.
Sen now hands I'm going to the
audience is there anyone who is
that who is opposed to the
legislation.
In no hands I'm going to zoom is
there anyone in opposition to
the legislation.
Thanks in no hands them going to
the committee are there any
committee members with
questions.
Thank you miss madam chair and
and and committee representative
K. thank you thank you.
I got caught caught that talking
what he's got going on thank you
very much I just would like to
say thank you very much for
bringing this forward I like
many of us on the committee have
run programs using OTP T. an SLP
Services I believe that number
of being short is actually too
small many of us to is to be
able to be rid of meet the
requirements of our medical plan
if you can't find an O. T. then
you have to come up with what
other ways can they get service
which are never the best of part
of Care and so I and very
grateful thank you very much
Representative Matthews for
bringing these and cleaning up
this matter and you will have my
support thank you.
Of any other questions.
If not
will accept a motion.
Thank you revenue passed motion
of the bill as amended as their
second.
Second day ended this second is
there any opposition from the
committee to the passage of this
bill.
That you have a do pass on house
bill three ninety two as amended
congratulations.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee we will
on.
Our last bill for the morning is
house bill two fifty eight
Representative block.
Representative Lara thank you
morning madam chair may Percy
thank you Sir of.
I will great thank you madam
chair thank you representatives
today I have house bill two
fifty eight in front of you and
my expert witnesses Mike Seidel
he is a an attorney and he will
be helping me with some of the
fun questions that we have on
this bill so regarding this bill
this would protect children in
the womb from the point of a
fetal heartbeat being detected.
Into the Johns Hopkins
University School of medicine
the average fetal heart rate is
between a hundred and ten and a
hundred sixty beats per minute
it can vary by five to twenty
five beats per minute.
Currently abortion is legal up
to the date of birth in the
state of New Mexico with no
protections whatsoever for
pregnant mothers babies in the
womb or medical professionals.
This bill explicitly notes on
page two line seven eight
nothing in this section shall be
construed to allow the
prosecution of a woman who
receives an abortion.
Leading national national
national and statewide polls so
that most Americans The New
Mexicans support limits on
abortion including heartbeat
bills they support those in
Albuquerque journal poll
conducted by research and
polling incorporated between
August nineteenth the twenty
fifth of last year found that
fifty nine percent of New
Mexicans support abortion limits
a hill Harris poll survey found
that fifty five percent of
voters said that they do not
think that laws banning
abortions after six weeks such
as heartbeat bills when an
unborn baby's heart rate is
detected are too restrictive and
so these are just a few pause
off hand sewing national and
statewide support for
legislation that limits abortion
at certain ages.
So this part of this policy is
very popular and in line with
New Mexicans values in our great
state.
And it is an important step to
protecting mothers and babies in
the womb all across our state
and I will turn it over to Mike
Zabel my expert thank you
Representative block thank you
madam chair and representatives
here today my name is Mike
Seidel amount practice lawyers
here in the state of New Mexico
I also do malpractice to
abortion malpractice all over
the country.
this bill will actually help the
safety and regulation of the
unsafe and unregulated
malpractice industry here in New
Mexico we only need to look to
the the southwestern women's
options in this situation who is
been performing abortions
outside the standard of care for
over twenty years they are
performing outpatient abortions
which was clearly you're marked
as outside the standard of care
by a clogged which requires
constant monitoring in a
hospital like setting as a
result we have seen fifty
injuries here in New Mexico
alone where there have been
transferred from southwestern
women's Office options over to
UNM hospital and we have seen
one death that would have been
preventable if we had any limits
on the standards of care
regulations for limits on
abortion.
In addition we are also seeing
the unregulated abortion in
France the yard in the south
he's telling patients in in the
most recent documentary to why
about why there in the emergency
room if they have to go to the
emergency room after taking the
abortion pill this is not in
regulation are in accordance
with any health care regulation
is potentially a violation of
the act the unfair practices act
for the regulation and
licensing.
We're seeing increasing numbers
of abortion hello
hospitalizations and ER visits a
national study cohort studies
thirty four hundred and nineteen
thousand
Chemical abortions of those a
hundred nineteen thousand ended
up in the emergency room within
thirty days well most of them
were not serious complications
it was clogging up our emergency
room bills.
All rights are emergency rooms
which is compromising other
patient safety in the in the
meantime.
Also just some of the highlights
of some of the cases that have
been involved within a topic
pregnancy due to the abortion
pill at six weeks the topic pre
pregnancy ruptured because they
did not do an ultrasound yours
over a hundred thousand dollars
worth of medical bills another
was a molar pregnancy was agency
because the abortionist did not
do an ultrasound which is being
it's becoming increasingly
common in throughout the United
States and the lady has brain
cancer inoperable and is soon
going to die as a result of
that.
In addition we're seeing our age
factor cases where women are
becoming infertile or miss
caring because they are not
doing our H. testing for these
doctors are each testing is
recommended by the national
abortion federation at fifty six
days or eight weeks a fetal
heartbeat bill would protect a
lot of these situations the
reason being is if a fetal
heartbeat what is detectable
between six and seven weeks
according to most experts in
this country it would require a
fetal doppler ultrasound which
would pick up stuff like molar
pregnancies and a topic
pregnancies and other
abnormalities which would give
women health care true health
care in this situation rather
than just an abortion.
The other thing that it would
protect against is something I'm
seeing increasingly common over
there in the last couple of
years since twenty twenty I have
had numerous phone calls from
women who have had the abortion
pill.
They call my office on a regular
basis us what do I do with this
baby.
This baby I had it it's in my
toilet should I fished out can I
bury it can I flush it what am I
supposed to do many of them are
telling me I can't live here
anymore the guilt is too much I
have to move from my apartment
my house I can't go into my
bathroom the emotional distress
of the abortion pill right now
is just astronomical amounts
these women you can go to silent
no more and see hundreds and
hundreds of testimonies just
like this.
So a fetal heartbeat bill would
protect against those safety
both physical and emotional
problems that we are seeing more
and more every day with women I
can tell you that there are
groups formed across this
country right now that are
seeking to see doctors who are
not in compliance with the
safety standards and it you know
as the New Mexico attorney I
want to protect the women that I
represent the women like you
check ins who died as a result
of abortion malpractice here in
the state of New Mexico.
And protect my taxpayers would
pay three hundred and sixty five
thousand dollars to my in my
office in my client because they
referred to a an abortionist who
is operating below the standard
of care and they knew that our
legislators can fix this they
can protect women they can make
sure they are safe they can make
sure that they have if involve
abortion is health care they can
make sure that abortion is truly
health care and regulated in
that within that matter and this
bill would do that thank you.
Thank you the with the with
thank you madam chair we will
stand for questions.
Thank you very much it's not
going to the audience is there
anyone that standing in support
of of house bill two.
We will limit your speaking we
have a number of people here two
one minute of peace and if you
would like to line up please.
Madam chair members of the
playoffs.
All right thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Alan Sanchez I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico conference of Catholic
bishops we understand the a
difficult in the discernment of
these issues we're here not to
impose but to propose and the
bishops stand in support of this
legislation and urge you to vote
for it thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee and
Representative block I'm a
little bit over come with
emotion because the bill in New
Mexico this is history I just
want you to know I have worked
in both pregnancy center and I'm
the executive director right to
life committee of New Mexico I
have seen women's lives changed
as the C. that il to Senate only
six weeks in the state that
heart beating in the media we
chose choose life Dr Boyd itself
was Women's option says he
admitted he admits to killing
these babies and they are babies
we know there's been an effort
to dehumanize them but they are
babies the act of killing is
actually taking a live it's the
intentional taking a life and so
we want to save these babies
from the in the first trimester
they are sectioned out with the
two in the second trimester
there dismember their heart torn
limb from limb and in the third
trimester is a lethal injection
given in their heart or their
brain so that the cause of death
seventy two hours that.
Thank you very illegal for a
dog.
I want to remind you you have
one minute to speak either
please go ahead.
Thank you chair Pamela Hearn
done and god bless you for
having us here to.
Praise god that we have a chance
to change our minds again you'll
note that Representative
Jennifer Jones has legislation
in this direction giving us a
chance to change our minds.
When there's a pregnant woman
she's already a mother don't
forget to introduce yourself my
name is James doctor James
Langenbrunner at that rate bond
from Santa Fe president of the
Santa Fe right to life chapter
thank you.
Regnant woman is already a
mother and the baby will always
have a birthday whether it's
forced birth or whether it's a
natural birth whether the child
is born alive course born dead
that woman as a mother that's
the emphasis of the heartbeat
bill.
So if a woman has a child that
is born through abortion very
much we have for today thank
you.
good morning thank you madam
chair and representative my name
is Benny Gonzales I'm just a
resident here in New Mexico
I see that several of you are in
your cell phones you're not
paying attention to me I wanted
to look at me.
Please.
And I want to say one thing
please.
Do not put your party.
Ahead of what the lord wants.
Hi a lord Salazar number coming
here's an expert witness I
passed my tenth grade biology
class.
This is.
Why in New Mexico this culture
of death when is it going to
stop it's like how many can they
kill.
The heart beat hard beach we're
talking about A. B. how many
more babies are we going to kill
in New Mexico it's New Mexico
going to become a yes
destination state it already has
we're having to we're having I'm
having to pay for abortions.
It just breaks my heart.
Please please.
I know when opposition this
could be people in opposition to
they will never mention the
babies I've been hearing
testimony all week whatever one
word about the baby's not one.
I'm begging.
I'm begging please open your
hearts.
Thank you please.
And pay attention thank you.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Richard
Sanchez I am a child of god.
And I'm asking you this morning
to open your hearts and minds.
That we are all children of god
and we are entrusted by him to
the care of each other.
And our.
We have created government we
have created legislature's to
ensure the care and protection
of each other.
And who is more vulnerable and
more innocent and the unborn
child think about that as you
vote thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
wants this set of Santa Fe
resident currently lifelong New
Mexican.
To read you a email like
composed for you guys about a
week.
Our Supreme Court in the Dobbs
decision last week has
essentially ruled there's no
constitutional right to
abortion.
Much of their reasoning is based
on the new science of the embryo
over the past fifty years.
We now know without a doubt that
an embryo that is an unborn
child is a unique human being.
With separate distinct DNA from
its mother.
We may deny this fact as many
seem to want to by calling the
woman's so called right to
choose and over right to privacy
rules right to abort a decision
to be made with your doctor
sadly the right to abort
reproductive freedom at several
arguments which totally ignore
reality.
Reallocate that is very member
you was a living human donor.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Maura Jan's I live in Rio
Rancho New Mexico I am here
representing the women a special
the wounded women the many many
many many.
Wanted women of silent no more
they I have over twenty years of
listening to their testimony and
witness.
You can find them on the
internet at silent No more
awareness campaign there are
thousands of testimonies about
the deep hurt the regret.
And women suffer lifelong damage
I know because I know many of
them I've heard their
testimonies and I have friends
who suffer life long deep regret
over a choice they can never
reverse so we are damaging women
these women are wounded they
would reverse this decision the
wrong choice.
Hello my name is merry income
and I am one of those women when
I was at UNM in the seventies I
chose to abort my child for
basically.
disk they wanted to hide what I
was doing but the if the.
Well first I want to say that
every child is born in in the
image and likeness of god and
that's why I have such a high
value for them but I I had an
abortion which was messed up
failed so I had to have a re
abortion with no medication at
all had lost so much blood in
hemorrhaging rather than send me
to a hospital they did it there
without any kind of medication
for the pain.
My only hope is that my
screaming could.
To somebody who are way and that
there's a baby are going up now
walking around for that reason
about twelve miscarriages for
the table pregnancy I know I'm
forgiven by god for for the sin
of the portion I'm so thankful
and I'm with the baby one day.
Thank you.
Morning
Madam chair members of the
committee
I stand before you of.
I this is difficult for me
because my mic granddaughter
passed away about a year ago.
And she was born with down
syndrome and as most of you know
most there's hardly and I'm
representing all the all the
kids with down syndrome because
We rarely see them anymore.
And my daughter my granddaughter
lives up to twenty one shoes it
was wonderful please please.
And all children a chance with
with the heartbeat bill being
passed thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
representative I'm here and sort
support at the babies with the
heart beat but I am speaking to
you.
As one of the women who if this
heartbeat bill would not be
passed that you would need to be
at have the ultrasound.
I was one that had a miscarriage
due to a molar pregnancy I was
told that I had one in two
hundred chance of having cancer.
I got pregnant when I was thirty
two thirty four years old and
they were telling me to wait two
years before I could even begin
to start having children again
also with the heart beat law I
am R. H. negative so.
Any I would have all three of my
boys would have died in the womb
because they were all our H.
positive.
So this heart beat law is for
women's.
It is for women.
We're going to the zoom is there
anyone else speaking in support
of.
House bill two fifty eight
please raise your hand.
Thank you I see Angie Smith miss
Smith you may and you did you
have one minute.
Thank you good morning Sir I
would like to ask you to think
supporting HSD two fifty eight
less and less and HB meeting at
the seventy argue one of the
things coming up was want to
protect from the side and that's
a very powerful thing to want to
help present well let's look at
the suicide rate among women who
have had abortions is one of the
few countries that has been
brave enough to take that kind
of a study on a discover of all
the one that had a questions
into one half of them thought of
suicide twenty percent of them
attended it of those six eight
they have three times or suicide
aborted women than the national
average is six times more than
the women actually again or so
if we're going to protect
suicide in each of the seven
less than here to us H. B. two
fifty eight thank you thank you.
All right thank you next we have
the needs we've are.
Thank you chairman we have been
told for over two years all
science.
So let's do that today science
tells us that our party is a
sign of life this is a life for
the Human this is a unique DNA
also please gender different
from other.
Indicates all of these these
indicate life of a human we
removed that this is a life LFC
in agreement.
We are responsible for
protecting the lives of those
lower wage Mexican citizens well
good and good evil your all
elected officials.
We're responsible.
On this bill.
Voting for their life for.
The courageous enough to over
life it's the with your vote for
those who cannot be here to to
health if you.
Thank you.
We're going to the audience.
Is there anyone here speaking in
opposition to the bill.
Would you please
move to the center.
I I would like to remind you
that you have one minute to
speak and you may proceed.
Please introduce yourselves
before you speak and then
continue.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Kayla
herring with Planned Parenthood
votes New Mexico and we stand in
strong opposition to this bill.
New Mexicans and those who are
forced to travel to our state
because their own politicians
are banning them from access to
reproductive health care need a
few things one they need access
to make their own personal
medical decisions including
abortion care throughout
pregnancy and to they need to be
able to make those decisions
with their health care providers
and not the government I
healthcare providers need to be
able to make the best decisions
with and for their patients
without fear of criminalization
bans and jail for those reasons
we ask that you say no today.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Naomi
Valdez I am the director of
public policy at the ACLU of New
Mexico I am also a mother to two
girls and we stand in strong
opposition to this bill as well
what we know is that
criminalizing abortion in any
form doesn't stop people from
seeking the care they need
instead it forces them to make
at really risky and drastic
decisions such as what we're
seeing from women in other
states having to to flee to seek
the care they need here what we
also know is that this is not
about safety of women we have
giving birth is twenty eight
times more risky than having an
abortion procedure thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Victor American on this and
advocacy associate for equality
New Mexico the state's LGBTQ
advocacy organization
representing over ten thousand
members and a statewide so we're
in complete opposition of this
bill this bill would not only
restrict access to abortion
tremendously but
have by and by implementing a
six week ban but it also aims to
incarcerate medical
professionals who provide the
services at a time in which we
are already experiencing is a
shortage of physicians and
medical professionals in our
state for this reason and this
reason and the reason stated
prior we urge you to vote
against this bill thank you
thank you.
Chair committee members my name
is cats on just on the policy co
director for bold futures we are
a reproductive justice
organization led by and for
black indigenous women and
people of color throughout the
state I'm also a proud queer
Latina from down south my
partner and I have four kiddos.
Criminalizing providers for
performing medically established
health care seems to be counter
productive in the state where
all right we're we're already at
a sorted to providers.
We've also heard for the past
decade and specifically in the
past year what communities of
what communities are most
impacted when access to
reproductive health care is
limited the more we see bills
similar to these around the
country or even copy pasted
verbatim the less it seems these
impacts are unintended
consequences for those
communities we strongly oppose
this bill.
Yes yeah Debin  and madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is sandy Harris and I am
with indigenous women rising the
tribal liaison we are in strong
opposition of this bill as
abortion providers are providing
necessary true health care and
they should be criminalized
because this bill doesn't agree
with other people's decisions
and their bodily anatomy.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Mike
and I and I and I'm here on
behalf of a cog which of the
American college of
obstetricians and gynecologists
I just want to say there's a lot
of debunking we have to do it
today actually many of our
providers are delivering babies
today so one of the things I
want to talk about is this word
abortionist because a lot of
folks say it but what this is
really doing is de humanizing
these providers because the same
providers are the same providers
that provide birth control that
see folks through their entire
length of pregnancy that do
provide a questions and post
partum care the same docs that
follow up and say Hey how are
your other kids because we know
that that the majority of folks
were getting abortions already
have children and their families
I also want to talk about this
notion to protect patients and
providers and there's nothing
that you can do to criminalize
providers and try to protect
them it's the same thing for
patients you can't restrict
access to care and claim that
you are trying to protect them
what we know is that providers
protect patients that's why they
go into this profession.
Thank you so much madam chair.
Adam chair members of the
committee my name is Linda Weber
I'm a policy advocate with the
American civil liberties union
of New Mexico we're sending in
strong opposition to this bill
as you've heard these bands
beyond being unscientific
deceptive and interfering with
doctor patient relationships are
extremely harmful for families
patients and providers we've
seen in states with similar bans
the disproportionate impact
particularly shouldered by
people of color and queer
communities we've been hearing
loud and clear the session from
our community leaders
reproductive justice
organizations and legislators
about the barriers to accessing
full spectrum reproductive
health care including abortion
care that already exists in our
state especially in rural
communities.
This bill goes against our
values as New Mexicans polling
shows that in New Mexico we
trust pregnant people to make
decisions about abortion for
themselves we deeply value of
bodily autonomy we want to
increase access to legal safe
full spectrum reproductive
health care not create further
barriers for patients and
providers for this reason we
urge you to vote no thank you
madam chair thank you.
Good morning madam madam chair
and members of the committee I
am in stellar Hernandez and I'm
speaking on behalf of the
coalition of sexual assault
providers the coalition of
sexual assault programs opposes
H. B. two fifty eight for three
reasons because New Mexicans
deserve access to health care as
six week ban would be a band
before most people know that
they are pregnant and because we
need more reproductive health
providers banning and
criminalizing them is the
opposite of this and for that.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen Canaday with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
we stand strong opposition to
this bill for many reasons one
is that it violates our code of
ethics that allows for people to
be able to provide autonomy for
themselves self and self
determination.
Also we would like to
acknowledge that we know that
legislators are in their phones
because it's the only unpaid
legislature in the country and
they and they have no staff you
have nothing to apologize for
thank you.
Thank you all right we're going
to assume if there's anyone also
who wishes to speak in
opposition to this legislation
please raise your hand.
And you will each have one
minute.
Janet Dawkins.
Madam chairman members of the
committee my name is Alex.
Year and a half.
The Santa Fe trapper of the
national organization for women
we sounded strong this into this
L..
Because of the ways in which it
it have been swimming for making
appropriate decisions about
their own health care and about
whether or not and when they
wish to become mothers this is a
bill election ice women and also
hotly over time to be and has
tremendous impacts on
communities of color and poor
communities in New Mexico we've
seen what bands have done in
other states this bill is
against of the values that we
hold as Mexicans we are strongly
oppose passage thank you.
Thank you.
We have Representative
Representative that's any more
at the.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
I went to New Mexico religious
coalition for reproductive tools
and included organization we
know that many people of
different ethnic backgrounds a
little worse we should remain
safe and legal and even Mexico.
Once again the decision to have
an abortion it require access to
medical care for supported in
school medical professionals
restricting imposter providers
from performing abortion forces
we're talking eighties our last
state for themselves and their
families attacking some
providers harms our communities
by cutting off access to help
those who need it agencies he
ate as an attack on the medical
professionals
learnership and agency over
their lives and bodies for these
reasons activity please now on
each B. two fifty eight.
Next we have he leaves that.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Haley often I'm an attorney from
the southwest women's Law Center
this is actually it providers we
have a New Mexico at risk of
becoming a family providing
healthcare it is also extremely
date.
Able if Representative appears
in any are in second shock on
the edge of the bill demands The
provider either first or maybe
and then discussed this with
percent lower cost to seek out
another providers to do that
while all the attendant
Representative this is a life
threatening waste of time for
those who are pregnant and an
honest opinion on as a
requirement for providers to do
high there's no medical city for
this bill and it is an affront
to modely economy this is why
the south doesn't loss Anderson
sure opposition.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Victor a little and I'm a
resident of lotus New Mexico I'm
also representing the eastern
New Mexico rising I'm a wife a
mother of two small children and
I strongly oppose well.
We must trust women in their
medical decisions not hear more
rural women or lack of health
care at this is the only amplify
this issue reproductive health
care including abortion is
healthcare thank you.
Thank you.
Next we have Nicole Martin.
Well as the Madam chair members
of the committee my name is Kirk
and I am the co founder of the
nineteen and I just want to say
that we are strong opposition of
this bill the men being
forwarded these those who do not
understand
and it should not be making laws
based on other people's choices.
And then another thing is that I
would love to nibble the
statistics a few people who had
to go to the emergency room
where people who have to go to
crisis pregnancy centers who
gave them this information and
I'm obligated something called
an abortion reversal health
which means that even protesting
and that is not FDA approved and
that is also why we do this on
influx of people who are
HANBIDGE in the ER because you
have people who are.
Why there is thank you.
More.
Right I see no other hands on
zoom I'm going to the committee
is there anyone on the committee
who wishes to speak
Representative Jones.
Before I say much I just want to
say that I I acknowledge all of
the deep emotions on both sides
of this conversation and I
welcome the opportunity to keep
talking about it it's important
obviously or we would have these
emotions
and.
I I mean I guess you guys can
tell I'm a woman I'm a mom and
dad are in so I speak I speak as
all those things and also
representative of of the people
in my district and of New Mexico
but.
I also look around and I I am.
I don't think there are very
many of us in here who remember
that pre roe V. Wade days I do
remember those days many years
ago when.
We didn't have CT scans we
didn't have we really didn't
have the knowledge that we have
now and that abortion was talked
about with our terms.
Not proud of it and down and the
the mantra that drove Rovi way
the people that supported it
was saying.
And we've come a long way.
We're at a place now where one
of the bills that was mentioned
to have it was mentioned that
I'm carrying some built in one
of those bills is an attempt to
Ensure that.
Viable babies have been born and
outside mother's womb.
Will be given medical care.
So it's so important that we
keep having this conversation
because that slippery slope that
some of us have talked about for
years we're on it we're on it
big time so I appreciate.
The chance to move back and and
acknowledge that life does begin
at conception there's that's not
my belief religious belief it's
not it's it's a scientific fact
an individual unique human being
is is actually begun at
conception so we know that the
argument revolves around does
that person does that does that
human being deserve protection
from this legislative body so
that's what we continue to talk
about we have to especially
since now we're discussing.
Full grown infants outside the
womb whether or not they there
are deserving of care as human
beings this is unacceptable so
I just have some questions what
about you know some technical
questions to move on from that
emotion
I didn't hear you say anything
about that topic pregnancies and
I know that a lot of times the
opposition to a move heartbeat
bill has to do with ectopic
pregnancy can you address that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative yes I I
understand that those are many
concerns that people have and I
have the same concerns and I
think the folks that have not
topic pregnancy that pregnancy
is not defined as an abortion
when that that child is removed
you know because the child is
passed away already and so that
is not an abortion as this bill
reads Madam chair representative
but I will pass this over to my
experts Mr Seidel.
I agree with the Representative
block Representative Jones madam
chair I also echo the fact that
I am seeing more and more cases
that these ultrasounds and
doppler ultrasounds are needed
to identify these
doppler pregnancies are simply
not being done by the
abortionists to protect women
and their rupturing because
they're just prescribing the
pill and moving on and we're
going to be litigating a lot of
these cases nationally in the
next couple of years and it's
it's something that we is easily
preventable if we could just get
some regulation on this on
regulated industry.
Thank you.
And I and.
So so what does this require.
This requires an ultrasound not
just a doppler handheld doppler
to determine heart beat is that
true thank you madam chair thank
you Representative this would
require the physician to.
Determine if there is a heart
beat and we will leave that up
to that physician on what method
they would use but a doppler is
the most effective for finding
that fetal heartbeat Madam chair
representative.
Did you have anything to add to
that Mr Senator yes in Texas
dealing with a heartbeat bill on
a couple of cases it is common
for the abortion is to use a
doppler ultrasound to determine
Jeff if there is a detectable
heartbeat or cardiac take
activity so I've have a review
to hundreds of records submitted
almost every single drive in
this situation has in fact
Done an older sound.
Thank you.
I don't have any questions at
this point.
Thank you madam chair
Representative benefit and I
apologize I was fighting for
special let in and of the
committee so I had
Representative Vincent thank you
madam chair representative.
Are to figure out if we were to
start.
I never thought we'd arrive
talking about this kind of
stuff.
And
Madam chair representative.
How does this bill treat
patients.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative it's a very good
question this bill actually goes
above and beyond to ensure that
the patient is the one that's
protected in this instance Madam
chair representative so that is
the most important thing
especially with this piece of
legislation such as making sure
that the doctor is ensuring that
they are doing the standards of
care to make sure that that
child is seen to have a fetal
heartbeat and it also explicitly
excludes the woman from being
responsible with any kinds of
charges whatsoever Madam chair
representative and I'm sure that
Mr Senator has more to add on
that no I I think you are only
covered Madam chair
representative I'm block
representative Vincent.
Madam chair representative is is
it possible that this is going
to save women's lives.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative yes very simply
this will save women's lives in
the state we know such as the
the case of miss Keisha Atkins
who was killed after a botched
abortion in Albuquerque she
would be alive today if she did
not have that late term abortion
and this bill is focusing on
those extreme late term
abortions that happen all across
our state harming and injuring
women.
On the monthly basis in December
we side two different instances
at one of the busiest abortion
mills in Albuquerque where it
was two days in a row that we
sign ambulance taking a patient
to the hospital Madam chair
representative and we hear a lot
today we heard a lot about folks
complaining about the lack of
access to physicians and medical
care in the state well if our
laws such as the medical
malpractice act actually
protected those individuals and
those doctors.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative well as your
question was regarding this
bill.
We need to ensure that we have
as many physicians and doctors
as we can get in the state and I
think if we allow these doctors
to have the discretion to
provide a heartbeat that would
significantly help with that
Madam chair representative.
And madam chair representative.
How often are these emergencies
happen and clinics and is there
malpractice are they run into
the same malpractice insurance
that hospitals do thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative I'll defer to my
experts on that thank you over
the course of two thousand
fifteen New Mexico Alliance for
lines like get a it per request
from two thousand fifteen to two
thousand twenty two there were
fifty six emergencies at a
southwest women's options alone
we we see a little bit in the
south as well if you look at the
cohort study about thirty five
percent of women and taking the
pill and up in the emergency
room I would say two thirds of
those have no you know
complications whatsoever and
that comes from another cohort
study done shortly after
the first one so there are
significant amount of
emergencies representative madam
chair that that that have been
taking place here in New Mexico
from a complete lack of any
regulation and I I see that is
it is it is denying women true
health care as a malpractice
attorney here in the state as to
the malpractice for these
abortionists most of more shared
outside of the
it you well our motion is and
doctors who perform abortions
many of our with UNM are insured
by the taxpayer but that's not
where our major problem is it's
in in the independent clinics
you they are insured by other
outside companies you know not
under the New Mexico medical
malpractice act were there part
of the pool so they are insured
self insured are outside the
company's in this situation so
you know and they have a variety
of weird policies that it I've
seen over the years.
Share and we're not going to
call names and and the smarts
anyone please thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
I keep hearing health care.
Is.
Is a pregnancy and disease.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative absolutely not.
Madam chair representative I
would actually argue the case
that having the child is safer
than a boarding that child Madam
chair representative according
to a cog who actually heard from
today their own study shows that
compared to an abortion at eight
weeks just station the relative
risk of mortality increases by
thirty eight percent for each
additional week of just station
so that's saying that the later
in pregnancy madam chair
representative the higher the
opportunity for that woman to
indicate any kind of violence or
or harm during that abortion
madam chair representative so
absolutely not pregnancy is not
something that would be a health
care thank Representative
violence is not a word to be
used regarding health care
please.
Thank you madam chair thank
representative I believe we may
have a different different
definition of health care that
madam chair.
Representative thank you madam
chair representative.
My last closing statement is I
believe.
I stand for I I appreciate the
legislation that you brought up.
And they tell us to be strong
and courageous and just like my
colleagues I've got to know all
of and I lie component on a
special basis however I've never
I've never been a part.
I've always heard these these
conversations but I've never
really been in the belly of the
beast where we disagree with
things and.
I do respectfully disagree with
my counterparts because I
believe that pregnancy is
divine.
And as a Christian man I will
always opposed abortion thank
you madam chair Representative.
Anyone else with questions.
And I will entertain them did
you have questions our motion.
Okay go ahead Representative
Ferrary.
A second second.
Okay more of a role.
Representative Kate.
Yes to table.
The other.
No to table.
Yes.
Yes.
Check yes.
Seven to to build with table.
I believe that concludes our
business for the day and we will
be in recess until Friday
morning.
