Representative Cates.
Here and on time Representative
Chavez.
That's it.
Native Ferrari.
Representative, Harem Eo.
Representative Jones.
Representative Lord
Representatives. Capan Ski,
Okay, Yeah, okay.
Representative Vincent
Madam vice chair.
President.
And Madam chair. I'm here.
Okay, so we just have one
memorial representative Ferrari
going? Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you. Committee for
convening one more time, so that
we can, um, make this attempt to
get a house memorial through
hopefully with the consent
agenda. Um, but what we're
trying to do with, um
House Memorial 59 is to set up a
substance and alcohol abuse task
force and the Senate is also um
Has the but what we'd like to do
is bring forward a task force
that will look into and study.
Um, the policies.
Innovative policies and
prevention and care to improve
the health and well suffering
from substance and alcohol
addiction.
And, um
It's um, I think that committee
substitute
Yeah, Sorry what they have at
the heading
Well, um, let me look at the
billing now.
Okay. Never mind. This is I'm
sorry. I'm looking at the Senate
bill. I apologize. Yeah.
Represented for our never looked
to the Senate for direction to,
um
So, yes, it is for nine members
of the new Mexico. So, um
Are all stand for questions.
Oh,
I guess there's no public here.
Uh, just get Yeah. Is there
anyone on Zoom who wants to
speak in opposite one, Okay?
Bashing. I'm sorry, John
Dickerson go ahead.
Madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Joan
Dickerson. I'm with the veterans
and military families caught us
and we strongly support this
memorial.
We are supported the
Bill for liquor excise tax and
seeing that had failed. We will
support this memorial to get a
task force to study this problem
and hopefully will help some
veterans along the way. Thank
you very much.
Joan and sorry for calling you,
John, The Apprentice. Tiny,
tiny. Do so Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you, Madam
Representative for bringing this
memorial is highly needed and
greatly appreciate it. I just
want to make sure we do what the
memorial says. You want the
Legislature to make these
appointments. Tell me what you
are envisioning so that we can
follow through.
Um, we are looking, uh, at
having representation from you
know, some of the other bill
sponsors that when, uh,
substance abuse or on cannabis
Also, Um, I know that cannabis
but you know what we can look at
we would like, you know, um,
Majority minority.
So, Madam Chair. Madam
Representative, you You are open
to having this study joined with
other studies that are aligned
and in consistent operation with
what you've described here. Is
that correct? Madam Chair
Representative Herndon? Yes.
Well, that is really gonna
because there just happens to be
a a study that's looking at
substance abuse and addiction.
That is going through the
health, Uh, authority and so
let's see if we can't make them
join together in this would be a
great way to carry out the term.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you so much Committee for
meeting and happy Valentine's
Day. All enjoy your monkeys.
Yeah, and and members and staff.
I would really like to thank all
of you for your hard work and
your I personally think this is
the best committee and the
building. Yes, Yes, yes, Before
we sure, sure. Thank thank you,
Sergeant. You always take such
good care of us. We we
We don't thank you enough. But
we do know that how much you do
for us, So thank you. Thank you.
Staff. Um, less than 20. I mean
less than 26 hours to go so we
can survive. Representative
Jones. Thank you Agree with
everything you just said, Thank
you for the help of new
Mexicans. I choose very, very
dark pink. This
Right? Yeah. Put your monkey on
Madam Church. Who? Who did?
That's very sweet. Thank you.
Thank you. And with staff. Yeah,
You want to take one with us at
the table, okay.
Oh, here, all right. There you
