Here.
Representative Liz Thompson
your.
Representative Representative
vice chair Joanne J. Ferrary.
Here.
Madam chair Deborah on strong.
I'm here okay.
So thank you everyone will get
started on the health and Human
Services Committee and I
appreciate
everyone being here and I'm
going to turn the chairmanship
over to my vice chair our
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair would you
like to introduced house bill
forty seven Elizabeth what the
what what bill white field white
field on thank you end of life
options act yes and madam madam
chair I have a number of experts
that I would like to join me if
I can call their names and have
Gabby bring them over.
Dr Steven Koenig.
You can find him and then Aaron
Armstrong.
Robert Schwartz.
And my house a co sponsor
Representative day Hochman
Vigil.
Okay I think we I think we have
a long.
And your I just like to make
sure everyone that's in the
audience understands that you
don't need to put your hands up
now when it comes time to go to
the audience we will make sure
that everyone gets a chance to
speak we will have a one minute
At time for everyone and so if
you're just relax and not worry
about putting your hands up will
announce that later on.
Thank you madam chair go go
ahead.
Thank you
thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee
this morning is going to be a
tough hearing at and I realize
that it's going to be deeply
emotional and difficult
the only thing more difficult is
living at and you're going to
hear from a number of people
including myself who have either
left it or are
Going to
And so I had some.
will
Trying get through this and I
thank you for your patience
because I'm going to be
emotional as well.
House Bill of forty seven is the
Elizabeth white field and of
life options act and the
Elizabeth white field is no
longer with us but was a great
advocate in twenty seventeen
shoes was a a judge well
respected judge in the
in Albuquerque who I may have
the number wrong but had eight
different I believe occurrences
that occurrences or re
occurrences of cancers and when
she spoke in twenty seventeen
had a trade can has to cover on
the whole Internacional order to
speak and we've named it for her
Eversense.
And House Bill of forty seven
Is a.
This legislation that will allow
a terminally ill mentally
capable adult with a prognosis
of six months or less to live
the option to request obtain and
take medication to die
peacefully if and when they
choose.
It has a number of
Of protections are in it and and
prescribed method of how this
all works.
with to licensed health care
providers one of which that
needs to be a physician to
affirm all eligibility of a
terminal illness mental capacity
to make the decision and ability
to self administer.
that individuals have to be
informed of all of their options
including palliative care and
hospice
if there's any concern about the
ability to make an informed
decision are they have to be
referred to a mental health
professional
to determine whether they have
capacity to make the decision
and we can't move forward
without that after they've gone
through the whole process of
two.
different are providers of
firming everything the mental
health provider if they need
that they have to this has to be
reduced to writing
and signed by the individual and
witnessed by two people
only one of which can't be in
any way are related or involved
with the patient says to be a
disinterested party.
And only then can the
prescription be written and then
there's a forty eight hour hold
before it can be filled.
Are there is the ability of
Jessa's more imminent to us
speed up to forty eight hour
hold on the prescription but not
the rest of the process
everything else has to still be
done.
The individual can
take or not take on the
medication many don't many just
knowing that they've got that
option greatly really uses their
anxiety and suffering.
and the last thing I there's a
number protections for four of
providers who and and anyone
family friends who are present
or participating in helping the
individual to
to pursue this.
are protected from liabilities
health care providers are
protected whether they want to
participate or not want to
participate.
And finally the the self
administration is
IV or injection is not allowed
that's.
This is a a self administration
of ingestion.
And that's just a brief overview
we can get into a lot of details
during question and answer but
I'm gonna have my.
Experts
presents now and I'll call first
on professor Representative
shorts.
And you need to you.
Thank you very much
representative Armstrong madam
chair members of the committee
thank you so much for setting
aside time today to talk about
the main and dignified Health
Care at the end of life in the
special thanks to those who are
here today to present stories
because it they're really
difficult stories a to tell but
they're really important stories
I'm rob Schwartz I'm on the
faculty of UNM law school where
I taught law for forty five
years where I've studied health
law and the law of end of life
care for the last thirty years I
also teach at university at the
university of California
Hastings Law School and
California I've been studying
the implementation of
California's end of life options
act and I would be pleased to
answer questions or attempt to
answer questions anyway that you
may have about what I think is
the tightest most carefully
drafted and best medical aid in
dying bill that's been
introduced in any of state
legislature in the country
over the years New Mexico the
New Mexico legislature has
passed a number of bills that
have given patients authority
that they wouldn't otherwise
have over health care decisions
that includes the uniform health
care decisions act New Mexico is
the first state to adopt that
act the pain relief act the
genetic information privacy act
and more not New Mexico's always
been at the forefront of Health
legislation that protects
patients and preserves their
right to make healthcare
decisions and it's one reason
that I feel so lucky to live in
New Mexico.
Today we are all talking about
one end of life option that New
Mexicans do not yet happened
that's medical aid in dying and
this is a very regional issue in
the United States and most
people in the west from the
Rocky Mountains west most people
have the option of medical aid
in dying is permitted in
Colorado Montana Washington
Oregon California Hawaii ten
jurisdictions overall mostly in
the west but it is not permitted
yet in New Mexico the
constitutional issues
surrounding aid in dying have
been fully litigated New Mexico
and as you know the New Mexico
Supreme Court determined to the
Morris case that the question of
whether medical aid in dying
should be available to New
Mexico residents is a question
for the legislature it isn't
constitutionally required it
isn't constitutionally
prohibited The New Mexico courts
will respect whatever decision
the legislature makes with
regard to medical aid in dying.
Well let me just say a word
about terminology because it is
so important in this area.
We are here to talk about
medical aid in dying which is as
Representative Armstrong said is
a process Word adult resident of
New Mexico who is both competent
and terminally ill and is fully
informed about the risks
benefits and alternatives can
ask for and receive a
prescription for medications
that if taken will provide for a
peaceful that and advocates on
both sides of this issue use
highly charged language I think
that we have to be really
careful when we use that
language and I I think of those
who are on the side that that I
support medical aid in dying
sometimes call it death with
dignity but you know we all
support death with dignity and
we realize we all support the
idea that people should have a
dignified death is it's not
really right to say that that
we're asking the legislature to
decide for or against death with
dignity and opponents of medical
aid in dying sometimes called
euthanasia but of course
euthanasia is absolutely
prohibited by this bill and by
the bills that have come before
all those other states as well
similarly this bill has
absolutely nothing to do with
suicide assisted or otherwise
suicide is where a person your
rationally attempts to solve a
temporary problem with a
permanent solution.
In medical aid in dying.
Competent adults who is near
death attempts to solve a real
problem in the only dignified
way that is available instead of
leaving family members the raft
and guilt ridden as is so often
the case was suicide medical aid
in dying allows family members
to face the M. together
supporting each other it brings
families together without guilt
and recrimination when families
need it the most and that there
are many many good reasons to
outlaw assisted suicide and
anyone who's been touched by
suicide knows how awful it is
and how important it is to
eliminate suicide
but there is not a single reason
that we've outlawed assisted
suicide that is also a reason
for outline eight nine I will
take you through all of the
protections in the statute
because representative Armstrong
has already done that but the
protections are strong and
that's the protections are
strong not only for the patients
because there are many many
hoops to patients has to jump
through to be able to in fact
have access to medical aid in
dying but the protections are
also strong for providers and we
work very hard to prepare a
conscience clause in the statute
that is the strongest conscience
Clause I think in the United
States no provider ever has an
obligation to participate in
medical aid in dying those who
choose to protective for to
provide that health care that
form of health care are
protected those who choose not
to perform that kind of health
care not to provide that form of
health care our also a protected
now the drafters of the statute
New Mexico did learn something
from the other states that have
had these statutes in Oregon now
twenty years
Other twenty years of experience
with the statute and there are a
few changes that are probably
relevant the waiting period is
different and shorter in New
Mexico because experience has
shown that the waiting period is
that the primary effect of
making it impossible for those
who would like to take at at you
to make use of the statute and
qualify under the statute from
actually getting the
prescription so the waiting
period in New Mexico is forty
eight hours rather than the
longer period elsewhere there's
still a waiting period here
a second The New Mexico statute
broadens the scope of providers
who can participate in medical
aid in dying here the nurse
practitioners and physicians'
assistants it also participate
they also have a roll but under
the New Mexico of the proposed
New Mexico statute under house
bill forty seven there would
always have to be a physician
who made all relevant
determinations with regard to
the patient and other third as I
mentioned New Mexico statute as
a very vigorous very protective
conscience clause that protects
individual providers and
institutional providers
hospitals and others and allows
them to exercise their rights of
conscience.
Medical aid in dying fits
particularly well with the New
Mexico health law traditions and
in New Mexico all that health
legislation I mentioned at the I
just a couple of minutes ago
it's all based on two principles
that have been so important in
health law in New Mexico and the
first is a pride in the cultural
diversity and the religious
diversity of the people in New
Mexico and the fact that there
are people with different values
and the second principle is
really a strong libertarian
streak in New Mexico that says
each one of us as a human being
get to the side what medical
care we will get that that's a
question for individuals for
patients for individual Uman
beings it's not a question for
the government in Santa Fe so I
hope that you will give this.
Hello I do pass recommendation
and I would be pleased to be
able to help in any way I can in
as discussing the structure of
the bill thank you.
Thank you professor Schwartz now
if we could hear from doctor
caning.
Madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
representatives and guests.
Good morning I'm Stephen can't
drive Steven Cain again I very
much appreciate the opportunity
to present a medical perspective
about medical aid in dying.
I lived in New Mexico for the
past forty years where did all
of my post graduate training as
a physician and we're are
practiced medicine as enter from
the gist.
Caring for patients with kidney
disease many of whom are they
got to know over a period of
many years.
Dealing with death and dying was
very much part of my
professional life.
I'd like to tell you a short
story involving medical aid in
dying that had a great influence
on why and sitting here today.
If you years ago I came across
an essay.
Written by a fellow named Greg
that began with the provocative
title.
Goodbye cruel world but not just
yet.
You see Greg had been diagnosed
two years earlier with stage
three lung cancer that was
treated with radiation and
succeeded in getting him into
remission.
Here's what he wrote.
I was hopeful I'd be around for
another few years.
Well as discovered last month
that the cancer is come back
with a vengeance and now it's
stage four.
The consensus of my treating
physicians is that I have four
to six months left on this
mortal coil.
But I am happy I am shouted from
the rooftop happy as a resident
of Washington state I have the
legal right to look cancer in
the in the face and say you
don't get to dictate the time
and matter of my death I do.
He then went on to describe the
procedures he would have over
the following several weeks to
allow his lungs to function a
bit longer so that quote I
should remain healthy enough to
enjoy my age July going away
party.
Healthy enough to walk in the
garden with dozens of friends
and family.
Healthy enough to share good
food good beer and good memories
and at the end of the evening to
bid farewell to my friends then
retire to the bedroom.
Drink my cocktail and fall
asleep in the loving embrace of
my sons and their mother.
He added I implore you to
advocate and fight for aid in
dying legislation.
Death with dignity should be a
universal fundamental right no
state should have the power to
dictate how much suffering you
and your loved ones must indoors
you approach the end of life.
What really got my attention
wasn't attached poll.
That although informal and
unscientific.
Reflected the opinion of the
rather large community who reads
the blog where Greg's essay was
posted a contentious and
thoughtful community that seldom
agrees overwhelmingly on much of
anything.
At of one thousand two hundred
and twenty seven votes in this
poll.
Ninety seven percent voted that
people with terminal disease
should be able to choose the
time and manner of their death
ninety seven percent.
Medical aid in dying is not
suicide.
As you just heard from the
previous presentation it is not
a decision to that death is
preferable to life suicide
indeed means the choice of life
over death but medical aid in
dying makes no such choice.
Terminally ill patients are not
choosing death.
Medical aid in dying only
provides a choice of how death
that is imminent will occur.
Here's the crux of the medical
issue.
Positions of always recognize
that relief of suffering is a
fundamental part of our calling.
And of course there is the ages
old admonition to do no harm.
In recent years the profession
has been able to use ever
improving tools and treatments
to very successfully it levy
eight physical pain in the
overwhelming majority of
patients with severe and
terminal illnesses.
The traditional argument has
been why should we participate
in bringing about death if we
can relieve suffering isn't that
doing harm.
The problem is that these
assumptions are incomplete and
misunderstand what it means to
do no harm.
Suffering is not only about
physical pain.
Emotional suffering and
emotional pain are just as
important and just as powerful.
The fact is that there are many
patients for whom not being able
to be confident of being in
control of their destiny of how
and when and where and with whom
they will die of their terminal
illness imparts emotional
suffering and pain they can be
every bit is decimating as
physical pain.
Simply knowing that they are in
control provides immense relief.
In fact data shows that about a
third of the patients who have
received the cocktail never
elect to use it.
But one hundred percent of those
patients are enormously relieved
and much more at peace knowing
that they had the option.
As a physician I am strongly
supportive of HB forty seven I
am convinced that not only is
this in accordance with the most
sacred covenants of our
profession.
It is precisely what it means to
be a compassionate to be
compassionate and the most
difficult time of a patient's
life.
Thank you very much.
Thank you doctor Koenig and next
madam chair of like to call on
my a co sponsor should like to
say anything Representative
Hochman Vigil.
I thank you very much madam
chair I want to thank you
representative Armstrong for
your strength and courage and
bringing a spell.
I also want to say a few words
if I may
about judge white field she was
a mentor of mine she was an
incredible woman and I it's it's
one in the honors of my life and
my service here's a
representative to speak on this
bill.
I'll try to keep it short.
I am not here to speak about the
mechanics.
Of this he's the legislation I'm
here to give a story of real
life representation of what this
bill would need
to me to families like mine and
others are facing this extremely
difficult decision at the end of
life.
I'm when I was twenty years old
madam chair.
My mother was diagnosed with
stage four adrenal carcinoma of
unknown origin.
What that means is by the time
she had a concrete diagnosis the
cancer was so widespread
throughout her entire body that
they could not even find the
source.
My mother was everything to me I
was her miracle and I she had me
at forty three years of age
after she had already lost one
overview to cancer before she
was my life our relationship was
perfect in every way and it was.
A no brainer for me to take a
year off of college to assist
her and the transition I'm from
my desk.
Madam chair as my mother's time
got closer
it was revealed that she had a
specific type of bone cancer the
test it metastasized to her her
bones and I used to sleep at
night with her in the hospital
and she would be in so much pain
that she would cry out.
Thank god.
To me.
And there wasn't much we could
do I'm.
Other than administered the
regular pain medications and
asked nurse to just give her
warm and the time is right.
At a certain point my mother
woke me up.
My mother loved me more than
life itself what we up and asked
me if I could assist her in
ending her life.
Because she was in so much pain.
That moment that I realized that
this bill that medical aid in
dying is not about philosophy
it's not about religion it's
about a Tanami compassion and
the ability to live one's life
in in one's life in a way that
they choose.
I could not help my mother at
that moment.
I had to continue to listen to
her cry it's.
Help her to her pain.
Until she died about a week
later.
Four years after I lost my
mother.
My father was diagnosed with the
Dino carcinoma.
H. for.
And I had to re live that
experience all over again.
So when I had the.
Opportunity and the honor to be
elected to the New Mexico house
of representatives and I knew
that this was a bill that would
could potentially hard I knew
then that everything that I have
been through culminated.
To this moment.
And so I want to thank you madam
chair again for bringing this
bill the honor of my life to be
co sponsoring it with you and I
want to dedicate this to my
mother Daryl in and to my father
Joel.
This everyday thank you very
much.
Thank you representative.
I too have my stories both
professional working in hospice
and being at an end of life care
giver for family and friends I'm
not gonna tell you those stories
because the one that really
matters to me.
Is the story of my daughter
Aaron.
And I'm gonna let her speak for
herself.
Erin.
Madam chair members of the
committee can you hear me
alright.
We can hear you.
Thank you for allowing me to
speak today and thank you to my
courageous role model and mom
for sponsoring this legislation.
My name is Erin and.
I desperately want to live.
Thank you.
Want more delicious on inspiring
exhilarating ordinary boring
challenging heartbreaking life.
I want it more than I've ever
wanted anything.
I'm fighting for it every day
with everything that of.
And I will keep fighting until
there are no more options and
I've run out of right.
They start by sharing that basic
truth with you so that you don't
get the wrong impression today
as I thank you to allow me some
small measure control in my own
death.
I spoke in favor of this bill
for the first time this
committee in two thousand
seventeen.
Year I students spoke as a
member of the audience and as a
survivor of a cancer but at that
time I'd been managing for
nearly twenty years.
I support came from my own
insights is a patient.
Someone with experience
suffering.
Since our teenage years valued
the ability to struggle and make
complex difficult health care
decisions of my
I spoke also that as the chosen
family of other patients.
Friends board of shared bottles
and experiences with cancer.
Lost those battles and I'd say
did not to serve.
My testimony that day and twenty
seventeen was real.
Heartfelt and honest person.
Here again today with an even
more immediate perspective.
In twenty nineteen a rare
genetic mutation my long managed
cancer took charge.
Because in my old familiar and
any teacher to spread
aggressively my bones my lungs
my liver and my brain.
These two years been completely
surreal.
Brutally devastatingly all too
real all at once.
Three craniotomy is a massive
infection unspeakable nerve
pain.
And multiple rounds of radiation
therapy later I find myself
alive today to speak to you
thanks only to a clinical trial
drug.
It is being tested on my body
right now significant physical
cost.
If this blessed life extending
Medicine turns out to be like
the ones that have come before
it its efficacy is likely to be
time limited.
Great is too small a word.
To describe the way I feel about
the additional time for it.
My most optimistic days I catch
myself hoping for many more
years daydreaming even a decade
in the future.
My more realistic media Galle.
Is to live in my forties my
fortieth birthday this next
year.
Whether a year or six years or
six months left to live this
ordinary beautiful life.
I am coming to terms with the
knowing.
This disease is likely to catch
up to me much sooner and I'm
ready to go.
There are moments when the
heartbreaking reality of it all
is inescapable and hangs thick
in the air.
I am unspeakably stat.
At the building.
Well that I miss.
But what scares me is the
potential agony.
He.
These last two years granted me
a few terrifying glimpses into
the potential for physical
suffering.
And I'm afraid but my final
days.
Could be filled not with loving
eyes and memories shared with
loved ones.
But what disorientation and
wrenching pain.
Patient with elements that is
likely to all.
I want to be able to have the
same level of what we.
And the ability to make choices
about my eventual death as I
have always.
In my choices about how to stay
alive.
Earnest and well intentioned
people express their feeling
that one all right to accept
one's natural course subject.
The only god or some other fate
can determine when and whether
one lives.
Respectfully the the truth is.
I already cheated death by that
measure.
Without all of the countless in
desperate Medical interventions
and to help with out question
would have died of this disease
already.
This is a difficult but
essential truth for me and for
so many other patients with
terminal illness.
We simply wish to benefit from
careful medical intervention
once more sh in a way that
affords us some small measure of
control and dignity in our final
dates.
This bill is smart.
It's a careful.
And it's kind of a thoughtful
legislation that this topic and
the people of New Mexico to
serve.
And it will bring me measurable
peas as I move forward in my own
journey to live and eventually
die.
Thank you again for hearing me
today thank you for your
consideration of this important
urged passage.
It's.
Thank you
my sweet Aaron.
madam chair I almost forgot.
I have an amendment that's just
a one word technical specs of of
of.
Our word choice that we didn't
intend and.
If we could
Did you know that.
Could you explain the amendment
please.
what city actually don't have a
right in front of me hold on
just a second.
All right that's the one thing I
don't have in front of me
Do you like to come back to it
after we take and that would be
that would be fine not and I
will I will find before we get
to a questions I will provide
the
my copy.
Thank you madam chair and so
we're we stand and now for
questions and on you can go to
public comment thank you.
Yes now we'll go to public
comment for anyone who is in
opposition if you'd like to
raise your hand if you are in
opposition.
And.
Okay we'll give you a minute.
Okay there's
Not too many
we'll go ahead and.
And those who would like to
speak if you'd like to keep your
hand raised if you do not want
to speak lower your hand.
Otherwise we'll go in order of
those with their hands raised.
Hey I'm almost to the top of the
list again.
Okay Margaret.
I'm sorry at.
I thought I was at the top of
the list.
Yes.
Market if you would you.
And you have one minute.
Can you hear me yes we can.
Okay my name is Margaret I'm
very hard of hearing
I thank them all the drunk
driving accident twenty five
years ago or more
Subsequently.
A failed back surgery.
Stops and so.
Many rounds of hospitalizations.
On one point.
I.
Told that I had met a
complications and hospitalized
for weeks and weeks all doctors
did not expect me to survive the
pain was excruciating and I was
told by one doctor that.
Most people would have.
If the window to my hospital
room locked.
Because most people would have
drawn.
I thought point.
It was.
Hurry your one minute is up you
would close.
Groups.
Okay.
I'm sorry to market it
automatically stops of the Mike.
Next we had Steve Rangel.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can hear you madam chair
and members of the committee
thank you for allowing public
comment my name is taken Steve
Rangel on the associate director
of the New Mexico conference of
Catholic bishops and we oppose
the house bill forty seven
doctor assisted suicide opens up
to human error just as it does
for the death County if there's
a chance a person who doesn't
choose to take their life is
kill and it's called murder it
has also unethical because it
places doctors and nurses and
conflict with their Hippocratic
oath to do no harm the doctor
still participates in active for
a patient to a health care
provider who is willing to
describe legal drugs.
That that that is clear that we
have to have a care and hospice
to deal with pain if we're not
willing to provide health care
palliative care and hospice for
everyone we should we have no
business writing prescription
drugs to kill we should be
talking about making healthcare
available for everyone so they
don't have to choose between
life and death because of
finances house bill forty seven
does not require a fifteen day
notice waiting period but only
requires a forty eight waiting
periods that can be waived if
that health care put.
Okay I'm everyone would watch
the clock the timer because it
will shut off your mind when
you're done.
Apologize okay
Allen Sanchez.
A good morning madam chair Ellen
songes New mexicana Mexico
bishops
this is a very emotional I agree
with the the sponsor and our
hearts go out to everyone we've
all walked our family members
loved ones to the grave I walked
fiance to the grave and
understand the the pain and the
feelings that we have our
concern above all is the.
The chance of human error and
motivation I think this is a
very difficult piece and we're
talking about the determination
to give somebody the the the
prescription is motivation.
We've seen this and other type
of issues ethical issues same
reason we oppose the death
penalty of the chance of human
donor is too great and the
motor.
I'm sorry that for that
interruption if we could start
the clock again or
addition Sanchez.
Thank you for I'm not a bishop
got elevated Division I'm not a
bishop by Representative.
I'm sorry this so I don't know
how much you heard didn't hear
said on a.
repeat that our concern is the
human error they can take place
in the same the same way that we
worked so hard to repeal the
death penalty because of human
donor motivations a very
difficult thing to define I
think that the professor a was
sharing with us about
definitions of words we can't
even agree on I'm definitions
let's let's on the motivations
it's bringing a person we're
afraid of core hers in a in a
state that has a one of the
highest rates of poverty in the
nation we're afraid to be Kerr
coercion by family members and
and then the chance of air the
termination of imminent death is
also in question because there's
a huge percentage that's never a
correctly diagnosed and that
human donor has is very
concerned also so we ask that
the committee with a vote no to
this and thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
We have next apple.
May hard.
And
Can you see the timer.
No there's no time to.
Yes we can hear you
I'm sorry it's on the screen and
will
See if we can
extend the time are
To nother at fifteen twenty
second sense of it's hard for
you all to see that time.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee I would just like to
say that New Mexicans are
strongly opposed to this
in twenty nineteen they're asked
to call in and make your voices
known nothing has changed since
then over ninety eight percent
of the ten thousand calls so
that they were opposed to this
bill.
See the doctors continue to say
that suicide aid in dying is not
suicide it is exactly suicide
because that's exactly what
you're doing the end result is
still the same it is suicide
risk you think we I know you
want to give people control
frankly we don't have control
over everything that we do.
So the thing is that twice is
really not our choice to make
and the all it that just like
abortion was supposed to be safe
legal and rare we have over
sixty five million who are now
dead because it is not rare and
it's happening every ninety
seconds or again began with
assisted suicide twenty years
ago and now he had increased
suicide by forty percent we
don't want to open that door we
don't want to crack it because
then it'll be kicked wide open
for any reason we are already
number one in suicide in the
nation please I ask you I
implore you to vote no on this
measure thank you very much.
Thank you.
Next we have Jules Taylor.
All right.
I'm sorry using my daughter's
computer this is Sally of all of
this.
My name said involved is and I'm
a family practitioner in
Albuquerque for the past thirty
years and in Rio Rancho.
Can you hear me.
Yes I'm sorry for some reason we
lost you for a second okay can I
start over.
Yes okay so this is a live all
day is
and I'm a family practitioner in
Albuquerque and Rio Rancho for
the past thirty years concerned
about this bill for several
reasons primarily because of the
conscience clause.
It requires and I refer people
to other providers that can
perform this procedure.
And that would be totally
against my conscience I feel it
would violate my my morals and
my hope credit goes.
And it might lead to my early
retirement or even leave the
state because I just can't
practice procedures I think the
harm my patients so I think this
will only harm New Mexico and
that a whole bunch of other
providers would decide they
can't do this or they would end
up leaving the state and that
would leave our state which is
already lacking providers
needing even more special in
primary care.
I was very moved by all of the
stories I walked with my own
sister and she died in my arms
years ago and she did this.
Without assisted suicide and it
was a beautiful was wonderful
moment for her and myself.
So I deeply grieve with everyone
who is facing these issues but
as a provider I don't think I
can agree with this and would
not practices and again I think
a lot of providers would decide
to retire early and that would
affect medical care New Mexico
thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Next we have market.
Are you coming back to
finish my comment.
Yes if you'd like to.
I'm sorry I can't unmute.
Okay.
Yes Margaret you have just one
minute go ahead and okay.
Thank you so much for giving me
a little more time on the
doctors this is more than twenty
years ago twenty five years ago
that the doctors for quite some.
I'm sorry.
Will ask Margaret to come back
again.
Madam chair looks like she might
have dropped off the call we
don't have the attendees need.
Okay I'm.
Let's go on to the next one
Chavis.
Good morning can you hear me yes
we can hear you good morning
madam chair and members of the
committee thank you very much
for hearing our testimony my
name is once this I am a retired
state employee living in Santa
Fe.
I would like you if you would
please indulge me in a short
prayer.
In the name of the father of
some the Holy Spirit AUMENT.
Father lord of life your son
Jesus Christ conquered the power
down are you Mr the directions
this excuse me could you keep it
to the point of the of the bill.
Yeah the point of the bill thank
you bill you're interrupting me
appreciate my but my freedom of
speech to pres please fycompa
complete my prayer it's a short
prayer you're cutting into my
time and you did this to me a
year two years ago please.
I'm sorry Mr Chavis we're here
to hear about the bill and I'm
and I'm addressing a larger
portion of the bill but it is if
you would please indulge me it's
a short prayer.
Father and lord of life your son
Jesus Christ conquered the part
death by his own death and
resurrection and maintenance a
people of life called to
proclaim celebrate and serve the
gospel of life we praise you for
the gift of life first and most
fundamental gift you give us the
foundation of all our other
rights we thank you for raising
up Saint John Paul the second
the pope of life and for his
teaching and witness to the
value of life.
That we may respond to his call
to bring it into abortion
euthanasia which is end of life
and dying I'm sorry.
And all assaults on human life
and United agree temping in
support of life bring is a
culture of life we pray through
Christ our lord amen thank you
and I appreciate you please do
not be rude to others the same
way you are rude to me thank you
in the name of the father son
the old spirit on.
Your muted madam chair.
Thank you.
I'm.
Next we have Dominique Davis
hello.
Yes go ahead.
Yes can you hear us now.
Hello.
Yes go ahead.
We can hear you Dominico have.
Hello dominate can you hear us
I'm sorry I don't hear anybody
but I'll just go ahead and speak
thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Dominique Davis and I work at a
clinical okay great doctors
nurses and community workers who
are very hard work very hard to
leave people suffering we
dedicate our lives to it and it
is truly are calling house bill
forty seven expand who can
approve the prescribed these end
of life drugs and it lowered the
standard of care that we do not
necessarily see happening
elsewhere in you may add more
harm to those who are already
suffering by doing so.
It will also require health care
providers were unwilling to
carry out the request for the
two sides refer the individual
to provider who is able and
willing the form of direct
cooperation and trample our
conscience record health care
providers the COVID nineteen
pandemic has shown us that we
already in desperate need for
health care providers our
current providers that I work
with and the many I know have
told me they will retire or move
out of New Mexico what happened
we did not force more good
doctors to leave I am asking you
to vote now thank you.
Thank you Donnie I'm.
Next we have a Lisa Martinez.
At least a go ahead.
Okay can you hear me OK yes we
can hear you okay thank you
representative madam chair my
name is Lisa Marie it Maria
Martinez I'm in need of New
Mexico and and I just wanted to
point out a few concerns that
really I have not been addressed
by this bill in protected
particularly it does not
adequately protect the
conscience of medical
professionals and respect to
forcing them into affected
transfer patient requesting
assisted suicide against their
conscience it does not address
overall unintended consequences
including the role of insurance
companies what role do they play
in this type of legislation if a
patient with a terminal
diagnosis wants to fight for
their life what if they want to
seek a lifesaving care will be
receive a letter denying care
because of the cost involved
like others have in states where
this bill has become law New
Mexico already has the highest
suicide rate in the country we
know also in other states that
suicide rates skyrocket with
this type of legislation so I
ask you to please vote now.
Thank you.
Next we'll go to
Alex Jennifer.
Alexander.
It.
Yes thank you very much well I
just have a minute so sick
couple of things that are we're
talking about assisted suicide
or aid in dying legislation what
we also need to discuss is that
these deaths are not always as
they appear to be because when
you look at the drugs are used
to cause death by assisted
suicide it's not always what you
call a great debt so Frances the
medical xpress reported on
September eighth twenty twenty a
little known secret not
published by the advocates of
aid in dying with that while
most us for speedy others were
very slow and some patients
lingered for six or nine hours
actually one was forty seven
hours in in twenty eighteen it
was a thirty one hour deaths in
in Washington state so we see
some of these does take a long
time there's been assisted
suicide drug experiments in
order to provide is more
effective deaths but this is
resulted in some very harsh and
horrible deaths so as people are
trying to avoid a bad gas they
say by having assisted suicide
in fact sometimes assisted
suicide causes a horrible death.
Thank you.
I'm next we have
Make Magnus Sen.
You just need to on mute
yourself.
My name is Nancy Magnuson
citizen of Albuquerque I'm not a
professional on involved in this
testimony this morning from a
doctor tanning as well as from
Erin really have impressed upon
me how this bill can give people
with a terminal illness.
The sense of peace and a sense
of control and I see that is a
form of mental pain management I
right now have two friends who
have a terminal illness both of
who say that the anxiety they're
experiencing.
Over a long term drawn out
painful death is one of the
worst things that is happening
so I urge you all to please pass
this bill thank you.
Okay is there anyone else in
opposition that would like to
speak.
But we.
I
did Code Waterson.
Sorry I'm in favor for.
Okay okay
Will now go to those in favor if
you would like to raise your
hand.
And
we will first go
To this Sanchez our list of
His speakers.
And then we'll come to those who
are here from the audience.
So first we have the B. Hopkins.
In she is our Gabby you can find
me.
Yes we can hear you go ahead
please thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Libby Hopkins and I am a very
proud hospice and hospice does
alleviate so much pain and
suffering of many kinds but I
would like.
Now tell you a story about what.
Time that the patient would have
rather had control and a
peaceful death and his name was
Mister eight he had prostate
cancer with metastasis to the
bone in the brain he had
increasing seizures despite the
fabulous hospice care and he
asked me if he could die like
they do in Oregon unfortunately
I couldn't help him with that
less than a week later he died
in status epilepticus which was
a prolonged seizure it was eight
in front of his family a very
traumatic death his family no
doubt still remembers it is I do
so please consider passing age
billion three twenty forty
seven.
Thank you levy next we have Jim
Jackson.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Jim
Jackson and registered lobbyists
for disability rights New Mexico
this is a controversial issue in
our disability community because
of the historical abuse and
mistreatment and discrimination
and the devaluation of the lives
of people with significant
disabilities in our society the
disability rights New Mexico
recognizes this troubling
history but also recognizes the
fundamental importance to people
with disabilities of self
determination the ability and
authority to make choices about
one's life and death do you mind
is neither promoting or opposing
this bill we want to acknowledge
and appreciate that the sponsors
of work closely with us to
address concerns that we raised
we're confident that there are
adequate safeguards in the bill
that is sure that this option
will only be available to
individuals with disabilities
who are at the end of their
lives and who have the capacity
to fully understand the issues
and make this decision
voluntarily and we encourage
your support thank you.
Thank you Jim next is Glenn
Buckland.
Good morning can you hear me yes
we can hear you.
Madam chair members of this
committee my name is Glenn
Bucklin from Rio Rancho New
Mexico I'm here to speak in
support of HB forty seven we've
all seen a movie where a
character is mortally wounded
dying in pain begging for
someone to end their life
because the experiences too much
when their wishes granted what
do we feel as we watch
compassion and relief we feel
compassion for the fictitious
life taken to stop their
suffering compassion is our
nature should we show any less
compassion for a real live human
being I have terminal cancer and
my time is short I don't know
how harsh the pain of my dying
will be I've watched my life
shrivel to a fraction of what it
was my disease has made my life
very small and uncomfortable
this bill gives me choices to
decide how my life spans medical
aid in dying is empowering for
our most vulnerable citizens is
the most compassionate thing we
can do please vote in favor of
HB forty seven thank you for
your time and attention.
Thank you next is Randy make in.
Good morning everyone many of
you on this committee knew my
husband and the love of my life
Charles Daniels he was the most
vital and vibrant man I ever
knew he drove race cars he
played electric bass in two
different bands.
He went from being a
sharecropper's son to being the
chief justice on the New Mexico
Supreme Court and when he was
diagnosed with a fatal disease
ALS Lou Gehrig's disease a year
and a half ago they gave him
some choices if you wanted to
live for a year or more he can
agree to go on a ventilator or
be in a wheelchair he chose not
to do that ten weeks after his
diagnosis when he woke up and
said I'd like chief Dan George
and little big man said it's a
good day to die he called
hospice and they said we can't
let you.
you have to we can yourself and
die on your own and so for a
week he suffered gasping for air
and died he was one of the
people who who passed to this
bill I mean will not Morris and
and I ask that you pass this
bill.
Thank you.
Next we have now dean.
Thank you can you hear me yes we
can hear you thank you very much
madam chair members of the
committee I urge the support of
a house bill forty seven there's
a quote living well and dying
are inseparable the ingredients
are the same and with courage
and intention a well lived life
can flow naturally into a death
that honors and reflects the
values and beliefs of a
lifetime.
I am a person with a disability
I'm sixty five years of age I've
lived twenty thirty seven years
with the disability twenty eight
without I experienced this first
hand and I just attendance
someone and they're passing on
Monday morning early if they had
choices I think that their death
might have been more comfortable
but it is a choice it is not
suicide is a choice to live well
done well and two of the years
of protection are intact to
create protection for all
parties especially the patient
within this bill thank you very
much madam chair members of the
committee.
Thank you our next we have or
hate or terror.
I can hear me yes we can hear
you go ahead hi good morning
madam chair members of the
committee my name so that no the
software engineer living in
Albuquerque on life and life
long New Mexican in twenty
eighteen my father Pueblo hard
working honorable man and devout
Catholic passed away from
metastatic cancer in his bones
the last months of his life
experienced extreme pain
weakness in his arms and legs
nausea vomiting into
constipation and incontinence we
had conversations where he would
say that this is not living or I
wish there was something I could
take to just make this act as a
Catholic I was raised to respect
other people's face and to not
judge others until one what one
walks in another shoes one
should not stand in the way of
this compassionate option being
available for someone else I
therefore ask you madam chair
committee members to support H.
B. forty seven and give New
Mexicans the option to have a
compassionate and dignified
death thank you.
Thank you doctor do you did
Roman is next.
Hi madam chair and members of
the committee I am Judith
Perlman MD I was an emergency
physician and and that and and
UNM professor emeritus and am a
hospice volunteer.
In the E. R. I can't tell you
how many terminally ill people I
saw suffering you've been there
you wouldn't expect they would
be in the ER.
For my parents both died on
hospice my father thought the
experience was worse than the
battle of the bulge my
terminally ill mother died four
weeks later she spent every one
of those last four weeks in
misery cutely lonely missing my
father's arms around her waiting
to die she later on feces she
couldn't eat or drink she was
confused hallucinated advocated
it was excruciating I wish my
mother had options outside of
this hearing I've heard of no
physician who would move out of
state as a result of this law
this has not occurred in other
states the vast majority of
positions support medical aid in
dying thank you.
Thank you next we have Erica
of courage.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dr Erica
garner H. I'm a professor in the
school of social work at New
Mexico state and before that I
was a geriatrics worker I think
it was twenty seventeen when I
traveled with social work
students to Santa Fe to advocate
for a similar bill and I
remember feeling very
passionately then which stemmed
from my work with terminally ill
patients testifying to their
pain pain management and
increasing changing sometimes
unmanageable.
Unpredictable with the loss of
peace and control.
My passion today is different
it's more personal I was
diagnosed with stage four cancer
when I was pregnant with my son
I wrecked my cancer had spread
to my bones and liver I'm gonna
ask you today is to let me let
us decide when the fight ends
and the pain is too much and let
me say goodbye to peace one
meaningful way.
When the doctors agree and I can
make that decision my last weeks
or days not to set for my family
to allow us that peace.
Thank you.
Thank you doctor next we have
right screen.
Madam chair of the committee I'm
a psychology in Albuquerque I'm
a member of the New Mexico
psychological association an
affiliate of the American
psychological association and I
want to tell you that on January
twenty third the negative board
of it Hey voted to endorse house
bill forty seven and there were
no dissenting votes.
The board stated as follows.
In MPA supports the dignity and
worth of all people we support
people's right to self
determination and or or aware of
and respect cultural and
individual differences in that
self determination in MP eight
point role of psychologists in
the Elizabeth trio end of life
options act.
Madam chair I want to to tell
you that the and and other
members that.
Suicide is the adversary of
therapist.
And we realize that this is not
suicide medical aid in dying is
is it's like comparing apples
and aardvarks in most states
that have enacted the and in may
I do law the suicide rate is
actually decreased suggesting no
relationship between MIT I set
budget from the national center
for health statistics suicide
mortality state by state.
At thank you
Dr spring next we have my it
discussed your.
Okay can you hear me yes we can
go ahead okay good morning madam
chair and members of the
committee thank you for your
service my name is Maya to
Stasio and I'm here in support
of house bill forty seven my
grandpa Vincent to Stasio was
like a second father to me he
was a man who was in his words
never bought nor owned and
masterfully independent on March
twelfth twenty seventeen he was
diagnosed with acute myeloid
leukemia a highly aggressive
cancer doctors said he would die
within a month initially
received palliative care and
then was put on hospice hospice
both did little for his rate you
would scream and cry from the
pain he described it as feeling
like and I quote drilling
multiple holes into my bones
constantly he wanted eight and
dying it was horrible to see a
strong and independent then
suffer the way he did with no
escape but a drawn out painful
death on March twenty eight
twenty seventeen my grandfather
made the brave choice to end his
suffering by slitting his wrists
and Achilles tendons with a box
cutter knife alone terminally
ill patients who want aid in
dying should have the option so
they don't have to die alone
when someone has a terminal
diagnosis their independence is
taken away to give them aid in
dying as an option is to give
them their control and
independence back that is huge
thank you.
Thank you our next we have
Adrian there.
Go ahead.
Legislative leaders.
Can you hear me yes we can hear
you hello I'm sorry Madam chair
and members of the committee.
My name is Adrian there I'm from
Silver City and I have a
positive story about my mom
being able to have control to
enter life peacefully surrounded
by family cleaner life became
unbearable maam in two thousand
two mom was ninety and
diagnostic diagnosed with
terminal cancer unfortunately
her pain could not be controlled
using Oregon's death with
dignity act she requested a
prescription to and are
suffering when the pain was just
too much on September fifth two
volunteers came to mom's home
with the medicine the next the
day before she had asked for
water because she was practicing
to swallow for the next day and
that night I said other bad side
and when I put my head down on
my bed I heard you say Adrian
don't cry I'm all right in the
morning she was handed the
medicine and after drinking it
she had a little smile on her
face and she died quickly please
vote yes on high health bill
forty seven.
Thank you next we have Sandra
can.
Can you hear me now yes we can
hear you go ahead my name is
Sandra pen I'm retired family
physician madam chair members of
the community of the committee
I've delivered babies and I've
been present at that as a
physician I'm called to heal
when possible and to care always
this is not assisted suicide
when we do not care.
Nations do sometimes resort to
suicide suicide reveals our
failure to hear and understand.
Each of us deserves autonomy
especially when death is near
it's a kindness and caring to
and for the patient and their
family please pass this bill
thank you.
Thank you.
All right next we have Zach
inteiro.
Madam chair representative
committee my name is Zachary
Anthony can federal service the
state ombudsman for you and over
twelve thousand residents in
long term care settings in our
state we support house bill
forty seven because it provides
protection and support New
Mexicans with terminal illness
need and deserve to have their
economy respect privacy and
dignity and informed medical
decisions Tanami to us is having
the legal right to privacy and
respect for informed medical
decisions.
This is a bill that reflects the
core values of New Mexico and
also reflect the core values of
our program which is to listen
investigate an advocate on
behalf of residents families and
communities who need and deserve
representation and some of the
most difficult situations New
Mexicans facing terminal illness
are asking that you respect
their autonomy and ability to
make their own medical decisions
I implore you to listen I
implore you to pass legislation
thank you so much for the for
your time.
Thank you I'm next is Tracy
Nicholson.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Tracy Nicholson I'm a native New
Mexican and I'm here part of HB
forty seven my mom and dad were
married fifty one years when she
was diagnosed with brain cancer
in twenty eighteen she was
terminal in our medical team.
And hospice prepared her for the
likelihood of seven to ten days
of keeping her comfortable while
her organs shut down.
She wanted choices on how.
Why put into hospice for options
including magic cocktail she
researched.
Well looking into medical aid in
dying in neighboring states but
time was not on her side Boston
and desperate my mom went behind
the garage the trash containers.
Location two garbage bags over
her head with a gun in her mouth
to pull the trigger my last
vision of my mom was at UNM
trauma.
As I held her hand.
With only half of her face
intact she begged for compassion
option and to die with dignity
please consider this bill.
Thank you Tracy next is Linda
Siegel.
Madam chair I don't see Linda in
the list.
On on the list of attendees okay
we'll go next to Nancy able.
Can you hear me yes go ahead
thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Nancy a
bell I am a retired social
worker and have lived in Santa
Fe for thirty years in twenty
twelve my brother in law Ron was
diagnosed with a galloping
multimedia my husband and I were
on the speaker phone when he
heard his oncologist in Oregon
tell him he had only days or
weeks to live and that he might
have emerged to death but Ron
had an option.
That none of us here in New
Mexico yet have and he chose
that option a gifted writer Ron
got to write the last page of
his life story rather than
hemorrhaged to death in an
ambulance or an ER or an icy you
run back to died peacefully on
his own terms.
In his own bed surrounded by
those he loved what a gift the
state of Oregon again our family
thank you very much.
Thank you.
Next we'll go to other people in
support in the attendees list if
you have your hand raised but
you were only showing that you
wanted to support the bill and
not speak go ahead and lower
your hand if you do want to
speak keep your hand up and
we'll go in order.
Okay next we have a dynamic
catch.
Good morning.
my name is Diane may catch of
the tires not going okay there
we go I did you know my story to
you last night but I want to
share my story here as well my
family is witnessed first hand
the sorrow of having a
terminally ill family member
with unmanageable unbearable and
unrelenting pain violently and
as a last resort take the manner
and timing of his death and his
own hands by putting a gun to
his head and pulling the trigger
David deserved better his wife
deserve better we all deserve
better I hope that when I'm at
the end of my life and my
medical team will ease my
passing and if I am lingering in
your the and that they will be
able to allow me to choose a
peaceful manner in my own time
to say goodbye to my family and
stuff away into oblivion I wish
David had options in the end of
his life this is not assisted
suicide this is compassionate
care in the process of dying
thank you.
Thank you Diane next we have
Burt Cup ****.
Okay.
Morning can you hear me.
Yes my name is Stephanie ****
and I would like to share my
story four years ago my only
sister died alone sitting in her
garage inside her car she had
been in terrible pain for many
years after struggling with
Parkinson's disease for eleven
years medications no longer
provided relief from her
horrible symptoms the brain
surgery that was supposed to
give her ten more years.
Again are only one and then she
was diagnosed with breast cancer
so she decided to take her own
life despite having a loving
extended family she could ask no
one for help or advice she knew
that if she involved any of us
in her decision it could expose
us to criminal charges she
couldn't ask a doctor for help
either it was so very sad for us
to know that she died alone in a
loving and humane world the
situation would never happened
and I can't imagine that anybody
would ever want to go through
that I strongly urge the
legislature to pass house bill
forty seven thank you.
Thank you our next we have a
doctor G..
Okay hi can you hear me now.
Yes we can hear you go ahead.
I would like to think on madam
chair and the members of the
committee and I do both with the
yes of course on the H. B. forty
seven are very short story my
mother suffered from irritable
bowel syndrome COPD and I
watched her slow deterioration
basically with no quality of
life.
I went down to Florida to see
her she was on oxygen.
To and she.
When outside which are low.
Was the garden and our she went
outside and I would just waiting
in the kitchen for her she comes
back in with scrape center knows
and are far ahead.
she fell over and she couldn't
continue her gardening that was
probably the saddest moment.
Anyway she did pass away in
hospice I was with her to help
or passed to the next next madam
our and the deterioration was
awful I do believe in compassion
and dignity for the dying and so
that's why I say vote yes please
for house bill forty seven so
you don't watch other suffer.
Thank you you.
Next we have a Libya Ridgeway.
I need yourself.
Good morning my name is a would
be a rich way and I'm here in
support of house bill forty
seven I have been in RN's for
forty five years thirty five of
those years have been practicing
in New Mexico I worked twelve
years as a critical care nurse
and three years as a hospice
nurse during those years I saw
many many patients that we were
unable to address affectively
there and chat in tractable pain
and suffering.
I strongly advocate that you
vote do you pass on this bill
this is not assisted suicide
this is death with dignity and
compassion relief of suffering
in respectful a Tanami for the
patient to make their own
medical decisions thank you.
Thank you.
Next we have Tracy Nicholson.
I believe we already heard from
Tracy.
Okay Michael McCaffery.
Hi this is Michael McCaffrey I
moved to Oregon about four years
ago from Oregon where I was a
hospice volunteer stole a lot of
death and dying there how is
the.
Diagnosed with this dimension
former Alzheimer's disease the
about two years ago I know what
is in front of me I've done tons
of research I have two friends
who have wives who were
suffering from the disease ones
an institution ones at home of
quite frankly the husband allies
or living hell and
I know what is happening on H.
used to build myself of the AS
the privileges.
Granted by this legislation I
implore you to pass it and
relieve pain and suffering when
the part of people like me
choose to exit the earth
peacefully thank you.
Thank you at next is Laura
adulting.
Hi this is Laura gray teen thank
you madam chair and committee
members for allowing me to speak
can you hear me yes we can hear
them I have I'm a pulmonary and
critical care physician at with
a lot of experience with dying
patients several speakers today
have already spoken powerfully
to the desperate importance of
this bill to patients so I'm
going to limit my comments
specifically to aspects were
positions be might be valuable
first opponents often argue that
palliative care can believe the
suffering that drives patients
to medical aid in dying but
while it can relieve much
suffering at the end of life and
I'm very grateful to and
palliative care colleagues on
some occasions even the most
expert care is not enough and I
say this despite working in some
of the organizations with the
very best palliative care
programs in the country
including the Harvard teaching
hospitals.
Second we heard today that
medical aid in dying can lead to
prolonged uncomfortable deaths
but in the vast majority of the
experience in other states that
the Kurds while the patient is
soundly asleep within one or two
hours and I can tell you that
this is often not the case and
deaths without medical aid in
dying we're debt can often take
hours or days and can be very
difficult despite expert
palliative care.
Third I personally have never
heard decisions complained that
they would leave New Mexico
because of the requirement to
refer patients to other
physicians for medical aid in
dying to the contrary the large
majority of my colleagues are
strongly supportive of this bill
as is majority of physicians in
the U. S. in numerous polls
polls thank you your time is up
if you could close.
Okay.
Next we have hand a burning.
And if you could of.
Keep it to one minute please as
close as possible.
Can you hear me yes we can hear
you I'm in a Burlington I'm
speaking for the league of women
voters of New Mexico.
The building stands in strong
support of this bill we believe
state law should grant the
option for terminally ill people
to request medical assistance
from a license position to end
their lives and that such
legislation should provide
safeguards against abuse for the
dying and medical personnel
thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Thank you.
Next is Jefferson Welsh.
You can and you yourself.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for.
For here then I rise in support
of house bill forty seven.
My eighty six year old mother
two weeks ago received a
terminal diagnosis of pancreatic
cancer although I think this is
probably too late for her.
I remember my father who passed
eight years ago of throat
cancer.
He had a feeding tube in his
third stay in the hospital he
asked to be taken home.
Where he took control and wished
to not be fed anymore through
this too.
The problem was he had really no
way to implement this except to
deprive himself of essential
food water.
He died several days later
although we knew that he didn't
wish to linger.
And I remember things my wife
said she's not she and she said.
How enabling it would be to
shift the paradigm.
From.
Quantity of days to quality of
days I urge you to pass house
bill forty seven thank you thank
you next is Jennifer Brak.
I can you hear me yes we can
hear you go ahead.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you for
allowing public comment on this
very important topic my name is
Jennifer Brak and I live in
Albuquerque I'm a current first
year physician assistant student
at UNM I'm a future health care
provider in the state and I
wholeheartedly support this bill
I want to ensure terminally ill
patients have safe and
compassionate options at the end
of life and do not necessarily
suffer.
Thank you for your time and
thoughtful consideration please
vote yes on house bill forty
seven thank you.
Thank you Karen of next we have
here and I'm sorry that was
Jennifer next we have here and
what law.
Okay can you hear me yes going
at.
I can't lock with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter and I think
everyone and stated the case
very well we stand in strong
support of this bill thank you
very much and have a great day.
Thank you at next is Dorothy
Dorothy Bracey.
During the one and mute
yourself.
I'm sorry I didn't mean to speak
I would just like to say.
Looking forward.
In my old age
I would love to have this choice
I don't know whether I would use
it but I.
Would really love to have this
choice and I strongly urge you
to pass this bill.
Thank you.
I just like to remind people if
you're not of wanting to speak
to go ahead and lower your hand.
Okay next is Dakota Waterson.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is to cut our
waters and I'm on the policy to
Representative the ACLU in New
Mexico where we work to protect
and advance justice liberty
inequity is guaranteed by the
constitution we all hope that
when the time comes for us dire
passing as quick and painless
but certain illnesses make a
peaceful dignified death all but
impossible it in dying is an
option that gives terminally ill
people some measures of comfort
and control that with their life
ACLU of New Mexico believes a
personal decision decisional
capacity has a fundamental right
to make their own health care
treatment decisions a terminally
ill patient mentally capable
adult with the prognosis of six
months or less to live should be
allowed to request obtain intake
then medication to die
peacefully and when they choose
in dying is an option that gives
terminally ill people some
measures of comfort and control
at the end of their life is
compassionate medically
established practices article in
several states and New Mexicans
overwhelmingly support having
access to aid in dying our state
as well is that yes in H. P.
forty seven.
Thank you next we have lower
largest Liz Garo risk are we're
still.
Good morning I thank you madam
chair and committee members I am
in support of bill forty seven
house bill forty seven I think
Aaron put it beautifully when
she said that she has the right
to make decisions about how to
live her life and what
treatments to continue and I
think this is a continuation of
that decision making process I
am a family medicine physician.
And as the primary care
physician I do not dictate to my
patients what treatments they do
or do not do I present them with
all of their options and I have
the privilege of being a part of
their journey during this very
difficult decision making
process it is not my job to not
offer all of their options and
they get to decide what is best
for them and and then I referred
them as the primary care
physician I refer them to those
who provide that specialty care.
I we do need access to health
care that is a separate issue
that's definitely important
and yes please vote yes on forty
seven.
Thank you doctor.
Next is less done.
Good morning.
Good morning go ahead hi my name
is Liz stand and I was a nurse
and I'm a retired nurse I worked
in Idaho many times on the
oncology floor and watch people
go through very painful yes in
spite of all the medication we
could administer I later moved
to work in a became the clinical
director of hospice and hospice
house and the difference was
amazing for those patients were
given that option many did not
take it but just knowing there
was spare relieved a lot of
anxiety and pain those that did
take it had.
Credibly I want to say beautiful
desperate family France grand
children pets you said and.
And dignity so please vote in
favor of this bill.
Thank you next is the we are
pop.
Good morning committee I'm
asking to do past this house
bill forty seven I ask you to
remember that this is not about
you personally you are
legislating for all of us in New
Mexico to allow us to have our
own choices in life and death
this is not about religious
liberty everyone should follow
their own religious beliefs this
is about choice for the rest of
us thank you.
Thank you next is Bobby Stacy.
You can unmute yourself.
Bobby did you want to speak.
I think you need to I need your.
At computer.
Okay I guess we'll have to come
back to
Miss Stacy.
I'm.
As seven Sabina Romero next.
Thank you madam chair for
allowing time to speak my name
Sabina Romero and I'm a devout
Catholic and a lifelong needed
to make New Mexico my grandpa
Rossio died in horrible pain
with no effective medicinal
relief aid he had no blood
supply to his legs feet and
hands and was unable to even
have a socks put on put on
without screaming screaming out
in agony he was not able to die
around all his family sons
daughters and many ground
grandchildren when they
surrounded his bed side just two
weeks prior to his death he died
without support and excruciating
pain and suffering and was not
awarded any type of dignity or
autonomy in the process now my
grammar Celia is suffering with
terminal cancer that has
metastasized into her bones and
organs she misses my grandpa
dearly and often makes that
known to those around her please
give her the opportunity to die
gracefully and to meet my
grandpa at her will want her
immense suffering and bodily
failure has overtaken her spirit
I do as a devout Catholic I
believe that real life continues
after death and the but that the
material body alone does not
constitute or control the true
spirit of life I strongly urge
you to pass house bill forty
seven thank you so you next we
have Shelly Man lead.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Shelly Man left and I'm the
president of the New Mexico
Public Health Association I'll
keep my promise brief our
mission is to promote public
health policies practices and
systems that promote health
equity in New Mexico and we
believe that this is one of our
priority bills we strongly
support house bill forty seven
have selected as our top twelve
priorities it is something that
is critical to the well being
and health rights of New
Mexicans and thank you so much
for your attention.
Thank you next is Dorothy
Bracey.
I'm sorry I cannot lower money.
She is.
thank you
Okay I think we'll try Marie
Strickler.
Did that do it yes.
All right well I think it's not
only honest here decide that
we're not really speaking about
the right to die we all have
that right India is in fact in
fact a blockage in so.
This is really about the right
to kill ourselves or others and
what my concern is that it opens
Pandora's box for instance.
Well exhausted caregivers are
inheriting relatives be tempted
to speed the process of death
and checked will physicians be
pressured to defy their us of
doing no harm.
And also there's the money
issue.
Insurance companies and
government coffers stand to save
a lot of money if they do not
effective pain management in
lieu of I'm providing premature
death drugs.
You know it helps the bottom
line so I think we need to admit
this and I also know that this
is just symbolic because this
committee staff to pass this
bill also I'm finished with what
I have said thank you thank you
and I.
We miss getting you in the
opposition period
is this Bobby Stacy
Can you and mute so we can there
you go okay yes my hand was
shaking so much earlier I I next
myself out so seventy five years
ago I was born here in
Albuquerque.
Thirty years ago.
Watch my son died of aids.
Seizures while in a coma.
With the blessing of the secret
help through the U. N. M. I
can't say anymore than that he
was able to release.
Himself.
From.
His.
So now that I'm facing.
Madam.
All.
And the prospect.
During this alone in a death
phobic culture like the previous
speaker.
Where.
We.
Must be
at least to have the choice
would you please just give us
the choice that's all we're
asking nobody's gonna kill
anybody for Christ's sake just
give us the choice to relieve
Representative so.
So.
Please.
Support.
Thank you.
That all of our public comment.
Madam chair would you like to
explain your amendment and close
have any closing.
Words I guess after that.
Thank you madam chair and first
of all I want to thank all of
the speakers.
whichever side of the issue you
were on I know that your
That you're feeling and your
We're sincere and I appreciate
it's difficult on these
emotional issues to stand up and
speak out and the last speaker I
think really demonstrated this
is this is hard it's hard for
me.
In my family to to speak our
truth and what we're going
through and I I want to
appreciate all that
participated.
So cool get back on to this and
I found the amendment thank you
madam chair.
it is on page eight.
Line fourteen.
to strike.
The word current and ends in in
lieu thereof insert recent and
I'll just read it to you.
This is on determining capacity
and the choice award Justin make
sense it's not what we meant and
it we just didn't catch it if an
individual this is what it said
if an individual has a current
history of mental health
disorder will current history
don't make sense if an
individual has a recent history
of a mental health disorder.
I'm in later in the paragraph it
says of an individual is
currently has a mental health
disorder or intellectual
disability
so we're we wanted to make it
clear that not only if you have
a current
potential
issue that might impair your
judgment but a recent history of
that you need to be referred for
mental health evaluation from
the valuation about your ability
to make an informed decision
have the capacity to do that so
that's that's the amendments to
this one one word does make
sense what we what we have
their.
Do I hear a motion to accept
the.
Amendment.
What
do I have a second.
Thank you yes I I second.
Hey we have a person second on
the motion but they motion to
move for the amendment is there
any opposition to the amendment.
Seeing none of the motion
passes.
Tex went madam chair point of
personal privilege please a
point of order.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair I just
didn't see that there was an
amendment to this bill and since
it's such a simple amendment I
just want to madam chair and
representative Armstrong to know
that I'm not going to object to
it but I honestly didn't know
that there was an amendment and
want to follow all the rules and
I'm not going to object to it
and I appreciate the amendment
thank you madam chair and and
thank you and that's it analysts
didn't didn't get it it was
distributed
twenty four hours I had we we
did have it and so I apologize
apologies if we still don't have
the distributions down
down but
tried to do the twenty four
hours great.
Sure Madam chair of would
Representative would you like to
have any closing remarks before
we go to committee.
madam chair I think that I think
that we will get that and
everything in the questions from
the committee and I don't need
to to restate what the bill is I
just appreciate all the
testimony and I'm happy to stand
for questions.
Thank you
Okay at the first hand I see is
Representative Lord.
And you yourself okay can you
hear me I'm in a different
locations want to make sure
everything works yes we can hear
you thank you madam chair thank
you everyone it was very hard
testimony today and I just want
to say it it I listen to
everything that everybody had to
say and I have also gone through
death I think everybody's
experience staff and the last
time I was actually holding my
mom's hand when she died so.
I want to.
Trying to the emotions out of
this.
Go directly into the heart of
the words get into the
technicalities of what this bill
actually says so the question
that I have first madam chair is
it is section two its owner
discuss capacity.
This is a the capacity means an
individual's ability to
understand and appreciate health
care options available that
individual including significant
benefits and risks into making
communicate informed healthcare
decision.
Then we go to section three it
says.
Prescribing health care provider
determination describing health
care provider may provide a
prescription for medical aid in
dying medication to end of
individual only after the
prescribing health care provider
has determined the individual
has capacity.
Act two capacity.
I was looking at health care
provider and that means any of
the following individuals
authorized pursuant to the New
Mexico drug device X. Sentara
and it says a physician licensed
physician an osteopathic
physician a nurse license and
vast practice and a physician's
assistant my question is since
those are the four.
That oversee the capacity will
these people have special
training will they be certified
or will it just be any
physician.
I'm.
Madam chair and representative
I'm gonna have doctor Koenig
respond but this is standard
practice that occurs all the
time but if Dr Koenig if you
wanna.
Respond.
You are muted if you're there or
professorships.
Thank you all
this is the standard way of
providing a termination of
capacity and as of
Representative Lord madam chair
members of the committee as as
you suggested Representative
Lord capacity is determined by
the definition in section B. but
it's also determined according
to the standards in twenty four
seven eleven which is the
uniformed off your decisions
that so the uniform health care
decisions act provides a way
that capacity is determined
across all health care decisions
in New Mexico and this
determination will be made why
all determinations of capacity
are made across health care
decisions in the state of New
Mexico and I might add really
increasingly across the United
States and so health care
provider as part of a providers
training is a train to be able
to determine the capacity of a
patient because one cannot
obtain informed consent and last
one determines that the patient
has capacity so this follows the
standard of legal definition
that has been used actually for
at least twenty years in New
Mexico and really for the last
century probably across the
United States and in other
common law countries.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for answer the question so I
guess my other question will be
for example because I worked in
the medical field sometime when
somebody decides that they want
to do something that is kind of
beyond the scope what is normal
for like a general practitioner
they'll take a weekend course on
how to let's say do botox.
You should train you know they
have some sort of special
training above and beyond what a
normal general practitioner will
do so and and my understanding
that there will be no above and
beyond extraordinary weekend
trekking to handle these people
that come and or a dozen Diné
situation.
After can I.
Hi I'm I have to apologize I was
on an emergency phone call so I
missed the recent discussion how
can I help.
Okay.
The court the question if if I
can repeat it madam chair and
and Representative Lord is
whether it requires special
training to determine capacity.
You know I don't have the
specific expertise to answer the
question but off hand I would
say it would not I think any
physician would be able to do
that without any problem.
Thank thank you for that that
was that was how it was just
answered so my other question
above and beyond that so in
general besides capacity in
general if somebody was going to
And to think how to word this a
lot of times when a doctor wants
to specialize in something or
wants to learn more about
something they'll take a weekend
course to learn something that
they didn't learned while they
were and medical school would
this be something that doctors
nurses osteopaths and physicians
assistants would be required to
take so that they understand how
to handle this particular
situation of a death and dying
doesn't die in situations where
they have a special training.
And that might be a question to
ask professor shorts as well you
know I it would be my
understanding that if that sort
of requirement would have to be
something that would be decided
on by the state in terms of the
procedures that would need to be
followed and and to be
consistent with what the.
with the law will will will
provide
you know I would think that the
vast majority of physicians
would be very very capable with
existing training and doing all
the things that are required
without having to have specific
training you know if if that
sort of training were mandated
that I'm sure the physicians
would.
Hopefully be be willing to do
that but off hand I would say
that wouldn't be necessary.
I'm thank you madam chair my
other question is because I have
worked in the medical field for
some time and I'm very familiar
that when doctors have to do the
classes that they need to every
year to maintain their license
that there's usually an option
to take some classes I would
think that if you guys are going
to pursue this you should add
ace and training course are you
continue on or this kind of
situation just because it
encompasses more than your every
day to day situation this is
where someone's coming in you're
trying to decide if they have
the capacity to make this
decision there's a lot of steps
and I'm gonna go through because
I want to go through all the
steps of what's about to happen
and that might be something that
you want to consider that
Everybody's on board and they
know exactly what's in compass
in this bill and exactly what is
expected my other question I had
and that is when somebody comes
in in this situation are they
going to be given all of the
options and all of the risks
that can happen with this and
other gonna be given options of
you have other options and these
are what they are and these are
the risk of they're gonna be
handed out and signed by the
patient.
you madam chair and
representative that is a
requirement of the law and
something that they have to
affirm in the form that they
have to sign in as a witness
that they have been presented
with the options we specifically
name in here that they have to
be presented with the options of
palliative care and hospice but
there could be additional
options for treatment or or
other things that that we don't
specify everything but certainly
those are the most obvious ones
that they need to be presented
but it is a requirement of the
law thank you madam chair I'm
going to try to keep everybody
on track format this is.
Section two J. it's on page
three.
So it's is terminal illness
meeting work condition that is
insurable are reversible and in
the course of reasonable medical
judgment were results and death
within six months of two
questions on that it seems to be
six months seems to be the kind
of standard that everybody uses
there's a reason for that but it
six months.
madam chair and representative
thank you for that question if
there is a reason for that it is
what is the standard definition
and requirement for hospice and
so it's under federal law
for hospices that that's the
determining factor that a
someone with that the presenting
a condition is expected to not
survive more than six months and
that that this tracks with the
hospice definition.
Thank you madam chair asking
this question but if this is
passed at some point this bill
could be brought forward in that
anything could be amended you as
we all know that six months
could be amended let's say in
five ten years two years next
session someone could come in
and and bring that for a vote to
have that sixty six months
Amanda is that correct.
Madam chair representative any
proposal to amend any statute
can be done at any time that's
not our intention of what we're
offering here were tracking with
hospice in the common definition
across every state that does
medical aid in dying and every
hospice program in the country
that six months as the is the
criteria.
Yeah I just wanted to make sure
everybody knows you know because
I know that we know thank you
madam chair that we know can be
amended just wanted people to
know that this bill could come
back with an amendment and that
date could be different.
so I want to move along to.
The section three on page four
and can I ask is do you go
through the chair.
Yeah it does not seem Madam
chair I thought I did well it's
kind of confusing for both of us
being madam chair so.
Okay.
So who do you want me to go
through apologize to commend the
downside of it you just
addressed the chair and then of
this year okay thank you.
Dressing the chair okay.
The question to the chair then
can you explain to me how the
ability to self administered the
medical aid in dying medication
that's number four can you
explain to me the details of
what happens what is the process
are they given pills and what is
a process that is that happens
when they self administer.
Up madam chair and and our
representative if I can refer
you back to page three on the
definition of self administer.
It means taking affirmative
conscious voluntary action to
in just a pharmaceutical
substance and by ingest that
means within to take it into the
gastrointestinal tract so it
would be orally.
through a feeding tube if you
had a feeding to and there is a
potential to even do
Rectally.
It's not that does not include
IV or injection because that's
not an ingestion.
Thank you madam chair and
directed back to the chair
Without getting into gory detail
No.
Process works does it stop the
hard how does it shut the system
down.
I'm.
Madam chair and Representative
it causes them to go into a
coma.
Go to sleep and then I I would
assume done stop the heart.
Thank you madam chair
okay good question dress back to
the chair moving down a little
bit further and section on
oversee chairman that the
individuals making an informed
decision after discussing this
so I do have a question about
this.
Going back to what we just
talked about with capacity and
making informed decisions.
Could somebody technically go
see one doctor and have one
doctor give them the paperwork
it capacity and then get an
informed decision and move
forward just one doctor visit.
does work Madam chair
representative no.
there must be a consulting a
provider.
And the so that there's at least
one physician that is affirming
all the criteria
has been that the person is
eligible the prescribing
provider doesn't necessarily
have to be the physician but if
the if there are nurse
practitioner or PA done that the
consulting has to be a physician
the only
somewhat short cut if you will
is that if someone is enrolled
in hospice already they don't
have to get a second well that
that is the second opinion about
being terminally ill because
they have gone through a very
regulated in mission process of
affirming that they are
terminally ill from a a
referring provider and by the
sign off of a medical director
of the hospice and so we don't
make you get two separate
opinions on on
a terminal illness if you're in
hospice but you you do need to
affirmations on everything.
Thank you madam chair I
apologize I didn't see any part
in there I see that this is a
question of the chair I see that
it's as if your firm Dick you
are ready in hospice or eligible
for hospice I didn't see the
portion where it talks about the
consulting provider is that in
this bill.
I'm madam chair and
representative yes.
if you'll look on page five.
Yes.
Confirmed in the record that at
least one physician or
osteopathic physician licensed
as determined capacity terminal
illness ability to safe safely
administer that position maybe
bit the prescribing health care
provider or their hospice
provider another physician and
that doesn't let me say
Is Jeff you directly to the part
where there's a consulting
provider to did see that about
the position I just want to say
consulting provider may I may
find that.
And professor so it's if you
find it faster than I am than I
do.
madam chair and members of the
committee it is I think section
Act section that you that you're
reading because you have to have
the the physician who presents
the original document is what
are the provider who present the
original document must make
these findings and section as as
section after requires that
there be a confirmation that
another provider has also made
these findings so that combined
with section G. requires that
there always be to providers who
made all of the findings and
that one of those providers at
least must be a position either
up a position or osteopathic
physician so the language
doesn't use the term consulting
provider but in fact the section
F. is exactly that the what what
you describe there must be an
initial prescribing provider and
there must be another provider
who meets the requirements of
section after and again as
section have also points out at
least one of those must be a
physician or osteopathic
physician.
And if I can add if you look
further down Angie so.
Has a firm that individuals
enrolled in a Medicare certified
hospice for.
Eligible after the prescribing
health care provider has
referred the individual to a
consulting a care provider.
Who has experience with the
underlying condition rendering
the qualified individual
terminate L. and the consulting
health care has a provider as
examine the individual reviewed
director relevant records and
confirmed in writing the
prescribing health care
providers prognosis that the
individuals suffering from a
terminal illness.
Thank you Francis very confusing
because I did see consulting
provider after almost sounds
like they just see one position
one time and then they could
just be eligible and then we're
and so.
Okay and answers to the
questions I have there because
it is it is very to me the very
subject of the way that it's
written I would love to see it
spelled out I'm current
conformity tales person it would
I would love for to say they
need to see it consists you know
they have a consulting provider
they have to see this one doctor
than it goes this other doctor
and then the other steps happen
so Act the chair.
So on this point on page seven
it's for the I believe section
three where they're signing this
disclaimer it says that the
online eleven I further
understand all the most deaths
occur within three hours my
death may take longer we you
explain to these patients how
long it will take and how long
because I've read somewhere that
taking a very long time we did
have some people call in to will
everyone understand that it
could take maybe twenty four
hours for them to die from this.
madam chair and representative
that is the point of having that
this is in the written document
that the individual signs that
they have been told all of this
and that they are still want to
go forward it usually they fall
asleep within a very short time
and then they pass away within
within hours those hours can be
a little bit longer but they are
at at that point
Fund conscious.
Thank you madam chair do more
questions hold on one tax this.
So
on page four.
One fifteen it says potential
risks associated with self
administering what are those
potential risks as it that or is
there another risk associated
with this.
madam chair and
Representative and I don't know
if the professor starts in your
experience with California and
so forth have additional
information Dr Archana I think
had to have emergency on the
call he's taking care of.
Yeah thank you madam chair
members the committee there are
I'm extremely rare circumstances
in the thousands of cases this
is been used in states where
this is legal there have been a
few cases for example where the
the maybe but I saw in the
single digits and it may be down
to two or three cases where the
patient
was for some reason the body
didn't absorb the medication and
the patient might I'll wake up
that's expat extremely rare but
it's it is it it is a remote
possibility normally I think
that the provider must provide
the same information the
provider will I provide under
the general rule of informed
consent and that is what would a
reasonable person want to now
and so is that that's the law in
New Mexico and you'd have to ask
what are the other alternatives
and the other risks that a
reasonable person in the
position of this patient would
want to now and so that
certainly would be any common
risks and it certainly would be
one of a hundred risks whether
would be one in a thousand risks
is our partner question.
And may depend on the
relationship of the provider and
the patient.
Thank you this questions to the
chair on page five
line two eight the term in a
good faith that the individuals
request is not a rise from
coercion and undue influence by
another person how you know
that.
Madam chair and representative I
think that
Of a the provider if having any
suspicions or a say a family
member this overbearing and not
letting the person talking
cetera this is I think probably
pretty common practice when you
need to talk to her patient
individually and not and let
them make a decision about
about care in in not a family
member that you get some alone
and certainly if if there's any
sense that they're being for
state that provider isn't gonna
cooperate
and and people make life and
death decisions about their care
and their treatment all the time
and I think it's that's part of
the
you know standard of care and
practice that you are cognizant
of what your patient wants and
not necessarily being forced by
what they're what someone else
wants.
Thank you madam chair and and I
appreciate that but I do know
that there is elder abuse and
there are no other situations
where people are course in all
kinds of things I think about
human trafficking for one of
them.
At and madam chair and
representative you know I
suppose you could never be one
hundred percent sure what those
conversations are outside of
that are not in front of the
provider
however it is one of the reasons
also for having I a
disinterested party if you will
the witness to to the
to this conversation unless in
the agreement to and request to
have the medication.
Thank you madam chair any
question back to the chair as
I'm looking through this and
maybe I missed it I see now I
have to explain that there's a
consulting provider
position but when do they get
when did they get therapy when
did they go get to speak to
their best separately or maybe
the therapist should find out if
they're being co workers to the
therapist can find out of maybe
they're just suffering from
depression and it isn't that
they just want to die is that in
this bill.
madam chair and Representative
yes if there is any sense and
I'll try and find exactly where
it is so you can follow along
but if there is any sense
whatsoever by either of the
Prescribing or consulting
provider set there is
a current or recent history of
mental illness and or other
reasons that their judgment
might be impaired then they
refer to as a mental health
provider to make that
determination there's not an
automatic referral to every on
every case to someone to mental
health provider to determine
capacity to make the decision
physicians nurse practitioners
PA's make those decisions about
capacity and and judgment
every day as people do informed
consent on whatever the
procedure as and so those that's
as we talked about
common skill set and
responsibility of providers and
when they have a question
or a concerned then they must
refer.
Thank you madam chair did see
that part but that seems to be
separate from what I'm about to
ask you I'm so back to the chair
I'm going to that section
section four if an individual in
United recent history of mental
health disorders if.
More in intellectual disability
and I would like to focus on
that right there.
If somebody has an intellectual
disability that causes
impairment.
Which means the factory in
section C..
They can not do an informed
decision which was we discussed
that earlier.
The still can opt for this if.
They see a mental health
professional.
And.
They determine they have the
capacity.
Visit so I have some issue with
us and I want some clarification
so if I have there was somebody
with an intellectual disability
they still can go through this
even though they don't apply for
section C. with informed
decision.
If they go see a mental health
professionals so my first
question this pleases what
training what end of life
training will this mental health
professional have an asset
because I have a degree in
psychology not everybody I mean
some people get it stopped there
been they don't understand their
training is not in that so what
kind of training will this
mental health professional have
to guide a person through with
intellectual disabilities to
make this important decision.
you madam chair and
representative we
right below that.
I health care on page eight
health care provider refers
individual for evaluation by a
mental health professional with
the training and expertise to
assess a person with such a
disorder or disability.
And it's not necessarily a
single business.
mental health professional
determines the individual to
have capacity to make end of
life decisions after evaluating
the individual during one or
more visits with the individual.
Thank you madam chair back to
the chair that was one of my
problematic things I had with
this I see one and I get really
nervous when I start seen.
Not enough attention to detail
with more visits for somebody
especially somebody who has an
intellectual disability also
worry about people that are
suffering from depression and
not being able to make the
correct decisions and I would
hate for them to go see it kind
of therapist and I have for lack
of a better word
Self help their best you
understand what I'm trying to
say so thank you for that and
you're more questions please
fact check your Representative
Lord I just like to remind you
that I more on Representative
said have questions.
And I'm almost finished thank
you.
It's important bill and that's
why a lot of questions with
thank you.
So I'd like to go to section
twelve and I do believe this
will probably be my last line of
questioning when we go against
what page six pages.
Okay.
Ages at the same time that
that's all right the page
twelve.
Line seven.
Thank you.
Health care personal server six
the health care provider so so
inform the individual and refer.
That we're referring like to
pull that out.
So what will be the penalty to a
health care provider that does
not refer because they object
for more reasons or because they
took the Hippocratic oath and
they do not want to refer
somebody.
I'm and thank you madam chair
and representative I a couple of
things I want to first
say that it's are referred to a
provider who's willing or.
another individual or entity who
will assist the requesting
individual to provide care so if
they don't know with the
provided they don't have to go
state and trying to figure out
who is who is willing.
they can refer to
if there is such an introduce
someone who will help them so I
just want to make that that
clear this is not a criminal
statute.
This is not doesn't have any
particular civil penalties it
would be it is required so I
suppose someone could civilly
sue but it seems to me that
would be a waste of time when
someone's at their end of their
life they're going to look for
somebody else.
We've been that if it's an
entity who I like a hospital who
is required to provide notice I
suppose they could be cited by
department of health or you know
as to provide notice but it's
some.
this is not a criminal or bill
or civil penalties in this bill.
In.
Madam chair and members the
committee I wonder if I could
just at a point out that again
there are no penalties provided
in the statute there's no formal
penalty that if anything it
clear could be a complaint to
the medical board and then the
medical board would have to
handle it the way they would
handle a complaint against any
other provider but that would
just be an evaluation of the
appropriate steps to take and I
presume that the medical board
under normal circumstances would
inform the provider that there
is an obligation a legal and
ethical obligation to provide
the patient with the officer.
But no other penalties.
Okay and thank you for that and
and thank you chair like to go
back to what you just said I'm
that you said that so there
would be a legal penalty than if
it was sent to a complaint to
the medical board
that would be.
then that could turn into
something legal or the.
Madam chair and representative
no if it's referred to the
medical board they could just be
informed they have an obligation
but this law is very clear no
one can be
can be punished or receive a
negative
action from there licensing
board or anything else from a
participating or not
participating.
And but they may be reminded I
would assume it and to provide
and their obligation to provide
on a referral.
And.
That's but there's there's no
punishment in here or negative
consequences for anyone whether
they participate or not.
Thank you madam chair what I do
see though and then back to the
chair but I do see though is a
of problematic thing where
doctors are going to see this
and see while I have to refer I
don't want to this is
problematic for me we already
have doctors leaving the area
and also does open up looking
from a legal point does open up
form malpractice lawsuits from
the family well this doctor did
not refer madam chair and
representative I respectfully
disagree this project this
legislation difficultly you
you're not not subject to
malpractice if for
or or claims of abuse or neglect
or anything by participating or
not participating
under the statute thank you
madam chair I know there's a lot
of malpractice attorneys that
would be just that okay I think
that's offer marijuana question
the main thing I wanted to make
sure that everybody understands
this bill had in it and
especially this part or our
health care professionals
understand this word is very pop
problematic on page two of the
about the referral and that's
all the questions that have
thank you to the chair thank you
madam chair thank you
representative for the
questions.
Next we have Representative Liz
Thomson.
Thank you madam chair I'm and
madam chair for bringing this I
remember I have gosh I don't
know what it year was when I was
I was the vice chair and I had
this.
The put them honor of of hearing
this bill while madam chair
Armstrong presented it and I am
in a thousand percent support of
this bill and I I.
I thought that the questioning
time would give me time to get
over my crying but it's back.
I watched my best friend.
Cancer.
When you to do a.
Yes directed me for what they
thought was I rates.
When they open your up it was
cancer everywhere they took
nothing out because they started
to try organ started falling
apart so they say you're back.
I remember being with her and
she to hi.
B. E. T. I was trying to help
her partner.
With you know everyday things
like transfers to the toilet
things like that.
In her last few days I was doing
a transfer to my shoulder we
were faced.
And she was here I'm scared.
Issue with the.
She was more afraid of how
things would end.
Thank you
I know for a fact that she would
something where she knew she
could go go to.
Thanks.
The whole time if you would just
security blanket I don't know
whether she would have used it
or not.
Last few days or few weeks what
what psychologically painful for
and for everyone around no
waiting when she.
Well actually she she was
occupational therapist.
a wizard with kids with autism.
And she ordered her casket had
it in her living room and as
friends came in to use the book
case she had shelves.
And as friends came in they
could sign it they could put our
on it they could do so she knew
what was happening but I just
know that it would have been so
much easier for her for her
family for her partner.
For all of us to
for her to know that she had the
option.
Of deciding when was the right
time.
And so I don't know whether she
would have used it or not but I
know that the suffering the
psychological suffering.
For her was not knowing was not
having any type of control in I
understand people's religion
doesn't want them to do this and
that's fine they don't have to
if you if you don't believe in
that you don't have to use it
but I don't think it's fair for
people's religions to tell
people like my friend thank
thank you.
We have the capabilities I'm in
and that's it and most of you
know that that people with
disabilities is is my work and
my life and my son and and I
hear people say oh you know
they're going to kill people
with disabilities this
legislation is so well crafted
that that cannot happen it's not
going to happen my son no matter
how terminally ill he may become
does not have the capacity to
make that decision.
So that I get tired of people
say the same things that are
untrue I'm in trying to scare
people I I don't really have a
question madam chair but I do
think that we need to think
about the psychological rate of
the people who are dying and
their families and and we didn't
hear as many stories as we did
the last time about I remember
one of the stories was.
By a man who whose grandfather
was so was so ill and in so much
pain that he tried to run in
front of a moving car but he
didn't have the strength can you
imagine that that you get to
that point of desperation that
you are willing to throw
yourself in front of a speeding
car to kill yourself I just and
and there was another call a
college student who was very
close to our grandfather and he
he was in horrible pain from
bone cancer and he called you
know she took care of them he
Center out and then he called
her and said please come home
she came home to find them in
the back to with this with is
arteries what.
And dying.
That is not humane that is not
humane I don't think that's what
anyone's creator wants for them
I will leave it at that thank
you madam chair for bringing
this forward and I do want to
thank all the brave people who
were willing to tell their
stories and to to let us hear
what what reality is if we have
a base that thank you madam
chair.
Thank you representative
Thompson next I have a
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Thank you madam chair if you can
hear me now yeah Madam chair of
I just had a couple of quick
questions
and I believe they go to
Presentation of Mr Schwartz did
but I will dress in through the
sponsor and that is well I was
curious about the observation
that.
The states that have enacted
this law have been sort of on a
regional association of
trajectory.
And I thought in a regional
center staying and I wanted to
simply follow up and ask what
states in this region are have
this law in place in which
states down if I could Sir.
Yes
madam chair members the
committee thank you very much
for that question Representative
Anderson it's up most of the
people in the Rocky Mountains
and west are covered by the
statutes that allow for medical
aid in dying they are
of starting from the west Y. E.
California Oregon Washington of
Montana and Colorado
the other other states do not
formally permit of medical aid
in dying so there are statues
bills pending in in some of
those other states most clearly
the one with the greatest chance
I think the passing probably in
Arizona
but those are the states that
have adopted this and begin in
Oregon and was followed most
closely by Washington and
California
and so there's been a server
westward children there's been
an interesting discussion about
why that is and why states in
the west have been more willing
to adopt adopt the statute I
think that the general thinking
is the libertarian principle
that states in this part of the
country are more willing to
trust individuals and maybe less
willing to trust government
limitations on individuals.
Thank you thank you for that
answer in that and then I'm
going to up follow up sure with
another comment you made and I
was curious in short please
because I suspect this gets into
up quite a bit of of of law but
we talk about content what I
call the conscience clause and
you use the work that this bill
forty house bill forty seven
carries a vigorous conscious
Clause and I thought okay I like
that I like vigorous conscience
clause it made me.
Did want to say why is it
vigorous and is it more vigorous
than is currently on the books
for other areas of health care
in New Mexico.
Madam chair and and
Representative if I can answer
that first and then let
professor Schwartz because I
know we had a conversation the
other day about a conscience
clause in it not being needed
and the abortion bill because
it's in other areas of law.
This is a little bit different
the the conscious ability to
object and refuse to participate
tracks with those other laws but
we went to further in this
because of something that's
that's very an important and
that is explained in an the
liability protections for anyone
not just a provider to
participate and be present so
anyone and we wanted to make it
clear
that everyone is protected
should they decide to
participate from many other
disciplinary action or or
otherwise and and as well as
family or or loved ones that
might be present but
additionally it's it we thought
it it was important to expose
explained that liability
protection because assisted
suicide outside of the
parameters of this law will
still be illegal in the state.
So you cannot do make your and
do any kind of assisted suicide
you have to within a what this
law does is exempt this specific
narrowly focused and in very
specific.
statute removes it from the
existing.
assisted suicide as being
crime.
And so it was very important to
us to really explain those
liability protections to make it
clear you have to follow this to
get those liability protections
but once we did all the
liability protections it really
does make sense to do the
counter in that you also are
protected from refusing to
participate and so I I know we
had that long discussion about
we don't need it in the abortion
but this really required the
liability protections to be
honest well but the
ability to object and not
participate tracks with all the
other state law.
Thank you very much for that
chair it Mr Schwartz of you had
a short addition to that might
be helpful madam chair but
otherwise I'll go to my next
question.
Yeah just that I just let me
Madam that if this is a more
specific conscience clause in
the deals with a couple of
issues that don't come up in
other contexts or don't come up
in the same way in other
contexts because you actually
have observed three
organizations that can have
three entities that had can have
a conscience interesting the
individual patient the provider
and then the institutional
provider the hospital or the
managed care organization and so
we have to consider all of those
in the relationship of all those
and I hope that we did that in a
way this is Dale speaking direly
needs really as to the the the
the America this bill which
obviously I'm strongly
supportive of but we would try
to compromise those to make sure
that the conscience of each of
those can be maintained to the
maximum amount that was
possible.
Thank you very much for that
answer that was helpful in my
understanding of that the last
two I believe madam chair to up
again Mr Schwartz I was
listening this morning and it
dawned on me that does New
Mexico's enactment of this law
impact my insurance policy your
flight chose to
look to medical aid in dying.
madam chair members the
committee no it does not as in
terms of life insurance and
annuities it's expressly
excluded under the terms of the
statute and beyond that it is
had no effect on insurance
because the other insurance that
could be implicated would be
health insurance and to be
honest there's no indication
that the cost of deciding to
take this route is very much
different from the cost of
deciding not to take this route
so really but there's no cost
factor on the health side on the
life insurance side this cannot
prejudice your decision as to
whether or not to except aid in
dying when either way whichever
you choose cannot prejudice your
life insurance policy.
And madam chair and
representative Mike if I can add
it'll take me a moment I fumble
through it I should have it all
marked but there is a specific
clause in here that says that a
health insurance cannot make any
decisions about denial or of
benefits or any that benefit
decision based on the
availability of this in the
state and that's section eight
of the statute on page ten.
Thank you very much in it and
of of I was also pleased glad to
hear your response on life
insurance
as well is is hello
then my last question is
hypothetical it may be
appropriate madam chair it is
simply this could up person do
this entirely with hello of
that.
Element to me is an emerging
area of health care and I I
don't know whether I'm concerned
or not just a quick response of
if there is one please.
Madam chair members the
committee
I I really can't tell you for
sure I tried to look around in
California to see how that had
worked and whether or not they
were determinations are made
through telemedicine and I tried
to find out in Oregon as well
and I couldn't find a case where
it actually happened and I think
that there is a natural
limitation on physicians to
participate in making these
kinds of determinations and
allow and writing these kinds of
prescriptions when in fact the
encounters through telemedicine
but I think that entirely
hypothetically thinking we could
imagine for example that we
provider would write a
prescription in the consulting
provider in a rural area in New
Mexico for example where there
isn't another provider around
the maybe the consulting
position could be contacted
through telemedicine if other
forms of health care could
reasonably provided be provided
through telemedicine then I
think we look to the standard of
care and asked whether that
would allow this kind of
decision to be made by
telemedicine's well again I
certainly don't anticipated in
very many cases but I don't want
to say for sure that there could
be an opinion at some place or
place along the line with that
would be permitted.
And madam chair and
representative if I can just add
that
but the prescribing provider
ultimately it it has to be in
person because this has to be in
writing and witnessed witness
that signature and witness
the service request.
Thank you very much for that of
us to sponsor Armstrong madam
chair that concludes my
questions thank you.
Thank you for the questions.
Yes thank you Representative
Anderson next we have
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you madam chair for Armstrong
for for bringing this
legislation forward and for
always being so professional we
are madam chair for years we've
heard this bill and I I want to
thank all of the people who
called and sent emails and
everyone for their testimony
especially the representatives
virtual hug to all of you.
we've all walked that road.
Trying to hold it together.
I watched my mom died a
miserable death.
She was actually kicked out of
hospice to such a to such a
fighter.
You know she us got kicked out
of hospice twice because the
woman just would give up.
Five foot nothing cuss like a
sailor and smoke like a
training.
Hello it in Spanish.
Right right and speak at.
Tom how to hunt how to raise
children how to build a house
how to work at all.
Strong strong women.
And she died a miserable death
that lasted ten years.
And my sister and my brothers
and I all held her hand.
I don't think she would have
chose this mainly because of
being kicked out of hospice
twice.
and then.
Shortly after she passed away.
around thanksgiving.
My dad died twenty days later.
And it was horrible I can't even
remember the funeral I can't
just decide for in my mind which
funeral was which and who said
what because they were so close
together we had in the same
place they're buried on my
ranch.
Together.
And the can't imagine.
What.
People go through with sick
children.
And we miss you a lot last year
Madam chair Armstrong and we
created I personally prayed
every day for Erin.
And for your family for to be
safe happy healthy and to be
healed.
I understand why you want this
legislation completely
understand why.
I have.
Personal problems with this
legislation I have personal
problems my biggest problem is
the conscience clause.
We're acting role in this
legislation we are acting like
we are protecting the physician
when ultimately we're putting
shall so inform the individual
and referred the individual.
And so we've we just heard other
legislation.
Where we took the conscience
clause out.
And now here we are in different
legislation putting a conscious
because in the still mandating.
Are you.
I've sat at the table.
With a professor Schultz and I'm
sat at the table with so many
people the freshman in on this
committee are very.
I don't I can't call it.
Lucky.
But to to have a lobbyist from.
A position of wanting this
legislation come and talk to you
madam chair is.
This makes this even more
emotional.
We've all all the reps that have
been here for a while have have
that and the one that we had
last year was just very very
he was good and boy he discussed
your heart just wrapped it up.
I I'm sorry I don't recall his
name madam chair but but.
I understand I really do why
some people want this but just
in good conscience I cannot vote
for this legislation I would.
I it's such a tug.
I want to because I understand
that part but I'm worried about
the safeguards and I don't like
the conscience clause that's
added in
to me it's a.
You know what's good for the
goose is good for the Gander and
and I I don't appreciate that
being put in here I I want to
send my love to Aaron
and still praying for you every
day thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative
Thank you.
Thank you for that your kind
words and you have been.
Kind all along and I wish I
would have met your mother.
She was she sounds at.
Feisty and Matt and I would have
loved to have met her.
you know all I can say about the
conscience clause which I have
said previously is that it was
important to us.
To put in the liability
protections and to make it clear
that no one would be subject to
any kind of adverse action for
not
participating or participating
and that's that's clear in this
it does say shall and refer but
again as as as we mentioned this
is not a criminal statute it's
not a
the civil penalty statute there
we were very explicit that it
you there can't be any negative
repercussions from the licensing
board or or whatever but a
provider may get a warning about
reminding them of their of their
duty to refer and we don't have
an obligation that they find a
willing provider they don't have
to know the willing providers
are they don't have to search
and find one.
they can refer to an entity that
I think is in the midst of being
developed as we speak a
volunteer organization who would
be able to refer people to help
them find something that's all
they would need to do and again
there's no mechanism in this to
do anything about it if they
refuse to even do that.
so.
That's as much as I can I can
say thank you thank you madam
chair and thank you chair
Armstrong I
I I I asked the question in
every single committee but you
know I'm I'm still concerned
about eighty a definition for
terminal and I know that it's
you know.
Going to die at least in the
last the next six months.
But it's like I said you know my
mom was kicked out of hospice so
I I so I have a concern with
that but but I do truly
appreciate.
The thought process.
I have a family member that says
you know you need to vote for
this.
Because they've worked in the
nursing home and and in the
medical field there her whole
life and and said you know I've
I've seen it.
But once again I just got all my
emails cleared out from another
bill and my emails are filled up
again hello with the majority
asking me to vote against it
I can't imagine the
The pressures and and the at
it's heart wrenching and if we
were in real life and and the
the seasoned members and all
this it is it is tough it is
tough to be face to face and
hear the stories and but anyway
madam chair I'll quit rambling
but I I appreciate it and thank
you I'm done.
Thank you representative.
Next we have
Representative tur office.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Armstrong.
Representative.
There's two Armstrong someone
else's area of the other
Rep Gail Armstrong and all the
members and other people
commented I pulled over I've
been listening to it all the way
back from from Santa Fe trying
to go home to be with my family
and
I can tell you that also I feel
it's it's this is very hard to
hear.
And it's difficult for everyone
all the people the comedies and
I feel sorry for everyone in my
prayers to every person on here
because it is it has been a very
sensitive subject in an
emotional week here in both the
abortion bill and the right to
die.
That being said I've had a lot
of feedback and received it I'm
overwhelmed overwhelmingly
against a HB forty seven.
When I worked in the funeral
business for most of my life
thirty three years.
And I know the hospice's
provided care and dignity for
men's.
When I personally witnessed it
many times.
I feel for those people who have
suffered.
But surprisingly a number of key
of occasions families have come
to make the final arrangements
expecting
the low point to pass away.
When in fact they do not pass so
that years later.
Sometimes there's mixed signals.
It's also said
that our state ranks so high and
suicides so I have a few
questions and and and you cover
some of all and and and I don't
every once
It's been rough for everybody
are in so but to my questions
real quick.
This year.
My questions were answered so
I'm gonna go to.
This.
I had just a question about the
manner of death Madam chair
representative of who how you
got the manner of death.
I doctor I I saw that you were
able to.
instead of having it say suicide
or split Senator it's in suicide
to die from the mentor position
das.
So I'm not sure Madam.
Madam chair and representative I
assume you're referring to the
death certificate yes ma'am so
since we've specifically said
this is not suicide
it that's not what is listed and
this is consistent with every
other state.
and how those laws are are done
is and it's partly to not
complicate although we've
additionally mentioned that
specifically but not to
complicate
life insurance or contracts or
other things that might be
invalidate might have a suicide
clause and this we specifically
say it doesn't impact those but
to make that easier and clearer
and because we specifically say
this is not considered
suicide or assisted suicide
under the law if you follow the
practice exactly.
Then is is the underlying
disease status on the death
certificate.
There was some the reason I
bring that up is
The reason I bring that up is
because
well have you did you consult
Madam chair representative with
the office of the medical
examiner or investigator.
I'm Madam chair representative
not this time around this is the
third time we've had us we have
consulted with
with attorneys a professor she
works as a long time attorney on
this and we have that's never
been raised by office the
medical examiner ever in all of
our testimony in the previous
sessions and as I said it is
consistent with every other
state that allows medical aid in
dying I'm not gonna go on and on
about it is is that
in our.
Training we're we're taught that
on the only one that the other
that a doctor can only sign
for natural causes you cannot
alter it and so the office of
the medical examiner's.
Well investigator in the state
usually handles the other for
manners of death what I just
wanted assets you know I think
Representative Madam chair
representative on Mr
Representative of arms are not
Armstrong but Anderson asked
about
The conscience clause I think it
was hammered maybe was Gail I'm
sorry Representative Armstrong
called Gail so that'll get you
guys confused this is Armstrong
caucus right I'm learning it is
the arm Senkaku S..
And so and we have that long
discussion as you said madam
chair representative on on the
difference
and so
My question was.
There's a difference with the
difference be considered.
Discriminatory to work toward
other
Medical professionals and
providers who also expressed the
same.
Madam chair and Representative
I'm not sure I understand your
question discriminatory against
two other medical providers and.
All the medical personnel that
the that that aren't covered
under this type of our conscious
protection.
For participation in then other
dying in other.
Things that are in other issues
where their moral compass does
not allow.
I'm I'm madam chair and
representative if I understand
the gist of your question this
Clause tracks with those with
the other existing laws that we
discussed the other day on the
abortion but in addition and
again this doesn't apply we
wanted the liability protections
to be really clear that there's
no and implications for provide
for participating or not and
that was necessary because there
could be family members are lay
people who are present who don't
want to come under a potential
illegality there so we want to
make it clear that they are
protected for
the president or participating
and also to make it really clear
that these liability protections
only apply if you follow this
law exactly if you don't follow
this you are in the realm of of
assisted suicide that is a
criminal activity in the state
currently.
Yes ma'am chair I just
You know we have.
Madam chair excuse me and
Representative we had
Long discussion
that was.
How we couldn't have a two
tiered system.
And it was Adam it might the
attorney the other day that was
on it was it was not good for
the state to have a two tiered
system so my next question is
what would happen if.
If we didn't have any cuts to to
give all the medical providers
but I'm on the same playing
field what happened of the
section was removed.
I'm.
Madam chair and representative
but.
What what remains and what's
important about this I'll say it
one more time is this is more
than just providers.
And it is
walking the line between what
will be legal and illegal.
And and someone ending their
life who may be terminally ill
or for whatever reason if
they're not terminally ill if
they haven't gone through this
process they're not protected
and that piece was really
important to put in here and our
I suppose we could take out to
the rest of the conscious Clause
and just leave in those
liability protections but the
other loss as we stated the
other day would still apply
the other conscience clauses in
already in this in state and
federal law.
And this doesn't require that
you have on a moral are
conscientious or religious
objection you just can refuse to
participate sure and maybe I
guess what I was saying is I
believe that this could be
considered discriminatory or
other medical person that maybe
our want the same sort of
conscious protection immunity as
to stated that.
In the bill.
And I I believe that they should
be afforded the same respect
All.
I'll just leave it at that ma'am
and
I'll just stop say you know
again this is been a very
emotional for many.
And I do have concerns about the
two tiered system
the discriminates against the
medical providers.
Can
provide countries immunity and
those who are not afforded the
same respect.
This first terminal care for
hospice it's extraordinarily
available in New Mexico
virtually every person in every
county but the state has access
to hospice.
If and when they need it it is
true for the old number report
also have cancer don't.
And significant protection of
the people who died in our state
our hospice care.
And madam chair and
representative I'm really glad
you raise that point as
emotional as this is this
morning I I failed to to make a
point that is relevant to that.
And and that is that the
experience in other states is
that for those two the vast
majority well over ninety
percent of the people that avail
themselves of this are on
hospice
so it's not an either or the
other thing that that on the
experience in other states and
studies have shown is that when
medical aid in dying is
available in the state the
conversations with with on an
individual has with their
providers.
expands and opens up and there
is actually a greater use of a
palliative care and hospice
because there is open a dialogue
about death and dying and what
those other options are had
someone not been aware or or
utilizing those options yet and
so there is it improved I think
the entire continuum of care for
end of life care if all the
options are on the table.
Madam chair
Representative all.
Could you home.
Advise or advertise excuse me
sister's suicide for to its
residents.
madam chair and Representative
this is an assisted suicide
under the definition of by the
matter of law if this were to
pass by matter what's not
assisted suicide and I would say
the reverse if they refuse or
don't want to participate in
someone of legitimately are
choosing this option they need
to they they do need to provide
notice so that
someone can make arrangements to
be somewhere else or maybe never
get admitted to that facility of
that something I think in the
end they may want
and again so
but to advertise you assisted
suicide here no.
I'm sorry a drop in a second
yeah.
The card is not easy.
So I guess let me rephrase that.
Nursing home.
advertise.
End of life options.
As as something that they
advertise at the nursing home.
Madam chair and representative I
thank you as in the opposite of
what we don't provided here they
could certainly say yeah and and
the care that they provide that
they allow that to occur in
their facility the vast majority
of these the current home but
by way or insurance of
Not wanting to say they don't
allow it they could say that
they do allow it
again it needs to be
there needs to be the two
providers the witness saying I
can't be
someone who is
it were at least one of the
witnesses cannot be someone who
is either related or has a
financial interest in the in the
in the individual or an employer
representative of a facility or
institution where the individual
maybe.
Right.
And you know I understood the
Calvary admitted their
registration because insurance
companies denied services.
And then off and then offer
suicide in the same letter or
phone call.
Your amended requirement.
The amendment required two
separate forms of communications
one for denial chemotherapy and
a second to offer.
Of the assisted suicide.
Would your bill allow for this.
I'm Madam chair representative
but I'm gonna let our professor
Schwartz actually weigh in who's
been involved in
In California.
Madam chair members committee
I think that there are stories
and there are anecdotes of those
kinds of events taking place but
I have never actually seen
something like that take place
there's been no issue in
California or Oregon or any of
the other states where this is a
permitted that have all
ultimately created a problem for
the state regulators in those
states or in for the people who
are insured in those states so I
don't I mean the the in the
statutes have been amended
slightly in in the in
significant ways in Oregon and
California but I don't I think
that the incident that you
referred to has actually led to
any provided activity.
Are you sure relevant and
Representative I mean Madam
chair representative we also
specifically say in here on page
ten that it's unlawful for an
insurer to deny or alter health
care benefits that would
otherwise be available to an
individual with a terminal
illness based on availability of
medical aid in dying or
otherwise attempt to influence
an individual with a terminal
illness to make or not make a
request for medical aid in dying
medication that being said
there's also no obligation for
any provider to provide
can or continue to to provide
treatment that is
ineffectual in on and not going
to
be of any use.
Thank you madam chair.
Again I L. over the L. O. roof
of repeat myself but that it's
been a very motional day and the
two tier system this is what the
it discriminates against those
medical providers and so
with that are not afforded the
same
respect that they requested on
this the other day in the same
week
I know it's emotional and and I
pray for everyone that's on this
but I consciously.
Myself
find it very hard to.
To support this legislation
thank you madam chair thank you
all keep your markers and got.
Thank you Representative and
thank you for your for your
questions and for your attention
even as you've been traveling.
You are muted madam chair.
Thank you
I just want to let the committee
know we've been going over three
hours now and
Representative lord you have a
follow up question from your
earlier I do and thank you madam
chairs and and this is to the
chair what I wanted to at last
question is if somebody was in a
very rural district in New
Mexico which we have a lot of
and I'm trying to think of a
situation where a doctor House
somebody who comes in into
situations comes and that
they're asking for end of life
two situations one they don't
want to refer and there are well
let's do it this way let's say
there's nobody to refer to and
that area
what would be the repercussions
of that to that drive there's
nobody I did and forced to have
to treat this patient.
Madam chair and representative
there's no forcing anybody to
have to do anything I I think
that in good faith if there's no
provider and they don't know
where to refer them there
wouldn't be any negative
repercussions the most that
might happen if somebody made a
complaint side of the Medical
Board of the Medical Board may I
remind them they have
and in providing with the
permission of where they could
refer should someone access them
again and that referral again
doesn't have to be to another
provider it can be used to and
entity who will assist that
person and try to find someone
who's willing.
Thank you for and to that I did
check with a an attorney who
said that there is a liability
for improperly managing a
referral so there would be
repercussions and they can also
be severe replications to the
board if somebody refuses to do
this even on ethical basis I
just want to clarify that from
earlier thank you thank you for
all your time I'm finished you
madam chair.
I and.
Representative we have a
question from Rep are from
Representative Montoya.
Good afternoon madam chair and
we're Representative is on this
committee members of the public
I just want to make a brief
statement in support of this
bill I will be voting in favor
of it.
The crafting of this legislation
is impeccable the protections
that the staff is with together
thoroughly meet my standards and
I commend this process I want to
share a brief story.
In the late nineteen eighties as
a man living with HIV
I held too many young men.
Who suffered.
Long and torturous deaths.
It took so.
So much out of them many of them
had been.
Ostracized from their families
the data alone in hospital.
The testimony I heard today and
the the powerful inertia that
Erin brought forth with this.
Legislation with her testimony
was was riveting.
I just want to say as a
legislator having the
opportunity to weigh in on such
consequential lawmaking.
Takes my breath away and I take
it very seriously I yield back.
Thank you so much madam chair.
Thank you representative
Madam chair there any further
words that you'd like to close.
I'm thank you madam chair I just
want to thank you everyone again
like the other day the
the respect and civility that
everyone has had today I know
its emotional and hard and I
guess I would close with the.
with that my opening
remarketing while this is very
difficult to hear.
It's more difficult to live it
and I hope that you will vote
with your heart.
And
I thank you for your
for your thoughts your prayers
and your your honest
consideration of.
This bill that's before you
thank you.
Thank you all entertain a motion
from the committee.
Move it to pass madam chair.
Also.
Thank you sent off second.
I did.
Thank you.
I'm sorry the representative of
those.
Okay.
Dealers we take all.
Roll call vote.
We have as Amanda we did say
that right okay we have a motion
to for do pass with as amended
on house bill forty seven.
Are there any objections.
Okay.
Without on the amendment I'm
sorry madam chair no we've
already voted on the amendments
we are going for the bill to
divorce we roll call the yes.
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
I respectfully no.
Representative but I address.
Yes.
Representative Karen bash.
Representative Stephanie lowered
no with a very brief
explanation.
Representative Marian Matthews.
For my good friend Elizabeth
wide field and everyone else who
wants dignity and freedom to
have it yes.
What do Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Louis have
offered.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
By.
Join Ferrari.
Yes.
I'm gonna go back to
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Representative Phelps Anderson
Madam.
I'm Deborah Armstrong.
I'm Representative Anderson is
trying to.
Is trying.
That Turkey on mute there you go
madam chair can you hear me now
yes yes I vote no.
Chair Deborah A. Armstrong yes.
US and.
Yes and for now.
Thank you
Madam chair you have a very
respectful Pat do pass with as
amended on house bill forty
seven.
Thank you and thank you again
everyone.
I appreciate it and I'm the next
bill up again and if I can
respectfully ask for
Representative Lord wanted to
explain your vote sorry thank
you I and I apologize it's so
hard with the zoom in and thank
you madam chair Representative
managers I just want to say my
no vote was mostly because I
worry about some of the holes
that are still in this bill they
were about not getting special
training not enough behavioral
therapy I worry about coercion I
work about elder abuse and
people being questioned at this
and I were about fourteen Dr
stir for and thank you and I do
appreciate and I do understand
this is very emotional for
everybody thank you.
And thank you and madam chair
I'd like to thank your co
sponsor sponsor representative
Dayan Hochman and your daughter.
And all of our experts and
people who the testimony for and
against this bill thank you.
Thank you and madam chair since
I'm the sponsor of the next bill
up if if I could ask that we
have just a not a full recess
but just a moment for.
Right a short break.
I hope that thank you thank you
and we are not in recess we're
just taking a short break so
we'll see you in just a few
minutes thank you all.
Madam chair can I'm not sure
madam chair is right now.
I'm still chair because for her.
do you have any idea how late
we're going to go because I have
another commitment at twelve
thirty I thought we would in I
twelfth.
that we are most we have three
more bills so we are probably
going to go past that if you can
make arrangements.
I'm well I would I would and I
have to go to the other meeting
I I would just ask to be excused
if that's alright.
Yes.
When that time comes thank you
I I believe and I will and I
will then seek come try to come
back if in case you're still
going but.
Okay I'll check back in that be
great thank you.
Madam chair.
While we're waiting I'm
wondering if
Gabby Year Devon can move over
my experts for this next bill
which would be Rick Madden.
And Susan Wilson.
And is Dr Koenig still out they
can remove the the air and and
Dr Koenig and.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
I was just getting ready to text
her thank you.
Madam chair yes affirmative the
We do have doctor canning and
Representative Hochman Vigil
honest panelists was there
another expert witness for this
you know there they were on the
previous bill so they can be
removed okay so in the end the
experts for this next bill are
Rick Madden and sue Wilson Susan
Wilson.
Thank you so I I will serve.
Representative Madden on now and
Susan Wilson as well.
Thank you.
I'm
sorry your which we work in a.
Discuss.
This is house bill sixty seven
primary care council act.
Six.
And we're ready whenever you are
ma'am chair.
Thank you madam chair I think we
have a few more
People to.
Come back.
Representative Anderson and lord
are you here but just not on
video.
Yes yes madam chair I'm here
and.
On and off the video of but I am
here yes ma'am okay just wanted
to check we do want to start to
sing okay
this is
House Bill six it's I'm sorry
yes sixty seven
and
R. S..
The primary Care Council act
and.
Madam chair which you're ready
to present thank you madam chair
and committee members and I
promise this one's not emotional
and whole this one should be
pretty easy I hope this creates
at the at the Human Services
Department a council
specifically are regarding
primary care of to focus on
not only defining primary care
but studying and analyzing of
the extent of the availability
of primary care the pipeline for
primary care how much much we
invest in primary care and the
point is the more primary care
you have an ability to address
health care upstream the more
costs and better health outcomes
you have downstream and so
this is
and you might ask do we need a
statute for this probably
technically no other than this.
gives the intent of the
legislature to to have a primary
care addressed it would it would
transcend it ministrations and
require reporting to to the
appropriate interim committees
and so I think it's worth
putting in in statute and
without madam chair I would like
to introduce my to experts is Dr
are Rick Madden who was led a
lot of the effort of putting
this together are there was a
group of folks who worked on
that and Susan Wilson and I'm
gonna I've it's been a long
morning I'm gonna blank and I'll
let you introduce where you're
from it to talk about the bill
briefly and and then we'll be
ready for questions.
A doctor then.
Thank you Representative
Armstrong and madam chair thanks
for allowing us this opportunity
and I appreciate you bringing
this bill before the
legislature.
So the bill is only four pages
if you haven't seen it you can
see that it's fairly
straightforward and establish
its primary care council within
the Human Services Department
with the intent of not only
defining exactly what primary
care is by not just what types
of practitioners provide primary
care but what those services
are.
And then study what we do with
the expenditures in the state of
New Mexico for all of health
care how much of that is spent
on primary care.
With that information.
We would then make
recommendations to improve fund
to help patients and that's very
important let me just back up
for a second and say the people
are participated in our group
that wrote this bill include
of primary care physicians
physician's assistants nurse
practitioners some people with
interest in the business
community as well as health
administrations we had a broad
Group of people working on it
for quite a long time and we did
work with secretary Scrase and
Human Services Department so
that we feel that this aligns
well with the Human Services
mission.
What we would like to do is get
this council started with a
group of nine voting members to
be appointed by the secretary of
Human Services and look at
Medicaid first the reason for
Medicaid first because the data
on expenditures is relatively
easily come by and then
eventually moved to an all payer
type source of information that
would be from all the insurers
in the state of New Mexico.
What we found worldwide is the
primary care improves many
things for patients it this
helps with access it helps with
quality it helps with cost it
helps with equity.
Decreased use of emergency room.
Decreased hospitalizations.
Better use of hospital
resources.
Patient satisfaction improved
better primary care access and
utilization.
Primary care provides prevention
we played a big role in the
COVID nineteen crisis I get
calls from patients on a regular
basis not only us should they
have the vaccine but what do
they do about the symptoms that
they have should they stay home
what kind of treatment can they
used to they need to go to the
emergency room to the need to
have a specialized treatment and
we're glad to do those things
we're glad we're here for our
patients the specials would get
better referrals because
patients often get referred
through the emergency room and
some of those referrals or
because the patient doesn't have
access to primary care we need
to improve that access.
So with the improvements that we
recommend all of those things
would be improved I think there
are other states that are
working on that on this
particular process and in Rhode
Island it's been going on since
two thousand ten in Colorado
since two thousand nineteen
they're at least six other
states that are currently
working on a primary care bill
of the same nature within ten to
improve primary care and thereby
improve the entirety of health
care systems.
We would also coordinate and
collaborate with.
Graduate medical education
expansion review board is
currently part of the Human
Services department in the group
more.
Works to try and improve the
increase in the number of
primary care physicians
available to the state my
increasing in part at least by
increasing the number of
residency slots in primary care
so that's an ongoing effort that
we would certainly coordinate
collaborate with in the in the
in goal for goal of trying to
improve patients access to
primary care with more primary
care providers would certainly
have more patient access so who
would benefit by this bill
certainly patients would better
access higher quality higher
value care and lower costs
communities would be healthier
workforce would be healthier.
The primary care physicians
nurse practitioners and.
Physicians assistants as well as
all the members of the primary
care team including physical
therapist behavioral health
specialist and many others would
benefit specialist would
actually benefit because
specialist would get more
appropriate referrals referrals
that are of higher quality
because they have gone through
their primary care physician.
PA or NP hospitals would better
utilize their resources because
they would have more appropriate
use of hospital resources
insurers would benefit by having
a better cost ratio in
businesses would greatly improve
their ability to help their
employees stay healthy and have
access to good health care.
So that's my particular take on
things as a primary care
physician I've been practicing
for forty years and I'm in bill
and now and have been for thirty
six years and plan to continue.
I would like to if I could madam
chair and representative
Armstrong I ask our other
panelist Susan Wilson to be
allowed a few minutes to talk
about her point of view as a
representative of businesses the
buyers of health care.
Madam chair thank you committee
thank you for allowing me the
opportunity to speak in support
house bill sixty seven thank you
chair Armstrong for introducing
this bill my name is Susan
Wilson I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
coalition for health care value
the coalition is an employer led
multi stakeholder nonprofit
focused on improving the value
of health care in New Mexico our
coalition represents the
interests of our employer health
care purchasers and advocates
for high quality health care
system that's transparent in
price and quality.
We bring together employer
purchasers with providers health
plans vendors and brokers with
the goal of transforming health
care efforts in other states and
by large national employers have
shown employer purchasers that
improve primary care provides
increased value for their
employees and their dependents
as well as for the company's
overall employee health care
program.
Employers know that primary care
reduces inappropriate referrals
refuses help your employees and
their dependents as well as
reducing waste in health care
spending.
High quality primary care also
provides better screening for
behavior health needs which is
key to improving employee
wellbeing which has really had a
focus on it during the COVID and
the impact to mental health the
creation of a primary care
council as outlined in house
bill sixty seven will help New
Mexico address issues that exist
in the current primary system in
New Mexico today as well as
address challenges as they
emerge in the future we believe
this bill puts in place
foundation measures to improve
the quality and access to
primary care in New Mexico New
Mexico coalition for health care
value stands in support house
bill sixty seven thank you madam
chair.
Thank you and where we are now
stand for questions.
Madam chair your muted.
Thank you.
I thought I touch the bar and it
didn't work
For those in the attendees are
the audience if that is there
anyone in opposition to this
bill raise your hand and would
like to speak.
Okay seeing none will go to
those who support and if you'd
like to speak please raise your
hand and madam chair if I if I
could ask you to
here Dr Scrase secretary Scrase.
First he's got other obligations
but I want him to be able to
affirm the relationship this
will have with HSD okay great
I'm Dr Scrase.
Right now my muted so let me
just briefly I go through a
couple things that won't take
long I'm I'm sitting here
looking at a map I can't share
my screen but I was straits a
map of where do we have enough
primary care physicians which
are green you know a shortage
which is yellow in a dire
shortage that is red eyes I
brought up this morning I laugh
because it looks like all these
COVID maps that I've been
showing for nine months with
only one green county but HSD
went through every calculated
the number primary care
physicians in the counties we
have a significant shortage we
also know that for the Medicaid
members who are statewide in
every area that we have
significant access issues in
rural areas and so documentary
described the GME bill that was
passed by the legislature in
twenty nineteen House Bill for
eighty and only twenty two
months later we have a program
in place we have funded new
slots and if all goes according
to plan with continued funding
starting in twenty twenty five
we will add forty six new
primary care doctors per year
which like if we can keep them
all in New Mexico is enough to
take care of a hundred thousand
additional patients or really
making headway but you know
recruiting new doctors is one
only one piece of that puzzle we
need that the state is expand
training for nurse practitioners
in PA's and recruit them and we
need incentives for people to go
to and stay in rural communities
to India expand medical school
training to get people in rural
rural communities so they see
what it's like we need to
understand that our our
expenditures on primary care and
all the other things that Rick
Madden said and so this group
chaired by I guess me and agency
really will try to paint a much
broader landscape of all those
things we need to do to ensure
to expand it and ensure
continued access.
For Medicaid patients so
obviously I'm speaking in favor
this bill it's an agency
sponsored bill and I also agree
with Dr Matt and that there's no
real there's not no secretary of
health care it's not going to
benefit from getting people into
their primary care practitioners
not just doctors for
practitioners and early as we
can to identify problems but to
also prevent disease medicines
come a long way in the past that
by one seven years since I
graduated from medical school
and that we we now have an
abundance of data that shows
that that early contact as
Representative Armstrong
mentioned
Reduces costs improves health
improved livelihood so those are
my comments and up again to
reiterate that we speak in
strong support of this bill
sponsored by our agency thank
you.
Thank you Dr Scrase and because
we only have about five at
people who want to speak about
this bill in favor of it we will
not have the time or on budget
you can be brief one to two
minutes that would be great and
next we have sherry Dodson.
Good morning madam chair of my
name is sherry Johnson and I am
a volunteer advocate for a a RP
and we strongly stand in support
of house bill sixty seven thank
you.
Thank you and next we have
Lawrence and Shannon Chandler.
Thank you madam chair.
The representatives on the
committee I'm Lori Shepler
pediatrician in Santa Fe.
I'm here today representing the
New Mexico pediatric society the
state chapter of the American
academy of pediatrics.
We strongly support HB sixty
seven.
Improve access and quality and
reduce the cost of health care
thank you.
Thank you Mr Chandler.
And next we have
heather.
Breslin.
You can hear me okay yes we can
hear you thank you my name is
president and I'm an intern the
primary factor in the.
Current governor of the American
college of physicians for New
Mexico the American college of
constructs that make
improvements to advancements in
private.
We know problems like
administrative burdens an
adequate position payments high
drug prices and crucially for us
lack of access to affordable
health care coverage.
And lack of access to primary
care physicians are making it
harder for primary care doctors
to practice medicine earn a
living and most importantly to
help our patients the current
bill is in line with the current
priorities and policies of ACP
and we ask for your support
thank you.
Thank you next we have Alexander
a parent.
I thank you madam chair and
members the committee for less
my name is Alex Kern I'm a
registered nurse in the state of
New Mexico as well as a soon to
graduate family nurse
practitioner student at the
university of New Mexico as a
future primary care provider in
the state I strongly support
house bill sixty seven my
testimony today I wanted to be a
little more practical and I
wanted to give one example.
One of dozens that I'm sure any
market healthcare professional
could come up with the one
example of why the downstream
effects of this bill are so
important.
My experience is primarily in
March St apartment.
Now primary care is meant to
prevent things take the case of
the year average diabetic one of
the most common to the
conditions in New Mexico either
we can find this patient and
prevent diabetes from ever
occurring or it is in.
Leakers at some point during
their life they will develop
vision loss or even become blind
now unfortunately with suckers
the rate of falls go up
dramatically this happens they
will probably fall and
statistically they will break
there have at this point that
will come visit me in the
emergency department I will take
them up to the operating theater
where as this point they have
now racked up approximately a
one million dollar plus medical
bill.
We all know in the state of New
Mexico about half of patients
are on state sponsored health
plans so the end of this
anecdote is that the state is
picking up that bill house bill
sixty seven is meant to make
sure down the road situations
like this don't happen as a
nurse that would like to prevent
needless suffering.
Sarah who would like to pay less
public money on completely
preventable diseases urges for
house bill sixty seven thank
you.
Thank you Alex next is someone
from Health Action New Mexico.
Yes can you hear me yes we can
yes my name is Barbara Webber
and executive director of Health
Action New Mexico and we are I
health consumer advocacy and
policy organization.
Most interested in systemic
changes and we think that this
is a big step forward for New
Mexico we know I said on the
workforce the health workforce
the committee for New Mexico and
and sorry to say to see the
primary care is dropping in New
Mexico as it has across the
United States and I think we
have systemic issues with making
the portable Care Act was put
into
motion one of the.
Coaches statistics that has not
changed it was that in the
United States we have thirty
percent of primary care it's a
little less now.
Practitioners as opposed to
Europe which has a seventy
percent
specialist so we've not been
able to grow primary care and
there seems to to make systemic
issues for that
but it's a critical in
particular is a critical because
it right now we have less
primary care in the areas that
need it the most which rural and
tribal New Mexico so just from
inequity issue it's important
and forgetting our health back
under control for preventable
deaths preventable
hospitalizations and higher
quality of life Health Action
New Mexico supports this bill
and thanks to sponsor for
bringing it forward.
Thank you next is a Millia best
for.
I'm sorry is that right.
Dr million best for.
It's hi I'm I'm I'm I'm doctor
million estimate thirty resident
and of the president to program
here in Los crucis I grew up in
New Mexico I want to stay here
after residency to serve the
people New Mexico and thank you
for the Cherry committee for the
opportunity to speak to you
today in support of house bill
sixty seven.
Over this past year I've had the
privilege and honor working with
a diverse group of volunteers in
the care leaders and
collaborating to address some of
the health care needs of our
state and our efforts led to
drafting this house bill six
sixty seven I want to thank the
program that I here in Los
crucis for giving us a great
opportunity to train to become a
family physician house bill
sixty seven is important to me
because New Mexico's my home and
this is where I want to live in
practice as a primary care
provider COVID nineteen did shed
a light on our health care
disparities in the devastating
effect it's had on New Mexicans
in our nation and I've had the
opportunity to work with the New
Mexico Academy of Family
physicians and review survey of
our members on how Covid
nineteen has affected them it
was heartbreaking to see many
primary care providers
struggling to keep the doors
open and some not getting
themselves a salary so they
could pay their staff to not
close the doors to their
patients and unfortunately for
some layoffs and if you closing
their doors New Mexico cannot
afford to lose any single
primary care provider and as
work so underserved.
I know the value primary care I
know what it does for me
patients and for communities
across the state family medicine
is adaptable and we have shown
time and time over when there's
a demand in our communities we
rise to meet them when the
asylum seekers poured over we
volunteer to assess their
medical needs keeping countless
people out of the hospital the
meeting them where they were at
treating their dehydration and
listening to a devastating
stories of what they find when
COVID nineteen fulfill their
hospitals to the brim we stepped
up again with telemedicine I
currently have the honor to work
with COVID to comment to home
program where we call patients
and assess them to last able
people to say get treatment at
home this valuable work allows
for sicker people other sick
patients without.
Comment to be able to hospital
that's when they need them.
I know how important primary
care is to my patients and the
care that I provide.
Alright provides continuity and
it's good for the overall well
being of the patients.
They will go to the emergency
room because I come to see me
instead I get to get them the
care that they need when they
need it and also explained the
importance of CTE vaccines
account guided countless
patients on the C. practices
during COVID nineteen.
The panic investment is
important to me because New
Mexico is my home.
And in order for us to be able
to move forward we need your
help please support house bill
sixty seven the school but
benefit everyone especially our
patients thank you for your time
today allowing me to express my
opinion chair perspective if you
have any further questions
please feel free to reach out.
Thank you doctor next is
Valory Wangler.
Hi and act out when they're I am
me family physician and CMO at
here at arm's CCS it's chief
medical officer here at top
Rehoboth hospital in Gallup and
thank you very much Madam chair
for the opportunity and
community committee members to
speak to house bill sixty seven
when I introduce myself I always
a family that first and that's
because I really believe that
primary care is the heart and
soul of medicine that's where
patients go to see their doctor
and fortunately for us it's also
really wise investment we know
that investing in primary care
is critical to access improves
quality decreases cost that's
what's really at all around when
here in Gallup I think that we
have a special understanding of
what it is are to live in rural
New Mexico what it is to serve
our native American patients and
certainly here the primary care
capacity is is markedly lacking
access is challenging my
patients wait three or four
months for an appointment
someone can have a new complaint
it can take several months to
before they can they can first
get seen I'm so I believe that
house bill sixty seven is
critical to the state having the
data that we need to really
understand primary care in New
Mexico and the future of how we
want to structure primary care
we're trying to do our part here
in Gallup we are very excited to
have our first class of family
medicine residents are currently
interviewing and joining us in
July I and with that and again
my my personal commitment to
serving our patients to primary
care I strongly support house
bill sixty seven thank you very
much madam chair and committee
members thank you doctor next is
Motors this car.
Yes good afternoon Committee and
madam chair hi this is to this
risk that I am a family medicine
physician in Albuquerque New
Mexico from the moment I dare to
dream that I could be a
physician family medicine was
the definition.
That is the one legislative my
by my heart I completely believe
that primary care is the best
foundation for reaching out to
our patients establishing
partnerships making sure that we
empower them by educating them
and providing a preventative
measures in order for them to
have their their most healthy
life and prevent any type of
complications I am in support of
this bill thank you.
Thank you doctor result
I leave is our last speaker I
believe.
Thank you very much Madam chair
representative Armstrong and
members of the committee my name
is Roy good I am a nurse and I
am the CEO of the New Mexico
primary care association we
provide training and technical
assistance to the
federallyqualified health
centers and lookalikes in New
Mexico these organizations are
primarily located in rural areas
and always in underserved areas
in our state we have over two
hundred delivery sites and serve
over three hundred and fifty
thousand Mexicans.
Providing coverage of primary
care services has a lot of
challenges and I think that the
formation of this council will
really be advantageous for us as
we identify challenges
opportunities and strategic work
plan for the future primary care
New Mexico I would just like to
voice my strong support for
hospice sixty seven thank you
very much for your time.
Thank you very much is there
anyone else you'd like to speak.
In favor of this bill.
Okay we have the last person is
Quinn Lopez star madam chair
conceding and raise.
Madam chair this is Quinn Lopez
I'm with and members of the
committee I'm with the western
sky and the vice president of
government relations at western
sky community care I I support
this bill we need to review and
kind of refresh our idea of the
role of primary care providers
and we build the primary care
framework to really provide
value to the unique needs both
and cultural needs of New
Mexicans throughout New Mexico
rise and support of this bill
and and the only thing we would
ask if if the legislature will
consider it in Sanchez is to
allow us to have more
representation and input into
the process so that we can
leverage our resources and our a
expertise and our data and
everything we can to help design
the right solution so that we
have the long term goals match
of of meeting the primary care
needs and social determining
health needs of New Mexicans
thank you.
Thank you very much and with
that we will
Madam chair.
Europe I have to re establish my
internet I have to walk we it's
going to be about five minutes
to walk to my house and try to
re establish that even that
maybe about three minutes I know
you're going to I don't know if
you're gonna call for vote here
if there's any but but in
opposition or or whatever or or
for it so I just wanted to just
run in there so let's listen I'm
sorry I'm keeping or whatever it
will take me about a minute to
reestablish it that's all right
Representative trust as we were
going to go to the committee for
questions so you have a comment.
We all all real establish thank
you okay thank you
with that madam chair did you
have anything else to close.
madam chair at no I think that's
I think that's fine we can go to
questions okay thank you
I see first of.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you madam chair for
bringing this bill I see I was
reading in I don't know what's I
really disliked assume because
I'm printing this helps I don't
know if it's in the FIR whatever
but one of them says that this
might conflict with the current
New Mexico health care workforce
committee
and so I I just wanted to get
your response to that.
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative
there there is a committee that
that looks of formally at at
workforce by assessing the
number of licensed providers in
the state and and where they're
at but I think this this
committee on primary care is
much broader than that and would
potentially incorporate the data
from that workforce
a committee that is that studies
the number of licensed providers
in the state.
Thank you madam chair and madam
chair for that answer so I
wonder if we could look at
possibly combining them I just
want to have overlapping
information but I'd like to have
all the information the other
thing that I'm wanted to bring
up was the New Mexico health
councils and they are already
funded under G. O. H. and in the
communities in the areas where
they would possibly know the
best meet and it's already
already funded but they've been
lacking in funding and so you
know I just I just don't want to
create another council to create
another council to create
another council we need this
looked at.
We desperately need it so how do
you have any remedies for my
concern all as far as that goes
madam chair thank you madam.
I just got a note from Dr Scrase
that he'd be available to speak
about that I wasn't sure if you
got that also.
the yeah that would be that
would be fine if if that's
alright
she would have to move him back
in please David Scrase.
His okay.
I'm here thanks a lot go ahead.
Yeah you know I think madam
chair and and Representative
Armstrong Representative makes a
great point there are lots of
things out there the.
The the group that produces the
workforce document every year is
just counting and reporting you
make policy recommendations but
they don't actually.
execute on those local health
organizations in the county is
sponsored by the U. H.
supernatural I think the
intention here to kind of
coordinate all that activity and
make and to develop a cohesive
statewide strategy would be our
intent to and I include yeah we
we actually Medicaid is working
very much to redo the work force
analysis to make a reflective of
actual doctors working to see
patients and not just licenses
that what's retired physicians
and one not the new report and
so I I pledge is the chair that
we would coordinate activities
and try to bring them together
it's not the intentions of the
state to run all of it just to
develop a strategy the input
from all over the state very
similar to what we do with Jimmy
and that was very broad input
into that thank you.
And Madam chair representative I
will I would just add that the
the work force
efforts to identify workforce
shortage is brought it's not
focused it's not primary care
focused necessarily and it is
not making any qualitative or
policy about investments or
anything else just we're just
comments about shortages it is
important data for this group to
now but it's
I think a a separate effort and
then the there's also
required in here that there are
some that that not only
coordination but there's five
members from statewide
organization representing
primary care providers or
statewide professional societies
associations that doesn't quite
that the health councils but
then thirteen non voting members
representing health care and
other stakeholders in an
advisory capacity and I
certainly think that community
health councils
might have a very appropriate
role in that advisory function.
Okay thank you so much madam
chair madam chair and Dr Scrase
for those answers I I just
thought it was a pretty large
board and all of them to be all
the members to be are nominated
by I believe Dr Scrase.
All if I'm reading that
correctly so I it and why not do
this in the memorial madam chair
and then chair.
Thank you madam chair and
representative it could
potentially be done that way my
of my effort and and an
agreement to do this in statute
is it that I think this needs
the focus on primary care and
enhancing and and building our
primary care goes beyond one
administration and it requires
reporting and recommendations to
the legislature so I think it is
something that I see as an
ongoing effort and not just a
memorial
asking for so I just wanted to
formalize it and much more than
with a memorial that can quite
frankly be ignored it thank you
madam chair agreed with that
wholeheartedly and and madam
chair one that point us easy
Representative I think Dr Scrase
wanted to add something to that
yeah Madam chair representative
Armstrong our experience with GM
me with of the L. as House Bill
for eighty back in twenty
nineteen again incredible
impetus to organizing an effort
and I said in my earlier
testimony that we planned
starting in twenty twenty I
could graduate forty six new
primary care physicians in the
state of New Mexico each year
not to provide primary care for
an additional hundred thousand
people and we still have work to
do we have practitioners in P.
ace and so I believe as a
secretary with a lot to do when
we don't have a pandemic that
giving legislative backing and
putting in statute makes a big
difference some will really help
us.
Okay thank you for that point
would it be feasible madam chair
to possibly put a sunset on this
to go back and revisit to see
how it's working or have you
taken that into consideration.
Madam chair representative no we
haven't talked about a sunset I
think that this the importance
of primary care is worse
transcending over time and it I
think will always remain mmhm
yeah and we should be assessing
along the way where we can
expand or improve primary care
so
we did not contemplate a sunset.
Thank you madam chair I just
I just kind of like sunsets just
because it makes the legislature
go back and revisit and make
sure.
The what we're implementing is
actually working and I know that
the chairs of the interim health
committee are very diligent in
making sure of that but a sunset
what I would recommend a sunset
or just for you to think a
little bit more about that so
that we make sure that we're
getting the information that we
that we really need other than
that madam chair
I I'm all about this site have a
couple of memorials myself just
because just talking about
health care in general in New
Mexico and I I understand I we
own a business where the primary
care doctor is so important
because that keeps employees
family members everyone else
from going to urgent care first
or possibly emergency room where
to to help the lady in our
expenditures if the primary the
primary care is is the one that
we need to be focusing on and so
I do appreciate this and I will
be fully support us any way I
can help please let me know
thank you madam chair thank you.
Thank you there are no more
questions from the committee
unless I missed someone.
For okay all right
madam chair did you have
anything else you'd like to add.
I just urged the support of the
committee and appreciate that
the discussion.
Okay thank you and what is the
preference of the committee.
I'm moving to pass madam chair.
I was.
Okay we have to pass on House
Bill a sixty seven and and the
second is there any opposition.
Madam chair I'm not sure that
Representative has.
Maybe it back on no I don't
think he has I just checked.
Excusing madam chair I did just
speak to many still can't get
in.
Okay I think since we have a
consensus are we could go ahead
you might be a problem
for him the rest of the
afternoon I'm not sure.
So.
Pardon me madam chair at as the
the lead on the Republican side
I I think that would be fine I
know he really wants to not miss
any votes but since it's a
consensus I think it's fine
thank you madam chair great
thank you thank you
representative and we can mark
M. excuse.
Okay.
Thank you
with that and madam chair you
have a.
Consensus both in a due passi
for house bill sixty seven.
Thank you.
Thank you very much
of that would be ten it four
zero against on us.
There's Representative to rises
if we can
allowing them an opportunity we
didn't mean to exclude you
representative we we we
currently have a a unanimous
consensus on passing on this
legislation so but if you want
to formally take a vote or have
a quick question are you know
Larry may madam chair I'm
stepping Smith chair.
As.
I will I'm not going to talk
much I'm sorry I just wanted to
say you know these are.
I could hear some of the stuff I
think I'm are excused what is
one of the okay the only comment
I have is that we always hear
the same model.
Same.
Things were always trying to
increase access he lost and so
we can work toward that make are
there better in New Mexico and
making our expanded technical
support that the doctors for
tell support affordable.
I think that's all the only
comment I have I'm out so it was
all week for the next one okay
and just I think I came in could
established I'm getting kisses
for my wife and my children.
That is okay.
Thank thank you we didn't want
to leave you out when you
specifically said you wanted to
try and get back in thank you
madam chair Representative and
representative and we make it
your formal consensus that you
are in favor of this bill also
it's one this okay thank you
very much.
Now to the vote of eleven to
zero you have consensus.
For the past.
Madam chair madam chair I think
that Representative Matthews is
not in the room am I correct
about that COVID we miss her ten
zero I think she was she may be
excused yes okay thank you were
corrected
We have paper people paying
attention to what we're doing
exactly madam chair I I think
the gavel back in your hands
okay hi.
Don't have a gavel so the next
bill up is house bill seventy
two Representative Christine
Trujillo however I'm not been
able to reach her I don't see
your on the list waiting we may
still be able to reach her and
before we're done but if we can
move
on to Representative Ferraris
bill and I have to look and see
what bill that is next to what
money.
House bill ninety four.
Representative Ferrary are you
ready because I've not been able
to find Representative Trujillo.
Your your muted.
Thank you madam chair I did not
get a chance to grab my folder
yet but and I don't know if my
it didn't have it.
If my expert director of
developmental disabilities
planning council it director
Allison McCloy if she could be
Added to the.
Panel see I saw her a minute
ago.
I was supposed to text here in
fifteen minutes.
You were you were busy.
And not expecting to go next but
let me see.
Yeah I texted Representative
Trujillo and didn't get a
response and she's not in the
list.
Madam chair and representative
in keeping an eye out for
allicin I don't see her yeah LFC
she's not she was here earlier
so if Representative Ferrary if
you we can hold for a moment if
you're able to get her and
grab your folder okay thank you
madam chair.
Madam chair I just spoke with
Alice and she is wearing off
another meeting and zooming on
to ours so she should be on
here.
Where else McCoy is in the.
Then for over.
While you're doing that I'll go
ahead and introduce and Alice's
on so okay.
At this is the supported
decision making of task force.
has an appropriation of thirty
five thousand can be less but
it's it's for
Part time person to help run the
task force and
This supported decision making
was endorsed this bill was
endorsed by the health and Human
Services Committee and it's to
form a task force to study
supported decision making as an
alternative to guardianship in
New Mexico but currently we lack
of the necessary resources to
set up this task force
There is a of different levels
of guardianship and when did the
task forces met
To work on the guardianship of
programs they didn't get a
chance are have the funding to
implement this one other rung on
the ladder of options for
guardianship we're you can have
someone with the supported
decision making role and with
that I will
at ask the director of Lou
McCloy issue will add because
she has such a wealth of
experience in this.
Go ahead no welcome director
makori.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Ferrary and for
hearing this bill today I want
to start by speaking about what
supported decision making is and
why it's so important for us to
have it in the state I'm
supports vision making as a
system and it can look like any
number of systems and all over
the United states and every
state does it differently but
it's a system where a person who
needs assistance you need
support their decision making
but can they get with those
support have those supports in
place and have it in the special
way so that their supporters can
can access records whether it's
your medical records in medical
institutions or financial
records and financial
institutions but it gives the
control gives the decision to
the person whereas guardianship
is a system where we take away
people's autonomy their control
over their own lives and it
really should be a last resort
I'm the the latter of services
that Representative Ferrary was
discussing I know really starts
at the top with the most
restrictive which is awful or
what we call plan regarding chip
where where the guardian has the
right to make every decision a
person's life with or without
the person's consent and that
for sure should be a last resort
there are people who do need
that level services who might
have medical conditions or other
conditions where they have with
where they have lost all of
their capacity I'm and then and
then from down from there we
have limited guardianship I'm
where at where the court order
specifies what decisions to the
guardian can make and then the
protected percent retains
control over every other
decision that's not specified
workers in supported decision
making I'm it can be something
that the courts are involved in
it can be extradition judicial
it can be a statute that we put
into it I'm lost here in New
Mexico again it's been done so
many different ways and the
reason we want a task force.
Is because that the I'm.
New Mexico is different from
other states and we don't want
to just **** nilly put some
statute into the into our law I
without talking to stakeholders
the courts are really important
one we have an agreement from
the courts to sit on this task
force Department I'm at you know
other attorneys who practice in
this area of law and families
and people with disabilities who
would be affected by this and
other stakeholders and.
In guardians professional
guardians and other guardians as
well I'm family guardians and
conservators and so by bringing
these people together we can
actually craft legislation for
the legislature for I'm all of
you to consider that is well
thought out and that has been
discussed with I'm all the
stakeholders who are working in
in this area of our I'm and.
Thirty five thousand was at a
very generous I proposal from
Representative Ferrary you know
it can be anywhere from fifteen
to twenty five really just need
to hire somebody to to ride herd
on this task force the DPC
developmental disabilities
planning council which I am I'm
at the head up and out off the
guardianship which is within the
PC how we have our hands full
with a lot of at initiatives and
a lot of issues that are
happening right now we just
don't have the capacity to pull
together but it is so important
is a very small investment in my
opinion for this kind of big
change for New Mexico and not
only are we protecting people
living with disabilities and
protecting our economy and the
right to choose how they live
but we're also I'm protecting.
A vast.
Amount of other folks who are
eligible for guardianship who
need it so here at office
guardianship we provide
guardianship services to people
who are income eligible they
must they must either meet the
two hundred percent poverty
level or be cause to at there
are some exceptions and so
people come to us are folks who
don't have resources we don't
have a lot of supports your by
and they really do need this
high level of partisanship
service I'm and we are
struggling I think many
legislators here no at Oscar in
should be struggling to meet
budget demands for for the
services that we're providing
and by creating a system where
we're giving folks may not need
guardianship but have need some
kind of support we're giving
them an Avenue for support so
that we're freeing up resources
very scarce state resources to
provide a high level
guardianship im service to
people who really do need out so
I would urge that members of
this committee to vote yes on
this proposal and I have I am
happy to stand for questions
thank you very much Madam chair
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair
I have been involved in a lot of
of people's lives in
My district to have
Not had this other opportunity
before going into full
guardianship which they did not
particularly want to go into so
by having this supported
decision making support in
our other option of before going
into full guardianship I think
it will help a lot of people and
As.
Director McQuay said you know
this is something that we need
to have this task force and look
into so with that we stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative we'll
go to the.
audience and is there anyone
here in opposition to this bill
if you raise your hand.
Yeah I don't see any hand raise
anyone that is here in support.
Raise your hand.
And miss Cooper would you like
to make a statement.
Yes thank you madam chair is
very good to see everyone this
this afternoon actually.
I'm Jackie Cooper a volunteer
with AARP and AARP supports
exploring alternatives to
guardianship certainly in order
to grant greater self
determination and to recognize
the evolving state of
guardianship on in this country
thank you very much.
Thank you
Miss Cooper and I don't have any
other hands raise so we'll go to
the committee Representative
Armstrong.
If and when appropriate I moved
to pass right I have no other
answer right so I was out as a
as a motion.
I was second madam chair and the
second.
I'm the and before we take that
vote Representative dresses you
raised your hand you have a
question.
Yes ma'am I have a question
because I had a.
I had a situation
at the funeral home guardianship
this is I I'm really interested
in this because guardianship
was an issue and I just would
like to.
Ask this could help we had a
situation and I don't know if
this would I know it's a study
in other office will include
that an individual who was
unable I was on guardianship.
And was unable to follow through
getting your arrangement once he
was gonna lose them the money
that we had
it.
C. hospital we work with for
very long.
And so my question was.
When I went up to talk to them
there was no power of attorney
had no family no one and so the
reason that I'm bringing this up
with this help.
Person in a situation like that
because he was it was up
actually was a guardianship
there was a.
I can't remember the the exactly
what the status he was.
and but I wanted to get him on a
guardianship they could sign and
the state said it was very
costly and he was stuck in this
limbo.
Right in between north side for
him and they couldn't afford
well they don't want to the
expense of having to put him up
for guardianship so I don't know
if if that study I'm just making
out of a statement.
More than and and hopefully that
bill address that you just you
find very few patients that and
and clients that fall into those
categories and I hope that this
this legislation helps.
Thank you.
Thank you representative I have
a motion on the table for a do
pass is there any objection to
the do pass.
I don't see any
All right I see no objection to
the do pass so with that
Representative Ferrary
let's see for whoever's.
It's unanimous I think Marian
Matthews Representative Matthews
is not on
do we have everyone else just
want to get the vote count
right.
Madam chair Representative
Matthews asked me to excuse her
at twelve thirty and she had to
leave and okay all right.
Yes we have ten okay.
Ten ten to zero you have and one
excused you have up house bill
on ninety four is that this
ninety four has duly passed the
committee I'm juggling all
multiple screens I just talked
to Representative Trujillo she
had a pretty rough morning with
a lot of things going on and is
asked to roll her bill until
Monday so will roll over on
house bill seventy two until
Monday and add that to the
agenda and warrants for for your
support thank you and and I want
to thank the committee for
hanging in there for a long a
hard morning I also want to
mention to committee members if
you have not yet
logged in and signed up for the
share file.
you might try and do that over
the weekend it puts everything
on in one place so it and those
invitations should have come to
you I think from Wade share that
it's specific to you saw will
have your committees that you're
serving on and if you open the
file for you for the committee
you're serving on it'll have the
date then it'll bring up all the
bills and on each folder for all
those bills it has FIR it has
the committee and analysis and
of the bill and I think I'm I'm
hoping at some point we get if
we have handouts that that can
go there to but it's one spot to
look for it so if you haven't
done that yet I recommend that
you try and get logged on to
that over the weekend it makes
it not quite as easy as having
all the paper in front of you
but much better than hunting for
various emails and going back
and forth to the website and
pulling things down some.
with that possible yes to
Senator.
Madam is also for Mr Wade to to
see resend it I've got I've had
literally this week I'd get
sells and sells right I've had
the same and duly noted will
make sure that that message gets
to the speaker's office to
resend the invitation for the
share file because it is will be
really great tool and ease is
our ability to find everything
in one place so I will get that
Messager Gabby endeavor can help
get that message to the
speaker's office for him to
resend them Madam chair
representative us will contact
right now that the recent.
Thank you because I just got on
it and got organized for this
meeting it was very helpful so
with that we are adjourned until
eight thirty on Monday morning
and in addition to the agenda
that's already been posted for
Monday we will add house bill
seventy two rolled over from
today.
Thank you everyone and Senator
to the yes if I could just say
one thing everybody when we get
off.
It's it's been a real pleasure
to to serve thus far with
everyone to get to understand
who our colleagues are what you
believe in the open hearted
really truthful speaking from
our hearts is so important and I
think that you know this.
The information that we're able
to share in the process is
getting smoother out it's been
really unprecedented as a
freshman I don't know anything
different but it seems like it
is improving and finally I just
want to commend you meant Madam
chair in front of everyone for
your grace and the way that you
handle this committee I'm
learning a lot from your example
have a great weekend everyone
thank you thank you for those
kind words and have a good
weekend everyone this.
I was in the state.
