Some more at nine o'clock so
we're going to go out of order
any promises it will be short
so Senate bill one eighty one
and then we'll go back to the
agenda thank you.
Thank you madam chair of this
bill is just a bit of a fix of a
bill the past couple of years
ago of at that time anyone who
doctors who prescribe opioids
were to offer a prescription for
the antagonise also which is
typically called naloxone.
In the directions that was to go
with that indicated that a
minute a minute Lee after
administering the naloxone the
reversal drug for the opioid you
should call nine one one about
half the time when people do a
reversal like that the people
who were doing it are the ones
who would get called by nine one
one and so it doesn't make sense
to have directions on there to
call yourself to show up after
you get done.
What this does is just at the
bottom it says on that those
directions in less that person
is a health care provider as
provided under the pain relief
act.
I'll stand for questions okay so
anyone in opposition in the
audience.
Okay anyone in opposition on
zoom.
anyone in support.
For anyone in support on soon
okay we'll go to the committee.
Representative Jones and
Vincent.
Thank you madam chair and
senator I have I just wonder why
did this what brought this to
the to the we have a bill on.
Madam chair and and
Representative Jones.
When someone is administering
naloxone to reverse an overdose
the it is a temporary measure
they need to get help right away
I'll I'll stop you on that
because I think I think that was
understood or maybe okay I'm not
understand your question then I
apologize okay so so what was it
that was the problem with
calling nine one one.
Madam chair representative often
the person who is doing the
reversal and using the naloxone.
Are the first responders and the
people that would be called four
nine one one the law requires
them to do the reversal and call
nine one one essentially they
would call nine one one who
would call them to come and deal
with the patient that they just
did the reversal on okay so
thank you madam chair and I
understand that is mainly first
responders that this affects
right maybe first responders
nurses doctors who are already
on the C. the other kinds of
people of that under that pain
relief act that are providers
for that.
I thank you madam chair and I
just a I wonder about whether or
not those people are actually
trained in and that too is
watching somebody that since
that the a Los and then our can
has such a short.
A half.
It could actually is that that
person going to.
I gotta get this get my thoughts
together on this and I'm
concerned that the patient would
still be in danger if we don't
have someone watching them and I
know in the nine one one
situation where you've got
you've already got first
responders there that is that's
one thing but what about you
said any other nurses or another
setting where that particular
professional may not be the one
who's really supposed to be is
is a.
Is educated enough to really
take care of that person how do
we deal with that.
Madam chair representative those
are the ones that are qualified
under the pain relief act that
they don't need to call nine one
one they are the ones that I
understand that what the care
needs to be from that point
they're already in contact with
other emergency services and
things of that sort.
Okay I don't I guess I'm not
really.
I don't think it applies to
every situation I guess is what
I'm thinking yeah of course it
applies madam chair it applies
when you've already got a first
responder on site and maybe in.
Been at some other situations
but not everyone and so that's
my concern is is what if I as
just I'm a nurse but maybe I
don't know that much about nor
can but I have had an
opportunity to give that.
And that and I don't call nine
one one and then this person the
then our cameras off they're
still in our Kotick on board and
this person that is that sort of
situation I think is this is the
out liar but it's it's a
concern.
Madam chair representative of
this is what this does is it
read moves for people who do
know what to do the door don't
call if anyone is in doubt they
should call absolutely but these
are the ones that are under the
pain relief act specifically do
know and understand and so it
doesn't allow anyone else
everyone else is still would
still be required to call.
Okay thank you very much thank
you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair.
And thank you senator.
I don't happen to see this guy
beat me up on the basketball
court the other.
Well.
That's not what I'm asking you
these questions.
So.
As a first responder the reason
that I have a problem with this
is because I'm trying to figure
out so will these people be in a
facility.
The ones that are given the
opioids.
Madam chair and representative
then said they could be I mean
it could be in various different
situations the whole idea of
this is if you're the one who
would be called if somebody was
having an overdose and.
And you're the one that's there
when they're having the over
does you don't have to call
yourself to come show up.
The problem that I have with
this is.
I've been to several calls and
administered a lot of north can
to where I've had to administer
nor can all the way to the
hospital and
you know making sure that people
are on heart monitors and you
know you're being able to
stabilize them and I I just feel
like nine one one needs to be
involved just for secondary
measure that's the only reason I
I don't really care for this and
I do have full.
full confidence in nurses and
and everybody that that uses in
our can.
I'm just trying to figure out.
What if these people are not in
a facility.
It madam chair and and
Representative there's nothing
that prevents them from calling
nine one one and so if that is
still an appropriate measures
you're out by yourself you know
you believe Mr the the lock so
new fully know what it's going
to do but you're not in a
position to transport to do all
of the things absolutely you
would still call nine one one.
If it's the type of situation
where to the facility or all the
other things are there it
doesn't make sense to then call
nine one one to show up whether
already where they need to be to
do that.
So this nurse madam chair
Senator the the nurse would be
monitoring this patient
throughout the the
administration of them no locks
on.
Madam chair representative yes
it in a case like that they
would continue to be there
continue to monitor until it's
of a hand off to to a hospital
or or whatever the next level
would be.
Thank you madam.
That is my okay.
Ferrary no thank you madam chair
I'll move for do pass on Senate
bill one eighty one.
Okay Monica can you call the
roll.
Kate.
Representative Chavis.
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative condominiums.
Representative Jones nope.
Work representatives of pants
ski Representative isn't
respectfully no.
And madam chair talks yes.
Okay I forty two you have thank
you thank you for your
indulgence so let me go first I
appreciate it have a good day
don't forget next time one of us
is infinite.
On my computer.
I'm just teasing you.
Okay we will go back to
Senate bill seventy committee
substitute for Senate bill
seventeen.
You can start when you're ready
thank you madam chair thank you
members of.
State for presenting
Senator is committee steps to
percent bill seventeen
so the.
The goal of this bill is to
minimum standards to be set for
dental plans dental insurance is
considered exempt benefit under
federal law and state law as a
result many of the rules that
apply to health insurance plans
do not apply to dental plans
leaving them relatively loosely
regulated and Senate bill
seventeen it will create some
standards transparency and
accountability for dental plans
that will allow patients to
better understand their coverage
and receive the care they need
by addressing prior
authorization assignment of
benefits network leasing
retroactive I do not L. and
virtual credit cards and most
dental plans already me some of
the some of these standards
however this bill ensures that
they all they will all be
meeting some minimum
requirements and without have my
expert witness introduce himself
and comments engine.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Tom scripts
that the dentist in New Mexico
for forty years I'm currently
the executive director New
Mexico dental association
and we're very much in favor of
SB seventeen
as of the representative
explained some of these plans
have there's but they're not
regulated in the same way that
health plans are and the purpose
of this bill is really to Reso
standards and make sure that
patients are getting the most
from their plants and that
there's transparency there and
in respect of your time I'm
going to answer your questions
if you thank you so much.
Is there anyone in in the
audience in opposition.
Anyone on zoom in opposition.
Anyone in the room and support.
I think everybody's tired.
Anyone on zoom in support.
Okay seeing no public comments
Questions from the committee.
Actually I do have a question
The OSI notes quote as written
the proposed bill requires that
the consumer submit their own
prior authorization requests
placing the burden to obtain
prior authorization on the
consumer to make these requests
rather than on the provider.
Chair.
manager
That that's kind of a normal
situation not not every not
every service requires something
to be pre authorized and so
really all that does is make
it's if if a patient wants to
have a pre authorization they
want to know what they're in
plan is going to cover they make
a request to do that but it's
actually submitted by the
provider I mean all of the
supporting information so would
be provided it's just they need
to make the request as opposed
to just the provider making your
quest without them and so all of
the information they will need
to make a request is provided
for them thank you I will
entertain a motion and share all
move of four do pass on
a committee substitute for
Senate bill seventeen second.
and is there any opposition.
Then you have to do pass thank
you committee.
We'll go on to
Senator Ortiz.
Okay we'll skip over that one
we will go to all Senate bill
two thirty two health insurer
provider info and reimbursement.
Senator Pirtle.
And Representative Hernandez.
Food looks like spring today.
Winds is ripping Committee.
I I've heard that yes.
The lobbyist said that to me a
few weeks ago on a Friday and
I'm like what you like but it's
provided by no yeah yeah so now
I know the reference working in
teams
at the go ahead thank you madam
chair members of the committee
today we have I'm Senator Pirtle
today we have Senator Senate
bill two thirty two this was
brought in front of your interim
committee madam chair the health
and Human Services Committee in
the interim of spoken about at
length the issue that we're
having in two thousand sixteen
there's a huge problem of
credentialing of doctors where
it could take up to a year I ran
a bill we pulled it down we
thought we solve the problem
bring it down to forty five days
well they to most on a nice
little loophole of him we are
credential we satisfied that
portion of the law but yet we
have included them in the system
to get you reimbursed so all
this does is says Hey forty four
we took it from forty five down
to thirty but thirty days means
thirty days you're loaded in the
system you're getting paid for
your services because what
happens to these doctors always
doctors committee as an example
if you brought in another
surgeon a common practice under
his business and he doesn't get
credentialed doctors means has a
paying out of pocket until the
requests we have is and then the
HMO is reimbursed him so puts a
huge burden on other doctors
bringing doctors into the state
especially in our rural areas
where we don't have the large a
Presbyterian organizations and
things like that so this will
help bring in doctors in rural
areas but then what we did in
negotiations with H. M. O.'s as
we said thirty days for the
doctors at clear that are easy
there's no red flags from the DA
but if there are red flags about
five percent of the applications
they get red flag to get an
additional fifteen days to
credential the there was an
amendment put on and in fact
there was a gram for medical air
so we fixed it on the Senate
floor and that's why it was
amended twice we didn't change
anything there but that was the
fifth extra fifteen days for
those are red flags language.
And that will stand for
questions or I got nothing he
said the whole thing up.
Okay so anyone in the audience
and support okay if you want to
speak please line up and I'll
give you a minute.
And Mike is coming.
On its way all Tennessee is on
the house side wireless in this
room.
Warning madam chair my name is
Kerry robin printer I'm the
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico Medical Society this bill
is really high priority of ours
because it make sure that if we
bring a new provider into the
state not only can they get
credentialed in a reasonable
amount of time but actually
loaded into the system for
payment purposes so they can
actually start seeing patients
we work really closely with Abu
across blue shield that's the
amendment that came out of ****
in order to make sure that there
was an additional fifteen days
in case there was anybody who
was flagged we've also been
working with our other you know
health care partners the nurses
the PT is the nurse
practitioners on everybody
things that this bill is super
important to get done this
session on then we hope that it
passes today thanks so much.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Jennifer Texas I'm the interim
superintendent of insurance and
I'm just here to say that the
OSI fully supports this
legislation and hope that you
take that into consideration
thank you.
Okay the one on the on Suman
support hello Karen go ahead.
Zero nine it the New Mexico
American it is where is and we
support this cause will really
facilitate getting people
started to work in a new setting
thank you thank you for caring
more lock.
Yes members of the committee
model is registered this sort of
the prostitution of New Mexico
and we just want to thank
Medical Society for working with
us to do whatever we can use a
team to
You have providers in rural and
get into our network this is
possible thank you.
Thank you more up and I can't
remember if we did opposition
while they're doing wardrobe
malfunction.
I did what did I do opposition.
No okay is there any opposition
in the room.
Any opposition on zoom.
Okay seeing none questions from
the committee Representative
Vincent.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator Representative.
The only reason I'm just these
questions he's another one that
beat me up on the court the
other day and I was sore for
about five days my ribs are
still hi this is thank you madam
chair
what's the current I appreciate
you bringing this cause can help
a lot of our providers we're
we're on from for sure
what is the current rate of
reimbursement for direct direct
support provider agencies.
You know that.
And madam chair and
representative I I don't know
the answer to that question.
Feel like it that's all I've
got.
Anyone else.
Representative John Terry for to
pass a second okay so was Jones
and a tie between lord and
Vincent Celtic.
Is there any opposition.
Just.
Committee.
Get on the wrong page.
Okay
Senate.
Senator Padilla.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee Senator
Michael Padilla I think I've met
everybody have this year couple
weeks ago and
So you you madam chair might
recall we a couple years ago
created a program called the
fostering connections program
here in New Mexico it's a piece
of legislation I learned about
actually sitting in a housing
summit if you can believe it or
not and the speaker just was
very eloquent about you know
something that has been done in
one of our other states that
allow for supports from the age
of eighteen through the age of
twenty one and for young adults
that had just exited or or been
leaving the.
The fostering system and I think
we all know that you know we
think we know everything right
at eighteen and and we actually
know nothing and as it turns out
when you're in foster care and
you're leaving foster care at
eighteen you have those supports
that aren't there it really
makes things difficult to about
seventy to eighty percent of
these individuals wind up with
their own children in foster
care at some point what these
additional supports like housing
transportation health care
higher education help understand
the credit system the legal
system etcetera with this winds
up doing is the complete
opposite you see a massive
reduction in these children
having their own children go
into foster care at some point
is one of these kids grew up in
foster care almost my entire
childhood and at eighteen
thankfully I had my sisters to
help me I was the youngest and
but if I did have those support
to be very difficult so we
decided to make this a law here
in New Mexico we have a help
about two hundred and fifty the
young adults that have aged out
eighteen through the age of
twenty one it has worked very
successfully
We do bring down for you monies
and the Chafee Act helps to
provide funding for this program
we inadvertently left out a ten
kids that it every year that
essentially might not have been
adjudicated yet or with through
a foster care system program in
another state at a at the age of
eighteen it in their life and so
as a result that's what this
does it it it cleans up that
language to make sure that those
other ten to fifteen children
would be eligible going forward
so that's essentially what the
legislation that's madam chair
and members of the committee
okay let's go to the audience
for opposition.
On in opposition.
Okay anyone in the room on sept
in support if you want to come
up in the.
Lined up in our.
Wireless microphone will be
delivered.
Thank you chairman
representatives and senators for
bringing this bill forward I'm
fostering connections is
possibly one of the most
important things we've done for
our youth and our young people
aging out of foster care as
you're gonna hear again as we
continue to hear there's a lot
of youth especially on the
twelve and above the fourteen
about to go on run might not age
out there specific concerns
about that this is an amazing
bill and we absolutely must do
it there are kids who for
whatever reason might not have
had the circumstances that that
necessitated it before and we
think the sponsor for bringing
this forward this is just truly
amazing bill so.
Thank you for.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Emily
Martin I'm the director
protective services and I
actually had the
honor of helping build this
program over the last four years
and what I can say to you is we
have not only help we actually
have updated data and almost
three hundred youth have entered
this program we have been able
with this with this lot and
adjusting the act right now we
have been able to expand from
twenty transitional living
program budget to over a hundred
and are in the process of
creating our first transitional
living for young young adults
that focuses in on substance
abuse
and supporting them it is just
been an honor and to work with
this program and to be part of
this and I think Senator Padilla
very much and we are very much
ask for your support to continue
this work.
Thank you anyone on zoom in
support.
Okay see none Senator you have
to work on your touchdown dance
that was that was not a good
dance you just did I'm sorry.
The manager was very difficult
the first time around you all of
help to make this a little
easier this time I have to say
that
And this time of the season and
session but this one really
really touches me but I'll stop
talking now I think about it
tears of questions from where
have Representative Chavis to to
pass on second okay is there any
any questions quiz okay
Representative.
Sorry I just.
You up on the basketball court
TV no he did we we have a hard.
Forty two seconds managed all
of.
It's a nice one.
Madam chair center I was just
wonder what the current demand
right now is for this program
madam chair and and and
Representative extremely high so
in the time that it took us to
put everything together as you
heard from this Martin who by
the way is just an outstanding
New Mexican and and working this
program the work that she does
in the programs gone from two
hundred fifty youth when we were
crafting legislation now upwards
to close to three hundred so
that the adoption of it is
growing every year and these are
only it's only old.
I can talk with this morning the
only folks that are able to our
young people dealt with the ones
that are aging out of foster
care so we catch them before
they kind of fall off into who
knows what right at adulthood
can can you imagine so it flips
the script on seventy or so with
them percent of them having
their kids fall into the system.
It states have done as well but
I think for the fourteenth state
that did this.
You'll see a thirty percent or
less so it's pretty exciting and
it and it's good for down the
road for New Mexico.
And madam chair Senator whenever
they whenever they age out there
eighteen years old they go into
this program and what what kind
of services do they get out of
this program we teach them how
to be young adults madam chair
representative a whole host of
things that you just simply need
to live these are bare
necessities to live so that you
can focus on you know workings
of housing transportation help
with health care
With the legal system if you
have something else going on in
your life that you have to take
care of help with the credit
system but understanding
the the whole you know again
like I said health care system
so that you don't immediately go
right into debt if you will so
there there's a number of things
and and this morning anything
else I think I'm sure I've
failed to mention two or three
of.
Thank you Representative.
Managers Emily Martin R. my
second Mike's expert.
Executive expert.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Vincent we
everything not Senator Padilla
said I would also add many of
our young people have
developmental disabilities and
we have specialists that work
with them we also have begin
Begun to have young parent
specialists that help young
people that you know this is
this is probably the truest
prevention work we can do within
the state
so developmental disabilities
work higher education trade
schools and the way our program
has been set up in the the fact
that we had three years to
implement the legislature also
included a committee an
oversight committee to help us
build this program that includes
young people which their voices
but not this from from the get
go we are getting national
attention and many other states
have been reaching out asking
for our technical assistance in
our support in building their
program out.
I think what you find them chair
representative is massive
reductions in as I mentioned
these individuals young people
having issues in the legal
system down the road let's get
him on the right path to begin
with so that they're that said
this this very difficult part of
life is out of their way and
they're on into something better
for themselves and if they
choose to have a family.
Thank you madam chair of Senator
an expert so.
I appreciate.
Legislation like this and I wish
we had something for our kids
that we're graduating high
school because they're not ready
to go out they think they are
but they're not even ready to go
out and they and their in you
know the homes of their families
and you know I think we fell a
little bit but not teach them
how to run check books and
ending really have check books
that much anymore so I
appreciate this thank you for
being four I'm gonna support
thank you thank you
Representative Ferrary thank you
madam chair and thank you
Senator and for bringing this
and Emily for having this
program
when
Message in one of the early
on situations but we with make a
wish we helped one of the young
man a young man who had
developmental disabilities he
was aging out and he was going
into this program they were
helping him get set up with this
department and his wish was to
get
the
things he needed to make his
apartment to note for him to
have you know his computer and
monetary in bed and things like
that so those might be things
that you find but the these are
things that we were able to help
him with the transition but it
was wonderful to know that he
wasn't just going to be left out
in the dark and you know on his
own so it's really a wonderful
I've seen it it's great program
thank you.
So we do have a motion and a
second is there any.
You have to pass thank you madam
chair and representative Eleanor
Chavez has agreed to carry this
form on the floor so thank you.
So Senator Ortiz future.
And I well he's coming up we
heard this exact bill before
Representative Kate I believe is
is carrying it on the health
side so hopefully this won't be
long and then we'll get to the
memorials whenever you're ready
Senator good morning madam
chairman and members of the
committee of yes you're right
Senate bill two of three is an
exact copy duplicate of of of
what you've already heard and
Representative K. bills it's the
result of the then on going the
dialogue shall we say it too
could discussions between the
the people who are represented
by my expert witnesses the
direct service providers the
people who actually take care of
the the developmentally disabled
people and the agencies that.
Had the contract to provide the
services in other words
management and and labor if you
will.
And last year we we had to of
bills that attempted to say if
there were an increase in the
rate paid to the providers that
a certain percentage of that had
to be had to reach the actual
employees.
It turned out to be a lot more
complex issue than than simply
being able to do that we we we
ran into some serious of
resistance and an effort to to
dialogue about it begin and over
the summer many many meetings
were held.
Involving not just the direct
service providers but the but
the agencies and then the
developmental disabilities
bureau we had help from the
disabilities
community of the the of.
And I can the advice advocacy
organizations and out of the and
and I believe you were at some
of those meetings madam chairman
and and and I was that many of
those meetings ultimately this
bill as a result of that and
what it calls for is a
thoroughgoing analysis of what
of what goes into paying the
direct service staff it involves
an effort at having the the
health department which
supervises the developmental
disabilities division that
having the health department
undertake regular rate studies
analyses of of what it's
actually costing to provide
these services and then to to
come to the legislature with
proposals for how to increase
those rates and with that I'll
let each of my expert witnesses
say just a few words chair
versus Adrienne Smith.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee a key focus of
this bill is the collection of
workforce data on the direct
support professional because we
don't have data on those workers
we don't know how many work full
time them anywhere part time how
many vacancies there are even
though the providers will tell
everyone in New Mexico that
there's are up to fifty percent
vacancy rate so that's goes to
the heart of this bill thank
you.
Stafford.
Hello I'm at the New Mexico
caregivers in action and having
already heard this bill will be
I will be gone in talking with
you all but I think it's
important to note that this is
not only this bill is about
direct support professionals but
it's also about the legislators
who I have I have sat in the
audience and her heard for years
we don't have the data we need
and so this is really about
making sure that legislators
have the data so that they know
and can prioritize funding
decisions.
Thank you and that was senator
Gramm okay is there anyone here
and all.
Zoom in opposition.
Sure Patsy you tried to trick
me.
Okay anyone here in support if
you'd like to speak please come
up.
And you have a minute.
You don't have to don't feel I
don't feel obligated.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee I'm Jim Copeland
executive director of the
association of developmental
disabilities community providers
and we worked with Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino madam chair and the
various organizations to get
this bill put together and I
also want to just real quickly
in in my minute of this is not
only in New Mexico issue this is
a national issue and across the
country of the senators Lujan
and Heinrich from New Mexico
have joined senator Bob Casey
from Ohio in sponsoring the
better care better jobs act that
will make some changes
nationally if this legislation
were to pass CMS would require
right studies to be done every
two years instead of every five
years as currently there process
there's also.
Work going on with the
department of labor to create a
standardized occupational
classification code for direct
support professionals because
now is right studies are done by
the vendors of those right
studies use a composite job
description and we're hopeful
that we will get this direct
support professionals
standardized occupational
classification incorporated so
that we can really professional
eyes this.
The business opportunity and and
get this great data that we need
so thank you for your time and
we requested to pass support.
Thank you madam chair Jim
Jackson with disability rights
New Mexico this is one of those
nice occasions where the key
stakeholders have gotten
together and ironed out
something that everybody can
support and it really does begin
to
support the direct care staff in
our communities which are such a
vital part of our delivery
system so the media increase
your support thank you.
I don't need.
I don't think so okay if you can
hear me I guess we're good to go
Ellen pines representing the
disability coalition and we
support this bill this is about
direct support professionals
these are the people who work
directly with people with
developmental disabilities and
support them in their daily
activities they are absolutely
essential to the ability of
people with developmental
disabilities to live in their
communities this bill recognizes
the importance of these workers
who are absolutely essential but
have not gotten the recognition
they deserve and it's also about
ensuring that we have an
adequate supply of them because
we can't move all those people
off the waiting list for the DD
waiver ended to services in less
we have people to serve them and
it's also about US policy makers
having access to the information
you need so I'd expect that we
have the support of everybody on
the committee but if you need
any push I'm here to find it
please support this bill thank
you.
Thank you okay and on zoom we
have Patsy Romero.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee yes
your honor and seeing as the
presidency it's on my get a lot
I higher on agreed in sixty five
director workers and I need
every penny we can get to keep
them of employed and to retain
them but this study is going to
go a long way to really
determine what the data showing
and not just so much ****
relying on our subjective
observations I want to madam
chair please extend our deepest
appreciation to senator Ortiz ET
help to Adrienne and for all the
hard work the continuing on this
legislation and really for their
efforts to really do what is in
the best interest of director
workers across the state so
thank you madam chair for my
three comments and again thank
you to the sponsors and the
expert witnesses on this very
important legislation thank you
thank you Pat see
Representative Ferrary.
Madam chair like to move for two
passed on Senate bill two of
three.
Is there any opposition.
Okay we have a two part thank
you very much thank you members
of the committee.
Okay
Representative Lord on.
Memorial for.
Thank you madam chairman state
would bring forth house joint
memorial number four and the
reason for that was brought up
beautifully on the floor the
other day when we were
discussing
runaway children and somebody
asked why and this bill is to
address that so we're question
the secretary of children youth
and families to convene a task
force to address ongoing problem
children running away from
foster care home placement.
Throughout the United States
estimated fifty five chilled
will disappear today from the
foster care system and the past
twenty years more than one
hundred thousand cases involving
missing children and I states
were closed for the children
were located.
According to CYFD as of January
first twenty twenty three there
are thirty children missing
after placement by the
department's protective services
division and in New Mexico
according to.
CYFD and twenty twenty two
ninety over to foster care
turned eighteen years old of age
while and runaway status this
aging out of foster care losing
the safety and protection of the
department charged with
protecting them.
State agencies were not required
to report missing foster
children to law enforcement pool
twenty fourteen and since that
time reports of children missing
from foster care more than
doubled.
Human traffickers know the
children without stable families
are easy prey and research
overwhelmingly shows that most
sexually trafficked children are
from foster care.
Children in foster care in out
of home placement constitute
most of the sexually trafficked
children in the United States.
Children from sex trafficking
report that they were given a
quote of up to fifteen buyers
per night perhaps rolled in and
resulting in sex trafficking
victims being right thousands of
times a year.
Mr foster children offer main
missing a potentially sexually
traffickers are no involve
families to leave the search law
enforcement authorities are
hindered by laws prevent
transparency about the details
missing children's identity.
And there no state or nation my
protocols for protecting the
disappearance of foster children
or for the search a recovery
missing foster children and the
purpose of child protective
services to prevent reoccurring
child abuse and the Thomas trump
is ation of children New Mexico.
And many children in the foster
care system of specific needs
that are unanswered New Mexico
would make every effort to keep
foster children safe and spare
no effort to locate child
children missing foster care.
We ask that the secretary of
child youth and families be
requested to convene a child
protective services task force
to make recommendations to see
with the department on how to
prevent children from running
away from foster care develop an
effective strategy to recover
missing children foster care
with that we stand for questions
in my expert today is this
roundup.
Is there anyone in opposition in
the room.
Anyone
in opposition of the.
Pat see if your hand still up
from the last time more G. are
you in opposition.
That.
Patsy Romero are you there.
Okay anyone here in support.
Okay if you'd like to speak you
can come up if you don't want to
that's fine too.
Okay
and okay that's so I will go to
the committee for questions or
motion I just have a couple go
ahead Representative.
Representative.
Boards.
I would really like to social
workers on that list
Madam chair representative can
you you're on page five.
List of I'll just and.
The on the task force yeah I
agree with you.
Okay.
I agree hundred percent on that
madam chair.
Anyone else.
Representative Kate.
Yes madam chair representative
that was my ninety two yes it
was absolutely agreement on that
being a friendly man.
Representative pants Madam.
Yes this is a memorial that we
try to amend it here rather than
amending it on the.
It would allow for this to be
passed on consent potentially on
the floor if if we have.
I think madam.
Percent so should we just add in
half and social work social
workers.
On page five line.
fifteen.
And telehealth by six well.
So what.
Maybe that that institution of
higher education as a social
work program social hello social
worker in terms and at the start
madam chair representative its
the so what we're saying and the
other bills as a title II for
school school of social work and
we want to make sure that with
the social work they're pulling
in this title the funds and so
that's the specific language.
And then also some for making
the change we just realize that
it says federal Indian child
welfare act we've been working
to make sure it's as the Indian
family protection act so I think
that we should make sure that
that includes it specifically
for the New Mexico if that thank
you.
Okay so Representative and
expert eighty four for purposes
of getting everything right can
you please state what we're
gonna change and where you madam
chair representative expects
activity.
Page fact thank you
Representative Ciresi Monica
thank you Monica to get it right
okay and I'm happy to work with
you after just to make sure it's
safe page five line fourteen we
want to change Indian child
welfare act to the New Mexico
Indian family protection act.
Yes go ahead mark I have to
write every single word down I
can't do it after we have to do
it right now thank you for
working it's a very important
issue perfect okay so I have.
Page five line.
Line fourteen madam chair madam
chair may I assist yes please
okay so at page five line
fourteen we're gonna strike.
After the warranty the remainder
of the lied.
Page five line fifteen.
We will strike act of nineteen
seventy eight.
He.
What okay never mind go ahead
Representative.
And then insert.
Indian family protection act.
Okay all right the page I.
The.
The district the remainder of
the line and.
On page five live fifteen strike
act of nineteen seventy eight
right right.
Okay.
H. five nine fifteen.
Strict act nineteen seventy
eight.
Insert.
Indian family protection act.
Page that would be on page five
line fourteen.
After the.
Line fourteen strike after.
I nine fifteen strike act.
Perfect and then.
Page I.
Nine sixteen.
After F. period it's.
Representative child.
And and sorry Representative
we've been saying licensed
independent social work.
Here comes an expert fourth go
ahead Karen.
Both in statute we have.
We have both here you can speak
up so we can all hear madam
chair members of the committee.
Debate the fate.
Why not.
Three mornings
madam chair members of the many
care in Canada with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter.
And
if we could just leave it as
licensed social workers that
would be extremely helpful to us
we're working with the social
work board to clarify license
independent social workers in
life you clinical social workers
right now so if you just leave
it at licensed all because thank
you started okay.
Thank you cared you madam chair
page I.
Nine sixteen.
Insert new subsection F..
A licensed social worker.
And then.
Re letter.
The subsequent sections.
Representative are you.
Monica.
Just trying to see if what I.
They can but I have to.
Now we can.
Madam chair representative I
think we wanted to clarify I
think there's one additional
amendments did you get that last
one okay money now so I need
line sixteen the.
Okay so page five one sixteen.
Have a licensed F. period.
A licensed social worker.
For clarity chair representative
in that next section would be
come Jeez that currently is okay
the next section becomes.
Sen Michael in a and N. Monica
you need to strike the.
And I'm.
So we're striking the and page
five one fifteen insert new
subsection ask online sixteen F.
period a licensed social worker
semi colon and.
And then the affine.
Baseline page five one.
We're change
Madam chair representative acts
for which you repeat what that
reference for the social workers
school before you do what where
will it go just to try and help
Monica and it would be on page
five.
Line twenty at the end of that
line I believe.
Thank thank you madam chair and
representative I'm pulling it
from five thirty nine and
actually how we said it was an
in state public post secondary
educational institution with the
school of social work slowed
down repeat that a little more
for my.
So on page.
I line twenty after a and.
In.
In state.
Public.
Host dash secondary.
Thank you all for doing this.
Educational.
Institution.
Hold on we have we are
the interloper.
Madam chair members of the
committee the closest madam
chair the committee can
candidate with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter and if we
could list that that school B.
twelve because people cannot get
licensed unless they go to a
credit.
So in state twelve.
Before after in state twelve
public postsecondary.
Educational.
Thank you all this is really
important.
Madam chair representative
expert so in in the state occur.
Public secondary post secondary
posted.
Is there a hyphen is a second
just Madam chair of.
Institution with the school of
social work.
Very specific.
Thank you all this is just
really incredible.
Twelve.
Monica and then if you have it.
Representative I I think we need
to then.
Stricken page five line twenty
one.
Institution of higher education
is that correct yes mmhm.
Madam chair I move we changed
our name to House Judiciary.
Representative.
Madam chair I believe that
amendment.
If we're ready are in opposition
to adopt in the amendment okay.
You have an adapted Health drug
memorial for.
Okay are there any questions on
this.
I'll entertain a motion
Representative Ferrary madam
chair I just had a question
about how this was going to be
supported
Funded.
For the CYFD to bring all these
people together where they going
to have for they had travel per
diem or they were just going to
have to do it on their own
agency budget mentors refer to
my experts thank you madam chair
representative I'm C. idea of
the Legislative Councils
including the offer task force
the family representation the
FAA Task Force pastoral ten and
that's pretty and was never part
of that and that's just really
people who care in the community
and really want to make the
lives of children better I know
that the higher institution is
interesting and so I believe
that we can talk about funding
if that needs to come with the
supplemental but right now
there's just such a need for
this that as with best practices
of the past five years this is
been just community people
desperately wanting to do better
and that includes community
people like the FBI and the turn
general's office.
Madam chair and speaking with
them they've been on the other
task forces and so pretty Ms
never been an issue okay that
great thank you thank you.
Okay so.
Well listen if we have a motion.
Okay second okay any opposition.
The line you have up on
House joint memorial for as
amended thank you mentioned
thank you for your company the
C. thank you representative this
for your good and on.
Take
some of the let madam vice chair
take over and while I think that
house memorial I.
So madam chair house memorial I
let me tell you the back story
there is there was a man in
Albuquerque who had autism and
other some other developmental
disabilities but was very high
functioning at at when he was he
was probably in his forties
and he had a mental
Break down essentially and was
taken to the behavioral health
institute in Las Vegas and even
though he he was he had.
Someone his mother or his wife
to make medical decisions for
him the the staff at the
behavioral health institute.
Thought since you to folks so
well and then and was so
obviously intelligent that they
didn't really need to contact
the next.
Of can to check what was going
on with him.
So they admitted him and he died
and so the mom who is a friend
came to me and said we really
need to have some cross training
for particularly for behavioral
health providers
required okay so requests the
department of health to convene
a task force to study the
feasibility of requiring mental
health and developmental
disabilities providers to be
trained in the treatment of
people with developmental
disabilities and co occurring
mental health issues so this
basically is to set up a working
group to look at how we can make
sure that people in the
behavioral health world
understand developmental
disabilities and people in the
developmental disabilities world
world understand behavioral
health issues
the this is a group of women the
mom and the wife and some
advocates and other folks who
who came to me with this idea
some time ago and so this is
this is our first started trying
to make me I'm always of the
opinion the more you know the
better off everybody is so this
is just an opportunity to
prevent something tragic like
this from happening again.
So is there an expert anyone
else to testify no madam chair
thank you very much is that
everyone in the audience to
stand in support of this.
It is the tire this so let me
just say you all a wonderful if
I could get three of you to come
forth and speak that would be a
really wonderful.
So one yourself if you will make
the choice otherwise will be
good for you.
One more.
Thank you please press the.
Thank you my name is Dr Suzanne
brown and I've retired from the
school of medicine and I I
certainly stand in support of
this not only of four post
training in psychiatry or social
work but it's also important I
think for people who are
pediatricians like me or or
family medicine so I I really
hope that of this gains
attention thank you thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Ellen
pundits representing the
disability coalition it is
frequently the case that people
developmental disabilities have
co occurring mental health
disorders that's not the least
bit unusual and yet these two
groups of providers tend not to
have a good understanding of the
other side of the story so we
think that this task force can
move us toward a system where
people understand all aspects of
the people they're working with
and that this will improve
services for people with
developmental disabilities so we
urge your support for.
In the interest of time Karen
Canaday with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter and we stand
strong support.
Thank you all right we're going
to go in to the zoom is there
anyone here in support of the
memorial Patsy Romero.
Madam chair and members of the
committee thank you your rural
residency yield no idea on the
what you're adults with
intellectual disabilities and
eighty nine percent of the
individual sized also have
mental health diagnoses it is
extremely important to ensure
that we are training everyone
who's ever services to
appropriately understand both in
the mental health and
intellectual disabilities and
individuals with and I think
Representative Thomson for
bringing this memorial forward I
think this will be an incredible
task force and I think it will
absolutely improve that the
current system of care in New
Mexico thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
Thank you very much all right is
there anyone here in opposition
to the memorial.
Let's go to zoom is there anyone
on zoom in opposition to the
memorial.
Sen no hands let's go to the
committee committee
Representative cakes.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you
Madam chair of for for bringing
this forward I am especially
grateful for the opportunity to
be on this memorial I'll say I
participated in the past in a
program where you in and of
medical students are required as
part of their curriculum to seek
out the developmental disability
providers to learn more about
policies and needs and because
we've spent generations of
isolating in silos in
individuals with disabilities is
only been in the last four years
have we integrated into the
community our our medical
providers are behind the eight
ball and so I really appreciate
that I mean we need dentists and
medical doctors as well as our
behavioral health but this is a
wonderful I stepped into the
full civil rights which I
believe is really what the issue
is and so thank you very much.
Thank you very much I see no
further hands I will accept a
motion.
The path for House memorial I.
There's a motion to do pass on
the on the table and there is a
second is there any opposition
to the most of see no opposition
Adam chair you have a due passi.
The.
Thank you thank you madam chair
Representative cover you does
not feeling well this morning so
she asked me to
present this on for her so
basically this is another
memorial ominous Memorial
requested department of Human
Services and the workforce
solution Department to convene a
task force to make
recommendations for the
implementation of a
basic income for low income New
Mexicans and reports findings to
the legislature just a couple of
facts that I want to present
here and this is something that
that we all know so well New
Mexico has the third highest
rate of poverty in the nation
with eighteen and four tenths
percent of New Mexicans living
below the poverty line.
This harms our children
This harms our children we all
know what poverty does to kids
in New Mexico we have the second
highest rate of childhood
poverty in the nation with
twenty eight percent of our
children living below the
poverty level.
In two thousand nineteen the
center for budget and policy
priorities reported that forty
one percent of New Mexico
household incomes had incomes
below the poverty level.
And something else that I think
is necessary for us to think
about as well is that the
federal measure for poverty does
not take into consideration
costs like childcare health care
in both of those we know have a
have a huge impact on
on a basic income
one of the one of the things
that comes to my mind is the
recipients of General systems
there
what they receive has not been
updated in thirty years and they
are at two hundred and forty
five dollars a month while
they're waiting for their
social.
So with that madam chair I stand
for questions okay is there
anyone in the audience
opposition.
Anyone on zoom in opposition.
Leri Sonntag.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee
And just.
Speaking on behalf of I guess so
much on that myself and I work
with a nonprofit groups that
generational change already in
our state and the bill sponsor
mentions some of those assets
that we're aware of.
And.
Part of the issue I guess that
I'm I'm seeing with this as well
as an appropriation are an
estimated almost three hundred
thousand dollars that would go
into a study writing guaranteed
income to New Mexicans who made
certain conditions.
And my experience in working
with people do a lot of work
enjoyed junction.
They have a mantra that she want
to provide a hand up not a hand
out.
And I'm not sure where this
concept comes from that offering
guaranteed income in addition to
childcare pre healthcare okay
that thank you.
Thank you okay anyone in the
audience and support.
If you would like to speak
please come up.
Parents getting their steps in.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Karen Canaday with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter we stand in strong
support of this basic income
where it has been studied
throughout the country has shown
to really give people a hand up
as opposed to a hand out because
they have been able and it's
been shown that these people are
paying their bills they're
getting more food for their
families and they are using it
to pay their rent these are
basic expenses that the the
supplemental programs that we
have the many of supplemental
programs we have out there do
not cover completely at all and
so we stand in strong support of
this thank you thank you Karen.
Is there anyone on whom in
support.
K. C. nine also to the
committee.
Madam Representative Ferrary.
Representative thank you for
bringing this forward I was
wondering who is going to bring
together the task force I might
have not.
Read it real quickly thank you
Chair representative so that it
would be the department of Human
Services and the department the
workforce solutions department
they work together would convene
a task force I read it right a
title and disability for got
three sorry about that okay
thank you anyone else.
Representative Vincent and then
Representative Townsend.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
So.
I was looking at the very I and
what is the memorial site in out
of date unemployment rate.
Madam chair representative that
I don't have the answer to I
don't know Madam chair
representative I was looking at
that it's already dropped by
half a half a percent from when
it was cited right there and I
was just wondering if that's one
that was studied for why that
that was put in there and also
I was reading on.
I guess it's going to be page
three where they talk about the
the representatives of community
organizations work on behalf of
low income communities and those
agencies organizations already
working with those communities
but whenever I look at the
people that was going to be put
on the task force I was
wondering why there was no
provision made including actual
economist that study very eyes.
Madam chair representative can
you tell me what you're looking
at page three book for you okay
so at the bottom it says
representatives at the online
twenty five thank you
representatives of community
organizations working on behalf
of and then it goes on line one.
And to.
But I didn't see anything where
there might be you know
economists who studied very eyes
and if if that gives us a real
actual.
Good actual data on what the
very eyes are.
And.
Madam chair representative.
What a state very replace other
state assistance programs or
would would this just kind of
sit on top of those programs
Madam chair representative
that's the that's a very good
question I think that's one of
the things that
The would come out of the study
in terms of you know looking at
the totality of you know what
Madam chair representative is
being received and what
additional income might need
need to be sued and they may
come back in the state yes it's
going to be on top of that or
they may not I mean that's the
purpose of the study in this
this Madam chair representative
this is an actual like if this
was to go through this is an
actual paycheck that these
people would would get Madam
chair representative yes.
We don't know what the paycheck
number would be
Madam chair representative
that's the purpose of the study
thank you the token.
Okay or anyone else.
Madam chair I'd like to make
motion for to pass.
do we have opposition.
Okay go ahead and call the roll
Monica.
Yes Ferrary.
Yes and madam chair Thompson yes
seven two two five seven two
two.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Actually Representative Hermio
is going to put on the did she
get in language pathologist.
Go ahead Representative.
Chair members of the community
this is house memorial twenty
three in my other life I am a
speech language pathologist and
this is requesting that the
governor designate the month of
may as better hearing and speech
month the importance of doing
this is because is to bring
awareness to communities about
communication disorders
currently at present we have
one in ten New Mexicans who have
communication disorders and
And these range from individuals
who have had strokes or infants
or children in school so there's
a large range of this and this
is to bring simply awareness and
and also recognition to those
individuals who work hard every
day to to overcome these
communication disorders for that
I stand for questions.
Is there anyone in the audience
in opposition.
Anyone on zoom in opposition
okay anyone in the audience and
support.
Ellen do you want to come up
Garcia Ellen is in support
anyone on zoom in support.
Okay seeing no public comment
I will go to the committee for
questions our motion that can
be.
Okay Representative okay.
So is there any opposition.
The line have a due process.
Thank you.
The committee
we may.
We may get that another couple
bills that we may have to she
warned in another meeting
perhaps as early as this
afternoon at depending on what
goes on on the floor in the
Senate and all that stuff so
theoretically this is our last
meeting but practically I think
it probably is not.
Yeah so I will let everyone know
once once we know anything but
thank you all Representative is
that.
The chair of they did say that
we we are going to me we were
supposed to meet yesterday but
we're meeting today in labor
okay so I don't know what will
try well let's they it we were
supposed to do it yesterday and
they have one bill that showed
up that we got to meet today
hopefully those don't that what
will generally we have a ten
member committee so we can
probably get a quorum
and we'll just play it by ear
and this is where you freshman
learn how crazy this place can
get that help unpredictable and
just get yeah that's true just I
mean we obviously won't have
printed agenda twenty four hours
in advance we will post it will
be on the fly pretty much but
all all work with everyone to
help that we could revenue may
be that we get from the floor to
to come and do a quickie felt
okay thank you all for the great
Canadian a great session and
what do you yes.
yes let's give our staff around.
They are wonderful we need to
speak to someone hello yes.
Okay is our first day.
Audrey.
Yeah we're ready.
At the very.
You happy birthday to you happy
here authority have.
To.
Voices in this.
