Here Representative Ferrary here
Representative yes
Representative here.
Representative what.
Representative pants.
Representative okay here.
Hi tech.
President.
I'm here up vote and
Representative Lord is here to
pay.
And when she leaves she will be
excused.
Just in case I forget.
Okay so we're going to start
with house bill one twenty nine
monitoring of CYFD custody for
Children lord intensive whenever
you're ready.
Bills.
This
is speech to.
Madam chair these chairs are
very hard.
I don't complain I'm going to
I'm going to complain.
The committee chair give me one
second here one point my notes.
Okay madam chair today we are
going to be presenting H. B. one
twenty nine and
What I'll do is a critical and
introduces my expert witness
melon that go ahead and use my
name is Maryland back I am the
executive director of New Mexico
child first network and we are
dedicated to improving the lives
of children in foster care and
empowering those families who
serve them thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative so H. B. one
twenty nine would require CYFD
to supervise and monitor every
child released from custody the
home from which child was
removed whether temporary
protective custody a quarter
custody on a monthly basis for
free month three month period of
time which can be extended
excuse me to ensure the child
safety this is the best practice
in other states who were very
excited introduces I want to let
you know that this bill is very
similar to what is in Maryland
right now so this isn't
something that we
came up with the committee we
also looked at what other states
are doing because a goal with
CYFD is to have a committee of
people looking at how we can
fill the holes that need to be
fixed and CYFD and look at what
other states are doing that are
successful.
So Merioles has law H. yes and
one three if a child is remove
the household it's a three month
observation so it's based on
what other states are doing with
success.
So after the monumental decision
to remove New Mexico we
recognize or even more part
decisions as to when to return
and how to do so safely as we
said the families to recent
experience prices up for success
H. B. one twenty nine is a non
punitive approach to safety to
ensure eyes on children and
support for families who have
experienced crisis working to
ensure reduction trauma and safe
landing during a critical time
period.
We don't want to send first time
mothers home alone from hospital
no help for lifeline and we're
doing.
That was families to a recent
experience ultimate trauma child
removal.
LFC data analysis indicates that
in two thousand twenty two there
one thousand seventy two
children release from the
department's custody.
And more than forty percent of
children in New Mexico with had
a substantiated serious injury
from physical abuse or neglect
in fiscal year two thousand
twenty two and they come from
families have had prior
involvement with the state CYFD
program and the preceding twelve
months and this according to our
state data.
We have the highest repeat
maltreatment rate in the
country.
The highest.
I want to really get serious
about this this bill is to
intend and stop the revolving
door of repeat maltreatment and
engage families identified as
high risk by the department this
is not meant to be surveillance
and anyway this is meant to be
monitoring the safety and ensure
support if meeting of what
they're getting.
We also noted that there is a
error and the drafters will fix
from home household.
And basically what I want you to
know more partly I'm quite a few
CYFD bills coming.
And the reason for that is I
know we've all read the
headlines of things that are
happening CYFD that need to be
fixed and this is not a tech and
see what do this is to help them
because they have to work within
the bills that we present so
we're trying to make sure they
have all the tools.
And the guidance to make sure
that our children are coming
first interstate and not be on
the last list
melon did you have anything they
want to add yes thank you
committee chairwoman Thompson
and members and it is important
to note that threat especially
for health committee welcome to
our first health committee
you'll be seeing lots of CYFD
bills our organizations tracking
over thirty I've heard that
there are currently over one
hundred child welfare bills that
have already been introduced and
more to come I know familiar
faces many of you will also be
carrying some I'm one of the
things that will be heard over
and over again is this idea of
short term or short stays in
foster care New Mexico is an
extreme out wire in short stays
I was just talking to someone in
the audience about one of the
things we talk about is level
one foster care level to foster
care level three the incident of
a removal alone probably qualify
as a child is already a level
two I mean some a bill that no
one has introduced yet but
should probably be looking at is
we need to be looking at
children as they come into cares
individually and not necessarily
just instantly stamping with
them with a level one I was a
level one foster parents right I
had over a hundred and fifty
five hours of training because I
wanted to but most level one
foster parents have twelve hours
of training which is the raft
which is relative and family
attachment in that training also
level one we said how do you
understand how many important
training our CYFD workers at I
go to Pinterest if you have
questions about trauma informed
training go to Pinterest.
Okay that that is a true
statement it happened in my raft
is a well known issue I I know
that that I took graft in twenty
eighteen I know they've improved
policy since that but we have to
be doing far better for kids so
I will say over the last six
years this is according to the
LFC analysts from twenty twenty
approximately forty percent of
New Mexico children placed into
foster care New Mexico state for
less than thirty days the
highest short term placement
rate in the nation I can find
those stats the next highest as
Hawaii Representative twenty
three percent very eight percent
average is under one percent so
we really do have this revolving
door of short stays are going to
see these bills come over and
over and over and so law
enforcement can remove CYFD can
return under forty eight hours
and then our rates go up to
thirty eight percent and under
eight days so what this bill is
looking to do there's a couple
bills addressing that will come
before you even one today and
Senate health addressing how we
removed kids into care how long
before they go for a judge who
can remove in our time what this
bill is simply doing based on
national best practice is
ensuring that if a child is
removed in a nine one one
emergency situation.
That the department intended to
protect these children have the
ability to protect them so in
reading the analysis there were
some concerns with CYFD which
again I think it's we're stating
that we are very open and a we
we want to make sure that this
is a good bill that CYFD is on
board we want to make sure that
CYFD has the tools necessary to
prevent that there was a funding
question about funding I think
that we can address that the
sponsor wants to address that
and it's worth noting that in
twenty eighteen the federal
government passed family first
preservation service act so with
that the bulk of that funding is
directed at states to prevent
kids from coming into foster
care so there is a plethora of
Nash and federal funding
available for prevention
services I was talking to
someone on the committee earlier
this morning and saying that in
terms of our prevention services
it's something that the LFC has
repeatedly said is lacking
within CYFD and these are bigger
conversations that I'm so
excited all of you get to
address as this legislative
session I'm as Representative
lord said there is a drafting
error that we want to address
immediately I think that will
resolve a lot of the concerns
that bill was drafted to state
monitor the home it should not
be home it should be household
I'm and I will give a perfect
example one of the CYFD issues
was what if they're out of state
I actually happened as a foster
parent to take in an emergency
placement of an out of state
nine one one situation it was a
sibling group of three they were
at UNH with their mom who was
driving from Arizona to Florida.
The hospital wouldn't let the
kids stay there I think mom had
jaundice I forget what the
situation was and she was
homeless she was moving from her
brother's house in Arizona to
her cousin's house and Florida
and I got stuck in the way and
she wanted our kids to stay with
her and and that hospitals that
they can't stay overnight where
do you where can you get them
working to get that they came
into foster care right so they
came overnight they stayed with
me for under twenty four hours
they might have been the only
level one kids I've ever had
that they were super they just
wanted pizza and mac and cheese
but so wanted to make these
concerns was we can't monitor
their home they don't live here
I think that's valid I also
think it's valid for us to
really work to reduce these aces
maltreatment and our children
that it's okay to think we could
follow up with mom with a phone
call right if mom didn't have
anyone she didn't part of it was
they couldn't find anyone in
Arizona she was homeless could
live with a brother could live
with a cousin a simple phone
call to follow up and again we
want CYFD to promulgate these
rules on what this would look
like if you look at the bottom
part of the FIR CYFD does
support this an idea that this
could be it could clarify CYFD
is authority to reach out to
families after an investigation
is closed we want to give CYFD
tools to protect children and
support families this is not a
surveillance mechanism I also
think that it's worth saying in
front of you as you begin to
hear so many of the CYFD
improvement bills there is a
real trust issue with families
and CYFD you know as we look at
the early childhood fund as we
look at getting our most
vulnerable families into the
services that we and you have
funded to make sure exist the
families that need them often
the most are the families least
likely to get that and they are
afraid we care you're gonna see
quite a few caravels conference
direction recovery they're
afraid to bring the department
into their home because they are
free to lose the children in
their care we don't want that we
need to start reestablishing
trust CYFD is a helpful
organization we're here to
protect families and we're here
for alright.
And see if if child has been
removed in a temporary nine one
one emergency situation that has
risen to the level of emergency
remove all that family is in
crisis at some level I think
everyone can agree and if they
are returned back in forty eight
hours I don't think it's all
over I don't think it's asking
too much to just reach out and
say how are you doing we are not
the bad guys CYFD is not the bad
guys this is an organization
full of or social workers and
people who come and this to help
families and help children how
do we help you right and I think
that this bill it's not
surveillance and I I was really
point to that word support
monitoring help how do we lift
up families in crisis and do so
in a way that CYFD is happy I
know the courts have some
questions on this to they were
not consulted in the analysis
they like this if they can get
to a place that this can work in
New Mexico so I think that we
really want to work with the
department and the courts and
the service providers to make
sure that the short stays which
we're going to try to fix the
session stop happening New
Mexico stops becoming an out
wire and that we really the
first intervention should be the
last intervention so with that
thank you chair.
Are you ready for okay so let's
go to the audience anyone here
in support.
EPA is there anyone on zoom in
support.
But.
Okay.
So and McKinney.
Go ahead nine minutes of okay go
ahead and.
Thank you so much I just want to
stand in support of this bill
thank you to the sponsor.
Okay and that's that's all the
in favor anyone oppose.
Okay we'll start over here.
The lack of bills we all have
the same all.
For.
We have a project.
Anyone else in opposition.
Hey anyone in opposition on
soon.
Seeing none will go to the
committee Representative Vincent
and then
Jones and then Chavis.
Thank you madam chair
representative you know some of
the stuff that I read it it
seems like
I don't know that may be.
CYFD had a negative response to
this bill one.
Thank you madam chair let me
hold on one second
the December twenty okay what
I'm understanding from CYFD is
the lack of funding.
Okay thank you madam chair
Representative
so.
Are they have a hard time
recruiting people keeping people
what why it what it would not
have the resources to do this
job at thank you thank mentors
and I'll defer to my witness
thank you thank you can go
directly to her after that.
Thank you I'm chairwoman
Thompson and Representative and
sent right now as of the latest
CYFD publication report CYFD has
a vacancy rate of fifty one
point eight percent which is
over one out of two employees at
CYFD on the front lines is
vacant and so I think that we
all agree that there is a social
worker ISIS another thing we're
going to see I think that the
bill sponsor I think that we all
agree that however we need to
support this agency to lift them
up
and and I want to say that the
social or crisis is not unique
to CYFD right now you and UNM
does not of social work program
highlands does MSU does other
state agencies does
we have a resource problem I
think that it is worth looking
at a legislative body us CYFD
what they would need in the
analysis it says that to monitor
this
it would take just proximally
four million three hundred
thousand dollars of their money
again with family first act
that's that's again another
question for the Feds but it
would take four point four
million dollars to make this
happen and that would be
specific to the forty eight hour
hold switchers children being
released from temporary
protective custody or following
the not denial of an expert take
passed the motion and those of
those kids that have that nine
one one call it's nine one one
sometimes that's fourteen kids a
month I mean it's not very many
so it's a nine one one call
something is such a crisis that
these kids are removed and
returned within forty eight
hours so for us to extend
monitoring and support services
you're looking at a four million
dollar.
Expenditure.
Madam chair representative thank
you.
So as a first responder I've
worked with CYFD been right in
the middle of this and it's some
of the status stuff I've ever
seen and I do appreciate CYFD
and the services because you
know day in and day out when
they're having to deal with this
kind of stuff I mean it it can
actually start to work on your
psyche a little bit how do we
how can we assist and help CYFD
to
what can we do to help them
carry out this list to help you
carry out this legislation Madam
chair representative a great
question and going back to what
you just said I've talked to so
many law enforcement officers
and they've shared stories at
every to make me cry made me
sick to my stomach of what they
walk into it's it's.
It's just unbelievable some of
things that are happening out
there and the goal of every bill
with CYFD is to give them the
resources to give them the tools
and to help them.
Internally so that they can get
their job done because what all
we're asking is that we want the
kids just be tacked on for three
months to make sure they're not
being put back into a bad
situation to make sure we know
what they are to make sure
they're not missing to make sure
that their living situation is
okay and that they're not being
put back in the same situation
that they were taken out of this
is all about protecting children
and helping CYFD as much as
humanly possible we have three
billion extra dollars I don't
see that there's any reason why
we can't fund this to help our
children in the state to do
everything as you on that and I
just wanted to state tournament
pumps and and Representative and
sent that it is worth noting as
we look at the funds and I think
this is another question for the
appropriations and the Senate
finance that in twenty twenty
one fiscal year CYFD did revert
over fourteen million dollars of
unused funds and I think that's
really important as a
legislative body to continue to
say what can we do be doing with
these unused funds at the
department and I know that some
of that is as F. T. E. we do not
want to be adversarial to the
Department we've had great
conversations on the family in
need of court ordered services
so there's a lot of solutions
but this bill is intended to be
a solution to help families in
crisis again find trust and
support to families that rose to
the level of the worst incident
a family will ever go through
and that is the removal of a
child in an emergency situation
and again I will say I don't
think it's unreasonable to see
how we can support families to
make sure that does not happen
again.
Thank you madam chair
representative then one last
question on
I'm sorry that I have to ask
direct questions because you
know we want to protect our
children but have you have you
spoken to the leadership of CYFD
and how do they feel like
they're doing.
Madam chair representative there
was really good meeting on on
was Monday yes if you want to
expand on that at we we met with
Representative sorry madam chair
and Representative intent thank
you for asking
again I have personally met with
the secretary I've met with case
workers we had a great meeting
on Monday to discuss HB thirty
four which is expanding the
definition of family in need of
court ordered services which is
another bill I think it has a
very similar idea of we have
I think they you have to ask
them what they think we want to
provide services to help them do
their job it is very clear to
the headlines that this is an
agency that continues to
struggle and we as a public we
as a legislative body we as
stakeholders
it is really hard to work over
and over and over again and see
our children continue to be dead
last solutions exist I can't say
that enough I think you will see
that through one of the hundred
bills that have been introduced
already in continue solutions
exist we have to prioritize
them.
Thank you.
Madam chair representative thank
you are you back.
Make.
This year marks thank you.
It doesn't get any closer yes
okay.
Maybe this.
Okay I'll start over thank you
madam chair thank you
representative of lard and miss
that for bringing this bill I
think we need to look at
anything we can do to help our
children considering the
terrible state we're in New
Mexico and so this is really
personal for me as most of you
know I'm a registered nurse that
had a long career in health care
and much of my nursing
experience was with children
I've worked in and pediatric I
see use neonatal ICU use
pediatric
floor and also with with
children of all of all ages but
but it brought back to me as I
read the bill and I read my
analyses that
There is there is it would
there's such a need for us to
help families I I remit
remembered.
It brought me to tears
remembering one child in
particular that was
Was
a victim of abuse and had a head
injury and a I would rock this
baby
trying to comfort and calm him
he was just an infant and I know
that there was a similar it was
a similar situation where there
was already at the history with
abuse and so anyway instead of
me having to.
Deal with law enforcement to
arrest the parents I would
rather have been working with
you know them ahead of time
prior to this ever happening and
I think you know the this kind
of a bill would help prevent
families maybe maybe your
parents from going to jail
children from being victims for
life this head injury that this
child had he would never recover
from he'll be in need of
services for the rest of the
slide seizures constantly and so
forth so anyway I just I just I
really feel strongly about this
being a help and win win win for
everyone and in a.
Especially in the legislative
session where we're we have a
legislative body that's burning
to spend this extra money that
we have I think that money
shouldn't be the issue here that
children safety and of being
able to help the families with
the their issues to take good
care of their children is our
primary concern so I'd like to
know what to CYFD need to make
this bill happen.
I thank you madam chair and
representative as we said
earlier they do need more
resources we have a shortage was
staffing there's a there's a lot
of help and I look really look
forward to working with CYFD to
have them tell us what tell me
directly what is it that you
need how can we help you and
help us work with all of these
bills coming forward in the
future so that we don't have to
roll bills are move bills around
so that we know ahead of time
exactly where they stand so what
we would have a very straight
answer and answer question went
to a court case one time with
guardians of the children I
could only go to one it was an
abuse case on eleven Dale child.
The parent had ripped the legs
off the baby they did come off
but he Representative the bones
off and I couldn't I can't go
back to that and that's one of
my driving factors of why I'm
trying to protect our children
and our state and.
Yes thank you for that they and
madam chair and representative I
I share this this feelings I
just I shared with you one one
baby that I remember but there
were many many many and I just
feel like our children our
priority so I appreciate what
you're doing and and and the and
the.
And that the the nature of the
bill which is to help everyone
to help the children so working
together so thank you so much.
Thank you madam chair I'm also
concerned about CYFD and I
believe that CYFD.
Additional financial resources
to be able to do what they're
What what what their job is and
that is to protect the kids of
the state and I think that we
just need to figure out how to
do that
I do have a couple of questions
I was curious about your fifty
one percent turnover rate I know
the turnover rate is high at sea
when.
But I'm wondering where you
where did you get that number
from.
Yeah thank you madam chair
representative on the for two
years and she has the stats on
that.
Thank you Representative at
chairwoman Thompson and
Representative Chavis I don't
know if you can see it
this is actually a great report
at CYFD has really enhance their
transparency and public access I
think the priority of the
session is to ensure
transparency accountability this
is as of their most recent
desktop report you can find it
on CYFD dot org slash shaped
dash Representative publications
and reports and so it
specifically says that on page.
Six of our pages for at the top
I'm happy to follow up with
committee it is fifty one point
eight percent.
We have thank you if we have
someone from CYFD maybe you
could cut come up and sit at the
table.
Thank you for a second here
okay.
I think this thank you thank you
thank you.
X. share if you want to sit
right here Freeman my questions
I would not be opposed to that.
What I thank you.
Okay.
Thank you thank you for that the
other question that I have well
I have several questions why did
why three months how did you
land on that time frame.
madam chairman and
Representative we try to look at
other states what they were
doing and that seems to be a
three months that kind of what
other states have applied.
At a real quick do you want to
go ahead and introduce yourself
so people know who you are.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jennifer
actually but they do work for
that to occur in the I've been
with the department for about
twelve years
okay just.
Yeah it would likely.
I'm so ready to the
turnover rate that we have so
the turnover rate is fifty point
seven percent
rate is about thirty percent
just to clarify that the
department does oppose this bill
or the fiscal reasons in
addition to others
I know miss back talked about
their families first prevention
plan
that out of total forty we get
requests from that plan for
evidence based practices for
programs that are on the total
forty clearing house we get
reimbursed for that at a rate of
fifty percent so to say that
that is a plethora of of funding
stream that can support this
bill I believe is inaccurate
the monitoring or surveillance
that this bill is asking for
would be done by an investigator
right so the the families first
prevention plan requires
evidence based programming
that's like therapy that's a
evidence based parenting class
that's not a worker going out to
the home to conduct a home visit
so essentially that wouldn't be
able to fund this three months
Requirement.
in addition to that the bill is
not very clear so sometimes we
do get forty eight hour hold
where there is a mom that just
couldn't be found in the middle
of the night maybe we just going
to get her on the phone or we
could locate her so we did have
to remove in that situation it
doesn't seem to that this bill
would allow for the uniqueness
of the situation to be tailored
to that the family's needs right
so that's for.
Concern that the department has.
It is an unfunded bill at this
time and we do not have the
resources to the bill the bill
or to absorb we cannot.
We cannot absorb with our
current staffing we would be
able to find any committee
meeting fall support and
monitoring for the family right
now we're struggling to meet our
own requirements investigations
because the caseloads are very
high right now the case load the
case work is very high due to
the vacancies and the turnover
but even if we are fully staffed
right now fully staffed with our
FTE the department is saying
that's still not enough and
there are requesting more FTP
the session and I do worry that
we're not going to get that so
in addition to our current rules
that we have to perform if
you're adding three months worth
of work to investigators
caseload
that I just I just can't see how
that will happen
Right now law enforcement is the
entity that can remove a child
and although I absolutely
respect our law enforcement
partners and I I I appreciate
their decision making as well
there are times that a forty
eight hour hold does lead to
reunification within those forty
eight hours or or shortly after
and that is what we call a short
stare New Mexico is high on the
list of short stayers and we do
believe that actually Senate
bill one twenty eight that's
going to be heard this afternoon
is a more comprehensive bill
that will address this short
their issue
I say it's comprehensive because
it hatches many aspects of our
work and it was many
stakeholders were involved in
the drafting of that bill so you
you should see a lot of
People supporting them
one more thing and and I know
you wanted us to be brief one
more thing as
The.
My train of thought I.
So madam chair here's what I
would like to suggest right now
since we have the highest repeat
maltreatment maltreatment rate
in the country what I'm hearing
is that there's a lack of
funding although we have three
billion dollars that we could
easily put towards this I'm here
in high case loads vacancy
turnovers but at the end the day
we need to put the children
first so I'd like to request
that we roll this bill so that
we can work with CYFD because
what I want is to help them not
work against them I want to make
sure that we're all on the same
page and it seems to be a money
issue but I'm you know we've
also got a huge issue with CYFD
and I want you to know that I'm
trying to help you guys as best
as I can and I want to make sure
that you have all the funding
and the people and everything
you need.
So that we don't have to read
anymore you know headlines I
don't want that I want to put
our kids first so if you would
allow that we roll this until we
can work with them together to
to make some changes thank you
madam chair that's perfectly
allowable and I will suggest
that I mean we have money but it
doesn't you need to be
appropriated you know I would
suggest at least an
appropriation in this bill so
that maybe some of the issues
can be
dealt with but I think yeah we
have money but getting money for
what you want it for is a whole
different stand is a thank you
madam chair and you know we
talked about putting
appropriation okay we'll be back
in thank you for your time and
thank you for listening we're
trying to get the dialogue open
an interesting.
What's happening with CYFD so we
can fix it okay thank you very
much and yet generally I wait
until to do my bills at the end
but I have a an entourage over
here that I don't including kids
that I don't want to make wait
till the end so I'm going to
turn the gavel over to my place
here Representative Herndon.
And just for committee members
you address her as Madam two so
so okay no that's okay it's it's
yeah it's it's confusing.
Okay.
We are now on house bill one
thirty one prosthetic and custom
orthotic device coverage the lab
please visit the yourself thank
you madam chair and this is my
experts Kyle step which we'll
get to and I know you guys
didn't know we had show and tell
today so yeah but it's good to
see these things so.
Tell us today for the record.
Representative Thomson what.
for getting my idea he's in cues
so I kind of came to me with
this bill this summer and most
of you know I've been a
pediatric physical therapists
since since dirt was invented
financially
and so I've I've seen kids with
limb loss and limb differences
and I've seen the difference
that it can make in terms of
what prosthetic or custom
orthotic they get so think about
it have nine year old kid who
who has cancer and lose this
part of their lake and they get
a prosthesis that very heavy
that doesn't allow them to run
that doesn't allow them to be
active so when the when the rest
of the kids on the playground
or playing soccer they're
keeping score or those kind of
things and and not having the
correct
device whether it be a
prosthetic or orthotic I'm leads
to further complications to two
adults and kids I mean if you
can't be active you can't be
healthy if you get pressure
stores from your prosthesis then
you can't use it any can't go to
school or whatever so there's
all this is really a big deal
and what this bill is is
intended to do is to say that
insurance companies can't just
give you the cheapest thing they
need to look at your age you
know if your mechanic you need
to stand eight hours a day they
can't give you a leg that you
can't stand in all all those
kind of things should be taken
into accordance and and the
bottom line is it will be a cost
savings over the long run so I
will let my expert witness go
from there.
Madam chair representative is
Representative Thomson thank you
so much as Representative is
that are Thompson said twenty
five thousand New Mexicans live
with limb loss and limb
difference our mobility
impairments and are unable to
afford the access to life
changing or thought and
prosthetic care that helps them
due to the lack of coverage and
high out of pocket costs
insurance companies New Mexico
in New Mexico often set
substantial limitations on
lifetime in Pico bridge which is
or thought of him prosthetic
coverage and routinely deny
prosthesis in our thesis utilize
for physical activities are
medically necessary so what is
this legislation going to do it
will mandate that state
insurance plans provide coverage
for prosthetic and orthotic
coverage at the level that is
equivalent to the coverage
provided under federal Medicare
program this will also protect
individuals with limb loss and
limb difference from incurring
already experienced widespread
support this is already
experienced widespread support
across the nation with twenty
one states enacting similar
legislation and laws over twenty
years this legislation is also
going to make a huge change in
the state they're providing
coverage for additional or
thought I can process a devices
specifically for the purpose of
performing physical activity for
all ages empowering individuals
with limb loss limb difference
or mobility impairments to
experience a physical mental and
social benefits of physical
activity that provides main
passes similar legislation this
year for children under eighteen
but New Mexico has the
opportunity to lead the nation
and be the first state in the
country to provide coverage for
this.
No one ever experiences to X. no
one ever anticipate too
expensive in Los or limb
difference in their life but the
reality is every single one of
us in this room our family our
friends can become part of this
community at any point of our
life.
For most of my childhood I grew
up in foster care homeless
shelters boys homes and domestic
violence shelter.
But in two thousand eight I
returned to New Mexico to live
with my grandparents.
And I had the hopes of just a
brand new beginning and just an
opportunity just to be a kid
like most freshmen I plan to
walk in the high school brimming
with confidence and attitude to
literally try anything.
However my hopes of a new
beginning was suddenly
transformed into the fight of my
life.
My story is one of twenty five
thousand New Mexicans stories
and what I thought was a simple
knee injury during baseball
tryouts to lead to the diagnosis
of a rare and aggressive bone
cancer and October fourteenth
two thousand and eight I would
start at three and a half your
battle filled with countless
rounds of chemotherapy and a
dozen surgeries my orthopedic
surgeon for me that amputation
is inevitable but he's gonna do
everything we possibly can to
save my land which he conducted
a surgery called limb salvage
with which was replacement of my
bone with stainless steel
implants for the next twelve
years I would do my best to
adapt but I have to live with
chronic pain and mobility
impairments preventing me from
running and playing contact
sports but the one thing I could
do was still bike.
October seventeenth twenty
twenty thousand into fire New
Mexico doing with so many New
Mexicans love to do those
downhill mountain biking and as
a last run of the day and I
suddenly lost control crashed
into St and shattering the metal
that was placed in my late.
Immediately after the crash I
knew the invitation was no
longer future inevitability but
a present reality for twelve
years I accepted that pain and
the challenges that came with
limb salvage because honestly
and truthfully I feared
amputation I was deathly afraid
of it because I never saw
individuals with limb loss in
New Mexico living an active
lifestyle and doing the things I
love to do I had no idea that
was due to the lack of access to
appropriate prosthetics I
quickly realized in order to
receive the Kerry needed I would
have to fight enter my first
year and a half as an amputee I
was denied multiple times access
to the proper prosthetics just
to properly walk with insurance
now stating and I quote the
requested prosthetic device
exceeds our basic and minimum
needs and is not medically
necessary eventually that case
would be overturned by third
party review and the prosthetic
knee wasn't fact medically
necessary if we had insurance
bears New Mexico entities would
have to fight every step of the
way for access to the proper
prosthetics in the standard of
care that is protected by
insurance fairness and after
learning to walk with a
prosthetic I was excited to run
for the first time in twelve
years but that would require a
specialized running prosthesis
and so space with the new I and
I quickly learned that the only
way to access the prosthetic
necessary for physical activity
was a pay high out of pocket
costs for travel out of state
for terrible support because
insurance considers physical
activity for entities as not
medically necessary I
consistently denies coverage for
the specialty devices I'm
fortunate enough to have a
running blade donate a physical
activity is a right and not a
privilege today we have the
choice to give thousands of New
Mexicans with limb loss and limb
difference the ability to
exercise that right.
Today we have the opportunity to
support the most comprehensive
prosthetic and orthotic coverage
legislation the nation and be
the first in the country to
create coverage for prosthetics
and orthotics for physical
activity for all ages not only
does this legislation support
New Mexicans and regaining their
mobility but in Los our human
potential without limitations I
am honored to be sitting here
alongside some amazing stories
that you're gonna hear from our
community we are we are small
part of the twenty five thousand
Mexicans today we have the
opportunity to get the power of
deciding what's medically
necessary to the health care
providers in New Mexico and not
corporate interest how many
yield my time to representative
Thompson thank you madam chair
we are ready for questions.
Thank you let's go to the
audience first is there anyone
here in opposition to this bill.
C. L. Lujan is there anyone on
the way up who is that
opposition to this bill.
I'll go back to the audience is
there anyone here in support of
this field.
So those of you who want to
speak in support of it that me
see your hands again.
Okay so there are a number of
you and so I.
This is very important to be
able to speak and that I will
limit you to two minutes in
terms of your speaking and I'm
going to ask my assistant here
two time you because it's really
important that we hear from
everyone but that we also stayed
on time so I started in the
front it will go toward the back
so please here.
Thank you my name is feeling
Mathis a below the knee amputee
in a clinician in the field of
work products and prosthetics
serving patients in the four
corners area I'm testifying in
favor of house bill one thirty
one and two thousand eleven I
had a rock climbing accident for
years we try to salvage my lamb
I was in pain and unable to do
any outdoor activities that I
loved and even unable to
continue the path of becoming a
nurse.
That's whenever I decided to
take my life back and I became
an elected blew the name and I
spent the summer with my
processes and fell in love with
the lifelong relationships he
was building with this patients
and I knew then what I wanted to
be whenever I grew up I want to
become a clinician and work in
rural areas to fight for
individuals in need after
gaining my master of science or
thought ex and prosthetics a
completed my residency in
Albuquerque and now continuing
to serve The New Mexican
community after eight years of
being an amputee I'm still
trying to figure out what works
best for each outdoor activity
it's not simple and it's not
easy and it's very much
individually based.
There's not a single prosthetic
design that fits at all each
activity requires a unique
socket design suspension system
and the type of foot also is
different my insurance wouldn't
cover the cost items were
donated I use all parts and
pieces to build activity
specific prosthetic devices
without appropriate prosthesis
my limb can be left of blisters
and skin breakdown and the
majority of the population I
serve House commodities such as
diabetes that can delay healing
a small blister can lead to a
large wonder lengthy hospital
stays my patients already find
it challenging to get by and not
having access to activities
specifically X. income at a
greater cost to the individual
and insurance companies there
should be a dollar sign attached
to the pathway of healthy living
there's no one like for
everything there's no one like
for life you can be part of
making a difference and you can
be part of mobility for all.
Thank you thank you.
Good morning madam chair
representatives my name is Laura
Burnett I'm from Albuquerque
this is my daughter hope
affectionately known as hope the
tiny warrior at my mid term
ultrasound I was greeted with
the words your daughter is
missing her right leg and we are
uncertain of what other medical
conditions might be present at
birth.
Thankfully she was born only
missing her right leg for iliac
crest and her kidney not having
any other major medical needs we
were left to find the name for
her condition on our own it was
called the congenital heavy
pivot health activity designing
a prosthesis for pediatric heavy
public to me is challenging due
to the lack of public support
within the body as well as the
fact that the components for the
leg are designed specifically
for adults despite some
professionals advice to wait
until hope was older to fit for
a prosthetic we were able to
find a process is willing to
take on the challenge hope
received her first lag and learn
to walk on it just one year of
age the prosthesis was heavy and
restricting which prevented her
from participating in activities
such as running and climbing
last year hope asked me she can
join her sisters and I for a run
around our neighborhood instead
of riding in the stroller
unfortunately our current
prosthesis was doesn't allow for
that level of activity as for
ankle and foot do not bend in
the knee isn't designed to run
on with tears in her eyes she
sat in the stroller at our
school her class loved playing
tag wanting to participate with
their friends hope tried running
with her current prosthesis and
she tripped and fell she was
discouraged because she couldn't
keep that.
For mothers for P. any person
dealing with limb loss having a
prosthetic device that can help
them function in a world that
was made for able bodied people
should not require a
prescription or thousands of
dollars my daughter and
thousands of other New Mexicans
should be allowed the same
opportunities to experience that
freedom and joy that comes from
running swimming dancing hiking
and living life to the fullest
thank you thank you very much.
The next well.
Thank you chairman and chairman
hello my name is Julie Jordan
I'm a physical therapist and
amputee and thank you for giving
me an opportunity to speak in
support of house bill one thirty
one I became a P. T. in twenty
fourteen when I was run over by
a garbage truck while riding my
bicycle to work I was one of the
nine hundred six New Mexicans
that year to undergo amputation
that is two and a half people
per day I am an example of how
limb loss can occur to anyone at
any time.
Since then I have used many
daily walking prosthesis that
need to be replaced every three
to five years and even with good
insurance the like that I'm
currently wearing right now cost
me forty five hundred dollars
out of pocket.
And what many people don't
realize is that all prosthetic
legs are not created equally the
likely walk on are not well
suited for running and rock
climbing as has been mentioned
and those are activities I
wanted to get back to it and
they require specific components
and specific build out so
insurance doesn't cover that and
I have some legs appear to show
but it's significant personal
expense I put these things
together over time and I have
been very happy to be able to
the act and I'm often approached
in the community by people who
say that they're inspired to see
me participating in sports I
think this is because we don't
see many people with limb loss
participating in high level
activity but I know that without
a prosthesis just carrying a
glass of water across the room
would be very difficult for me
my prosthetic legs allow me to
to do things that enable able
bodied people to do without even
thinking and they allow me to
stay fit and participate in
sports with my family and
friends.
Limits cannot be magically
replaced but function can be
restored with equipment and
quality rehabilitation services
many New Mexicans don't have
access to that I've seen that in
the clinic and I would love to
just say repetitively that
disability doesn't come from
them loss but rather a lack of
equipment accommodation and
access thank you Mr very much.
The next so please.
We skipped one
thank
you.
I'm gonna ask you a couple of
questions okay.
Okay what is it that hard about
trying to run it with your
current prosthesis.
so hardy.
Visit it's hard.
Okay good.
Why do you want a running play.
So I can run faster and keep up
with.
What is it like being the only
person at school it's just one
way.
And.
And what is the hardest thing
about having only one like.
Hardest thing.
Sorry.
It's hard.
Is it time yes the time.
Thank you baby HM thank you I
did great thanks thank you.
Thank you madam chair madam vice
chair and committee
representatives my name is
Laurie Lewis and I'm Callaway
small.
Hello we lost her lower right
leg doing that she and so many
other New Mexicans love to do
she was out for a mountain bike
ride and stuff to climb those
Albuquerque foothill rocks that
you believe have been there for
centuries the rocks moved and
she found herself slams between
boulders she became an amputee
several days later.
Surreal was an understatement
five weeks later she was
discharged from the hospital but
as parents we were saying now
what I can't tell you how many
times we were told that Callaway
was resilient followed by the
promise of what she would do
again the promises would be
somewhat like this just you
watch next time next this time
next year Callaway will run
right past all of us we believe
that to we pictured her climbing
flipping racing biking but we
didn't know that insurance would
expect her to do all of those
things on a walking like on a
lake that felt heavy stiff and
didn't feel much like play at
all it was hard for us to
imagine the lack of quality of
life insurance offered to the
limb loss community having spent
quite a bit of time at Carrie
Tingley hospital who by the way
assign their support to this
bill hello and I can tell you
that we have yet to see one
individual in clinic on an
activity like our orthopedic
surgeon has shared with us that
she has found herself put in the
place of informing families that
their insurance will only cover
walking like if you teach
children ask questions like when
can I run and when can I play
soccer imagine the answer coming
back to your your child that
your insurance will not provide
the leg needed for these
activities we're here today
because sport is not a luxury
and movement is medicine in this
session we have the opportunity
to choose for others what we
would choose for ourselves let's
be the catalyst to provide
choice an opportunity to needy
to the limb loss and limb
difference community in New
Mexico thank you.
And our next is my daughter.
We'll hear me if I question and
she's.
Do this.
following Lewis tell me about
the day of your accident well I
was oxide in twenty twenty one
I had to be rushed to the
hospital and maybe like was
impacted what were you afraid of
when you first lost you like not
being able to do sports what are
your favorite activities today
climbing running and swimming
are they the same as your
activities your favorite
activities before the accident
yes how are you doing the same
things as before because I have
activity like how is it possible
for you to have a running late
today I was giving I was given
Cherry support.
What do you remember feeling
when you first put on a running
blade.
It was really fun and I think
that we should be able to have
a.
Prior to getting it running late
what did you do most at home I
would just sit in the chair.
Which like do you wear
everywhere including school my
rating what do you currently do
during school recess I play
video games with my friends what
do you do during P. E..
Well I do what everybody else is
doing if you were walking like
to school what would you do at
recess I would probably just
sentiment how does it make you
feel when you see others trying
to play sports on a walking like
sad because it's really hard and
it's really have and why do you
believe this bill should be
passed because everybody should
have access to the things that
they need.
Madam chair members committee
Larry R. N. registered lobbyist
for press train health plans and
question health care services
every once in awhile matters and
what please stand up on a bill.
I have to make a clear
Presbyterian this point is not
yet in support of the bill
because we have two issues we're
working on and go shooting but
there was no way I would ever
raise my hand when you ask for
opposition on a bill like this
and I don't want to take too
long so I think their stores are
more important than what you
hear from me coming into the
committee we have two issues
that we're looking at and then
that one was how often are
patients or enrollees eligible
for an upgrade or fix for their
prosthetic devices I do have an
answer on that issue and to and
the answer is going to be if it
needs to be replaced because
there's a change in physical
condition IT growth or something
else has happened or up every
three years because that's about
the lifespan for these devices
and so we keep we are agreeable
and agreeing to putting some of
that language in the legislation
the other pieces a piece about
reporting to OSI and the concern
on that is not necessarily that
would worry that we're not going
to cover the devices but it puts
a burden for additional
reporting requirements we think
we have that and a regulated who
already has the authority to
make sure we're complying with
the statute we're continuing the
in those discussions the sponsor
and and my new friends and I
have to say thank you because
they've educated me over several
days the chief negotiator Kyle
thinks it's him it's not it's
Callaway.
I am going to have to say
something she was wearing a
silver vest in the first
committee I designated that as
we're lucky that she did not
wear today please don't hold it
against.
Your mom's fall.
But but she does have a lucky
legs is so that maybe the new
new lucky for so we're
continuing to work on it I think
we just need a floor amendment.
And
every Saturday during the
session Presbyterian the entire
senior leadership team gets
together to sing was ran your
time is thank you.
Madam chair members of the one
of the sessions with this
constitutional we had some
concerns with this legislation
still do that to echo Mister
granted Presbyterians comments
we are committed to working of
the advocates in the sponsor to
try to find a resolution to some
of those concerns we want to
provide the best quality of life
we can for our members all of
our members thank you thank you
thank you thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Ellen
pods I represent the disability
coalition we advocate for the
interests of persons with
disabilities of all types and
that nothing I can say about
this bill will be as compelling
as what you're hearing from
other people here today so I
will simply say that we stand in
support of this bill and we are
chair support which I think we
can count on and thank you very
much.
Madam chair members of the
committee Gen Jackson on the
registered lobbyist and a former
CEO of disability rights New
Mexico and we advocate for the
rights of people with all types
of disabilities many of you know
us for our role in the
developmental disabilities but
we also represent individuals
with mental illness physical
illness and other disabilities
and disability rights New Mexico
is the designated the federally
designated agency to provide
protection and advocacy or legal
services on behalf of people
with disabilities in New Mexico
so we're really all about
protecting the rights of people
with disabilities but the
motivating value behind our
agency is to ensure that people
with disabilities have equal
opportunity and equal ability to
to
To get involved in life's
adventures as much as they can
and we did and have the kind of
quality of life that they want
and they can try to achieve and
this is the kind of bill there
really provides opportunity for
people with disabilities to
participate in things that so
many people without disabilities
tend to take for granted so we
encourage your support of this
bill madam chair members of the
committee and we appreciate the
Sanchez bringing this forward
thanks.
The anyone else on the to my
left who's want to speak in
favor of the bill that will go
to the right is anyone on the
side please come forth.
I'm sorry
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Janet Popp
I'm a physical therapist in
Albuquerque the story like to
share with you is what I've seen
sort of farther into the life
cycle we're and I've heard the
story by patients over and over
we're someone who experiences
limb loss living in a rural area
or does not have access to an
appropriate prosthetic device to
live in a rural area to could
take care of their property also
they have the chance their
challenge without the mobility
is limited they start to become
more sedentary there taking here
the property becomes more
difficult they give up on keep
in a garden they lose their
access to affordable healthy
food which can affect diabetes
they start to have trouble and
give away their farm animals
their beloved our these of
things that have been told to me
by former patients and so then
the family living in Albuquerque
convinces them come so you can
be closer to help so they leave
their rural community and they
leave the homes the their home
and they leave the lands of
their ancestors and it's
crushing
so what I'd like to say is on
behalf of the New Mexico chapter
of the American physical therapy
association we stand in support
of H. B. one three one.
Thank you Mr.
Is anyone else on the right side
which is please go for.
Thank you madam chair of the
committee my name is Chris Lori
I work with the ark of New
Mexico is a public policy
officer lobbyist you for some
extremely powerful statements
from exper with us as well as
from the self advocates we
represent people with all types
of disabilities with our New
Mexico and we stand in front
support would like to thank you
representative Thompson for
bringing this bill thank you
thank you.
I miss anybody in the audience.
If not we'll go to the to those
on the system on the web and
first that's the actually wiped.
This white you have two minutes.
Good morning madam chair and
distinguished members of the New
Mexico house health and Human
Services Committee my name is
Ashley white and the chief
programs officer for the NPT
coalition the coalition's
mission is to support educate
and advocate for people impacted
by limb loss and limb difference
we do that by providing programs
that train and survive here
visitors facilitate support
groups across the US and develop
and disseminate resources to
support individuals throughout
their imputation journey the
most common concerns we hear
from individuals living with
limb loss or limb difference and
their family members caretakers
and health care providers is
uncertainty about access to the
appropriate prosthetic care to
restore function that has been
lost or is missing so when Kyle
contacted me to ask if I could
help with this and New Mexicans
can move initiative the anti
coalition could help of course
we said yes since is bill was
introduced Kyle be Laura hope
Callaway Laura Suzanne J.
setting L. Helen grace Julie
David B. have all shared or will
share powerful personal
testimony about how inadequate
insurance coverage is disabling
the coalition commends insurance
companies in New Mexico that are
currently providing appropriate
prosthetic and orthotic coverage
for individuals living with limb
loss or limb difference but
unfortunately the experiences of
individuals we work with do not
show consistency across all
carriers or even within the same
Kerrier creating a scenario
where cost to care for the
individuals living with limb
loss or limb difference are
transferred to the state or fact
federal government the impact of
those inconsistencies it
underserved communities
indigenous Latino and black
communities the most prevalent
study commissioned by the
coalition show that African
Americans are four times more
likely to receive amputations
than those who identify as white
the health disparities present
in the limb loss or limb
difference community are
devastating people often ask why
prostheses cost so much but you
rarely hear that question about
a knee replacement or hip
replacement surgery both.
Restore function but because
external prostheses are covered
under a different part of the
insurance policy individuals in
need extra work very well let.
We appreciate you listening.
next we have the cold Bencoolen.
Hello good morning madam chair
representative my name is Nicole
for Kailyn from the American
iconic in Pacific association
and I support HB one three one
twenty one years ago at the age
of ten I lost my leg to bone
cancer back then I had no idea
that a waterproof prosthesis
would be considered a
convenience for that elect for
writing would be considered not
medically necessary my family
didn't have the funds to pay out
of pocket and so I would without
but I still wanted to be
included in everything my peers
had the opportunity to do and so
I pushed my prosthesis to keep
up but I couldn't it wasn't
built for that what was supposed
to last three years I was
breaking every six months a
costly my insurance even more
money than if they had just
provided me what was appropriate
in the first place as I got into
college I started running for my
mental and physical health but
by forcing myself to run on an
inadequate prosthesis I
literally read my pelvis out of
alignment I was in excruciating
back pain and physical therapy
twice a week and yet I still
could not get access to a
prosthesis for running.
Two decades later and my story
is not unique the health care
twenty five thousand New
Mexicans with disabilities is at
risk through my work I also hear
from the twenty eight or I can
president clinics in New Mexico
and their battles with insurance
companies to deny claims at
every turn we might not yet have
a cure for cancer but these
talented medical professionals
have a cure for mobility
impairment and their care is not
only affordable essays the
health care system money bill
similar to each B. one three one
have already been passed in
twenty one states including New
Mexico's neighbors Utah Colorado
and Texas why because every
single study commissioned by the
state's show these laws have a
minimal impact on insurance
premiums and clear R. Y. to
insurance carriers in fact
Colorado's analysis showed
savings of nearly five hundred
thousand dollars per year I
reducing rates of heart disease
diabetes and obesity we know
movement as medicine and not
only saves lives it saves money
please support H. B. one three
one thank you thank you very
much.
Next we have grace.
All there.
Hi my name is grace Waldron
intensifying in favor of each B.
one thirty one I am a certified
processes or that this active
life out of us actually in the
Santa Fe office right now with
the patient
talking about possibly getting a
running like maybe since include
disabled folks need custom
braces to support levels that
are not functioning properly and
people with limb differences
within my provide prosthetics to
replace their implicated arms or
legs I entered this profession
with the primary goal of
listening to my patients needs
and providing solutions that
would change their lives for the
better every day thanks
insurance I do see those success
stories prosthetics and
orthotics for number one size
fits all in fact some entities
cannot achieve their goals with
the single prosthetic arm relate
all that's covered by most
insurance most people
specialized devices are often
necessary for rehabilitation for
example running blades are
designed to store energy like a
spring allowing the wearer to
jump and run effectively other
still not matching the function
of an anatomical but because
usually they're not used for
normal walking.
Three running blades are
invented in the nineteen
seventies the technology has
come a long way in five decades
that access has not.
Your my company organized an
event where fifteen amputees
were able to trial of running
late for a couple of hours I was
stunned by how many participants
were running dutifully for the
first time becoming entities
simply by having access to the
right equipment.
Medially reading and writing
recommendation letters to
charity on these devices for
participants but I believe the
burden of payment shouldn't be
placed on non profits that a
patient has to seek out as
motivated entities are fit with
the technology their lives will
radically transform in fact
there health care costs will
likely be lower in the future
because of their improved
physical and mental health how
did insurance dismiss these
benefits for their members I
myself am able bodied athletes
involved in trail Fund skiing
backpacking rock climbing and
more I regularly appreciate my
body's ability correctly eight
in the beautiful state of New
Mexico I yearn for my disabled
appears to be able to do the
same.
Committee you have a unique
opportunity to become a cutting
edge reader insurance coverage
for these sites on the internet
needs.
Next we have this Chavis.
Kelly can you and mute.
Representing the Kerry to the
hospital foundation I'm a
retired fiscal implications
teacher that for forty one years
in the public and private school
system I currently work with the
children for the Kerry to the
hospital that permanent physical
disabilities during my career as
a teacher staff can't staff
member appropriate provider and
counter children with limb just
differences and disorders and
use that used Passat because the
it was and we're products were
specialized equipment in their
daily lives.
As children became exposed to
different physical activities
like running mountain climbing
rock climbing.
Swimming in our trade from the
developed a desire to continue
the as activities but also to
compete at a higher level
however these children for these
children to follow their passion
they need specialized adaptive
prosthetics and orthotics in
order to participate.
Which leads to run late is
necessary to running as been and
are often denied by insurance
companies because they are not
that the necessary.
Cost often makes it impossible
for these families to purchase
part of cross that for them to
participate as children grow out
real disappointment and
therefore they need the
equipment to.
To be.
Them and meet their on going
needs to.
On the number of prosthetics and
orthotics for find my insurance
is not in the best interest of
the child's ability to new
consolidated passion.
Just so you are aware Kerry
cheaply possible see over a
thousand patients here that
require prosthetics and
orthotics the quality of life
coordinator and patient County
corn committee on the hospital
they receive requests from
families to have this equipment
provided our children are right
on top.
Yesterday.
And we're now going thank you
we're going to end the Gail.
From Rio Rancho New Mexico and I
support house bill one thirty
one six years ago I became a
below knee amputee I support
house bill one thirty one
because for the last six years
I've experienced the struggling
can be getting a well fitting
prosthesis and the pain of
wearing one that isn't I've been
in the regular fights to get
insurance to pay for my
prosthesis I've known the fear
of wondering of a doctor
evaluating need would classify
me as to disabled deserve a fire
in prosthetic foot that was
better for walking I'd never
considered getting a specialized
prosthetic leg running late or
quite input because they're far
far too expensive to pay for
myself I to worry about paying
for my portion of my standard
weight thousands of dollars it
shouldn't be this hard to get a
prosthesis to keep on living
house bill one thirty one will
make sure all right and the
twenty five thousand New
Mexicans with limb loss and limb
difference have the for static
here to keep on enjoying life
out there and not just on our
couches at home it will help us
get out there and really live so
I ask you please support house
bill one thirty one thank you
thank you very much Danielle
Cummings.
Hello my name is Daniel Cummings
and on March fifteenth two
thousand seventeen I was
climbing at stone age when I
fell twenty feet and landed on
my left but shattering my to do
list in my ankle and damaging
the surrounding joints from the
first appointments I had my
medical team made it very
obvious that I would never be
able to run again and that being
a physician my dream of being a
physician was going after change
three years of battling with
chronic pain and no mobility
leader my doctor just sort of a
man in Washington who is making
these hybrid prosthetic orthotic
devices that he believed would
be my solution eager and
desperate I flew to Washington
to get fit for their access and
Waterville fortunate that my
family could afford the ten
thousand dollar breaks and all
travelling expenses I recognize
that this is not the reality for
many people and why this bill is
so important why I'm so thankful
that more thought it has allowed
me to enroll as a student
medical student UNM and to
regain some level activity the
chronic pain is still here and
it's consistently and eight to
ten out of ten Mexico said also
comes with many challenges like
having to add padding to try to
keep the functionality well my
last like out of these anti of
time and money to fly to
Washington for adjustments many
days it takes everything I have
to push through the pain to be
the best daughter friend and
student I can be I hear many
stories of amputees chasing and
pursuing their dreams pain free
and that is my hope but it would
be naive to not think about what
my access to prosthetics will
look like this is the power of
what we're doing here today with
house bill one thirty one we are
choosing to ensure that each
person will have the proper
access to whatever prosthetic
they may need thank you.
Thank you Mr Cummings the last
speaker is Laura Keller.
For New Mexico we can't hear you
can you get closer to your
microphone.
Yes.
Madam chair and committee my
name is R. Keller I represent
the American diabetes
association and more than sixty
percent of non traumatic lower
limb amputations happening in
the diabetes population so we
fully support this bill and
access to prosthetics and
orthotics thank you.
Thank you.
Welcome to the committee.
At the.
Yes yes thank you madam chair we
have a co sponsor who wants to
see Representative Hernandez and
Representative block is also a
co sponsor so it's a bipartisan
bill twenty second madam chair
committee I representative Josh
were named as an I'm a co
sponsor in a huge supporter of
this bill with my friend Kyle
because we need to assure a
better quality of life for
people with prosthetics and not
just the bare minimum.
At the time of day where thank
you Representative thank you
madam chair.
What are other co sponsor here I
don't believe so thank you we
will go to the committee now
will have.
I was worried about getting
people in the room and
Representative Kate is as a
primary co sponsor and excuse
me.
Representative K. thank you
madam chair and and and and and
thank you Representative thank
you representative Thompson I am
very proud sponsor of this bill
and and I think that everybody
was very eloquent and and making
sure that people understand the
the the permanent effects of ill
fitting prosthesis and the the
the.
Quarter of children I'm being
able to be physically active I I
of my daughter also has one
difference stirred due to a
birth injury I wanted to just
give you I just want to say into
the record some practical
information as well individuals
with with the disabilities who
have properly fitting and
appropriate prosthesis and
orthotics they can not only of
the act and therefore activity
we know reduces health care
costs and they are able to
maintain employment for a lot
longer this is
a bill of of dignity access and
affordability thank you thank
you go to representative John
thank.
Turn on.
Don't think you guys hear me
anyway I just wanted to say that
and and I also want to say that
I'm glad that our two biggest
private insurers are engaged and
working with a sponsor to to see
that that there concerns are
addressed to make it possible
from an insurance perspective so
I just wanted to say that and
I'm in support as well.
Representative fences thank you
madam chair and representative
Thompson.
you know what my normal
questions would be is this going
to cost money but I I want to
tell I want to tell open
Callaway have you ever seen that
show the requests.
Everyone is hard right three
sizes.
That's what happened to me today
the.
One thing that I would I just
want to say one of my questions
was what what type of insurance
coverage is generally in place
for prosthetics already I'm just
going to jump in and the
research shows that it's twelve
to fourteen cents per member per
month an increase.
Yeah Madam chair representative
Vincent so what's currently
covered is only the basic
minimum walking way so insurance
will provide the one single
walking lake and the additional
parts of functioning so for
example if you are in if you're
above me if you do you need a
specialized socket as well as a
below knee amputee so when you
are an individual the insurance
will only cover functioning for
your basic minimum needs which
is deemed walking and anything
that exceeds walking that hence
physical activity is dean from
them not medically necessary
never covered the right now it's
only walking like.
Thank you madam chair
representative so.
If you so if you get that one
leg.
And the other thing when I watch
a walk in here you just walk in
and with authority I I mean I
appreciate that because I know
you try hard and it is something
they don't keep nobody down but
if you needed a couple extra
legs one I'm looking at this one
that must be for rock climbing
or ice or something like that
and then you've got quite a few
let so every sport that you want
to do what would that cost you
out of your pocket so it depends
on the specific device it can
range anywhere you know anywhere
between two to fifteen thousand
dollars depending on the
specific custom device so if
you're below knee amputee which
you'll see for rock climbing
there's could be less cost
because of the fabrication and
there's not a device to mere the
knee if you look right here
where it's where there's a
running blade with the need that
is nearing the Human me and give
me the exact same function which
is a higher increase of cost in
the bill we did come up with
some guard rails where it is one
sport one one additional
prosthesis or thought it for
physical activity knowing yes we
would love for everyone to be
able to every single sport but
we know that there's there's
cost associated but knowing the
physical activities necessary
allowing the patient and the
provider to determine which
physical activities best for
them so for right now in the
bill it's it's one additional.
Thank you.
And.
Madam chair representative so if
you have for example if you have
one or the other of our big
insurance providers.
Or Medicaid do they all work the
same so that's where insurance
for madam chair and back and
Representative that's where
insurance fairness is coming
into this is being as the base
foundation of this legislation
is ensuring that there is
coverage at the same rate that
Medicare covers at the eighty
twenty so it's protecting the
patients and so with this
legislation to ensure that every
single private insurance
provider in the state covers
that that secondary prosthesis
or thought it yes the question
about Medicaid we're in
conversations with Medicaid I'm
to ensure that this is added as
we're working conversations to
the regulatory route to provide
this coverage but this
legislation is only focusing on
private insurance right now but
we're already in great
conversations with Medicaid to
provide this as well thank you
madam chair.
I would love to be the one to
make a motion for this to pass.
But we have level but I.
We may actually madam chair you
if you're the last person who
talked to can't make the motion
so this works and you go back.
Representative Ferrary thank you
madam chair and I'll I'll speak
so Representative Vincent can
make the motion it as soon as
we're done
madam chair and Center and Pyle
I was wondering since this is
your last committee and we in
and
past it in a consumer public
affairs
when you go to make your
amendments well that do we need
to move for that now no you can
do that on the floor we'll do it
on the floor okay and just vote
for it when it's on the floor.
I am I am so happy for this and
of you know working with make a
wish kids I mention this at our
previous committee that
it's really important that you
know not only children who are
seeing growth get you know that
prosthetics they need
but you know also for adults to
be able to have that
Provision so I'm really glad
that this is brought to us thank
you thank you madam chair thank
you any other members question.
Representative.
I would love to make the motion
that this have a due pass madam
chair.
The that seconded by
Representative Jones is there
any opposition.
If you have a consensus to pass
to ride to lead.
Representative are you to the
next bill also.
Actually there to the public
for.
Twenty four we went ahead with
them.
on house bill one forty four
Representative Chandler.
In in this.
What the.
Yes nine nine for is here okay
well then go to the
Representative diverge.
Hello I thought that.
To do that.
Thank you.
Okay okay that's fine that's
okay the legislative thank you
F..
Thank you.
The so.
Whenever you're ready
Representative Peifer.
Thank you madam chair as opposed
to the other bills I presented
that are several inches thick
I'm glad to report this is a one
paragraph Bill.
It's a house bill one sixty
seven.
I'm Greg Nibert representative
from district fifty nine and to
my ride is my expert Carrie
Leigh Kluger executive director
of the Chavis county casa and
heavily involved with all of it
crosses in southeast New Mexico
probably the state of New
Mexico.
The bill before you is a request
to fund.
I believe what would be maybe a
pilot program is and how I
should say continuation of great
stuff continuation of great
stuff continuation of a program
of that the local costs it does
through children youth and
families trying to deal with the
the children who find themselves
in abused and neglected
situations and allow them to do
that processing and and give
them the resources that they
need so that's the essence of
house bill one sixty seven.
Do you have do you have anything
that I have to ask okay
chairwoman Thompson
representatives thank you for
having us here today I want to
introduce my compadres at work
Amanda the directing us
insurance gates with our
courthouse facility dogs all
over and read who are part of
the services we give.
Our cost a program and indeed
southeastern New Mexico is in
crisis right now and we need
your help.
Our program in particular has
third twenty seven programs
under its umbrella and serves
thousands of people here.
We have ever after thirty five
years of service have never seen
the problem this bad the amount
of extreme violence in the
amount of torture cases that
we're dealing with right now.
Are extreme our teams are
suffering CYFD does not have the
resources to support their
people and our local law
enforcement doesn't have the
risks resources they need to
help investigate and prosecute
these cases we're also seeing
extreme trauma because of the
kinds of cases we're dealing
with extreme trauma on the team
of social workers foster parents
law enforcement.
And our advocates so what we
hope to put in place in
southeastern New Mexico is a new
way of approaching trauma for
the entire team getting all of
the outdated equipment and law
enforcement need to put in place
developing trauma sensitive
rooms and spaces so that we can
serve these kids without driving
them to a non trauma informed
hospital that it can all happen
in one site and that we can
serve all of our children with
therapists victim advocates and
courthouse dogs these are if
you're not familiar very highly
trained service dogs they're
trying for two years by
assistance dogs of the west they
have AT commands and they are
able to go into the hospitals
but also to go into the
courtroom and stay in a down
state in the witness box for
three hours without moving
helping a child testify against
their accusers.
So bringing all of these things
together and supporting foster
parents right now we have
fifteen foster homes four
hundred eighty foster children
we have forty children waiting
to be adopted who cannot be
adopted because there are not
enough people in place to get
the paperwork done we hope to
put things in place to support
all of these people to make the
system work more smoothly for
hundreds and hundreds of
children but beyond that for the
entire team.
So they don't turn over they
don't get burned out and we
don't lose them as we are now
over and over again.
I believe we have a lot of
supporters on the zoom right now
supporters in the room but so
grateful to you for
understanding you clearly
understand the depth and the
problem right now we are dealing
with children put it at that
time autistic child left in the
cage.
Two little boys kept in the
backyard and a dog crate and
shot at would be begins.
A child's.
Kept in a diaper teenage child
captain to divert child with no
special needs locked in their
room and so start to the trial
began to eat his own hand.
We're talking about torture
cases like the one in Texaco
which this amazing team and
these dogs help serve of
children chained to beds and to
be used in ways we can't fathom
you come out of the torture case
like that and the team of law
enforcement social workers DA's
office is so traumatized by what
they've seen we have to pull in
special therapists just to help
them because they're I'm out.
How the local law enforcement
officer they dig through the
rubble in a drug addicts house
finds the corpse a bit of a baby
and is carrying this corpse out
and I've had police officers
tell me I can't do this anymore
I can't do this and they're
begging for help this bill will
respond to that kind of trauma
and help to support the victims.
As well as the providers so
thank you for your time.
The following I.
so is there anyone here in
opposition.
Okay anyone on zoom in
opposition.
Okay in support.
If you want if you want to speak
please come forward and I'm this
is mostly for the committee but
we have a drop dead time of
being out of here at eleven
o'clock so so let's chair time
accordingly.
Thank you so if you want if you
want to make a statement please
come forward to the Mike in in
support.
Hello my name is Amanda blessed
and I'm the director in a
frantic interviewers.
Of
Of our Travis county because a
program like Carrie Leigh said
we do serve these children every
day these families the services
we are into a crisis right now
and our whole focus are these
severely abused and neglected
children.
We would like to aim some of our
focus a lot of our focus if we
can toward our providers because
they Carrie Leigh said we are
We are losing great people
social workers law enforcement
DA representatives to cases like
this because this is just that
difficult and if we could find
another level of care to them in
a one stop shop is what we call
it would just increase
Better outcome for the the
family and the providers that we
that we serve thank you.
Thank anyone else.
And a reminder of two minutes
and that's the reminder for
myself actually.
Good morning chairwoman and if
representatives my name is Sean
skates I am the multi
disciplinary team coordinator
for the children's advocacy
center which is unrelated under
costs in chambers county my role
is to make sure that everybody
that services these children
that are being used are taking
care of their all on the same
page that includes the district
attorney's office CYFD
investigators law enforcement
from state police to local PD
the sheriff's office and over
the past couple of years we've
seen an increase in the severity
of cases and the toll that it's
taken on everybody in this team
and how to support these people
in their roles.
We are in a rural community we
have a lack of support I'm like
Albuquerque or the major cities
around the country and so we're
doing the best that we can with
what we have but this bill would
allow us to do even more for
these people and find even more
services for these children
there's that saying that you
can't help someone until you
help yourself and so we are
trying to help these individuals
help themselves while they're
helping other people.
Thank you thank you.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee my name is Cody borrow
office of the secretary children
youth and families department we
strongly support this bill and a
fully heroes today the bill
before the state and and this
one right now so thank you thank
the sponsors thank you
Representative is L. for coming
to the to the Department ahead
of time and the we strongly
support this thank you.
Hey I don't see any more hands
on soon if you would like to
speak please raise your hand.
Okay we'll go to Montoya M. fry.
Montoya your unmuted but we
can't hear you.
The kids.
Hello good morning.
I was gonna say technology is
great until it doesn't work but
go ahead.
Yes I'm with a deputy lieutenant
of our if you need although we
represent also police department
we've spoken with Carrie Leigh
about this bill and we greatly
support we greatly appreciate
her effort towards this and and
I must say the building with the
police department dealing with
some of these situations
supervising some of these
officers that do this work the
it is a new age
the old school ways of just get
it done and go home and go to
that are done and over with the
trauma that these officers are
dealing with and caring
throughout their entire career
is really adding up and taking a
toll on receipt excuse me we're
seeing it with the new
generation our new officers and
we need to get systems in place
for these tragic events both for
the victims and for the officers
and the the other respond or so
we we greatly appreciate his
efforts and we appreciate your
time and effort listening this
bill.
Thank you.
Saying no hand what no more
hands on soon I'll go to the
committee and before I do I just
want to point something out to
representative Nibert that the
FIR says CYFD said the bill does
not define child crime victims
so it is unclear if the services
are provided to victims of
crimes committed by children or
children who have been the
victims of crime so maybe just
that a minor and minor
definition thank you.
Madam chairwoman there are a
great many people on zoom here
to support us who don't want to
take your time speaking but they
are on in support okay and maybe
I'll go back to zoom in if you
are here in support of the bill
but don't want to speak raise
your hand.
I see my friend Dr Kim Parker
Guerrero on their while there
are a lot of people and we thank
you very much for for
participating and for realizing
that unfortunately time is
always our enemy so thank you
very much for that
Representative been set you have
questions Representative turned.
I I have a question
Representative Representative
Madam chair representative
Nibert for clarification I'm
looking at the bill the bill
specifically say is in the
southeast why did to limit it.
We actually expanded it beyond
Chavis county to to basically
the fifth judicial district or
the southeast corner of the
state the cost is that this
where your works with
throughout.
The southeast portion of the
state.
There's not enough money to
support the whole state you give
me five million dollars in.
I'll make magic happen we want
to start this in Travis in
northern Eddy County which are
primary areas and then we do
reach out and serve all of
southeastern New Mexico and
partner with programs in that
area
giving services with the dogs by
legal services forensic services
and trauma supports so.
Thank you madam chair and
representative the the thought
was to see if this works and if
it works then I'm sure that we
will be coming before you in
subsequent years to take this
and statewide if it if it truly
works like we hope it works we
would like to have this as a
model for the rest of state but
the right now.
Early can only be in a few
places at one time and so we we
limit it to to the area that she
primarily serves okay thank you
madam chair Representative
Nibert so for Pollock programs
you're looking at a period of
four to seven years to do the
the to collect the data and then
presented for.
Thank you and then for
clarification thank you madam
chair representative might
divert you are talking about
children you mentioned three
different
sources that you were looking
to be affected by this bill and
this is the clarification that I
just want to make sure we all
understand it talked about
children who are victims of
crime you talked about those who
to prosecute and then you talked
about those who who help
children who are victims of
crime so I just wanted to just
clarification that will be good
for purposes of an amendment to
this bill so we know exactly
what we're talking about it your
targeting thank you madam chair
representative Nibert.
Any other question
Representative Kate.
Thank you madam chair
Representative niti and thank
you Representative and I prefer
for bringing this bill forward
yet that is my only concern I I
I'm I'm very much of
knowledgeable about costs and
thank you very much it's very
important and the work that you
described I wholeheartedly
support but it's not in the
bill.
It in and it says the funding
anything that you don't use by
the end of twenty twenty four we
were reverted back.
So how is it a five year pilot
with only one year funding and
and and and and it's not and so
you you're deaf if you're gonna
mended I would say clarify the
definition and and clarify the
program.
Please.
Madam chairwoman representatives
this is not to help the
predators it is only to help
victims and the team that
supports victims it is a
continuation of our current
services it's adding on and
giving more to our team.
We are happy to begin to develop
it as a pilot project and spread
it but
we will immediately begin
gathering data but a million
dollars goes like that and we
can will there will be no
remaining at the end of the year
because the equipment to updated
technology putting that supports
the technological supports in
place does take a good amount of
funding and then after that
recurring money money we hope to
put into services trauma
services and victim advocates
therapists.
And if it does work madam chair
and representative
There will be requests not only
of the department but of future
legislators to continue
this program to make sure that
the data is there and certainly
if we go statewide the numbers
will be much bigger than what
you see before you today.
Okay I will entertain a motion.
Okay second okay Representative
Penske
is there any opposition.
Thing then you have a do pass.
Committee.
Okay we will go on to house bill
one forty four and then
hopefully we'll have time for at
least one more after that so
Representative Chandler is here.
And she know right because she
demands it in our committee so.
Yes ma'am madam chair.
thank you so much
good to see you madam chair good
to see you this morning
committee members I am
presenting to you along with my
expert page night of both voices
for children of bill that
expands the child income tax
credit.
And.
I have to say I'm very proud of
what the state has done with
regard to children and families
and this is part of a package
that we've been pursuing for the
last I'd say for five years and
what it does is it simply
increases the amount of credit
for those families who are
eligible for the child income
tax credit.
we are at a place in our budget
where I think we can afford it
and it has also been shown
nationally and in the state to
help lift families and children
out of poverty.
And I would point out to you
madam chair and members in terms
of statistics this was one of
performance measure our area
where actually the state has
improved recently where I think
we've gone up a pointer so in
terms of removing the number of
people the children from poverty
and I know that ms night can
maybe expand on that point but
this bill proposes to increase
the credit the maximum credit to
six hundred dollars for families
with incomes of twenty five
thousand dollars or less four
hundred dollars for families of
between fifty thousand and
seventy five twenty five and
fifty thousand and two hundred
dollars for fifty thousand and
seventy five thousand and then
that leaves the remaining income
brexit brackets the same and
with that madam chair I am happy
to stand for questions.
Okay.
You want to.
Are you here for questions or
yeah I can just say if you
comment okay thank and just
introduce myself so hello
members the committee of and
madam chair my name is Paige I
am a senior research and policy
analyst at AG New Mexico voices
for children so thank you so
much for for having us here
today this morning
Representative Chandler did a
great job of explaining what
this bill does and the benefits
to families that so I'll just
add a couple quick points
so studies have shown that there
are multiple benefits to
families from at tax credits
like child tax credits from
improvements to child and
maternal health to improving
educational outcomes to reduce
teen hunger and poverty in the
state which is so important in
New Mexico we think that you
know these increases over the
help many families throughout
New Mexico they stand to benefit
tremendously from these
increases and like
Representative Chandler said I
think we're in a position where
we can afford these increases
and then just finally as a
reminder that you all had passed
this child tax credit last year
it begins tax your twenty twenty
three so families will begin to
be able to claim that next year
and so we would like to see
agamic Representative Chandler
said just a little bit of more
of a credit to more meaningful
credits as so families can
really see those benefits
starting next year as well.
Thank you let's go to the
audience anyone here in
opposition.
If anyone on zoom in opposition.
Okay seeing nine anyone in
person in favor.
Okay if if you want to come up
and make a public comment that
you made but don't feel
obligated.
I will be.
Madam chair members that that
might can you slide it over to.
Madam madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dick Mason
co chair the action committee of
the league of women voters of
New Mexico in New Mexico.
The one of those have positions
that I tax system should be
progressive equitable and taken
into consideration relevant
differences in the annual income
and we stand strong support of
H. B. one forty four because it
meets all of those criteria
policies like the child tax
credit boost our economic
opportunity for families as
shown to reduce childhood
poverty improve outcomes for
kids and their families what's
more they allow families to
determine how to spend spend the
money based on their needs and
family spend the money.
Immediately and that is a boost
in the taken are down at the to
develop a deep benefiting
businesses and economy in that
in addition the child track tax
credit will increase racial
gender and in cash income equity
so for all those reasons we
stand in strong support and you
have a handout with more detail
from thank did anyone else.
Madam chair and committee
members I'm letter Shaler in the
pediatrician here in Santa Fe
and I'm here Representative the
New Mexico pediatric society the
state chapter of the American
academy of pediatrics we've seen
over the past year or so the the
by the child tax credit that you
all of passed last year in the
federal tax credit we've listed
we've lit lifted children out of
poverty poverty is one of those
adverse childhood events that
leads to poor health and
wellness for not only children
but their adult to as they
become adults the closing the
increased the state and federal
resources to be spent on health
rehabilitation and even on
justice.
Raising this limit particularly
as the federal tax credit may be
ending with the end of the
federal of health order it is
important to reduce this adverse
risks to children so we The New
Mexico pediatrics IT support
this legislation thank you.
Charles.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on Charles good
marker speaking to you this
morning on behalf of New Mexico
voices for children the action
fund and
I'm so glad the doctor preceded
me talking about adverse
childhood experiences because we
know as he said poverty is a
great adverse childhood
experience itself but it also
leads to so many others so many
stressors in the family.
This also make affects their for
for this bill will help read.
Increase student success in
education as well students with
fewer adverse childhood
experiences do better across the
board thank you very much for
your vote to pass thank you
thank you what else.
One forward.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm very care group
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico restaurant association we
stand in support of this bill
childcare costs often created
Berrier for those entering the
workplace for wanted to return
to the workplace.
We thank the sponsor for
creating a more robust workforce
by supporting our New Mexico
families thank you thank you
anyone else okay we'll go to
zoom and we have
Just thank.
Or how do you stay on.
So for an efficient I had to
check on the prince is.
Go ahead Sapporo.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Secora Nefish and I am the
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico thrives and we stand in
strong support of H. B. one
forty four it's good for
families it's good for
communities it's good for New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you next we have this is
my study day I guess and Sierra
Burke bureau Veronese.
Go ahead.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is that
any state but it came up on that
I'm gonna turn it the New Mexico
Center online poverty we stand
in strong support of this bill
because the benefit every child
in New Mexico increasing the
child income tax credit and
making sure that keeps up with
inflation will not only help our
families but will also boost our
economy this improvements the
child income tax child tax
credit will have many proven
benefits including improving
infant and maternal health
reducing childhood hunger and
increasing increasing New
Mexican income incomes across
the state which will especially
benefit lower income families
thank you.
Thank you next we have Carmen
Flores.
A good morning
madam chair and members of the
committee this is Philip of us
because we have Carmen to see
one in Spanish permanent and
translate for you in New English
thank you.
The number you with anything in
this budget if they intend to
not any update about the end of
the.
Yep Committee Wunderland.
In the event that but with the
photos you know the Republican
under the sun with.
I think that's a good idea but
he's the only forty don't after
the end of the committee study
the part one of the most of the
other than those with you about
the amendment both of you it's
going to come with us on the
bottom for meeting and event.
Twenty gonna mental if they can
build on this for the state of
the union not a vote for my
fifty Bucks that you that this
is the median the following the
field you know I mean I have
been with the fully with that
this one of the the people.
The board president any form can
hinder.
Some assistance eligibility with
the what would allow for is this
will be we thank the local
community people just what is a
good thank you but I want to
thank you for your activity but
what I think what the yeah that
is only if you are a blessing in
a facility that is giving some
of the.
Man what I'm looking at economic
but I'm going to see from the
other for.
And about the political and then
of the other some of the
funniest only the budget yes the
amendment if and even when we
put them into us but our
notification about I think.
Now the version one of the
within the union but now the
verse and Spanish a good morning
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is going to
feel it is I'm a member of the
central and make it immigrant
mother and essential home health
care worker currently living in
Rio Rancho my family was
financially impacted by losing
our savings during the pandemic
and we lost one of the job that
brought home income the
financial impact versus which is
why I have not being able to
access the necessary medical
attention I haven't stopped
working though yes we live from
day to day trying to survive
because of the rising cost of
living the situation has been
very stressful for my family
general a six hundred increase
in child credits is not only an
effective way to help families
dealing with inflation but it
will also make our tax code more
ethnically and racially
equitable we're essential
workers and takes taxpayers our
hard working families contribute
so much to New Mexico economy
that's why I am here to state my
support for H. B. one forty four
as a tax credit tax credits are
a long term investment in our
communities and the well being
of our children improving
economic equity for women and
families of color the economic
and the economic impact of the
pandemic continues to affect
many New Mexican families and it
it's time to invest in emergency
economy economic relief that
impacts now our current
situation thank you.
Thank you next we have a lot of.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is eleven Martinez and I am a
community organizer for is that
they want the individuals and an
immigrants rights and what does
this organization based in
Albuquerque with over five
thousand members and the
majority of whom are low wage
immigrant workers as a mom of
four daughters I have experience
first hand the struggles with
keeping my family upload us up
been doing it while navigating
the education and Vigil axes our
community continues to share
stories and how inflation in the
from that end up in the make
continues to impact that their
purchasing power with the
current wages.
Making it hard to court sect and
survival like food and shelter.
Which is why we believe the
increasing the child tax credit
for low wages essential workers
is necessary hi this is like the
child tax credit how proven to
lift the children out of poverty
while also boosting our economy.
The New Mexico has taken the
step to move in in a direction
to more our tax called fair and
easy that strain in overtime in
this budget.
Increase the child tax credit
you need to be one forty four is
to Mexico investing in families
Intel in children's well being
thank you.
Thank you and that's all the
public testimony we have so I
will go to the committee for
questions.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative.
How many people will pay
negative tax.
madam chair and representative
if you're asking what how many
people get a rebate ascent I'm
not sure we have the data on
that but let me see if my expert
has a sense of what how many
people we might be talking
about.
Madam chair representative in
Santa that's a really good
question at a fair amount of
folks would see the at the
refundable tax credit is
refundable so yes if it exceeds
the amount of their tax
liability they would see a
refund
the exact number on that I am
not a hundred percent positive
but it would be a good portion.
So they would see the full
economic impact and benefit of
this tax credit.
Thank you madam chair
representative of and also is
there any way this maybe prevent
or soften the cliff effect that
this.
As we bring on.
I'm Madam chair representative.
First of all I'm not sure how
this will affect the cliff
effect I mean I think you bring
up a very good point madam chair
and representative we as a body
should definitely how to address
the cliff I defect but it's very
hard to do on on a single tax
bill so love to work with you on
that but on in terms of this one
I I think we we can address it
specifically here and madam
chair and representative I got a
text message from some of my
friends in the audience and it
looks like we might there there
might be as many as three
hundred and fifty thousand
people in the state who will get
some form of of of a rebate
through this this bill.
Thank you madam chair and
representative
So.
Trying to figure out how to say
this the amount of the credit to
the CPI.
Does that account for inflation
and if it does why not just tie
it to the income brackets to the
CPI.
Is that is that clear.
Yes.
And I will ask madam chair and
representative for my expert to
help me with that one thank you.
Madam chair representative
intent that's a good question
that so yes that that credit
right now as this bill would
propose it would index it to
inflation so that to be valued
their credit is maintained it
doesn't lose its value over time
which is really important right
now with high inflation we don't
want families to lose the
economic impact as time passes
so right now the credit amount
is indexed to inflation but if I
understand correctly you're also
wondering about the kind of
income bracket so there's seven
different income levels that is
something that could certainly
be done as well there is a
similar bill on the low income
comprehensive tax rebate that
will do the same thing to make
sure that the income brackets
also care keep up with inflation
so if that something that the
Representative is interested in
that something that could be
explored thank you madam chair
representative I think that's a
really excellent idea so I will
definitely madam chair
representative take a look at
that in terms of when we get to
tax thank you.
Madam chair representative
William what's on anyone else
for questions
what what.
Ferrary move that to pass in the
second I'm sorry was that okay
Representative Chavis is there
any opposition.
Thing line you have a to pass
thank you very much committee
appreciate it okay and now we're
going to go on to house bill one
thirty three which I am covering
my friend for my friend
Representative Trujillo so we
will switch chairs again.
The plan.
One thirty three.
Okay.
What we are on house bill one
thirty three recruit sexual
assault service providers.
Of Representative Thompson think
that this bill thank you and my
my expert is Alexandria Taylor
who was the executive director
of our New Mexico sexual assault
providers with some coalition
yeah I knew there were not that
not so madam chair this is a
very simple bill it's just an
appropriation to the crime
victims reparation commission to
recruit and retain sexual
assault service providers it's
two million dollars and I will
let Alexandria take it from
there thank you good morning
madam chair members of the
committee as representative
Thompson said my name is
Alexandria Taylor and executive
director of the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs thank you for having us
this morning I will keep this
very brief The New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs what fund represents
the fifteen sexual assault
service programs which you may
know is rape crisis centers the
eleven sexual assault nurse
examiner programs and ten
children's advocacy centers
across the state this two
million dollar request today is
to meet the service gap that we
identified last year when we
came to this body for a five
million dollar appropriation of
which last year you provided two
point seven million dollars in
funding and so the need and the
service gaps all across the
state have not changed they have
only continue to increase and we
need the remaining two million
dollars to address services for
survivors of sexual assault New
Mexico repeatedly ranks in the
top ten in the country in rates
of sexual violence the cost of
sexual violence over one's
lifetime estimates around an
average of a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars the state would
need to invest one point seven
billion dollars annually to
cover the cost of sexual assault
victim is.
Session over one's lifespan so
we think two million dollars to
provide intervention services is
a reasonable request to be able
to expand services in rural
communities so that survivors do
not have to wait hours to access
services to decrease the wait
lists for counseling services
and to be able to find nurse
examiner services across the
state you are most rural areas
and so I'll stop there so the I
know you all have to get to the
floor.
Then we stand for questions
thank you very much R. is there
anyone in the audience to oppose
this bill.
Sen no hands will go to the the.
Where is there anyone attending
online who opposes this bill.
I see no hands there are they is
there anyone in the audience who
supports the.
Hey thank you very much is there
anyone in the audience who wants
to speak with.
All right we will give you want
the piece.
Less than that he gets violent
crime Linda Williams from the
house and we are strong for for
this the world places are really
hurting out there and the child.
Thank you.
Whether others yes ma'am.
Sir anyone else come for please.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Jennifer up I don't have time
the executive director for the
commission on the status of
women and I just wanted to point
out that during our listening
tors speaking to women around
rural New Mexico of one of the
top three issues is a sexual
assault often accompanied by
domestic violence.
We important that we have.
For the women of.
Thank you.
There was one more yes please
yes both of you please come
forward.
Madam chair of the committee my
name is Chelsea Coburn executive
director of silver regional
sexual assault support services
and I County and I and I am in
support of this increase the
funding increase is necessary
First services in my community
and New Mexico statewide the
fighting will decrease
weightless for Kathleen and
address the expected of services
such as sexual assault nurse
exam in front here for rural
communities like the communities
that we serve thank you thank
you.
Good morning madam chair members
of him stark and executive
director of the right across the
center of central New Mexico and
that we do get the funding I
wish we didn't have to come
before you I wish our service
needed last year we assisted
eleven hundred sexual assault
survivors our youngest victim
was under your vote this was
eighty nine years old so it's
really important that we're able
to continue sect thank you for
your time.
Thank you right we will go to
the to the of zone.
Is there anyone who wish to
speak in favor who wishes to
speak in favor I thank you very
much Frank Zubia.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Frank Zubia
director for the New Mexico
crime victims reparation
commission we stand in full
support for this part for this
funding I do want to let the
committee know that we are the
administering agency for the
voca which is victims of crime
act funding and since two
thousand eighteen madam chair
members of the committee we've
seen a steady decrease in that
funding so we're looking to the
state legislatures to actually
support the needs of sexual
assault victims across the state
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mrs of the that'd
Williams.
Hello
madam chair and members of the
committee I'm Janet Williams
president of Santa Fe now and we
stand in strong support of this
bill thank you.
It was Williams that will go to
the committee is there anyone
who do you have questions yes
Representative Jones thank you
madam chair.
Question.
Why the entire.
The federal funding we generally
rely upon is decreasing twenty
two percent and and of the
school year twenty three at
fifteen percent if fiscal year
twenty four so have we reached
out to our federal
representatives to ask why
they're reducing that that kind
of critical funding to sexual
assault victims.
The.
Madam chair representative thank
you so much for your your
question is yes so the Bounkeua
funded to my crime act fund is
funded by fines and fees and
over a significant period of
time from twenty sixteen to
twenty twenty the federal
diversions that we're going into
that fund dramatically it
decreased which means that the
funding that's available in the
funds for the feds to then grant
to states to go to victim
service providers significantly
decreased so for fiscal year
twenty three this current fiscal
year sexual assault service
programs order up to twenty
seven percent reduction in their
federal awards amounting to
nearly four hundred and fifty
thousand dollars for our
programs across the state.
And we're and I'll just say we
are also in constant
communication Mr W. a directors
to be and our car statewide
coalitions are in constant
communication with our federal
delegation until more fines and
fees go into that funds with
which may not happened those
federal funds may not be
recovered.
Thank you very much.
Thank you yes Representative.
Madam chair I'd like to you can
ocean for Deepak's second.
everybody the thank you is there
any opposition against the best
part of ninety of it has thank
you.
No unfortunately if we could
hold it down unfortunately we
have to be out of this room is
two minutes and bills can go
fast but that's pushing it a
little bit so we're going to
roll the next one Representative
Kate spill over to Wednesday
thank you all for Friday Friday
what whatever's two days.
So thank you all for
participating in thank you
committee members we are in
