The.
I'm here.
Representative Karen bash
president.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Here's to okay.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Representative Roger Montoya.
I saw.
Thank you.
Representative Louis last.
Representative as president
thank you.
Representative Thomson.
Thank you.
Representative vice chair Joe
and for our president.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong
here and I saw Representative
Anderson if you didn't more can
he was waving at us but he's
he's working on some technical
effort of difficulties that was
like get the set up okay.
So that everyone is president
pro madam chair.
What we're all going to get
really adept at this mute on
mute.
Representative Armstrong we
waving at me yes ma'am thank you
to I don't know whether to raise
my hand or I don't know what my
hand is kind of really light
colored so I don't know if you
can see it behind my map but
anyway madam chair I I see
someone else under
Representative Marian Matthews
and I'm not sure who that is.
I see Marion also but I have C.
another representative it's
there's one other person that
says there Marian Matthews.
Yes and I just don't know who
that is thank you madam chair.
Good good catch you it would.
We can't we can't hear you
representative.
Did did did we feel do we figure
out who is using my name in
vain.
Now so there's someone with
white here in.
A background of bookshelves your
name is coming up as Marian
Matthews so we don't know who
you are out but that would be me
no no not yet.
Thank my hair is not white is it
is blonde yet no not you there's
another one okay
I believe that someone with that
nurse anesthetists if she yes
okay so we need to change the
name on that to her name and
over into attendees and tore
ready to hear that bill.
That probably is Dr at it is S.
appropriations and yes yes I.
Thank you thank you Shannon you
look familiar
mining.
So
if our technical support can you
Moves her.
To attendees and help or fix our
name.
Thank you Shannon what will
bring you back in in a while.
So so madam chair this is
Representative Gail Armstrong
again
what so my question is so I know
that this nice young lady doctor
is supposed to probably be
expert witness for presented of
Matthews and so if when I come
ready to have a.
Expert witnesses am I sending my
expert witness the zoom link
because it seems like I couldn't
share it.
no so that's not what's supposed
to happen will will review that
okay looks like she's move that
set there and we will
It helped will have patience as
we work through this and I know
that I got a number of panic
emails this morning about how do
I get in I'm a panelists so
Or I'm going to be presenting so
this group right here our
committee members and staff have
a special invitation that puts
you right in panelists so that
we don't go searching for you
the lord should have sent that
to your
assistance and that invitation
actually had all the dates of
the committee meetings on it and
there is a link in it that says
add to your calendar so whatever
kind of counter you use you can
put it in it'll populate your
calendar and you'll always have
your line for this meeting it's
actually the same line so you
can go to a previous one if if
necessary to get your like
everyone else including
presenters expert witnesses and
the public it should go to the
public calendar for the meeting
and click on the hyperlink what
it will put them in the
attendees.
it would be helpful for us to
for
Of presenters to let us no to
Laura Sir me ahead of time we
are experts are so we know to
look for them in the attendee
list when it's time but when
we're taught ready to present a
bill we will find out presenter
the US sponsor in the attendees
and whoever you tell if you
didn't give us the names I have
a ton at that'll be okay you can
tell us who to bring over into a
panelists position and then
so then they'll be present for
the whole hearing on that bill
in this group when it's time for
public comment I will ask
attendees to raise their hands
if they want to speak and we'll
do it as usual as if we were in
the room those in opposition
those in favor will will when we
do one group besides those in
favor I'll ask you to raise your
hands.
And you can take your hand down
after we'll we'll do a quick
count and then you
at can take your hand down if
you don't want to do anything
further other than having
raise your hand and support like
we do when it's a a public
meeting in the room a lot of
people raise their hand but not
everyone speaks so then
in raising your hand as an
attendee it puts the system puts
you in order.
Of how you raise your hand and
I'll go in that although
generally go in that order some
groups have arranged specific
speakers that they want to
present their side which I I
made them call on those in order
and then go to other public
members that that also want to
to speak and then we'll go to
the other
side the opposition
and do the same thing.
and we'll go through it
depending on how many it is that
looks like they want to speak I
may limit the time that they get
to speak but I my goal is to
hear from everyone who wants to
speak out the system maxes out
at five hundred
people on the on and so if if we
were ever to get to that or
hundreds of people we may have
to rethink that a little bit but
my goal is to trying here from
from everyone and just may have
to limit the amount of time each
get to speak if there's not a
lot of people to speak all do as
I've done when we're in person
and
maybe hurry some folks long
winded folks along but not
necessarily time cut people off
So that's we'll have to come
continue reminding folks I'm
sure and it's easiest for me for
this group if along the bottom
of your screen you see raise
hand.
If you would raise use that icon
instead of waving at me it will
put you it will put an icon on
the list to participate or
panelists and it'll put him in
order that the hand was raised
so I don't have to keep track of
who raised their hand when and
Representative Armstrong is
right those your hand raising
even the icon sometimes blends
into the background so I can't
see it readily but it will put
it in the list
to the right in order of hand
being raised so that will help
me manage
as a group.
Any other questions on.
Procedures.
Because
because we we again
backgrounds and so forth of of
last week but I traditionally
let all the
members of the committee
introduced themselves again for
the public who may not know who
they're listening to or seeing
on the screen so I will call on
you and if you want to say where
you Representative this isn't a
whole and drove your background
but you're welcome to
to say what ever is important
you on it introducing yourself
and where you're from.
And I will start with
Representative Anderson.
If you would like to introduce
yourself and your in your
district.
You have to on mute.
Representative Anderson there
should be of there should be a
microphone in the bottom left
corner of your screen as you
scroll down to the bottom it'll
pop up there you go got it.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair of my name is
Representative Phelps Anderson I
come from a southeast New Mexico
the counties of Chavis Roosevelt
in Lee County that's down in the
southeast corner.
Committee for the first time and
I had some opportunity to serve
with others on this committee
through the interim and
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Gail
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Gail Armstrong I
represent district forty nine
which is Valencia Katrin and
Sikora counties honored to be
here for my fifth year in the
Armstrong caucus.
Thank you Representative Burris.
Thank you madam chair
representative Brittney bottoms
and I represent district twelve
which is in the southwest part
of Albuquerque I'm very happy to
be here thank you thank you
Representative bash.
Hi I'm Karen bash I
Representative that house
district sixty eight in the
northwest corner of the City of
Albuquerque.
Thank you Representative Lord
you got your computer.
Yes I do can you hear me we can
okay yes I got my computer
apologize I didn't get that so
right now and I just barely
logged in yeah I Representative
stepping lord representing the
east mountains I have Mexico.
Thank you Representative
Matthews.
Marian Matthews I represent
district twenty seven in the far
northeast heights of Albuquerque
this is my second year on the
committee and I'm pleased to be
here.
Thank you Representative
Montoya.
Good morning madam chair and
members my name is Roger Montoya
I represent the beautiful
district forty that's Rio Arriba
Colfax County mortar and San
Miguel thanks so much for the
honor to be with you.
Thank you and Representative
Terrazas.
Good morning hi my
Representative reached us us I'm
from district Representative
district thirty nine that's a
grant Sierra and Dona ana county
so so you don't know what that
is it's US crucis of Silver City
and near tears State and so I'm
I'm eager to work with all the
panelists here all the other
members and look forward to
working again with all of you I
bless you thank you
Representative Thompson.
It gives me thank you madam
chair I'm Representative Liz
Thomson house district twenty
four which is in the northeast
types of Albuquerque New I am
have been a pediatric physical
therapist with kids with
disabilities four thirty six
plus years.
Thank you vice chair for ari.
Good morning madam chair I'm
Representative for house
district thirty seven and that
is the northeast part of Los
crucis and
I'm glad that I've of for my
this will be my fifth year on
our committee and I'm so glad to
be the best year to and work
with you madam chair thank you.
Thank you and I'm representative
Debbie Armstrong and I represent
districts seventeen which is in
the north valley of Albuquerque
and welcome to everyone and the
listening public and
just to I had for warns the
group
Our last week is that we should
block out till noon but today we
have a four session at eleven so
we will we will finish in time
for that if by chance we don't
get through our agenda then
bills will roll over to to
Wednesday so we'll we'll adjust
the calendar and I think we are
ready to bring in
Representative huh guy a goes.
For house bill twenty three and
what whoever I don't know who
are experts are but she can tell
us when we get her over here.
Let's see.
During the ache us.
You can move Doreen to panelist.
Representative guy a ghosts
settlement with the do you have
experts with you that we should
move over.
Thank you.
It's learn more hello are.
Time here at.
If you could
Allison if you could move over
PLR Faulkner.
And then who else.
Bill.
Sure at.
Bill correct if you could move
him up got it anyone else that
is it for today okay.
Thank you were hearing house
bill twenty three go ahead okay
and so I can't turn on my it
doesn't look like I can turn on
my camera is that correct.
I'm you should be able to.
You should be able to really see
if I can
it doesn't matter I just wanted
to.
Going to be a large and bill
folks are on camera.
Because on the bottom it's got
my mute button let's see.
Can you well.
I guess it doesn't matter I'll
just.
You can't I'll just you can talk
to my picture.
no problems okay
Mr chair go right ahead thank
you.
Okay house bill twenty three is
an act relating to higher
education and the requirements
for licensure of medical schools
house bill twenty three set
standards for medical schools
doing business in the state of
New Mexico the standard stated
and this bill will assist and
protect New Mexico hospitals and
healthcare facilities who
provide residency educational
programs from becoming
overwhelmed and incapable of
meeting the demands of for
graduating for medical education
programs lots it will also serve
as a mechanism to protect New
Mexico from predatory
institutions taking advantage of
our medical school students
graduates and health care
partners the standards are
reflective of the bare minimum
requirements necessary to be a
legitimate medical school and
our practice and I've held.
My both at UNM and be calm this
bill will ultimately ensure and
sustain it at ensure the
sustainable development and
expansion of higher quality GMP
programs in the state.
This legislation has been
endorsed by the interim health
committee and Indian Affairs
Committee as well as the New
Mexico hospital association and
the New Mexico Medical Society I
would like to introduce my
expert witnesses at this time
learn partner and bill correct
and with that we stand for
questions.
Okay I'm do either of your
experts want to make it any
statements.
Why would you like to say
anything at this time I would
just thank the committee for
for hearing the legislation and
I would like to thank the
sponsor for carrying the
legislation and I hope we can
answer all of your questions
your satisfaction.
Thank you Mr Kirk at.
Yes thank you madam chair
members Dr bill correct.
Honor to serve as the dean of
Burrell college of osteopathic
medicine I'm an internal
medicine physician.
By training and practice and
again at like to our I would
just like to thank the committee
for giving us time today and I'm
happy to stand for questions
thank you thank you it and so
just a reminder to committee
members as you think of
questions or or know that you're
going to want to ask questions
raise your hand and we'll put
it'll put you in line but we're
going to we're going to try and
see how well this works with
attendees.
Representative Anderson do you
see how to raise your hand.
On the on the zoom.
I'm working on that of
particular skill Madam.
If it's not time for Q. and if
we're going to hear from the
public first if you can't figure
out how to raise your hand on
the on the bottom of of the zoom
screen than I I I see that you
want to ask questions and all
of.
Thank you madam chair and we're
I will figure that out of in the
meantime I'll go the old
fashioned way if I can okay.
Madam chair thank you and so
I'm among the attendees I'm
going to ask first if there's
anyone among the attendees who
is in opposition to this bill if
you would raise your hand on the
zoom.
Okay.
I have one hand raised
Mr nail brown I'm gonna allow
you to.
talk.
Neal Bowen I'm sorry yeah this
is this is Dr Neal Bowen and the
director of the bureau L.
services division and this
morning I'm representing the
Human Services Department at
this hearing and the Human
Services department is is
speaking in opposition to the
bill because we are opposed to
any efforts to or any potential
barriers to restrict training
programs in the state as you
know we have under way an
expansion of graduate of that
medical education at this point
and we see this bill as being in
conflict with those efforts
so that that's the basic message
we do have some specific
language comments as well but I
can save those for another
moment if you prefer.
it if you have you might as well
do it right now you're the only
one speaking in opposition
if you wanna
It tell us what those language
changes might be.
All right.
Thank you.
I will go ahead in order
I'll point out is that in in
section eighty one of the
requirements execute agreements
with at least five different
clinical affiliates with an
inpatient bed capacity of a
hundred fifty or more licensed
beds there are only seven such
facilities in New Mexico eight
if the VA facility is included
and it's not clear from the
legislation is proposed whether
it is or not.
and it's so that seems like a
restrictive element which which
we are concerned about it's not
clear what additional advantage
would accrue if the.
If the.
Medical school itself already is
a large physical as a large
facility as.
As that UNM facility is.
moving down to eighty three the.
I'll just point out that Burrell
is as Dr Pierre Act certainly
knows and UNM already meet that
requirement to to existing
medical schools in the state.
In C. section C. one on page
two.
And Terry ambulatory care center
is not defined in in New Mexico
so we we would recommend that it
be defined in order for it to to
assure clarity at this point
C. two the the term medical
students we think is should
should best be medical residents
because by the time people go
into graduate medical education
of course there are already
graduated from from medical
school and doctors.
And then.
The section C. eight the about
that programmatic accreditor we
just point out that as of twenty
twenty.
The ACGME is already the twelve
that the national accrediting
body for both allopathic and
osteopathic medical schools so
we we think that section should
be should be struck.
And that would that would be the
end of my comments at this point
thank you very much thank you
doctor bone.
I'm next we will go there yes
I'd like for Mr Boeing to to
repeat if you can
what he said on section see I I.
Are you he was try to transport
extra something concerning the
medical student and I just
wanted to repeat that I am sorry
a lot of people here trying to
help me with my my devices
because it's still we're all
completely set up and so at some
distraction I like to hear where
he's from and repeat some of
what he said will quicken the
last and on the on the sections
thank you.
a doctor doctor bone.
Yes thank you madam chair and
representative assets at and
allow me to let me point out
that I'm from Silvercity so it's
welcome welcome here to to Santa
Fe as well
I'm speaking on behalf of of the
Human Services department at
this point and and the comment
about the changing this the
language from medical students
to medical residents is because
by the time people go into
graduate medical education
they've already graduated from
medical school and our doctors
there they're doing their
specialization at that point.
Okay thank you and and
Representative we will get to
questions if you have additional
questions you and later we will
we'll get.
Thank you.
I'm so in the attendees box if
you would raise your hand if you
are in support of this
legislation.
Can I and and just to be clear
you can raise your hand without
intent of speaking
but we're looking for those to
all who wish to register their
support.
Okay.
Yes I do have a hand button are
we just posed to physically
raise her hand.
So you don't have a button at
the bottom of your screen yeah I
don't have another experience
Representative looking at my
screen and I don't have.
So what I will add you to the
list to when it's time for
questions thank you madam chair
I think I don't have it at the
bottom of my screen but if you
check on participants it's at
the bottom there.
Yes it is thank you okay great.
I think it that depends on
whether you have the latest
version of zoom or not as to
where the hand is so will it
will get you so of the
Of the attendees who wish to
speak I have first
hi Kerry robin Brander.
Hello madam chair can you hear
me yes wonderful good morning
everyone my name is Kerry robin
brindar I am the registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
Medical Society we do support
this legislation we think that
it is important to have some
sort of guard rails around what
medical schools will be
operating within the state of
New Mexico and believe it is
incredibly important to have a
balance of our medical
professionals who will be
training our new residents and
need belief that this
legislation does reach that
balance and look forward to
continue conversation on the
legislation as it moves through
this committee and the process
thank you so much madam chair.
Thank you.
C. and the next I have
See I have I do not have and
just so folks know I had a
couple hands raised but just
Kerry who kept her hand raised
to speak.
All right so we will go to
questions from the committee and
first on my list is
representative Thompson.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you one what what day it goes up
what prompted this Legisla- is
there a fear that I mean I I
understand the intent but I
wonder why why why that why we
there was the need help to do
this at this time.
Representative H. guy goes do
you want us to answer the
question.
Please go ahead.
Okay I'm well the need came
about from relationships
that.
We see it happening in other
states around I heavy demand for
residency programs and not to
supply to keep up with that
demand and what that generally
did like in Texas for example is
they lost their retention rate
and when Texas implemented these
kinds of programs they were more
strict than what were looking at
doing
it it actually raise their
retention rate for their in
state doctors they went up to
the third in the nation I
believe and I can also defer to
doctor to doctor bill correct he
can give you some more
background on that Bill two
additional I'm sorry just on
that point madam chair so when
you say retention rate are you
saying retention rate for
residents for people who
completed their residency in
state staying in state it's okay
okay yes whether for case thank
you yeah I mean there you know
we worked really hard to take
this legislation other states
are a lot more restrictive and I
think the consensus in the in
the group of people who endorsed
it and then also on the part of
Burrell was that we don't want
to discourage new medical
schools but we want to make it
create an environment where they
come to New Mexico as a partner
in building residency programs
and not as
as an entity that would just
take residencies which has
happened in other states and so
bill do you have anything else
you'd like to add.
Thank you bill are and again
thank you Representative Thomson
for the question the as PR
stated the the the main issue
is.
Medical schools from outside the
state placing their students
here and our health care
facilities hospitals clinics and
so forth
and then those students really
maintaining their connection to
their out of state medical
school and then leaving the
state after that segment of
their training of.
Really again just just training
other schools say students
without contributing to the
ability to retain them.
By way of an in state residency
position of which obviously then
increases the retention rate for
practicing physicians to remain
in New Mexico after residencies
completed.
Thank you madam chair so I think
I'm getting more confused so in
terms of of of of that match how
I would I know that we have
schools from is it is it a
reciprocal thing how does that
work when when when medical
graduates are trying to match.
So the medical student
if you could address the chair
with your comments apologies
thank you madam chair thank you
so Representative Thomson madam
chair the the medical student
Max that they participate in the
is the process in the spring of
the fourth year just prior to
graduation where they match into
the residency of the specialty
of their choice primary care
residency such as family
medicine pediatrics internal
medicine OB Gen and so forth so
that match determines where
they're going to spend the next
three to seven years.
In that intermediate training
between medical school an
independent practice and so this
legislation looks set any
medical school that would like
to have student have it students
trained in New Mexico for
medical school we we are looking
for those medical schools to
help contribute to the creation
of new graduate medical
education spots or residency
spots for those students to
remain in the state and then
hopefully increase their chances
of of remaining in the state to
to practice independently after
residency.
So thank you madam chair and and
I'm just I I I guess I'm I'm not
down.
My and forward thinking and
glasses are not working this
morning so how would it say
let's just Judith Michigan state
just out of that that they
wanted they know that somebody
wanted wanted to match here how
how would they go about
creating of a spot in New
Mexico.
Madam chair all I'll defer to
you
correct again on this.
Yes madam chair and
representative Thompson so if
for instance Matt and Michigan
state wanted to.
I have one of its students match
into New Mexico they would
actually apply through the match
program for an existing
residency program that's already
created in New Mexico.
What what we are attempting to
do is to.
Reduce the the risk of a school
such a of we'll we'll stick with
the next Michigan state example
but if Michigan state wanted to
Develop an affiliation with a
hospital system in New Mexico
and have it students come be
trained and their hospital that
doesn't necessarily create any
increased likelihood of them
matching into residency program
and actually may I may create
competition for.
Teaching resources of that that
you amendment and and Burrell
and any other medical school may
use so we're asking that if
you're going to train your
students in the state but you
also help to work to create
additional residency positions
so that would so that they're
not just consuming teaching
resources they're actually help
helping to create.
Okay thank you madam chair for
that and thank you doctor for
that answer so essentially this
is more looking at at new slots
going forward as opposed to
spots that are are ready in the
match system okay okay that
clears it up for me thank you
madam chair that's all I have.
Thank you representative next I
have our Representative Gail
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair a lot of
my questions were answered
the doctor Representative
Thomson asked but one of the
main questions I have is.
other than repayment are we
making this more difficult.
Our for people to be accepted
into the residency here in New
Mexico.
I would madam chair I would say
no we're not making it more
difficult.
it to get the legislation
literally just establishes that
a there isn't it's there isn't
enough Jamie programs already in
New Mexico for UNM and and
morale are what it does is it it
focuses more on making sure that
if the school comes in here it
helps create more slots so that
it's less difficult.
And madam chair I could add to
that what it also does is put
provided standard that whatever
other colleges is coming into
New Mexico it would be the same
standard as the existing
colleges that are already
practicing here so it'll be
everybody would be on the same
level playing field.
Okay thank you madam chair
that's all.
Thank you our next I have
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair I hope not to be
redundant with the previous
questions and I just want to
here Dr Garratt
Can you confirm my question
which is
Is is the situation that New
Mexico only has so many.
Residency slots going forward
and.
In New Mexico I clearly want as
many of our graduates to provide
residency in New Mexico but
under the match system they may
find residency in forty nine
other states is that sort of
correct.
Madam chair representative
action thank you that that is
correct it is a if you talk
about residency slots as the
supply of the demand is ever
increasing as states many states
if we continue to expand the
number of medical schools and
graduating medical students if
if if they and we do not keep
pace with creating additional
residency slots to train those
students then you're correct
they do end up more likely to
train residency training and
match into residences and other
states which makes them less
likely to remain in New Mexico
practice.
Madam chair representative the
other dynamic is that if there's
too much demand on hospitals and
on our drive is to provide this
training.
And this is in part why the
hospital association Medical
Society support this legislation
it puts out a toll it takes a
toll on the entire system and so
it's a fine balance to keep the
right number.
The right amount of supply to
the demand without taxing our
health care system as a as a
whole and so right now we're
doing a great job building these
residencies you're meant UNM
Beacom hospo Association Medical
Society all of these groups have
joined together and are working
very diligently to create more
slots but right now there is the
we're in a delicate place any
any further taxing on the system
could set back all of the
initiatives and efforts that
have been done to date to build
a healthy and sustainable
residency program in the state
and so
I don't think any of the people
of endorsed this feel that this
is restricted it's just setting
a standard.
And it's a very low bar compared
to other states we didn't want
to exclude other medical schools
from come to the state if if we
get the system could handle it
and if they could participate as
a partner but that's this is a
this is a proactive effort I
think we seen and in the state
of New Mexico that when we're
reactive it's a lot harder to
fix the problem and to
proactively addressing.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for that answer madam chair just
one quick follow up it goes on
on after residency is over.
How do we.
Do we capture our New Mexico
residents.
Any other way than their their.
Their residency in New Mexico
has caused them to
become
in amburg with New Mexico is all
of us are order.
In other words are they free to
go to forty nine other states
upon completion of residency or
do we put golden handcuffs on
them in some way.
Anything short answer would be
appreciated.
Thank you madam chair and
representative they're free to
go where where they want but you
know I think once you've done a
residency you you establish
relationships with the community
with the people are and as you
said with our beautiful state
and so that's the part of the
motivation to keep people in New
Mexico and the yes really need
more medical staff.
Thank you thank you
representative that was only
confirmed what what I kind of
thought well I believe the
Representative your bill
improves our health care long
term by making New Mexico
attracted to not only of our
medical students being produced
in Los crucis in Albuquerque but
potentially elsewhere.
In drawing a greater number of
up practitioners to our state in
the future I don't see it as.
Raising of our to prohibited at
I see this as a.
The way in which to to build
part.
That will best serve right here
at a press thank you madam
chair.
Thank you and Representative
Lord you'll need to mute.
Thank you next I have
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you madam we have been panel I I
support this bill I was just
wondering
The suggestions that doctor bow
and has made if such as you know
making it so there's less than
a hundred hospitals that have
less than a hundred fifty get
specially like in our rural
areas could we open that up so
that we could have more
residency set up and and where
we need really need a lot of
Providers in our rural areas.
You madam chair I would say that
that's something you know this
is new information we have sent
arms several requests to HSD for
feedback on the legislation when
we are drafting it a couple of
times between drafting it and
now and this is the first we've
heard from HSD on this
legislation and so
I think I I know we have the
Education Committee before we go
to the floor so what I what I
would offer is that that it is
something we obviously have to
consider proposed amendments out
of fairness to all parties but
if we can get this bill out of
our health hi that's something
we could consider between health
and be Education Committee and
that would give us some time to
finesse the language in a way
that
that makes sense for what the
purpose of the legislation is
and and I would also like to add
that during the interim session
this legislation as it is was
endorsed by the inter have
committee as well as the Indian
Affairs Committee and so you
know we don't work on this
legislation for quite some time
to kind of get in the right spot
but again that doesn't mean that
we won't reach out to HSD and
have discussions are amongst the
the team and the endorsers to
see if there may be some wiggle
room there.
Thank you for that answer madam
chair in panel I think it's
really important and the
suggestions that they maybe even
though a little late
they might have been a little
busy with COVID and all these
issues that they sent they seem
to be very valid and and should
be I think address so if you
could
madam chair and and Madam with
if you could consider that four
year built.
I did it thank you madam chair
and representative I could build
correct weigh in on this a
little bit.
Is that okay on the go ahead.
Thank you madam chair just two
clarify the the the the the one
hundred fifty budget size is is
not intended to exclude anyone
from participating in graduate
medical education of the one
hundred fifty that size is of.
Is is intended to make sure that
a medical school placing it
students in our state for
training has a big enough
facility to provide adequate
clerkship resources so we're not
talking about residents in this
case we're talking about the
medical students who need to be
able to training in in different
clerkship areas so that they
would need a hospital service
with sufficient patients and
sufficient clinicians to do that
teaching.
So again not not intended to be
restrictive just intended to set
a of hello again a low
relatively low minimum standard
for an adequate size teaching
hospital for medical students.
On that point can I ask a follow
up question Representative
Ferrary yes please madam chair
so we know that both for medical
students and for increasing
residency slots we have some
potential in rural areas and
particularly if you're looking
at family practice or worse and
and not specialty
subspecialty practice
necessarily but
One of the hold ups and being
able to expand of those rural
hospitals to accepting medical
students and or creating new
residency slots which they could
do if they've never had a
residency slot that could create
one the ones that already have a
more limited and can't
necessarily add new US slots at
least not under Medicare
is that it takes an investment
of
resources to have the the
supervisors and and those
preceptors are I'm not sure of
the right term but the staff to
to help teach and support is it
possible.
That under this requirement if
you lowered the budget level
that it would mean that
they would have to.
Invest put their own
bring their all of additional
staff to to bear to teach our
indoor help support that local
hospital to a higher additional
of folks to dedicate to teaching
and so if you limit two hundred
and fifty I worry about the
potential to expand at but the
requirement would be that they
help invest in that in order to
create those slots and
opportunities.
Thank you madam chair I think
that's a really good point we
don't want to over saturate the
market and
we want to make sure that the
quality that the students are
are getting is what what the
other schools are providing and
by slide over saturating that we
just don't know what we do know
we don't have enough medical
staff as it is and so that was
the National Guard and to try to
do that.
Okay well we've been doing a lot
of effort over the last few
years to try and and develop a
process where we can
I invest in those local
hospitals to create new slot so
I just I'm not sure technical he
on the legislation whether this
would hamper that effort or not
but it is worse I thank you
pursuing with HSD because there
funding under Medicaid some
additional of slots
and so I and I hear that this is
this hundred fifty that is
related to medical students not
residency slots but
if there was an ability to
invest in putting more staff
there and the school was helping
to do that done I just want to.
Be sure that we aren't
are not.
That work were already closing
the door on our smaller rural
areas if there was appropriate
investment so just just a
thought thank you for letting me
are cut and Representative for
are you you still have the four
up thank you madam chair that
was all of my questions were
thank you madam chair eight
there should Bill Parratt.
Rest your concerns that a little
more is that right.
at yes although we've still got
a number of questions I want to
get all the questions out there
and I think that
Representative Ferrary
suggestion that you
work with HSD made with some and
and are trying to address some
of the issues that we raised
between now and the next
committee if it passes out of
this committee if it doesn't
pass out of this committee
Senator
do that bring it back but
so I I don't think we have to
answer all the questions right
now as long as we've raised
issues and and you all are
interested in in pursuing that
with with HSD.
That's all right.
I'm.
Representative Matthews.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee
I'm concerned to by the position
about of HSD that this is going
to restricted mission
how many.
How many slots do we currently
have.
Whoever wants to answer that.
Madam chair I will defer to bill
correct on this one again.
Madam chair and if if I may just
ask for clarification from
Representative Matthews.
When you ask about slots do need
residency slots or medical
students are I'm sorry I just
want to be should be sure I
address the.
I'm AT residency slots.
I I apologize I will have to to
follow up with that exact number
of.
I I can I can give you an
example that that we have
created well over the number
that this legislation is asking
for so we're were this
legislation would ask for one
residency position to be created
for every ten students in a
class of and and we have of.
We have created of.
Forty five of first year slots
for new residency positions it
for Burrell and that is based on
our enrollment of about a
hundred and sixty students so
so.
I while absolute numbers I don't
have the numbers for the entire
state I can tell you what we've
created since our inception and
that we are well above that one
to ten ratio.
Thank you madam chair
How many of those slots that
Perot has created the forty five
have been cannibalized.
Madam chair and Representative
Matthews
so the the residency spots
are are I am a.
I wouldn't say necessarily
cannibalize we have we have only
graduated our first year class
of the our first graduating
class I apologize as of may
twenty twenty and so we we have
a number of slots that other
states medical graduates have
matched into what we are what
what what we are concerned about
is the teaching resources of
medical students is what is at
risk for being cannibalized by
outside medical schools the
residency positions once they're
open they're actually open to
any states medical graduates to
match into.
And and then again after
residency those those graduates
of residency are more likely to
stay in state that medical
school graduates who trains in
in New Mexico for medical school
but then leaves the state to do
residency I I I'm sorry I know
it is a complicated system of
I'm I'm happy to help clarify if
if there are any follow up
questions to that I'm madam
chair
I would be I was asking these
questions based on a flyer that
and ms Faulkner sent me last
night and I have to say that I'm
not really totally clear what
this bill is doing or what
problem is trying to solve so
might cannibalize question came
because of the language that she
is in the flyer
and and I am concerned about
when HSD feels it is going to be
strict.
access and I hope that you all
will get with them and try to
solve these problems and be sure
that this is
going to be good legislation for
our our state I'm I'm sure that
your intent but I'm just kind of
concerned that maybe we're not
quite there so thank you.
Thank you representative next I
have
Let's see Representative
interosseous.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Gaydos
and all the members I.
I appreciate all the questions
are being asked
I have a few questions so.
My wrist I'm gonna ask you first
of.
Mr because I some of these have
been answered.
So if someone could answer I I
believe so this is for that said
that this is a less restrictive
than other.
Legislation is replaced and
others and other US states can
she explained to me the
difference of what we are.
In our a.
Deal compared to other states.
This legislation to part of the
state sorry.
I'm I'm sorry.
I'm sorry representative could
you repeat the question yes
my question is you said that
this is a less restrictive
policy than other states can you
explain to me what the
differences from what other
states are doing that are that
makes us less restrictive.
This legislation illustrious.
Madam chair representative to my
understanding and I think bill
can weigh and heavier on the
details on this the other states
all are are almost anti competes
and and that's not the intent of
this legislation
doctor per at do you want to
weigh in on Texas for example.
There how restrictive they are.
Certainly so Madam chair and and
Representative process the by
sample taxes regulates the
participation of out of state
medical schools coming into the
state with its medical students
through the Texas higher
education coordinating board
of which requires a completely
separate accreditation process
which is which is.
Periodic and has to be updated
every couple of years they also
can regulate or limit the number
of medical students that can
come in they can they can
restrict the terms in which a
medical school can affiliate
with.
Hospital and clinics systems
within the state of and and as
ms Faulkner commented really
becomes anti competitive by
comparison this legislation is
by no means intended to be anti
competitive it would we would
still welcome any school that
wants to increase the medical
student and resident workforce
in New Mexico all we ask is that
if a medical schools going to
places students in the state
that it actually help expand GMB
spots so that those medical
students have a better chance of
remaining in the state after
graduation for residents for
residency training and
ultimately independent practice
so we we feel this is much less
restrictive than the model Texas
has adopted and madam chair I
can add just a tiny bit warts
this discussion
the section of the bill that
pertains to the hundred and
fifty budget hawks Hospital
size.
The purpose of that it doesn't
restrict anyone from coming into
the state what it does is if a
medical school could not show
that at least five of these
hospitals of which there seven
are interested in and having of
in doing more residency programs
that would be a strong
indication like if the if the
hospitals hospitals of that size
say Hey listen we can't we can't
take on anymore resident we
can't take on anymore Jimmy
training that sends a message to
everyone I think that there
isn't room for that demand at
the time so really asking for
these five hospitals of that
size is kind of a way it's kind
of like a filtering system to
let the hospitals say whether or
not they can handle the demands
that a new medical school would
bring it so if if a medical
school came in I hospitals said
absolutely want to do business
with you that tells you that
this the hospitals can handle it
and that those big hospitals are
likely OWLETT then at the state
can handle it if I hospitals are
approach and I say no we can't
handle it that tells you that
the demand is too high for the
state and so that's kind of the
purpose of that it doesn't
restrict it actually what it
does is it says the hospitals
you have to provide the services
they're the ones who help
determine whether or not they
have capacity so it it really is
just a way of making sure that
if the medical school comes in
the state has the capacity and
the only people who can
determine that would be the
hospitals and the doctors who
would be providing the training
and so that's the intent of that
section of the
bill is it isn't restrictive
it's it's more a way of setting
up a filter system to say
whether or not there's a
threshold that can be hit that's
the right threshold at the time
the medical schools considering
coming into New Mexico.
That I hope to provide some
clarity.
To that point madam chair Mrs
Faulkner and to Representative
Ferraris point to continue with
that is it possible that rural
hospitals like where I come from
in Silver City we don't really
believe a sixty person that.
hospital and get forty miles
forty five miles up the road we
have Deming Luna county and they
have another I don't know what
their capacity is I would say
forty fifty budget also and then
we have a small clinic in the
boards for Exxon thank you know
the southwest area and I really
to be honest with you don't know
the capacity that be interested
in no which I hospitals they are
or that or the seven hospitals
that meet this criteria but my
question is is it possible for a
rural district because I am
concerned about rural districts
just like Representative Ferrary
mentioned I mean we we're we're
somewhat left out in a lot of
this stuff and I being that I'm
in the funeral business and so I
deal with a lot of positions and
I know that many positions Madam
goal of from our state and so
I'm always an advocate to in
trying to keep and retain of
positions so my question is if
if the southwest two or three
hospitals said they could
support a resident resident
maybe they said that I heard
earlier that having a hundred
fifty bed capacity.
Would mean that there was enough
patients to to to train that
person during residency if a
couple hospitals got together in
a rural area like such as the
south southwest New Mexico is it
possible for for that to happen
and if so how would that take
place.
What I would offer
Madam chair representative first
of all this legislation doesn't
prohibit the building of
residencies and GMB's throughout
rural hospitals in fact we
passed a piece of legislation
with Representative guy a ghosts
in twenty nineteen that actually
put together a border
stakeholders UNM of Beacom the
hospital association the primary
care association the primary
cares consortium and the medical
society to focus on building
residency programs in rural New
Mexico and so there is an effort
to do that and it's it's a
primary efforts to do so.
Right and so I that that's
something that if there's
concern about residencies being
built in rural New Mexico that
is on the radar as the priority
I especially around primary
health care and and a medical
mental illness and
there's a there's like the top
five needs of rural New Mexico
this board is focusing heavily
on creating residencies in rural
New Mexico and parting with the
state to do so so the
legislation we have on deck to
date it is not prohibitive in
any way to any building of
residencies in rural New Mexico
that you aren't necessarily
connected
it's it's more about saying if a
medical school comes into New
Mexico.
And it can't show that there are
five hospitals who normally
would easily take on more GME
programs and those I hospitals
are saying no we cannot take on
any more than that tells you
that there is to higher demand
for the state it but that
doesn't that doesn't it's not in
line with them staying because
that's happening we're not
building residents programs in
rural New Mexico that effort
continues with the stakeholder
group as a priority and so the
two aren't as connected as it
may be all in reading the
legislation they're actually
like two different initiatives
at with two different intents.
Chair Mrs Walker thank you for
your efforts in trying to help
rural New Mexico I mean here's
and and you probably I'm
probably
preaching to the choir but I can
tell you that in our areas we
have to drive.
two hours to get medical care
we're we're we're you know
there's a lot of us have to
leave even in those areas do not
have the medical care that we
need and have to even go one
five hours or to even another
state in order to receive the
the the care and so that's why
I'm advocating so much for rural
New Mexico true consequences
also their small hospitals one
of those that I worry about
Back to in and so that's comes
back to that hundred fifty
budget deal and I'm beating a
dead horse is that going to
cause any issue and and I don't
know that you and so my question
are are we able to participate
several hospitals in the
southwest area.
That would be able to
accommodate this legislation
that may be a medical school
would be able to maybe we need
to make an amendment to it so
that it allows partnerships.
To take place so that it's not
just so defined two hundred and
fifty.
That unit well I will let Madam
chair representative first of
all I I grew up in a hotel yeah
day and my mom just had to go
get her vaccine and she had to
drive from a whole to TA to get
her shot because she lives in
rural New Mexico and so I I
completely understand the need
for health care in rural New
Mexico as to getting answers
your question I will defer to
build correct because I know
that there's federal
laws around how GMB's are built
and who can build them so bill
do you want to take that one.
Happy to madam chair and and
Representative
The the thing I would point out
is that where GMAT and medical
student education come together
is that the level of practicing
physicians so that where your
training both residents and
medical students it's usually
the same doctors spending the
time doing the teaching and
supervising and so what what
this does is it insurers that we
are and again this this is
focused on medical schools and
their third and fourth year
medical students not not
necessarily the residents but
this is ensuring that the
medical students will be
training in a facility that has
sufficient faculty that is
something we answer to the
through our accreditors of the
U. N. M. an allopathic schools
accredited by a body call the
liaison committee for medical
education LCB we are accredited
by the the council on
osteopathic college
accreditation or coca so the
those accrediting bodies require
a ratio of sufficient faculty.
And so that's where this this
legislation just passed that a
medical school exploring putting
students in New Mexico has an
adequate affiliation with enough
hospitals that have access to
enough positions to be able to
train medical students without
further taxing the system it's a
very if you will delicate
ecosystem and and then our
experience when you're dealing
with community physicians
when when that resource get
stressed they they tend to
default to their patients
rightly so but then stepped away
from education as a cost and so
it's it really takes a you know
a critical mass of physicians
willing to teach medical
students and and that one fifty
is is just a way of ensuring
that there are enough teaching
resources for the students again
it's really not restricting us a
hospital smaller than one fifty
from getting residency spots a
little bit about post oranges.
It happened because I might've
confuse things holier and just a
clear I got it straight I think
in my in my mind now the hundred
and fifty is for medical
students who are still in school
to make sure we have capacity
and that number at while it may
or may not be hundred fifty is
also driven by accreditation
standards for the amount of of
faculty and preceptors that a
hospital may have so that would
be the thank maybe to track is
that to make sure the hundred
fifty is the right number in
according to accreditation
because you have to have a big
enough of facility for medical
students to get the broader not
abroad in office
exposure and it in in their
learning and you have to have
adequate staff.
Second on top is a graduate
medical education which is
residencies after they've
graduated medical school there's
and we and that is open actually
to and everyone across the
country so that's not being
restricted what is being asked
in this is that if you have a
medical schools it's going to
come and I can assure that
there's on off hospitals with
the capacity to meet
accreditation standards.
That they help us to expand the
slots for residencies which
takes an investment it takes us
staff being here and it and that
we have been trying to work on
separately trying to expand
those slots in small rural
hospitals by investing in those
slots
Chair is who pays for most
residency slots and they have an
odd rule that if you have so
many slots they have not
expanded those slides in a long
time so at a hospital that
already has residency slots
can't expand except New Mexico's
trying to look at Medicaid to
pay first and general fund
expand some of those slots but a
hospitals never had residency
slots like a small hospital in
Silvercity the in Silver City
awards for or combined hub of
hospitals
chair if you meet the criteria
will pay four slots new slots so
the only way we can expand our
new slots is to focus largely on
those rural hospitals and what
they're asking is that one if
you have students here medical
students.
that there's capacity to do it
we don't overwhelm the system
and and and we can meet they can
meet accreditation standards and
to they help us invest in New
Mexico and expand our residency
slots do I have it you madam
chair that is exactly okay what
thank you is it is thank you
very much madam chair thank you
so much for a.
Making that simple
well taken up that they didn't I
I really appreciate but again
madam chair
I have a question is are there
any colleges are currently
planning on coming to New Mexico
medical colleges coming to New
Mexico.
Not to my knowledge Madam chair
representative bill do you have
anything to say.
Madam chair representative not
at this time
the of course and and in our
networks in circles you know you
you you hear things and and
there are I will just say there
are predatory schools out there
that that will put their
students of you know kind of any
port in a storm type concept
There are there are schools that
are always looking but at this
time we are not aware of any
active negotiation between any
out of state medical schools and
in the in state hospital or
clinical affiliates.
Yeah.
And madam chair representative
one of the important things to
is that again if we wait until
there's a problem the damage to
the health care system will be
exponentially greater than if we
took a proactive step and send a
signal out to anyone is
considering doing business in
New Mexico that we we're looking
for partners in our health care
system and so this legislation
kind of sends a message out that
if you want to get licensed in
New Mexico you have to be a
partner to the other medical
schools and to the state of New
Mexico.
Madam chair and Mrs Faulkner Dr
press thank you so much for
giving all answering those
questions I have another
question for.
Mr Boeing
Sure are you still on the line.
Miss madam chair madam chair if
you still on the on the on the
zoom here so I can ask him a
question.
Or maybe he's not it is not it
love to be a he is yeah his his
if I can find them here we can
areas.
Okay you can ask adoptable on a
question thank you madam chair
Mr born.
The.
It I I heard your from solar
city apparently is your data
One of the work for the
insurance company is a.
Is that your family.
All righty then he may not but
I've all let's say there.
I've I didn't push the button
right there you go thank you so
much no Representative services
that's that's that's that's not
my family thank okay no worries
but we question is let me ask
you is it more the opposition is
a more about the language in the
bill I know you mentioned some
other things so it are there
amendments that that that.
Is it just a language but that's
me that question please Sir.
So that thank you for asking
Representative that madam chair
and and Representative of assets
and again I'm speaking on behalf
of the Human Services department
so it's not a personal concern
and and just for background I
actually was faculty on the on
to graduate medical education
program that there ended up
medical services before I came
to New Mexico so but that the
concern is at an inadvertent
restriction and the and
providing barriers to any
training programs in the state
we have we're very conscious
that we're we're currently
working on expansion of graduate
medical education we expect to
Fund forty six additional
positions within the next three
years so we we we would not want
to have any inadvertent barriers
to that continued expansion of
of of training here in New
Mexico.
Madam chair Mister born.
After the conversation that you
just heard the the back and
forth does that better settle
your mind.
So I very Madam chair
representative **** I very much
appreciate the recommendation
that we may need to the
proponents of the bill to to to
work things out I think there's
there's ample space for for
making progress there.
And madam chair on that point
yes
Representative dresses I I
appreciate you're concerned and
like the I think the the who are
Faulkner said we had reached out
had not received any kind of
information from from the
department of health and Human
Services and so of course we
want to be partners we want to
make sure that that legislation
does move forward and and and
that we can be working with our
partners to make sure that we
ease those concerns but like I
said this is the first time we
are hearing about this it did go
through the inner committee over
the summer and none of this was
raised we also had years Jan
they were all positive and so
now that we have some some
issues on the table we would
like to still continue to to
move this legislation forward
and in that gap time between
this committee and the next
committee is are some additional
language that needs to put in
there we would be open to having
those discussions.
Thank you madam chair
Representative okay listen I
think I appreciate that very
much and I just I just want to
listen to all all sides of this
and make sure that it is it is
doing the best for our state and
that it is so wonderful provided
that you're trying to for and so
one last thing madam chair
Mister Boyd.
Did you have anything else to
add.
To the comments I it seems like
Representative stables very open
to working with you and so I
just want to see yeah so I I've
disabled is talking has talking
I think he he's representing the
department but not the
negotiators so I I think he's he
has said that
they're they're willing to to
meet and talk through any
concerns thank you madam chair
Representative Gaydos and.
Which would be a good idea if
you want your bill to be signed
so.
Thank you so much bill thank you
next I have and I'll just remind
you the panelists were on our
first bill and we have at work
an hour and a half in and we've
cut we've got hopefully five
more bills to go in an hour so
if you could keep your
comments to the point
Representative bash.
Thank you madam chair and the I
have a question I believe for
Representative guy Ecosse
the University of New Mexico
medical school is not
represented here today are they
on board with this bill.
Madam chair and representative
my understanding is that UNM is
not opposed to the legislation I
don't know that they
I know that there has been
discussions and I think that
they are neutral on it as of
right now.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
And madam chair just briefly I
UNM did do an FIR and that FIR
reflects the same conclusions
that we came to in drafting this
legislation.
Thank you.
All right I will entertain a
motion.
Madam chair I move would do
passed.
Thank you.
I'll second okay I have a motion
to do pass and a second source
you want to call the roll.
Madam chair I just had a quick
question you yes Representative.
When they when they make that
motion of to pass does that
include the recommendations that
that work with now now that's on
good faith that they're going to
do that before the next
committee and if they don't then
we have an opportunity when it
gets to the floor.
Right raise any additional
concerns about that.
Sure thank you.
Okay our.
That motion Representative
Ferrary okay.
Rep Phelps Anderson yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative need but I'll
have.
Yes.
Representative.
Bash yes.
Representative.
Mr.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Yes.
Did she say yes.
Yes.
Representative Roger Montoya
yes.
representative Louise that off
us.
You're on mute.
Yes I think.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Vice chair representative John
Murray yes.
Madam chair representative
Deborah Armstrong yes and
Representative Lord is
continuing to have some I. T.
problems so marker excused.
Total of ten.
Yes.
All right thank you
Representative guy a ghosts
house bill twenty three has past
this committee twenty three just
zero and I I trust that you'll
have some follow up
conversations with the Human
Services Department.
You said twenty three does zero.
Zero house bill twenty three.
What is what we're all ready or
not two or three hands in the
air so giving you extra boost
right thank you madam chair and
I appreciate the healthy debate
we'll definitely keep working on
the bill and with the next
committee I I suspect we will
have a made a couple changes so
I appreciate that the time today
thank you very much thank you
everyone.
Thank you.
Okay next we have Representative
Matthews so for two bills so we
don't have to move the sponsor
and but Representative Matthews
you can let us know if you have
for house bill thirty four some
experts you want us to move
over.
Madam chair yes I do and Dr
Janet Simon please.
Can you hear me yes so we'll get
her moved over to a panelist
thank you.
There she is anyone else at not
for this bill thank you madam
chair right Grove okay.
And.
Go ahead okay madam chair
members of the committee
HB thirty four is a bill that is
designed to make podiatry
services covered by various
forms of private insurance
companies are more affordable
and us more accessible to
patients.
Problem we're trying to stop
with this legislation is that.
It relates to copays and copays
are set by the private insurance
companies not by the doctors and
the way the the reason this is a
problem is that.
The insurance companies are
still setting for basic office
visits for example
dissect.
Our.
The the insurance company may
set the copay for a visit
forward to a primary care
provider at for example twenty
to twenty five dollars and but
because a podiatrist is a
specialist the insurance we're
getting feedback from something.
We get it okay
but because the podiatrist is
considered a specialist the
insurance company may said the
Kate the the copay for up to a
hundred and twenty five dollars
for an office visit.
And the provider is not paid
more the insurance company is
paid more by the patient that's
the impact of these copays and.
This bill seeks to solve that
problem.
Which.
Which that serves to
because patients not to want to
come to see the podiatrist by
not allowing the insurance
companies to require podiatrist
to collect high copays for
office visits that are no
different than the services that
would be provided by a primary
care provider.
And
it.
The the coding which is now the
bills are determined of for a
service that might be provided
by a
nurse practitioner primary care
provider is to to work on an
ingrown toenail is no different
than what it but doctors would
use for the billing.
And Dr Sam I will explain all
that more than I more than I
can.
Anyway this approach of.
using of to increase
affordability and accessibility
was used in connection with
physical therapy services in H.
B. eighty one Representative
twenty nineteen during the same
think restricting high copays
for primary care visits are are
I'm sorry to the same level as
primary care visits
in twenty nineteen in order to
increase affordability and
accessibility and Dr Stannis
Simon is a board certified
podiatrist and the executive
director of the New Mexico open.
How do you address medical
association I'm we have
circulated a handout which
explains a little bit about what
podiatry is
and she will explain further
what this bill and the impact of
the bill thank you.
Maybe maybe maybe Dr seven
proceed please yes please doctor
Simon thank you madam chair and
committee members I wish to
start first with just some few
facts specific to put it trick
Medicine.
the PM's Dr podia Ettrick
medicines are defined as
physicians along with M. dis and
do you know those by the Social
Security Act title nineteen
known as Medicare.
Similar to M. D.'s indios de
PM's complete four years of
medical education after
undergraduate it is are
completed then three years of
residency training with
opportunities for further
specialty fellowship training.
As a handout identifies do PM's
our primary care team members
wear off for the health of our
patients many who have chronic
diseases such as diabetes
peripheral vascular disease and
are threatening is.
We treat conditions such as foot
sores and ulcers
in unfortunately many of our
diabetics that need close
monitoring also weekly if
patients are not able to have
home care nursing other family
members accessible to perform
basic dressing changes.
As you all know New Mexico has
very high rate of diabetes
here's a few stats to put that
in perspective.
two hundred forty one thousand
diabetics were identified in
this was our twenty seventeen
eight out of ten of the of the
dolls were aware that they were
diabetic and that's
approximately fourteen percent
of the population it is the
sixth leading cause of death in
New Mexico.
Greater than six hundred
thousand New Mexicans are
identified as pre diabetics.
Three out of ten were aware that
they were in this pre diabetic
state.
Diabetes and pre diabetes cost
an estimated two billion dollars
in New Mexico each year.
The break down of my own patient
population is approximately
sixty percent of my patients are
diabetic and fifteen percent are
in the pre diabetic category all
of these approximately ten
percent are being treated for
chronic what's.
So as Representative Matthews
indicated you know why are we
pursuing this.
Our our current
Cost sharing structure is a
financial barrier to our
patients many resulting in
missed appointments and lack of
subsequent care and monitoring.
Current pay Rick co pay ranges
very significantly from the
twenty dollars is mention that
often is what a primary care
provider co pay may be up to as
high as a hundred twenty five
dollars and is.
During the COVID this has
definitely increased the
negative impact on our patients.
R. H. B. thirty four aims to
increase access to care for the
patient and will not change how.
Podiatrist currently provide
care for patients are interested
in pursuing this legislation is
to provide timely quality
patient care.
Copays are contractual
relationships between the
individuals and their insurance
companies.
Physicians per their contracts
with the insurance companies are
not able to waive these
copayments.
I just wish to give a quick
examples that might help with
picturing what we're talking
about so a common scenario is we
have a fifty five year old
diabetic male who shows up to
their PCP with the server week
history of a school and ingrown
toenail the P. C. P. refers a
patient to see us for further
care and at that time prescribed
oral antibiotics for the
infection hello.
Patient is responsible for the
co payment to the P. C. P. of
twenty dollars.
Asian is seen by the podiatrist
within the week for the and grow
Tony a problem and treatment
includes a temporary nail
procedure.
Okay for this visit is seventy
five dollars.
The TPM advises the patient to
follow up in approximately two
weeks and that is based on the
fact that this patient was
identified as being at high risk
meaning the patient had a lack
of sensation in their feet which
access is is known to increase
their risk for continuing
problems.
The patient said.
I can't afford to come in for
continuing visits and so
essentially said.
You know I'll call if needed.
We know this often increases the
rest for this patient it is
recommended by the American
diabetes association
international workgroup on
diabetes that these high risk
diabetic feeder screen every six
months and if problems such as
ingrown toenails are identified
every three months.
You're on mute Representative.
Sorry it'll be it'll be the
question of most frequent
question or statement of the
years began nearly yet.
I wanted to add to what Dr Simon
said is that this bill was
endorsed by the NM and help
health and Human Services
Committee this summer
and as I said before it's a it's
a
it's a way that's been used
before in order to be sure that
people are getting the health
care they need
and so we would stand for
questions.
Thank you so first we'll go to
the audience and I will ask that
those in opposition.
Of this legislation of house
bill thirty four to raise your
hand.
Opposition.
Okay and if you wish to speak
leave your hand up and I'll call
on you.
Hey front more.
Morning madam chair can you hear
me yes thank you.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Brent Moore and I'm a
registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance plans
that's a national trade
association of health plans and
given my representation of a hip
I tend to be in front of this
committee quite a bit so some of
the other members of the
committee of our me over the
years and I look forward to
working with and talking with
each one of you as we go through
this process you madam chair if
you'll indulge me I may cover
some staff as an initial matter
for the committee that tends to
come up over and over again so
please please bear with me
as it relates that to house bill
thirty four it stands in
opposition to the bill and we
stand in opposition to the bill
not because we don't want people
to get health care not because
we don't want people to have
coverage in fact we want people
to have coverage and we want
people to to get the medical
care that they need our issue is
more with the controlling of
copays and the benefit design
that health plans are to come up
with to try to provide that
coverage and to provide try to
provide that care I did some
discussing with some of the
members of some of a have some
members about where these copays
are for these types of services
and the the information that I
had is limited but I will tell
you
for the most part primary care
copays are about twenty five
dollars and the diet the
podiatrist co pay is about
seventy five the expert witness
said that there were some higher
ones and I will acknowledge that
that could be the possibility
but I think she mentioned that
the highest one was a hundred
twenty five dollars so we're
talking about a difference
primarily of about fifty dollars
and sometimes of two hundred
dollars that amount.
Is significant to the patient
but relatively small when you
compare the numbers that you
will see in the FIR for the the
the prices of the procedures and
I would note in your FIR the OSI
provided you some figures on the
last page the average charge for
surgical procedures to one
hundred dollars and if you
include other procedures that
can be up to seventy five
hundred.
So the numbers associated with
some of these procedures are
quite large and we're focusing
in on costsharing that is at the
the the.
Much it's it's very small in
comparison to the cost of the
procedures the reason why that
is significant is when you start
talking about limiting
costsharing what you're doing is
you're saying for everyone who's
in this group we want to push
those extra costs those extra
dollars into premium that is
that can be significant we take
those small amounts and push
them across the board and a
premium and so what it means is
for everyone who's not paying
for these procedures you get to
share a bit of the the the pain
so to speak of a spreading the
rest and spreading across across
all of those particular members
now.
As a subset podiatrists are just
one specialty and obviously
there are just that one segment
but the issue with this type of
bill and the reason why a is
opposed to it is that they are
one specialist and you can
Google all list of all different
types of specialists that are
out there I did that in the last
couple days and I I can say that
the next bill down the pipe
could be dermatologist or
endocrinologist nephrologist
oncologist I mean the list kind
of goes on and on and on each
one of those doctors would come
in and tell you the services
that we provide our critical
they are so so important to our
patients that we need to be
treated just like primary care
physicians and I can say that
this is just the beginning of
he's a set of bills were each
specialist comes in and says we
need to special treatment right
now the structure of most plans
is that primary care is a very
low copay because we want our.
Policy holders to come in and
get.
Primary care in we incentivize
that to the greatest extent
possible we believe that the co
pays we have for specialists are
reasonable and reasonable based
on the numbers that I cited to
you and what you can see also in
your FIR is that the
superintendent of insurance the
statement is in the fiscal
implications of the bill I'm
looking at the third sentence in
the big paragraph it says the
OSI states that it's unable to
provide an estimate of the
increased cost but believes it
might be substantial plan design
that prohibited costsharing for
these services and anything
above what is required for
primary care visits would be
would increase insurance
premiums in a significant manner
and so we're we're looking at a
potential cost increase in we're
looking at spreading that risk
across a population that the
thing that I would also note
madam chair and I'm getting to
the Indians when we look to
these types of bills that you
would likely see in this
committee one thing we have to
take into account is how large
our Medicaid population is in
New Mexico the numbers that you
guys heard I believe it was a
couple days ago was it the
Medicaid population is close to
nine hundred thousand forty
three percent of the population
of New Mexico this bill would
not impact them the reason why
is the public assistance act is
not listed within this bill so
for that large population this
piece of legislation does
nothing so the other part that I
would note is these are these
are the numbers that we've
gotten from the superintendent
of insurance previously when
you're looking at the insurance
code you're looking at the
populations that are under that
that by coverage in a regulated
under that it's approximately
three hundred and fifty thousand
that number is not necessarily
up to date but it's the last
best guess we have from the
superintendent so when you start
looking at this piece of
legislation.
Your impacting those three
hundred fifty thousand lives
plus the folks to get coverage
under the state health care
purchasing Act so that could be
another I'm I'm not even gonna
gas with that populations but
it's less than a hundred
thousand and we're really
looking at fifteen to eighteen
percent of the population that
are affected by this piece of
legislation so it further
restricts our ability as health
plans to design products it
affects a limited population and
we believe that it's just the
beginning of more bills making
very compelling arguments about
the needed services by pushing
costs into premium with that
madam chair I really appreciate
your indulgence and apologize
for taking so long.
Thank you Mr more next I have
Marvel shows.
Good morning madam madam chair
can you hear me yes.
Yes this is more the shepherds
and I am the lobbyist for Blue
Cross blue shield of New Mexico
and for the reasons stated by
Mister Moore we also stand in
opposition of house bill thirty
four we believe that specialty
services reimbursed at PCP rates
will increase costs to all
insured population and as Mister
Moore stated leading out a
critical part of the population
in New Mexico which is in
Medicaid population.
also just to reiterate that the
OSI did say
that they can not really even
ascertain what the cost would be
to reiterate that there would be
significant so we ask you to
please The standing opposition
of this legislation thank you.
Thank you
Our long.
I'm and now if we can go to
Those in support if you would
raise your hands please.
Anyone in among the attendees
who wishes to raise their hand
and support.
Time.
Are we have no one that has
Raise their hand to provide
testimony and in support so we
will go to the committee for
questions and.
see if anyone has questions
representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you so much for the presentation
I have to stand with the
opposition on this one of the
questions I have is our
specialty
Doctors reimbursed more than
primary care physicians.
Can anyone answer that and maybe
Madam chair knows the answer.
I don't
miss Simon.
Yeah let me saying there are.
Contracting differences
Often.
Individually contracts made very
however
It it's based off of often
Medicare fee schedules and that
C. schedule is the same across
you know all providers under
Medicare.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for that answer I you know
to go to a specialty doctor you
have to have a referral so with
that referral go away as well.
Madam chair I will say that
that's not necessarily always
the case in regards to needing a
referral to see a specialist
It varies depending on the
insurance is in many insurances
that I'm familiar with currently
does not mandate a specific
referral from a primary care
doctor.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you for your answers on that one
I'm I I
I don't have a lot of other
questions but I I tend to to a
I agree with Mister Moore that
it's going to include you know
this is the first of many that
were come in front of us and I
appreciate your question are
your answers to my questions
thank you.
Thank you.
Next I have Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam chair
madam chair I was going to ask
Miss the good doctor Simon
Let's see what percentage of the
patients.
Is there such a thing as a as a
percentage madam chair of the
patients who seek care from a
podiatrist.
Art on Medicaid.
I would I would think that of
many of the patients seeking
care from a podiatrist are set
the same as seek other forms of
health care from other
practitioners and that there is
a very high percentage on
Medicaid.
Madam chair I would probably say
the patient population
you know sort of mimics what
primary care doctors averages in
New Mexico I mean we we see
clearly all mix as a handout
identifies.
Probably the patient
ages are a bit older in our
offices so we would see a higher
percentage of Medicare.
Patience then attention Lee just
a straight Medicaid population.
Thank you very much for that
answer then if I could I'd asked
Mr Moore.
He indicated that Medicaid is
not impacted by the passage of
this bill would Medicare copays
be impacted by the passage of
the bill.
No.
Thank you yeah it would be no
and Medicaid no because I don't
pay any copays on Medicaid.
Thank you and and Mr I'm gonna
just conclude with this remark
if I could and it's my concern
that that
that.
Going forward practitioner I.
Specialty by specialty.
Knowing that it it doesn't
affect of virtual the the
largest health care system in
New Mexico which which is
Medicaid.
And.
I suspected maybe Medicare might
be second I just I have a real
concern about whether or not
legislating
these copays outside of the
marketplace is a good idea going
forward thank you madam chair.
Thank you next I have
Representative Thomson thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative Matthews for for
this we did a few years ago or
physical therapy and and I I
heard what Mr Moore said and it
comes down to that.
Which you you have a person with
with diabetes and let's say
their copay is fifty dollars to
see a podiatrist they can't
swing it so they don't.
And they end up with the store
they end up with an amputation
which is our surgery and then
we're paying for therapies.
For.
The program was and we're
supporting we're paying for
prostheses it is not I mean you
could say what's going to kill.
We know that that's not true
and we know that if you look at
it spending in a twenty five
having a copayment twenty five
dollars less than it is
currently it when you compare
that to the two hundred thousand
four hundred thousand dollars
you're going to pay an extra for
the care of a person as an
amputee it doesn't even make any
sense so so sometimes we get we
hear things that sound oh my
gosh but stop and think stop and
think how much money the
insurance companies that tax
payers ex that are ex that are
are going to save over the long
haul so that's all I have thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative and yes
I the other P. T. on the
committee I have to say I agree
with that the consequences of
not in particular treating
diabetics is of far far far more
costly that will also impact the
premiums ultimately if they are
hospitalized and do amputation
of first the toe and then the
foot and then the rest of the
lake and and all the therapy and
we have that goes with that so a
couple of those cases makes all
the makes up all the difference
in and lower copays on of for
everyone else so
I will entertain a motion.
Madam chair I move it to pass
have a motion passed and the
second from Representative bash
would you call the roll please.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
No.
Britney but.
Yes.
Representative bash yes.
Representative.
Stephanie lord.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Yes.
For.
Roger Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Luiz loss off.
No.
When my vote I was having
trouble with.
With beauty might with the
asking a question of what and
wanted to ask a question I'm
sorry madam chair.
Explain your.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
I would Joanne Ferrari
Representative Ferrary is
excused on Representative
Anderson is back and we can sure
try Representative board again
right.
Chair Deborah A. Armstrong yes.
Representative Phelps Anderson
no.
This
is Representative Lord are you
able to hear us I just want to
make sure.
That you're not just accidently
muted.
I know she's been having trouble
there there go ahead
Representative Lord.
Okay.
Six.
And three now.
just a moment
I thought the representative
lord tried to on mute.
I I haven't heard.
I'm while I'm watching I thought
she unmuted for a moment so.
Representative Lord.
Okay so be excused is I know
she's having a lot of I. T.
trouble.
Okay you want to repeat the
votes again place R. six R. yes
and three hundred no and one is
excuse.
to should be excused
Ferrary as well okay yes thank
you okay Representative Matthews
set with six to three our house
bill thirty four passes the
committee.
I thank you madam chair members
of the committee okay now we're
on to your house bill thirty
five chair of the I'm sorry
Representative Representative
you want to explain your vote is
very madam chair I'm sorry I
wasn't able to ask my questions
but of course one of my biggest
concerns is is is diabetes is
something that is that is is
prevalent in our and and.
In our community and especially
not my area I see it's the
silent killer and so I I
definitely.
And.
Person that stands up for people
diabetes but what my biggest
fear of of this is the increase
in premiums all together for.
The the for.
New Mexico and I had a lot of
concerns.
That it was going to help some
of the Medicare Medicaid
recipients if they were going to
be left out I I I thought those
would probably be the people
that would be in most need of
because of their fixed incomes
you know and so that was a.
Was a little bit nervous to me
that that that's not they're not
included
I will say that the doctor's
going to receive their their
their.
Payment whether it's up front
again I just a I'm afraid of the
increase in premiums for for the
rest of the people on what those
numbers would be.
Thank you and just as a learning
experience Representative
Medicaid is not included because
Medicaid recipients pay no
copays or costsharing so there's
no need to include them they
already have no copays and on
chair on the federal
government's Medicare sets those
that costsharing we have no
ability to include them are you
madam and I again madam chair I
was having trouble with with
hearing and and I wasn't able to
so I miss that and I apologize
thank you that's alright that's
alright thank you.
okay Representative Matthews
and of which so we'll move
doctor Simon out.
Ellison and who did you want to
as your experts on house bill
thirty five actor Shannon Allen
and Dr Satcher pool.
You please repeat the names one
more time.
Dr Channell Alan and Dr Satcher
cool.
And I don't see Shannon.
She was me earlier.
Now.
Not Sharon Berman.
Want to take her back we're
looking for Shannon and she was
she was
there where it says on attendees
Allison says to Marian Matthews.
There you go.
Okay there should there she is.
So here's here's a lesson for
for those of us don't send don't
send anyone your link because it
put some and is your name so
we have everyone else a go to
the calendar
but we know who you are.
So go ahead Representative.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee H. B. thirty five
is also a bill that is going to
help you sure that New Mexicans
and particularly those in rural
parts of our state have access
to critical health care services
that are provided by certified
registered nurse and this and
this is this or C. R. in
eighties but this does not
involve insurance in any way.
C. R. N. A.'s are part of
an extraordinary pool of talent
that's been developed in the US
to help reduce rising healthcare
costs and provide more
providers.
I know you were only and the
okay this pool of talent is made
up of registered nurses who with
advanced specialized training
become certified to be primary
care nurse practitioners
midwives and are in and some
become C. R. N. eight these
providers work independently in
their area of expertise
exercising their professional
judgment within their area
especially and certification.
New Mexico recognize C. R. N.
A.'s in twenty oh two as a
separate
The.
Group and they have been
practicing as independent
providers since then H. B.
thirty five amends the C. R. N.
A. statute to codified this
reality and today to help
explain the situation is Dr
Shannon Allen she is a C. R. N.
A. in Hobbs in Lea county and
president of the New Mexico
association of nurse and this is
and Dr Satcher pool who is the
executive director The New
Mexico board of nursing and with
that I would
turn it over to them to explain
further.
Madam chair and members of the
committee thank you so much for
having me here today I'd like to
tell you a little bit about
myself in my profession so that
you'll be able to be well
informed and be able to make
your decisions so I am Shannon
Allen I'm a certified registered
nurse anesthetist I'm a
government relations chaired the
past president of the New Mexico
association of nurse
anesthetists I've been a nurse
for thirty three years and do an
anesthesia for twenty of those
and then I had ten years of
critical care experience before
that I have a doctorate and I've
been around twenty thousand
anesthetic safely in a rural
area practicing in an
independent manner where do you
see R. N. H. work in New Mexico
well we work everywhere that
Anastasia's provided in the
operating rooms in surgery
centers we give anesthesia for
women who labor at we get it
from pediatric to elderly in
ages we do more we management
regional anesthesia and recently
during the pandemic we have
stepped up and done some
critical care management with
our colleagues.
What fashions do C. R. N. A.
works in our state well we work
collaboratively in a team models
with physician anesthesiologists
we work on teams and are down
here in rural areas especially
where maybe we have a physician
anesthesiologist but they're in
their own room doing their
anesthesia and we're in our room
do and anesthesia independently
from them and then we also have
also see orders eight groups in
New Mexico at meaning that there
is not a physician
anesthesiologist in that group
also Mr.
What do you see our age the
table across the country fifty
three percent of rural areas are
only siRNAs taking care of their
patients the most cost effective
model of Anastasia's siRNAs
working solo and many hospitals
right now we're seeking recovery
from the pandemic benefit from
those cost savings so how do we
compare to physician
anesthesiologists studies have
proven equal safety outcomes
across all models of the
anesthesia delivery.
In C. R. A.'s working all
quarters of New Mexico would we
are trusted by our surgeons are
C. E. O.'s patients our teams
and we have sent some letters
that have gone to your email and
support from different
professions like that.
So how still thirty five is an
effort to update our nurse
practice act to reflect our
current practice.
As R. C. R. A. practices of all
our language we came antiquated
and we want to correct it to
matches according to the
National Council of state boards
of nursing sometimes
modification of practice acts
are just the formalization of
changes that have already
occurred in education practice
within a profession due to
investments in research
technology and health care to
then and that is exactly what is
happened here.
And we're wanting to update and
language so that it matches the
way that we have been practicing
independently for the last
eighteen years since two
thousand two when governor Gary
Johnson made an executive order
saying that see earnings could
work to be able to be all and
we've been followed up the nurse
practice act and said that we
would have collaboration with
other physicians in teams.
And
It gives you a big long list of
different professions that work
in collaboration with Dennis
podiatrist all of that we don't
think it's necessary to name any
particular position in that
thing I think we can say all
health care providers in teams
collaborate together but there
are some areas down here in the
rural areas of the state where
frequently it's just a C. R. J.
doing the anesthesia there may
be times that might work out
there working we may be the only
advanced practice nurse or
physician even in the hospital
and I can so we think it's
really important to also have
that recognition that we are
independently working as well.
And one thing about this bill we
have put in the language to make
it very clear that the facility
is not going to be forced to do
anything they don't want to they
have a choice they can either
let us continue to work
collaboratively as we do now or
if you're one of those areas it
really depends on your C. R. NH
working independently they can
write it in their policy and say
that there C. R. NH work
independently so they have a
choice we're not forcing anyone
that's the good thing to be
about it in we've already been
working for two decades
independently and have proven
ourselves safe many of our C. R.
now searing age even sit on the
hospital medical staff
committees and peer review teams
like I do and I have a vote on
the medical staff and so we
really have evolved and what
we're wanting to do is to catch
up our language and
thank you for your time I hope
to be able to answer any
questions so that I can help you
make an informed decision.
Thank you doctor Allen such a
pool did you want to add.
I just would like to madam chair
members of the committee thank
you I would just like to add to
that the New Mexico board of
nursing is in support of this
bill we have been working with
the New Mexico association of
nurse anesthetists for a year
and a half now on the drafting
of this bill so I'm with that I
stand for questions.
Thank you.
Okay I'm.
Representative Matthews are you
ready to go.
Two questions yes madam chair I
would just add to things of this
bill was endorsed by the inter
Committee during the summer and
in addition it is endorsed by
the New Mexico is supported by
the New Mexico hospital
association which I think is
important because as as.
As Dr.
It education and mentioned
of the hospitals and the health
care facilities it is set the
final rules on this.
And with that I would did.
Stand for questions thank you so
we'll go to the audience and I
would ask that those in
opposition raise your hands.
Okay and I will call on you if
you wish to make a comment
otherwise we have noted
one two three four hands raised
in opposition merry Bill strand
did you want to make a comment.
Yes thank you madam chair can
you hear me yes.
Thank you good morning my name
is merry bill strand and I'm the
president of the New Mexico
society of anesthesiologist I've
been practicing anesthesiology
for over ten years in a safety
net hospital here in New Mexico
so I can appreciate the
complexities of providing
quality healthcare to all New
Mexicans.
I'm here to voice my opposition
house bill thirty five that
removes physician involvement
from the Anastasia Care.
Before I attended medical school
and residency in anesthesiology
I was actually an elementary
school teacher and the south
valley for Albuquerque public
schools.
During my years as an elementary
school teacher I worked with
teaching assistants in the
classroom.
The teacher's assistants that I
worked with were outstanding
caring professionals they work
with me daily and I oversaw
their work with the children
they care for the students as
much as I did and we were
committed professionals.
As class sizes increased and
educational needs growth all.
Never in my ten years as a
teacher did I see the
administration or government
decide to elevate teaching
assistants to the role of a
certified teacher.
The administration government
understands that the quality of
education relies on providing
outstanding certified teachers
for students.
No parent would rest
jeopardizing their children's
educational future by not having
them talk by the most qualified
educator.
That's why and the standard that
the government would consider
jeopardizing patient state
safety by eliminating position
involvement and Anastasia Care.
Being an anesthesiologist means
that many people do not fully
appreciate what I do for work.
But all people understand that
what I do is provide critical
care and responsible for keeping
patients alive and safe during
serious health procedures.
I believe you wouldn't
jeopardize your health or your
family's health by not having
most qualified provider involved
in your anesthetic chair.
I also think you would want the
most qualified provider for your
constituents to.
I strongly recommend voting no
for house bill thirty five and
preserving since position
involvement and anesthetic Care.
Based on the vision language to
the nurse practice act.
Yes Lee in two thousand two when
governor Jared Johnson to opt
out certified nurse anesthetists
had to collaborate with the
procedural est or the M. D. at
least.
So by leaving that language in
there does not limit patients
access to care any time you
deliver an anesthetic you also
have an empty surgeon podiatrist
who's there to collaborate with.
And I don't see any drawback
from having input in many
professionals for the best
patient care thank you.
Thank you I'm.
Next I have hi David Siegel.
Can you hear me say we go yes
so I'm also speaking in
opposition to this bill.
you know doctor bills drafted
nicely summed up
our concerns I would like to
point out that independent
serenade practice in the state
that has been going since the
opt out occurred but the
language in the current nurse
practice act was adopted in
order to implement the opt out
would simply allow the nurses to
bill for their services without
a physician's supervision.
yes my feeling that we should
have a two tiered quality
in this state for Anastasia Care
one that one tier for rural
areas there's just a nurse
anesthetist and another for
urban areas where there may be
more physicians involved
there things can happen very
fast in anesthesia it's not like
primary care or even hospital
based medicine were nurse
practitioners are can work very
well independently in Anastasia
things happen very very quickly
so nice with devastating results
as that has occurred in some C.
R. N. A. based practices
recently so I think it's you
have to be very careful before
you removes any kind of
collaboration language was put
in there for a reason when the
nurse practice act was altered
in order to implement the opt
out by doctors are are by gender
jobs.
And with that I will turn it
back thank you for the
opportunity to speak thank you.
Next I have
Cassie Lang this.
I hope I didn't but your name.
And if I'm because we are all
almost have to go to the floor I
would appreciate
not repeating previous testimony
but if you have additional
comments to add.
Thank you madam I am traveling
miles and it's a good morning to
both to everyone madam chair and
committee members appreciate
your time and I'll try and be
quick about this I am a
certified anesthesiologist
assistant at the university of
New Mexico and work within an
anesthesia care team which is
one hundred percent physician
line like to start by once again
Canada stating that
indices is a practicing medicine
not of nursing positions are
heavily trained not to just
treat to diagnose where the
heavy portion of sanity training
involves a training of treatment
Anastasia is not like primary
care nurse practitioners can
practice independently with time
on their side to slowly figure
out how to best treat their
patients and things happen very
quickly and potentially with
devastating results in the
operating room and diagnosis
must happen quickly in order to
provide proper treatment.
Of the patients.
So please understand that CNA's
and nurse practitioners are not
equivalent.
In two thousand nineteen a
formal scientific poll was
carried out statewide.
Pulling your constituents in New
Mexico results from this pool
stated one in seventy two
percent of those polled answered
that they were very concerned to
extremely concerned about the
type of anesthesia care they
would receive two eighty nine
percent of these poll of those
polled answered that they wanted
in in a physician
anesthesiologist to be the ones
and ministering in their
anesthetic when asked if they
wanted to nurse this is a
physician and lastly when asked
who they would want to respond
during a medical complication or
anesthesia emergency during
surgery seventy nine percent of
your constituents of those
polled answered that they wanted
a physician.
You are not the answer to
increase and issues access there
simply replacing position
anesthesiologists and physician
led Anastasia care teams less
than seven years ago there are
twenty two anesthesiologists
practicing in Los crucis today
there I practicing physician
anesthesiologists due to see any
practices taking over.
Just this morning it was spoken
with that there is a concern on
positions leaving the state and
the need to maintain the
positions this bill will further
allow serenades to take our
position let Anastasia
practices.
Should be able to take over a
position what anesthesia
practices with the model that is
not as safe for the patients
with providers that are not
trained for ten plus years in
diagnosing and treating
especially in emergency
situations when time is not on
our side.
So I must ask if you were given
the choice would you not want a
physician led an ascetic
especially in the most
vulnerable time of surgery when
it is the anesthesia provider
advocating for your life.
Thank you next we have Maryland
arching vault.
Can you hear me now yes awesome
great and thank you for up
nothing my us recipes.
The gold star rap well thank you
everybody for all I need to talk
and it's a pleasure to be able
do you listen to the healthcare
policies are being affected are
in our state so I know you guys
are are crunched for time and I
just wanted to kind of recap on
everything that everybody else
had previously said I am in
opposition of house bill thirty
five
the the big thing I kind of want
to stress on is that something
you are that was mentioned by
doctor Allen is that the costs
the building so there really are
cost savings associated with
moving physician involvement in
anesthesia care allowing nurses
to administer anesthesia without
physician supervision does not
say patients are taxpayers money
to Medicare Medicaid and most
third party insurers pay the
same fees for anesthesia whether
it's administered by nurse
anesthetist or physician
anesthesiologists
and then kind of capping on what
doctor Siegel and Cassie said
the elementi position
anesthesiologists involvement
from the UC secure team could
potentially increase process
other positions we need to be
able to consult provide services
that a physician
anesthesiologist would normally
be able to provide if they were
not limited so if house it New
Mexico right to enact house bill
thirty five it would phone
within the minority of states in
terms of patient safety
requirements for Anastasia Care
so forty five states and the
district of Columbia require
physician oversight and
involvement in anesthesia care
delivery so patient safety
should not be the Dr ECECD
should be the driving force
behind any health care policy
changes specially one that may
replace a physician
anesthesiologist with a nurse
an acid test so it's vital that
you guys remain kind of patient
centered and and
Ensure that patient let our our
physician led anesthesia care
ensures that highest quality CGS
safest medical care so your
constituents here possibly our
future patients deserve nothing
lasts.
That's all I have to say thank
you thank you thank you
Maryland.
can I see a show of hands for
those who are in support.
Okay we have one two three four
five okay
I am
I I hate to split this up in the
middle of a bill but we are
scheduled to go to the floor at
eleven and so I think that the
best way to
do this and and I apologize
Representative Matthews but I
think we should hear from the
proponents
because there's about six of
them are listed to speak and
then questions first thing on
Wednesday.
Madam chair of the I do
understand that doctor Allen
will not be available on
Wednesday because you'll be
doing C. R. N. A. work.
so as we have talked about what
whether I'm sorry go ahead I was
gonna say you might talk about
whether someone can sub for her
as an expert to be able to
answer questions for you okay
okay I'm sure I I explore that.
because I ate a I don't think
that we are probably I'm trying
to find out but I don't think we
can be excused from the for
session
so and I don't want to stop it
in the in the middle so I thank
you I mean already we're gonna
stop in the middle but if we can
break it be too and and move on
to proponents and
and other questions and if on
any of those proponents I can't
make it a back next time I I see
that there's there's a six hands
I hands raised to speak and
hopefully they can
can come back if if any of you
who are not able to return on
Wednesday want to submit
something to us in writing that
would be all right and again I
apologize for having to
stop this in the in the middle
but unlike when we're here in
person just so that the public
knows when we have a lot of
introductions and reading a
memorials and introducing guests
and so forth on the floor we can
afford to kind of go a little
bit longer and and Miss Suazo
that started the for session but
we don't have any of that now so
we'll get right to the substance
of the of the reason for the
four sessions so I think that we
should
at this point recess and all the
bills still on the agenda will
roll over to Wednesday
so we'll finish
I apologize and do yard work
outside my window we will finish
this one and and also hear house
bill forty five forty six fifty
three and any additional ones
are put on the agenda for
Wednesday checked the calendar
tomorrow or later tonight for
the full agenda for Wednesday
can we chair we are recessed
thank you.
Thank you.
