Lord yes.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Here here.
President.
Representative live.
I'm here.
Where are the president.
Madam chair Deborah on strong
I'm here.
Thank you and Representative
Phelps is excused correct
correct and Representative
arises if he has to leave will
be excuse as well and as we get
started before we get started I
just want to let the attendees
know that we have one bill that
the sponsor has asked us to
remove it from the agenda this
morning and that's bill one
eighteen homeless youth
employment tax credit.
So if you're here for that bill
the homeless youth employment
tax credit house bill one
eighteen we are not hearing it
this morning at the request of
the sponsor so if you're here
till you're welcome to hang
around but you'd
I hate for you to hang around
all morning if you're waiting
just for that bill so it will
not be heard.
Madam chair this is a
Representative Montoya I was
left out of the roll call not
sure why.
I am here.
Please.
Representative you're Montoya.
Year.
Matthew's gospel both.
I had on my list.
Thank you sure yes I did not
receive my shared file again.
So message a email one out this
morning from Gabrielle also
reminding you okay I'll look at
your
It had asked us and madam chair
I sent it to.
Both of your I presented to both
your provided and your personal
email.
In the Gabrielle.
Senator Gabrielle Schultz I was
looking under wait I'm sorry.
That's for your initial
invitation to actually you know
if you want to log in to share
file file does make it a habit
to about you know the morning of
committees to send it to you
also it's freshen your in box I
heard that there was going to be
a training for members on Citrix
ShareFile so.
I can check in on
them thank you so much I'm sorry
about that I.
The problem that's alright and
Representative if you haven't
registered for it yet you still
won't be able to give them
unfortunately you have to
register and set up your.
although I think it's the same
as your provided email so you
can try that try your
legislative
email and your provided password
and that should take you and
thank you madam chair thank you
real.
All right so first on our agenda
this morning is house bill one
oh seven
which is Representative Thomson
we rolled over that bill from
last
meeting and so representative
Thompson are you ready.
I am and I have an expert
witness.
Harapan H. A. R. R. A. N. D. I
think.
This is is that it.
So thank you thank you madam
chair and so this is a bill the
the the old timers have heard
before and it's a fairly simple
bill although it comes it's a
lot of pages and this is
probably a good time to our just
do a little bit it in our law
our help when we make changes to
our health care law we have to
do it in a number of places so
when you read the bill it looks
like they're saying the same
thing over and over yes we are
in different places in the law
so
the first few times it feels
like like groundhog day that
you're reading the same thing
over and over but it is far
different place in the law and
this is a.
Simple bill what it attempts to
do is to allow New Mexicans the
choice of the pharmacy and many
of us have have been notified by
our insurers that we must get
all of our I particularly are
normal you know our our routine
Medications through a mail order
in a you must get a ninety day
supply from from X. as opposed
to going to derail in pharmacy
your own little local pharmacy
so what this bill tries to do it
what this bill does it says that
if the local pharmacy whether it
be CVS or or Durand's or built
built or what whatever it is if
they can offer the the
medication to the patient at the
same price as the mail order
then the your insurer has to
allow you to do it and what what
the insurers do now is they do I
mean and it happened to us we
just got a letter that said okay
no more going to your pharmacy
all your medications are going
to be mailed to you well there's
a couple of but there's a lot of
issues with that one of them was
really highlighted with all the
trouble with the a post office
that you know if you are
counting on your drugs and for
whatever reason the post office
doesn't get them to you there
are issues with some some
medications that need to be kept
cold and if they're left out on
your front stoop your first step
your front porch in July your
insulin is blacked out there
while you're at work it gets
dropped off at nine AM and you
get home at six PM and your
insulin has been sitting at in
the direct sun for hours so
thank you what what what I want
to do is to give New Mexicans
the most choice that they can
possibly have to what and we all
know that in in particularly in
small towns if you have a
pharmacist you are really lucky
and that may be the only health
care provider that there is for
miles around and we have a
member who was quite elderly and
has since passed away but he
became very ill and it was
actually his pharmacists to said
now wait a minute you don't look
so good let's take a look at
what's happening.
And found that he had been
prescribed a variety of drugs
that didn't interact well with
each other and essentially the
pharmacist saved one of our
members lives I'm when you have
a mail order pharmacy nobody
puts eyes on you you don't have
anybody to go to and and talk
through things you don't have
someone to check through your
medications and make sure that
there's not any contra
indications do you think that
you so so that's that's what the
bill does and I will let my my
experts are go on from there
thank you madam chair.
Thank you welcome
Dr current here and and I
apologize I butchered your name
but go ahead.
No problem thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Breanna here and and I am
currently the director of
pharmacy the health center and
we have locations in Santa Fe
Albuquerque and Rockwell
as a pharmacist working in New
Mexico for the past twelve years
I've seen patient access to much
needed medications restricted by
the business practices of their
health plans PBMs their pharmacy
benefit managers.
So house bill one oh seven per
month access to care by removing
the compulsory PVM mail order
utilization requirement and
allow patients to choose where
and how they can access their
pharmacy services.
I've had patients living on a
fixed income tell me that they
cannot attain their medication
from mail order pharmacy because
you know they ran out of minutes
from their cell phone and while
they were waiting on hold with
the mail order pharmacy and so
we had to assist them with that
and I've had patients company
concerned that their mail order
pharmacy isn't gonna be able to
get them their medication
because they really don't have a
stable address they either rely
on shelters our friends or
different types of living
situations and so in these two
entrances even though my
pharmacy wasn't the pharmacy
that was actually dispensing the
medication you know we have to
call upon our resources to try
to help these patients get their
medications and so.
referring to.
What representative Thompson
the talking about is.
As a community pharmacist I
would like to address the
importance of effective
education and medication
counseling you know pharmacists
to be effective they have to
meet their patients on where
they are and that means we you
know what that our messaging to
fit language skills we react and
non verbal the no cues that
patients give us and these are
all things that as a pharmacist
you pick on pick up on from
having a face to face
interaction
mail order pharmacies and out of
state pharmacy they they do they
are required by law to read to
have counseling available but of
course it's by phone and so some
of the crucial elements like the
patients reading ability or
visual impairment or even just
the dexterity to be able to open
their pill bottle you know
they're not gonna be able to
pick up on that unfortunately
the mail order pharmacy staff
are just not well positioned to
recognize though those types of
cues are also they're not well
positioned to recognize poor
medication adherence and so you
know they're not going to see
the heart failure patients that
have who would overflow they're
not going to see the patient
living with COPD that have
labored breathing or you know
hygiene changes in somebody who
you know living with severe
depression and so.
The thing.
Martin.
messages that community
pharmacists are able to assess
patients with on a daily basis
and so.
The other thing is PM often
require patients with complex
disease states that are require
specialty medications to a to a
payment medications from an out
of state pharmacy and this is
especially troubling these
medications are very expensive
and they typically require
strict adherence on to a
specific regimen or dosing
schedule and.
Face to face interactions are
really critical of medication
and and and in addition many of
the specialty medications are
for very sensitive health
conditions such as HIV and
unfortunately I have had
conversations with patients
before were there health
information was not protected
and their HIV status was
disclosed because of a shipping
error from out of state pharmacy
so.
Populations in New Mexico
probably have no issue with mail
order pharmacy and they'll
continue to use mail order
pharmacy or other out of state
pharmacies you know many of our
most vulnerable populations in
New Mexico
you know these compulsory mail
order requirements really
represent a barrier to care and
it can lead to wasted medication
poor medication adherence poor
outcomes and ultimately you know
increased use of medical
resources.
Thank you.
All madam chair we we will stand
for questions.
Thank you Representative and and
drive here and so we'll go to
the audience and of first I
would like the those who are in
opposition.
To raise your hands.
Opposition.
Hi I have two and
three four opposition raise your
hands okay.
Is about four right now
so and Representative Anderson I
think is among the attendees
were gonna bring him over.
and we will first go to Pat
block to make a comment.
And please keep it as as brief
as you can and and for those who
are speaking to trying not be
repetitious thank you.
Let's say.
Okay.
There we go.
Thank you good morning madam
chair and members of the
committee I'm Pat blocking today
I'm speaking on behalf of prime
therapeutics a pharmacy benefits
manager.
Ording to the FY are for this
bill it's aim is to increase
parity among local pharmacies
and mail order pharmacies on
price to consumers and it
appears to do just that but I
would encourage the committee to
take a deeper look to see a
passing this bill would achieve
that aim I contend that it will
not
agencies legislative analysis
noted that the effective
equalizing the copays would have
potentially negative impacts on
their subscribers and on the
programs are both this bill
creates a conflict between the
interest to community pharmacies
consumers and health plans this
especially rings true for state
funded programs this bill would
certainly benefit community
pharmacies but consumers health
plans or likely both would have
to pay higher costs to provide
that benefit.
Health plans and PBMs have heard
the desire to squeeze as much
value out of every health care
dollar they can The New Mexico
self insurance plans have been
able to realize significant cost
savings by using the mail order
option as part of their plan
designed to lessen premium
increases for their members
health plans work with PBMs to
determine how and why mail order
can help them keep costs down a
vital consideration giving the
increasing cost to our entire
healthcare system it's so vital
in fact that the retiree health
care authority points to their
long term financial stability
and how this hurts those issues
rather than helping with them
they have a need to save money
for their program and the
subscribers by taking advantage
of less expensive drug
procurement that is my health
plan so it's especially
important on a personal note so
in closing I ask you to oppose
this bill despite its good
intentions thank you very much.
I'm sorry I was muted brand
more.
I wasn't sure if I was next to
the yeah sorry I was time I was
talking so go ahead Brandt very
much appreciated thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Brett mortem a
registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance plans
and we respectfully stand in
opposition to this bill for the
folks who have been on the
committee for a long time you're
well aware and I think that the
new members of the committee are
probably well aware that
pharmaceuticals drugs were quite
expensive and health plans and
PBMs work to try to main Tain
Act good coverage for our
insureds while I'm managing
those costs for those expensive
drugs mail order is one of our
primary ways of managing those
costs and keeping them down and
it is very convenient what we've
seen with the pandemic is we're
seeing more and more services
provided to people's homes so
that they can social distance
mail order is a great way for us
to control those costs and keep
people safe while they're at
home when you try to restrict
health plans abilities to use
mail order what you're doing is
you're eroding an aggressive way
to say it would be attacking our
ability to contract one of the
ways that we I try to keep costs
in check is by negotiating
contracts in offering
eight membership to a provider
in the general sense in trying
to get the best rates we
possibly can when you win the
legislature considers bills like
this where anybody can
participate in our roads our
ability to contracted the roads
our ability to offer
to try to get the best deal and
so that's why this proposal
while it is seemingly simple is
very.
Very difficult for health plans
because we can no longer have
that ability to offer the best
deal and try to get the lowest
rates and try to provide the
best coverage we possibly can as
Mr black noted.
In the FIR you'll see a
significant cost that was noted
by some of the other agencies
who responded to the bill that's
just indicative of the fact that
mail order saves.
People money it saves the
insurance money and it makes the
cost of the products lower so we
very much oppose this bill and
ask you to look at the numbers
because what would benefit the
some pharmacies wind up being
paid for by state agencies and
insurance in the commercial
market thank you.
Thank you Brandt our next we
have
Of looking Mendez Harper.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Li
Gina Dr Lee Jean amend this
Harper of the pharmacist with
prime therapeutics prime
therapeutics is a PBM that's
owned by eighteen not for profit
Blue Cross blue shield plans
across the United States
including Blue Cross blue shield
of New Mexico and I appear
before you to respectfully
oppose house bill one oh seven
couple of points that I wanted
to share to dove tail on the.
Comments made by Pratt and Pat
mail service pharmacy is a cost
saving option for New Mexicans
that they they may choose to use
mail service pharmacies are
their volume driven businesses
kind of like cosco meaning that
these pharmacies purchase large
quantities of medicines and
because of that they're able
we're able to pass on those
savings to New Mexicans
this legislation would require
insurers to make the difficult
choice of either having to
increase premiums or increase
out of pocket drug costs for
their members so in either
scenario it results in a higher
prescription drug costs for both
insurers and New Mexicans
would encourage you to look at
the fiscal note the state
agencies
reported that two and a half to
seven and a half million dollar
in
additional expenses and that
would certainly
lead on to an apply to
commercial insurers.
secondarily as as Brett
mentioned we have been relying
on mail service pharmacy during
the COVID pandemic all
pharmacies and had to
Sen mail and deliver and
use different mechanisms to get
medicines to patients so that
it's safe and reliable
we have seen about twenty one
percent increase in mail service
pharmacy during the pandemic
primarily to seniors of peoples
and people with disabilities
so we really see mail service
pharmacy is as a mechanism to
help most at risk patients to
avoid having to go
into the pharmacy and
Jeopardize their health as well
as the state pharmacy staff
health.
so and then in response to you I
certainly appreciate the
comments that doctor here maybe
about mail order and specialty
pharmacy and I actually served
as a pharmacist in charge for
mail order pharmacy in
Albuquerque for several years
and.
Both mail service pharmacy and
specialty pharmacy that I work
for are accredited by national
quality entities like Jaco your
act and think entities such as
that in all of the issues that
were mentioned whether it be
post office delivery
maintaining medications at the
right temperatures making sure
that pharmacists are looking at
drug interactions
making sure that there's you
know a plan in place should you
run out of medicines
looking at medication adherence
all of those things are systems
that all mail order pharmacies
and specialty pharmacies have to
have in place in order to meet
those accreditation standards so
I would again acid to.
Not pass this legislation
is doing the opposite of what we
want in the face of the pandemic
it's going to increase costs for
prescription drugs and I think
that mail order pharmacy
provides a safe
mechanism delivery of medicines
to New Mexico thank you thank
you thank you for
and next we have our keys
Gardner.
Good morning madam chair.
Good morning welcome thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
members committee I don't want
to repeat a lot of things have
already been said but I I do
think it's important as you look
at the fiscal impact report of
this bill I'm sorry I'm he
garnered percent cigna
healthcare which owns express
scripts PPM and the concern we
would have what this bill is is
is the same as been raised by
the other P. B. M.'s and and
insurance plans but it goes
beyond just the cost that's
written in the FIR if you look
at that significant cost to the
individuals who are covered by
those plans but also rolling to
every plan covered by it and
that every New Mexican receives
we'll see an increasing costs as
a result of inputting this bill
and I know there's been a
tremendous amount of work by
this committee to weigh the
balance the access and cost
especially cost in these days
where more and more people have
lost or potentially gonna lose
their insurance coverage and so
for those reasons we are
concerned we look for working
with the sponsors if there's
ways to work through those
issues but we're concerned about
the cost and openly of Koss's
becomes an issue more more
people lose this benefit and so
with that Madam thank you.
Thank you.
I'm next we have Marla shots.
Madam chair.
Members of the committee while
shows registered lobbyist for
Blue Cross blue shield of New
Mexico to my knowledge we do not
have any mandatory mail
requirements for prescriptions
we also feel that a lot of these
issues were addressed with
Senate bill four fifteen which
was passed inside in the twenty
nineteen legislative session we
all worked very hard to address
some of the concerns that to the
legislature had regarding some
of these issues and for the
reasons stated above we also
stand in opposition to this
legislation thank you.
Thank you more law next we have
our mark Duran.
Thank you madam chair of good
morning.
Begin by letting you know madam
chair and I hope you appreciate
this
and by the way I represent the
United healthcare of that while
I'd rather be at the capitol I
am not Missy lobbying that
started arms trying to get in
your act
three one the committee meetings
so this is one instance that
this works out well United
healthcare is opposed to this
legislation I won't take a lot
of time most of the reasons that
are not being mentioned not only
is it reduction in price of the
of what isn't focused enough on
is is because.
And and the good job that of the
PBMs to in regards to provide
coverage to the people we insure
and that may not be seen
nonverbal cues and things like
that but we understand our sure
can work with are insured and so
this is a function of better
coverage also and so for those
reasons and other reasons that
have already been stated madam
chair we stand in opposition.
Thank you mark.
Okay next we will go to
those in support of the bill if
you'll raise your hand.
Those in support.
Like we got about seven with
hands raised
I will go first to Sherri
Dotson.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name issue readouts
and and I am a volunteer
advocate for a a RP and we stand
in support of house bill one oh
seven thank you.
Thank you.
Hi next will go to jail to
anchor.
Good morning madam chair good
morning members the committee
I'm Dale Tinker I represent the
New Mexico pharmacists
Association.
I listened with interest to the
opposition comments
very few of them commented on.
Health care although the Janet
Mendis Harper did and I
appreciate that but most of it
was about business centers one
of the things in the FIR that is
not ever included is.
What happens when you take
business away from local
community businesses and you all
know that you have community
businesses you have
pharmacies in your area that
struggle to survive
We have lost significant number
of independent pharmacies over
the years
but that during the past year
our community pharmacies have
worked really hard to be
accessible to their patients
they provided curbside delivery
they have word.
PPE and been very careful about
how they manage their
medications so that they don't
impact their patients.
They also are being prepared for
doing a
testing and we are getting them
prepared for doing vaccinations
that is not something that you
can get from a mail order
pharmacy it is not something you
can get from
out of New Mexico so
would like to encourage you to
take a careful look at the
fiscal impact.
On our communities that is never
something that's evaluated in
FIR unfortunately and I think it
should be
We do struggle our pharmacies do
struggle with they have not had
an increase in their
reimbursement mechanism.
because of that the COVID
nineteen
we we have asked Medicaid to at
least look at increased for
delivery
and so far that has not come
through we're still looking at
that and trying to get that
implemented but
our our community pharmacies do
struggle.
and one other thing I would like
to point out to you is that.
look at the change of ownership
of the pharmacies mail order
pharmacies are largely owned by
the PBM so when I talk about
what it costs them there's
there's a corporate chain or
cost shifting goes on and you
can you cannot follow how they
shift the dollars around.
and so if they if they look like
they're making significant
savings in their specialty
pharmacy
Is there a way to figure out if
that's because they've shifted
some of their costs to the PBM
so that it looks better site
like they're saving money I
think they are I think that's
happening
generally the PBM owns their
mail our company
and recently they've also
started owning their specialty
pharmacy so I believe express
scripts owns the pharmacy called
a credo which is a specialty
pharmacy that they should guide
their patients to so there
directing patients to those
pharmacies.
When you talk about copays it's
all about cost shifting with the
patient pays it through a co pay
a rate to preen premiums
one way or another the costs are
still there and courage you to
support house bill seven
and and thank you for your time.
Thank you Dale I'm next we have
superintendents all.
Go ahead superintendent.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the.
Committee I'm sorry I can't be
physically with you again.
but
obviously we are state agency
and R. F. I. R. to you did not
indicate the kind of costs that
are being reported our
responsibility here in terms of
reviewing health plans for and
the commercial market is to
ensure many different things
that one of those is that they
have an adequate network.
Providers.
In the course so over the years
we've seen as Dale just
referenced you definition in the
number of community pharmacies I
think that's not something we
should support we also because
philosophically believe he
consumer choice.
And so we're actually very happy
to support Representative
Thompson's dental we've worked
with her on this in the past
the bill specifically requires
the pharmacies that want to
participate to accept the
carrier's terms conditions which
means payment amounts.
So I don't see the harm
that will Kerr to use the PBMs
or to the respective carriers.
We have raised questions about
network adequacy specifically as
it relates to pharmacies.
a couple of times here recently
so.
We all know that community
pharmacists in particular
frequently act as a primary care
counselor on people who have
complications who are not close
to.
The regular position so we think
this bill will bolster their
ability to survive in a
difficult Clemente and we.
Urged the committee to pass it
on so that can be further debate
on the floor if necessary but we
do support the measure.
Thank you.
I next we have the LCS.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I
strongly support H. B. one oh
seven.
And thank you.
Thank you LCS.
And our last we have Diana at
Tim it got cut off from you
unmuted got cut off I think
Diana.
When does the test does this
think of a Senate members of the
committee so again I think the
most other sandals either this
will for work to get that action
the one economy is so yeah keep
it up again and they are very
similar to those that get those
medicine most women quickly
that'll.
They said look I'm a hopeless to
six.
Thank you.
Okay.
I think that was it for our
public comment and so we'll go
to the
Committee is there anything
Representative Thompson you
wanna.
say before we go to questions
yes thank you madam chair so so
one of the people who spoke
against spoke about their
options well what what this bill
does is give options what
without the bill there are no
options and I heard somebody say
that there are is no such thing
as mandatory mail order I can
tell you from the letter we got
from our health insurer in
November there is mandatory you
have until January first to
switch over to this pharmacy
period there's no choice there's
no there's no option I'm in and
and it really it always strikes
me Madam chair interesting that
they say it's going to cost more
if we have competition this bill
said that if the local pharmacy
cannot do the prescription for
the same price they can't they
don't have to be allowed to do
it so I'm not sure how having
competition with price fixing it
is going to be so horrible for
their bottom line I think maybe
Dale said it best when he said
they are in every step of it I
mean they are the sales they are
the mail they are the health
care they are it it's all
wrapped together so so they
there it they want a monopoly
essentially is what is what it
comes down to is they do not
want competition
Let's see.
And and we want another thing
that's not take a look at in the
FIR someone talked about I don't
know two to seven million
dollars you have a patient who
gets into it into a really bad
situation because there's no one
put let's say they're turning
yellow and no one notices that
they've got liver failure well
they end up needing a liver
transplant that's seven million
dollars is going to be eaten up
in costs in no time you know you
get a couple of Kate a couple of
cases where where something is
messed that could have been
caught by a community pharmacist
your seven million dollars is
gone just like that I'm and and
basically what it comes down to
is is are we protecting
businesses are are we protecting
people and I personally think we
need to protect people and with
that madam chair I will stand
for questions.
Thank you representative first
on the list I have is
representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you to that the.
Presenter for bringing this bill
forward I one of the questions I
have is where are most of those
mail order pharmacies located.
Remember they have to say our
yes Representative go ahead and
take this one.
Yes they're usually out of
state.
And thank you for that Brianna
and madam chair and so do is
there tax charged on medication
gross receipts tax.
I'm.
I'm not to my knowledge.
Usually only on over the counter
medications.
Okay thank you for that answer
so this is a real catch twenty
two because I'm I'm a little bit
concerned mail order pharmacies
the file that you know they buy
in bulk so it makes it cheaper
for everyone but the problem
that I'm seeing is money a
little pharmacy in Sapporo New
Mexico not to Walmart but the
home owned home grown young lady
that owns the callous pharmacy
it's coral is going to have to
you can't buy in bulk.
Is going to have to match the
price for what they can get it
for mail order is that it might
hearing that correctly Madam.
Representative Armstrong if she
chooses and that's the key if
she can not make money at the
price then she doesn't have to
do it but all this is saying is
if he finds a way to do that.
And she should be allowed to it
I mean it's it and it's very
simple if the if the local
pharmacy cannot match the price
of the mail order they then they
are not included so it's totally
up to the local pharmacy if they
can't match the price that they
don't that make thank they don't
do it if they can then they have
the opportunity and that's all
we're asking for is an
opportunity no mandatory
anything for a local pharmacy
you know and and that that is an
interesting thing as far as I'm
concerned that these these mail
order pharmacies that are you
know doing millions of pills a
day
are afraid of of your local
pharmacy in the Carl who may do
you know a hundred of those
pills a day if she can get the
same price if you can figure out
a way to make it work for our
patients then I don't see why we
would not allow her that
opportunity.
Thank you for that answer I just
think that you know if it's
My personal opinion is we should
make the insurance companies not
making a mandate that they have
to do mail order I think that's
the ultimate way of giving the
consumer the choice
part of my problem is this this
doesn't mandate if you do mail
orders you have to order more
than what is part like a sixty
day supply instead of a thirty
day supply doesn't madam chair
no this bill this bill
essentially says you know
whatever that whatever the
insurance company says you have
to do then you have to do.
Okay well thank you for that so
on one of the significant issues
this in our one of the.
we get so many got I don't know
who let's see it's a ask about
so is the one who wrote this and
one of the significant issues
that says and this is so
disheartening to me I'm really
upset about this that the state
of New Mexico does this.
The state of New Mexico group
benefits program has provided
financial incentives for members
to have me maintenance
medications filled through the
mail order of its contracted PBM
for the last twenty years so
they give incentives to do mail
order instead of going to our
local pharmacy.
And that is actually hurting the
state of New Mexico so actually
I'll just say I'm disgusted with
that.
Yes it's going to save
individual money but.
We have businesses here brick
and mortar businesses here in
New Mexico that are going to be
suffering because of that hi I
have a lot of.
Issues I wish that I knew
what kind of.
Do you all that my the local
pharmacy gets on say a mock
Cicilline compared to what mail
order does anyone know what
local what anyone have any
numbers on that madam chair.
No okay.
Okay because it be interesting
to see that you know the cost of
course they're probably not
gonna share costs with madam
chair and representative
Armstrong I will say that
that.
The.
The PBM and pharmacy benefit me
you need to have a PhD at
Stephen Hawking level to
understand all the credits and
the rebate that it is to in my
opinion it is so non transparent
that no one could ever
understand and and that's part
of the business model is that if
if people could understand how
much you know self dealing and
and and this person owns this
the next company owns this I
think if we could ever see that
we would be horrified but it's
made up I believe purpose we
made incredibly complex and
intricate so that no one can
really understand and and that's
that's been need it with this
bill in previous years that has
been one of the arguments is
that it's just so complex that
you could never understand it so
we won't even talk about how we
do it.
Thank you madam chair thank you
I agree I I do believe that
there's a lot of entities in New
Mexico that that are.
eat out of each other's hands
and and especially in in the
healthcare industry and
Thank you for your answers are
appreciated thank you madam
chair.
Thank you representative next I
have Representative Lord thank
you madam chair so madam chair
Representative do you have a
question so this is for state
contracted insurance only is
that correct it's not for like
my private insurance or for
Medicare.
No madam chair it's that that's
what I was saying earlier there
are there are different sections
of the health care laws so it
does it does apply to that's the
that.
Health care purchasing Act The
New Mexico insurance code the
health maintenance organization
law the nonprofit health care
for all the farm pharmacy
benefits regulation Act.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chair representative so continue
on that line.
So is there ever an option to
switch insurances because I know
with my own insurance and with
my husband's insurance at the
end of the year we find out a
whole bunch this medications
don't work and we can apply for
option a or B. or D. or
different trucks as our option
without with the state contract.
I'm sure I'm not exactly sure
what you're asking but I'm.
If you if you have Medicaid then
yes that the end of the year you
can switch from one of the
providers to the other my family
is insured by where my husband
is retired from so we have no
they they tell us every year
this is the company you're with
and if we want to keep our keep
the coverage with them that's
where we go so we it depends I
mean some people may have that
option some people and and many
people get their insurance
through their jobs and their
jobs may have one option or so
it varies but a lot of people
are not able to just pick up and
go to a better or different
insurance company.
Thank you thank you madam chair
yeah and what I was trying to
get at is with both for
insurances we have an option to
pick a it did not only different
planned with money but he can
also pick the case he's on
Medicare the supplement he can
pick a variety of pharmaceutical
options and usually what you do
is you pull up and you see okay
he's taking medications it's one
through five and the cheapest is
to go through option do so they
don't offer that then with the
state programs madam chair and
representative not to my
knowledge and I know that
private insurance does not.
We have those kind of
Representative go ahead on that
point on that point one this
doesn't cover Medicare Medicaid
just to be really fair and
Medicare is the only one that
I'm aware of that you select a
separate freestanding pharmacy
planned any other insurance
plans the pharmacy benefit as
part of it I I thank you all
employer plans individual plans
have an opportunity annually to
kind of re enroll in their plan
and some employers will offer a
choice of plans some won't if
you're an individual you can
pick a whole different insurance
plan during open enrollment but
so it it depends what options
you have.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I worked at I did
insurance billing for ever so I
I know that it wouldn't cover
those two things I I but I do
know that.
And as I'm thinking about this
I'm thinking that such a simple
solution would be if they just
did like Medicare does and you
get to go to a website and say
okay here's my medications and
it's cheaper through this route
and of course I also enjoy the
golden age of there being no
insurance when everybody can
afford to pay cash for other
stuff those days apparently are
gone
so I what I want to know is
So with this what what I get at
what I'm concerned about this it
is has their insurance board
review this and the reason why
is if you're a medical
practitioner and the you charge
insurance sixty dollars for
visit and then you say well if
you pay cash or charge you
thirty.
Working come down on you for
price fixing you're acting as an
insurance company so has
insurance for review this to say
that this is okay that you're
going to actually get in there
and start making mandatory
prices.
So and and I'll jump in there
isn't an insurance board there's
a superintendent of insurance to
your heard from I am public
comment supporting us the state
plans however are
those are governed by a board of
that covers each one of those
plans or this or the state
department of I'm John General
Services Department
and the superintendent doesn't
have jurisdiction over them.
Okay thank you madam chair so
was looking and one of the
analysis inherent and something
that is very concerning and that
I'm very concerned about because
insurance is our for profit okay
so my concern is we say okay
mail order is for us for my
husband zero you pay zero copay
and a very low premium when he
does mail order he can he has
the option he can go pharmacy
Santo he wants in his plan but
he's going to pay a lot more
money my concern is if we're
trying to balance these two out
and say okay would like for the
pharmacies to price match This
and as you're saying that is
optional not mandatory my
concern is that the insurance
companies if there I'm gonna say
forced to do this option where
they have to say okay you can
now get it from a local pharmacy
which I would prefer because it
is local but in the reality is
my big concern is there want to
keep their profits and they're
going to make that zero co pay a
low premium much higher to try
to balance out their loss have
you guys taken that into
consideration that could
actually backfire.
Madam chair and representative
or I I am not following and at
the claim it back fire what
what.
This bill says is that okay
pharmacy a in in Lordsburg.
If they say we can provide your
medication for high blood
pressure for ten dollars a month
because that's what you pay the
mail order company all it says
is that the insurance company
has to allow them to do you have
that business if they can do it
at ten dollars a month if the if
part the pharmacy in Deming says
I can't do it for less than
twenty then the insurance
company does not have to include
a there there is no.
I'm not exactly sure what you're
asking but there.
I'm I just don't know what
you're asking okay what I see is
in as I know you're trying to
say price matching which
unfortunately is almost
impossible I'm very familiar
with how of pharmaceuticals
charge and it's a tremendous
amount of more money so I don't
see how this is going to work
out if you're saying okay and I
want my local pharmacy to to
actually be the primary choice
reason we do mail order status
too expensive if they can't ever
compete.
How this is benefit the people
if you can't ever get to the
local pharmacy because they
can't compete and how does this
work.
Madam chair and representative
it doesn't
this is the only way we have to
try to attack this problem we
can't M. we are to you have
heard all of the and I will and
I believe that the the majority
if not all of the people who
spoke against this are are
either PBMs or or health
insurers it if if if the local
pharmacy cannot match the price
that it will not happen can we
cannot force businesses to do
business with other businesses
we can say let's level the
playing field right now even if
your local pharmacy could go to
that insurance company and say
yes I can do it for ten dollars
just like your mail order the
insurance company can say we
don't want you we don't care we
don't care if you can do it for
less because we want to have a
monopoly so all we're trying to
do is level the playing field
will it will it make every local
pharmacy be able to match the
prices and just blossom no I
wish it would but this is the
vehicle that we have we're
attempting to level the playing
field that's all it is and
you're right your local pharmacy
it said be a park or wherever
it's gonna have a really hard
time matching express scripts so
I I I really don't know why the
insurance companies and the PBMs
are so worried about it because
it's going to be a giant up
you'll climb for the local
pharmacies but we're trying to
give them at least a you a
lifeline a chance the way it is
right now there they have no
chance so we're trying to level
it a little bit to give them a
chance to survive.
Thank you Representative chair
my final question so it if
that's the goal which which is a
great goal to give the pharmacy
is a chance then what is the
need for the two point five to
seven point three million
dollars and FIR.
What is that for madam chair and
Representative it's it's all
kind of a gas
and and and essentially what
what I have heard from the PBMs
as if you do this to us we will
we will
We will go broke essentially and
as I said that are the prices
will rise you know the fact that
they're selling you know ten
million Torrez that in New
Mexico a month and and my local
pharmacy is going to sell a
hundred I don't really think
it's going to cut into their
profit margin I personally see
if it's wanting to keep a
monopoly that's what it comes
down to it and the amount of
money that is in the FIR is kind
of a gas because no one knows
what will happen but as I said
before if you missed a couple of
cases of somebody having a bad
reaction because you can't tell
that over the phone if you could
ever get through the phone
without push one for this push
to for this for seventeen for
this a few of those cases which
we cannot catch in FY are will
more than make up in terms of
actual dollars let's not talk
about pain and suffering for for
someone who ends up with that
medication interaction or bad
reaction to a medication and
they can't ever see a live human
being that could catch that
before it becomes a major
medical problem.
I'm on that point Representative
Lord at I would also add on the
F. I. R. I think that they have
kind of assumed that if we do
this there would be a mass
exodus of patients to go to
their local pharmacy instead of
mail order
to such an extent that the the
mail order company could no
longer ball purchased in the
same way and so would have to
raise prices I don't see that
happening as you as you talked
about earlier
they have to match the price so
a lot of pharmacies are going to
be able to participate for one
thing into a lot of people like
their mail order an essay said
mail order grew over or COVID a
lot of people don't because they
have other issues I don't see
that this is a mass exodus of
people such that they can no
longer ball purchased the drugs
for the mail order but I think
that's part of the numbers if I
can follow on on in the FIR is a
fear that that there would be so
many people moving to their
local pharmacy instead of mail
order that they wouldn't have
enough population to Balko order
in the same way.
Yes thank you madam chair
representative that is quite
frightening when you get to your
three at fourteen million
dollars so I'm okay that's all
the question I have thank you.
Thank you for dropping in and
making that more clear than I
was able.
Thank you sometimes it's easier
when you're not on the spot to
answer the question
Representative Anderson I saw
your hand up earlier did you
have a question or your
questions been answered.
Madam chair my question is been
answered.
Thank you
thank you I'll just make a
couple closing remarks not
really questions Representative
because I carried this bill a
number years ago before you
started caring it thank you all
for picking up the the torch on
it and over the years I've
talked to many people about
their pharmaceuticals and mail
order or not lots of people it
that's the lifesaver to be able
to get it mail order because
they can't get to a pharmacy
of for whatever their health
condition is or the location of
their pharmacy or not having
transportation or whatever that
that may be about many many
people rely on their local
pharmacy
they rely on their pharmacists
for information they don't have
stable addresses for delivery
you mentioned you mentioned that
I've got a member in my family
who can't get delivery of that
sort it out there if you have
they have to use a PO box and
the and the post office for the
PO boxes the only open certain
hours that makes it hard to go
every day to pick that to pick
up medication
and it and so it's at some
they prefer to go to the
pharmacy and there are some
health conditions such as
hepatitis C. that if you missed
any doses.
and and because of a an issue
with getting that medication at
the right time and you run out
and you miss some doses you have
to start the treatment all over
again and that's tens of
thousands of dollars in a
treatment regiment so I agree
with you leveling the playing
field where those pharmacies are
able to participate
and having the option and is a
good thing so and help protect
our local pharmacies as well if
they can afford to participate.
So without what's the pleasure
the committee.
Pants.
I have a due pass service
second.
Thank you okay revert to pass in
the second doors you want to
call the roll.
Representative Anderson.
No.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
No.
Representative Brittney by that.
Yes.
Representative Karen bash yes.
Representative Stephanie lord
no.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Representative Roger Montoya
yes.
Representative believes fluff.
Representative Louise cut off.
Thompson yes.
Representative vice chair Joanne
Ferrari.
Yes.
Madam chair I'm going back
Representative Marian Matthews.
Should be excused okay
representative Louise I.
And he's also excused okay madam
chair Deborah A. Armstrong yes.
And that is a very fix two three
two excuse.
Okay Representative you have a
do pass on house bill one of
seven thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
I'm.
Yes.
I'm going to be getting on on my
computer now so I just want to
let you know and then I'll take
it off of my phone okay thank
okay all right we'll see you
back in a in a few seconds.
I'm at next Representative
Ferrary are you able to chair.
Yes madam chair and
Representative Thomson
Representative Ferrary us to put
on a bill another committee in a
while she has to leave are you
able to take over as chair yes I
if I'm presenting one of my
bills yes I will thank you you
thank you.
Okay I'm gonna turn it over to
you Representative Ferrary for
house bill one twenty two.
Madam.
Representative Anderson to will
be exposing himself briefly to
present a bill this morning and
another committee just wanted
you to know thank you thank you
and to members of the audience
this is how it works and start
we'll start our own bills start
getting heard in other
committees we have to
we have to step out to put on
our bills and so we're in and
out of committee and and members
are excused to do that.
you madam chair would you like
to go ahead and present house
bill one twenty two that health
insurance premiums surtax and
madam chair I can have a couple
of experts brought over first is
a vocal Estrada.
And then superintendent toll on
your list it's our toll.
And
I'm looking just to see who's
who's in the in the list
and we have also in the audience
I have some other experts if
questions come up from
the Medicaid director Nicole
Comeaux or
secretary Scrase was maybe going
to be here and we have the
secretary of tax and revenue if
we need to call on them but if
we can just.
Have of Boko and
Representative and
superintendent toll.
And thank you
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee house
bill one twenty two is the
health care affordability Fund
Act this is a bill that I grand
last year and we got through the
house and over to the Senate and
I ran out of time before it was
heard by
could be heard by Senate finance
so I'm bringing it back again.
And what this is under the help
of sort of
The health care
Affordable Care Act the federal
government was how to see on
health insurance companies to
help us on the start up of the
affordable Care Act that fee has
gone away.
And what this proposal is to
add that as a state at sea but
we we added on to the existing
surtax to health insurance
companies a little bit less than
what they've been paying on to
the federal government added in
as a state.
tax added to the existing surtax
so that we can generate a fund
of to help
of individuals who are
struggling to in get themselves
insured or stay insured
on the health insurance exchange
are primarily that school the
first area we're gonna look at
we estimate that probably
another twenty three thousand
people would come on to the
health insurance exchange and
get insured if if it was more
affordable.
And so this fund which will
generate
about I believe it's about a
hundred and
town or so new dollars into a
New Mexico a little bit more
than that.
would go into a fund that we can
then establish some criteria to
our four ability criteria to
enhance the US subsidies to
individuals purchasing insurance
on the exchange.
Our after we have done that what
we would and the superintendent
would establish zero
hearing process and to what
those four that affordability
criteria is.
And then we would look at the
rest of the uninsured population
and if we are able to offer some
support for individuals outside
of the exchange you who aren't
eligible for the exchange to to
get insured and there are or who
aren't eligible even for
subsidies on the exchange and
there's a number of reasons why
that might that might occur and
and so then this fund can be a
plan developed by the
superintendent and brought back
to the legislature of the funds
would accumulate in this in this
fund but would have to be
appropriated by the legislature
so in this also has a reporting
requirement in it just so that
we know how it's being used and
what the impact is on the
uninsured population and
the whole aim is to be able to
provide some assistance to
working working families who are
struggling to be insured I think
that's even become more this the
need for affordable health
coverage during this pandemic
when people have lost jobs or
otherwise have had to drop their
coverage because they just can't
afford it and so this is an
attempt to
reinstate the same level of of
taxation or fees that the
carriers the insurance carriers
were paying before to try and
get a larger
population insured and keep them
insured and with that Madam
chair of like to turn to my
experts
first to superintendent tall if
you wants to add anything.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee.
I want to first say this has
nothing to do with.
They'll order prescriptions
this is a an opportunity to make
a significant impact on reducing
the number of uninsured in New
Mexico I'm sure you've all seen
the numbers over the years there
is an estimated eighty seven
thousand people out there who
cannot afford or who are not
offered affordable health
insurance no to your credit.
Through the exchange almost
fifty thousand people are serve
now but when we survey the
uninsured and asked why they
don't purchase on the exchange
what we find is that the out of
pocket costs even the there are
subsidies available for some.
Are still too high for them to
be able to a four the premiums
or the high out of pocket costs
the maximum out of pocket the
was established by the federal
government in the last
administration.
Is over nine thousand dollars
and I know that probably none of
us
can afford that kind of out of
pocket expenditure on top of the
premium cost so this bill is a
mechanism to
Generated revenue both for the
for the general fund and for the
support of bill to fund that
will enable us to offer
additional subsidies to people
who purchased on the exchange to
reduce their premiums are to
reduce their out of pocket
costs.
Now instead of creating a.
State program of insurance this
subsidizes private insurance.
And the costs associated with
that for those who purchased on
the market place so I want to be
quick to note.
that this surcharge would not
apply to any self insured
arrangements.
Our so called reserve plants you
know by federal law the.
We cannot we as a state cannot
apply any taxes to those plants
so the actual number of
individuals who would be subject
to this tax is far smaller than
what you might initially think.
The other point to be made here.
Is that.
The genius you're forgiven if.
For labeling and such.
of this tax is that roughly
eighty percent of it.
Are going to be paid by the
Medicaid managed care
organizations and as everyone on
this committee knows.
the premium costs for those NCOs
is paid.
Dominantly by the federal
government.
So essentially the federal
government would be paying for
roughly eighty percent of this
tax.
I know that every member of this
committee has gone on record in
support of bringing additional
federal monies into the state.
The money is generated for into
the a general fund can be used
under rise the fairly minimal.
State cost impact of increasing
the premiums for those managed
care organizations.
Now in terms of who deciding who
gets those we will do that as
the chair said through a open
hearing.
Also this where we allow input
from the insurers who offer.
On their policies on the plan on
the health exchange for
consumers and from others.
Yeah and if we.
Do this right it will result as
a the chairman noted.
With an investment of twenty
three thousand additional
uninsured people who could be
serve through private insurance
on the exchange
and again the cost of this war
to sensually be in large part
under written by the federal
Medicaid program so I think this
is a win win all the way around
to the chairs credit this is a
better built than was presented
to your last year.
which got held up in the Senate
finance committee.
And we also want to note that it
gives us the opportunity also to
look for.
Four and create ways for folks
who are not able to buy on the
health insurance exchange for
whatever reason.
So it's a two part bill if you
will the first to create the
subsidy program and the second
directing us to.
Try to find a solution for
covering more of the uninsured
sure some sort of private
insurance range.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you and of New Mexico
Estrada if you want to add
anything.
Thank you madam chair just
briefly
you know of the affordable Care
Act helped expand health care
coverage to hundreds of
thousands of New Mexicans and
while we've taken some major
steps forward as a
superintendent mentioned there
are New Mexicans who still
trouble struggle with the cost
of health coverage and that's
reflected in a couple of
different ways through the
uninsured who lack you know the
security of having health care
coverage there are currently two
hundred fourteen thousand New
Mexicans under age sixty five
who fall into that Madam
category there's also a category
of the under insured and these
are individuals in New Mexico
who might have the ability to
afford a monthly premium but the
plan itself does not provide
adequate financial protection
due to the high out of pocket
costs like the superintendent
mentioned of you know
potentially having a deductible
as high as nine thousand
dollars.
By establishing a health care
affordability fund New Mexico
can help increase access and
affordability of quality health
care coverage for both the
uninsured and under insured
population to purchase their
coverage through the health
insurance exchange in a recent
study done by your Institute and
Representative led by the Human
Services Department we looked at
various scenarios of providing
assistance to families and
providing this type of premium
assistance and costsharing
assistance proved to be the most
effective for boosting
enrollment in improving
affordability.
Including the increasing the
insured by up to twenty three
thousand individuals in the
first year of the program and up
to seventy thousand more
individuals who already
purchase their coverage in the
exchange seen improved
affordability.
Additionally even those with
incomes too high to qualify for
the assistance would see some
indirect benefits by improving
the the risk pool with that
population they could see as
much as eighteen and a half
percent reduction in their
premium costs and that's
something that we would be
paying for but we would be
benefiting from as a state in
terms of lower premiums just by
expanding the risk pool.
And finally we could also see
uncompensated care drop by over
forty million dollars annually
helping to alleviate strain on a
health care system that's that's
fighting so hard to keep us all
healthy during the global
pandemic.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you a Boko I just want to
add one emphasize one thing that
of a cause said before we go to
comment on madam chair I think
Representative Thomson is taking
over as chair
that
if we were able to increase
enrollment is projected in the
health insurance exchange by
twenty three thousand that is
almost a fifty percent increase
in the population served under
the exchange and that's a really
really significant increase in
the number of people who would
be in the same our risk pool if
you will for us setting premium
so while we will hear probably I
assume in the opposition that
premiums could potentially go up
by adding this tax I think that
would be balanced by premiums
going down by spreading the risk
even farther by am a
substantially larger risk pool
being insured
and so I just wanna make that
point it is not just a one that
one factor in what sense those
premiums but the risk pool as a
whole so that would make a that
would balance out any increase
and again as the superintendent
said
the bulk of this is getting paid
through matching funds from the
federal government by including
and again in Medicaid in the
Medicaid rates so with that
madam chair were we stand for
questions and you go to public
comment.
Thank you madam chair so we will
go to public comment so we will
start with those who are in
opposition to this bill so
please raise your hand.
Okay we will start with Ashley
Wagner excuse me go go ahead
Ashley when you're.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
actually Wagner the director of
public policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce I represent
businesses all over New Mexico
and in every industry although
we appreciate the intent behind
this bill we respectfully stand
in opposition to house bill one
twenty two because the tax on
health care coverage will be
paid and felt by New Mexico
small businesses the business
community has suffered and paid
so much as a result of COVID and
this tax will just make it
harder on them it should also be
noted that this bill would make
premium taxes on health
insurance products the highest
in the United States.
Not only would house bill one
twenty to make health insurance
less affordable but some small
business owners could stop
offering health insurance
altogether simply because they
cannot afford to do so
Representative in this committee
posed a question on a previous
bill are we protecting business
or are re purposed protecting
people and I respectfully ask
the committee to not forget that
people start and run businesses
and they often are not wealthy
they're simply trying to make a
living thank you so much for
giving me the opportunity to
speak with you today.
Thank you next we have brought
more.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee appreciate the
opportunity to speak on this
bill my name is Roy Moore I'm a
registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance plans
a national trade association
health plans and they have
stands in opposition to this
bill and we stand in opposition
not because we're opposed to the
goal my understanding of the
proposal is that the intent is
to try to get coverage to folks
who don't have insurance and
potentially undocumented folks
and coverage is a good thing
we're you'll always hear a get
talking about getting people
coverage our issue with the bill
is the how how that coverage is
being provided I want to make
sure that the committee
understands the context of this
tax increase because it is a tax
increase is proposed as a surtax
increase under the New Mexico
insurance code currently that
the premium taxes that are
imposed on health insurance
products are built into the
drugs by the help with health
plans charge.
For those taxes in that
amendment to the state so this
is a tax that will be paid by
people who purchase health
insurance and the current base
rate is three percent or three
point zero zero three percent
that's the base premium tax and
then there's a surtax that's
currently apply to one percent
so the current premium tax total
that is paid on health insurance
products is four point zero zero
three percent that makes us
second in the nation behind why
that's at four point two percent
if this bill were to become law
the new rate for the total
premium taxes applied would be
six point seven five three
percent if I did my math
correctly so that's a good two
percentage points higher or two
point five percent higher than
all other states then the second
state which would be a why in
most states range in the three
percent range for premium taxes
so please understand that the
rate for premium taxes is going
to be extremely high and that
premium tax will be paid by
those who purchase health
insurance products.
The other thing that I would
note is to simply put this in
context coming into the session
there are a number of proposals
out there that talked about
helping businesses helping
businesses survive the the COVID
nineteen pandemic and that they
are struggling this bill is
seems to be going in the other
direction this is a proposed tax
increase that will be borne by
businesses for currently paying
for health insurance and it
seems to run contrary to the
intent of a lot of other
proposals that the legislature's
been considering about helping
businesses survive the COVID
nineteen pandemic the last thing
that I would say and madam chair
is that.
On the federal level this health
insurance tax was repealed it
was part of the affordable Care
Act and it it was taken off the
books.
It came off the books it was it
was realized by health insurance
consumers during this project
this year so people saw a
reduction in the amount that
they were paying in twenty
twenty one reinstitution of this
fee or on the state level a tax
would mean that there would be
an increase that everyone would
feel in twenty twenty one and
that just seems to be going the
wrong direction we absolutely
understand where the motivation
is we understand that.
People want to get coverage but
placing that burden on the folks
who are currently paying for
health insurance to help provide
health insurance for those who
were injured just seems to be
the wrong direction from a hips
perspective and we respectfully
appreciate the opportunity to
comment on the bill thank you.
Okay Jason Espinoza.
I'm madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director with the national
federation of independent
business
and similar to other speakers
but we certainly appreciate the
entire legislation and to get
more affordable coverage the
mechanism by which it generates
the stop Ahlers does cause us
grave concern you know as Mr
more spoke about this cost is
going to be passed down although
we can say that it's a direct
tax on the insurance companies
Mister Moore does that look
we're gonna roll this into our
rates yeah we're gonna pass this
on to our customers and as the
representative of small
businesses across the state that
is a serious concern for over
sixty years and it might be has
been holding its members on what
are the biggest obstacles to job
creation and and growth in New
for probably two decades now the
rising cost of health insurance
and health care in our in the
country has been number one so
this continues to be a grave
concern and and we're really
concerns Mr more said is going
to be passed down to the cost
more especially given the
pandemic and rising health care
costs
we're we're really worried about
the impact on the small business
community you know and I'm not
sure if there's any way to
protect the downstream sort of
customers.
In this legislation but we
really are concerned as we do
respectfully stand opposition.
Thank you mark during.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I want to first
say.
That we have great respect for
the Sanchez Bill chairman
Armstrong
we appreciate the intent of the
bill of by the way I'm
representative of the United
healthcare and not to be
repetitive.
What has already been set and I
appreciate especially that of
comments I miss Wagner there's
just there's no other way for us
to interpret this piece of
legislation as.
Then other than a tax increase a
major tax increase I guess I
represent the.
The other twenty percent and
it's been mentioned that eighty
percent of this will be paid by
the CEOs I represent the other
twenty percent and that as those
small businesses that have and
having a very difficult time
during the pandemic that are
going to bear the cost of this
tax increase of at a time when
and where and we have really
really been suffering of a very
much appreciate that of of part
of this tax increase will go to
help subsidize those individuals
that will most adverse we are
being impacted by other costs
that are not allowing and to get
health insurance coverage I
guess where the rest of the
money will
be will be used for specially of
those items inspection three
bill items to an item's three
are and so will I understand
there's been some of then
minister being discussed will
eventually like to see that
language but it's the bill
stands now this is a tax
increase on small businesses and
we just can't afford it over and
the people that are employees
can't afford and so for those
reasons we stand in opposition
to.
Thank you Marshall more less
sure what's.
Madam chair members of the
committee model shows registered
lobbyists for Blue Cross blue
shield we stand in opposition to
house bill one twenty two for
all of the reasons previously
stated are we absolutely
understand the intent of the
bill and recognize the need to
cover the uninsured population
to the greatest degree possible
in New Mexico we do also have
concerns that the federal
government may be imposed health
insurance tax and our members
and citizens in New Mexico small
businesses will be faced with
the federal and state tax thus
increasing premiums even
further.
The difference is the they
currently are we supports and
have been involved in health
insurance exchange since its
inception.
And we believe in providing the
assistance and subsidies to that
population we do have as stated
previously additional concerns
about the broad definition as to
what the fund could be used for.
We appreciate the Sanchez
willingness to work with us as
we move through the process to
address some of these concerns
thank you.
Okay thank you now we will go to
the audience for people who are
in support of this.
Okay we will start with Bill
Jordan.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and
happy birthday Representative
Montoya.
I am Bill Jordan representing
New Mexico voices for children.
And as some of you may know
before joining voices I spent
eight years running a statewide
council that was funded by the
department of health to do
public health planning on
prevention of infectious
disease.
This pandemic has been deja vu
all over again for me.
Here we are in the middle of the
pandemic and still learning the
lessons of the importance of
public health and the importance
of maximizing health care
coverage for the benefit of the
public health.
None of this is safe and healthy
when some of us are not safe and
healthy.
And the biggest barrier to
obtaining coverage is cost it's
critically important that New
Mexico take every action
possible to maximize health care
coverage by making it more
affordable.
I just want to say I'm
disappointed to hear our
business leaders oppose this
because New Mexico is last in
the nation in providing employer
sponsored health insurance it's
almost as if business relies on
Medicaid in the exchange to
cover their employees for them
and now they're opposing
legislation that would make it
more affordable for those
employees this bill is clearly
one of the best most innovative
ways to make health care
coverage more affordable for
more New Mexicans in a really
want to thank the sponsors in
the lead advocates on this
effort for their good work to
keep New Mexico safe and healthy
thank you.
Thank you bill sure re Dodson.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee again
I'm sure reduction with a a RP
is a volunteer advocate and we
do support house bill one twenty
two thank you.
Thank you sure re Steve lose
their vote.
Good morning madam chair of a
committee member's mining Steve
Lou settle I'm up lobbyist for
the New Mexico Academy of Family
physicians the academy
represents over five hundred
fifty practicing family
physicians from across the state
one of their priorities is
access to primary care in the
think this bill is a big step in
the right direction and we urge
you all to vote yes thank you.
Thank you Steve thank Quinn
Lopez.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Quinn Lopez I'm vice president
gore relations at western sky
community care western sky is
committed to transforming the
health of New Mexico Munich
communities one person at a time
to freshen innovative health
insurance coverage and social
service Lucien's.
As such western sky stand in
support of house bill one twenty
two to assist people being able
to afford marketplace coverage
lower The New Mexico uninsured
rate to the greatest extent
possible to achieve this public
policy goal this bill must
ensure though New Mexico in
amount of revenues get into the
hands of New Mexico residents
for premium subsidization and
costsharing assistance for
marketplace coverage and not re
directed to other initiatives
state lawmakers should also be
mindful of the three challenges
which I believe have been raised
today one is that the increased
surtax will impact premium rates
of payers whether their
individual employer government
sponsored.
Over to you New Mexico will be
the second highest top insurance
tax state that could exist be
exacerbated by the
reintroduction of the federal
hit tax by the by the
administration.
And three affordability
considerations must include
assistance to employer based
health care coverage under the
marketplace shop coverage as so
many small medium sized
employers have faced double
digit increases in cost to
medical information western sky
remains available to assist the
sponsor lawmakers and the
superintendent other regulators
and considering these issues to
fine tune house bill one twenty
two to successfully achieve its
honorable public policy goals
for New Mexico thank you.
Thank you Stephanie Chardon
Clark.
Good morning members of the
committee my name is Stephanie
Chardon Clark and the secretary
of the taxation and revenue
department I stand in support of
this bill and I just want to add
in addition to the comments of
others that this bill will offer
an efficient way for tax and Rev
to administer this revenue
source because the premium tax
already exists in our Jen tax
system the department will
simply need to change the rate
in the distributions and all
that means that TRD can
implement this bill without any
additional resources and on time
I'll note also there's currently
a difference in the revenue
impact scoring between LFC and
TRD on this bill we we believe
that we're in touch with the LFC
analysts this morning and
they'll be issuing an update
that will reflect consensus and
are scoring last I just want to
add you know this this bill has
been presented as as those
making comments in opposition as
a tax increase I want to
emphasize the comments that the
sponsor made at the beginning
this really maintains the status
quo from a tax rate perspective
by replacing a federal fee that
was phased out with the state
fees so that we end up with the
equivalent rate being paid thank
you madam chair.
Thank you madam secretary and
I'm sorry I didn't that use your
title Nicholas Cordoba.
Thank you madam chair.
Nicholas you are muted.
Yes okay perfect thank you madam
chair my name is Nicholas
Cordoba I'm an attorney at the
New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty we at the center stand
in strong support of H. B. one
twenty two.
Affordability is a significant
barrier for New Mexicans when
seeking health insurance in fact
ninety percent of New Mexicans
believe it's important for the
state to make health care more
affordable H. B. one twenty two
helps make that a reality for
tens of thousands of New
Mexicans the bill would drive
down costs of plans for up to
twenty three thousand Mexicans
because more people would enroll
in plans on the exchange costs
would go down for everyone else.
H. B. one twenty two would also
prove equity in our healthcare
system by extending health care
coverage to uninsured Mexicans
who don't qualify for coverage
at all using the money raised
through H. B. one twenty two
towards expanding health care
coverage to all New Mexicans who
can't access it is absolutely
critical especially during the
pandemic in which everyone
everyone needs access to health
care certainly we've heard
opposition today arguing that
these costs would be borne by
small businesses in New Mexico
however I really want to
reemphasize the superintendents
point which I'm sure he will on
to NA that most businesses are
self insured and that this bill
would not impact self insured
plans.
So H. B. one twenty two is a win
win win for New Mexico insurance
companies get more people
enrolled.
Providers get more cost for
their services compensated by
people who can now get covered.
And more families can access
affordable quality health care
coverage thank you.
Thank you Nicholas Kristof
permit us.
Good morning madam chair good
morning committee thank you for
the opportunity to speak my name
is Christopher and it is all the
cookie Mexico on the executive
director of together for
brothers about half of the young
men of color that we work with
that too for being do not have
health insurance because they
are not their families with them
me too much to be eligible for
Medicare but don't have enough
to buy a plan on the exchange.
This would allow young men of
color and some of their family
members to have access to health
insurance some of them for the
first time I especially want to
do is set out to legislators for
including undocumented immigrant
families in this bill.
Like Bill Jordan said when.
We are all going to help your
New Mexico it's more New
Mexicans have access to health
care during the COVID we see
that young men of color are less
likely to get COVID tested or
seeking medical treatment
because they don't have
healthcare insurance in a really
worried about the impact the
cost to them and their families
this is one step in the right
direction to make sure the all
New Mexicans are healthier thank
you.
Thank you Christopher Carey
robin Brander.
Hello madam chair I carry robin
Brander I am a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
Medical Society good morning to
everyone we do stand in support
of house bill one twenty two our
physicians really support
efforts that are being made to
ensure that there is access to
quality healthcare and quality
services throughout the state of
New Mexico as chairwoman on
Armstrong stated twenty three
thousand more New Mexicans would
become eligible and be able to
afford insurance through the
insurance exchange if this bill
passes and we as physicians know
that those twenty three thousand
New Mexicans would then have a
better option and more access to
seek treatment from a clinician
and received treatment from
those clinicians in order to be
healthier and let us stronger
quality of life we know that
that is incredibly important to
make sure that patients are not
waiting for care until their
conditions become emergent and
create another stress on the
system by having care be delayed
we also think that this bill and
more efforts to make insurance
plans affordable through the
insurance exchange is an
important step in answering
growing calls around consumer
protection in the healthcare
service industry and we believe
it is far more productive to
make sure that our patients and
our citizens can qualify for
affordable health insurance
plans through the insurance
exchange so that they can have
this access to care while us as
physicians and clinicians across
the state of New Mexico can
receive appropriate compensation
for those services through the
plans once the services have
been happy to get into our
patients for all of those
reasons we think house bill one
twenty two as an important piece
of legislation and to support at
the committee thank you so much.
Thank you Erica.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Eric how gave us and I am the
policy director at Oatley we
stand in favor of house bill one
twenty two and see it as a
racial justice issue this
pandemic has disproportionately
affected black indigenous and
people of color and we have seen
positive test spike in these
communities and in turn they are
also a majority of those on the
front lines of this pandemic
these communities are also
struggling with health care
coverage this act will expand
coverage equitably giving
priority to low wage workers and
those most in need that don't
have access now for these
reasons we stand in favor and
urged committee members to vote
in favor of house bill one
twenty two thank you.
Thank you Karen what lock.
Sorry hi madam chair.
Hearing you were on for a second
then you are muted so try.
Okay let me try again you're
good you're good now okay great
madam chair members of the
committee and Karen Witt lock
with the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we stand in strong
support H. B. one twenty two we
want to thank sponsor for
breaking this very important
legislation to help provide
health care in New Mexico would
like to echo the comments of
voices for children secretary
Chardon Clark and the center
online poverty this will reduce
the uninsured in New Mexico
three increased health care
funding thanks again to the
sponsor and I would like to urge
your sport.
Thank you Karen Pamela
Blackwell.
Pamela if you're you need to and
you.
Can you hear me now yes we can
okay thank you
good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Pamela Blackwell I'm the
director of policy and
communications for the New
Mexico hospital association on
behalf of our forty six hospital
members we stand and support at
house bill one twenty two we'd
like to note our appreciation to
representative Armstrong and
superintendent toll the staff
for taking the time to discuss
with us the concerns we had
prior to deciding to support
this bill we do believe this
bill will help provide health
care coverage to more New
Mexicans expanding and improving
coverage for saman bring others
and so that they now have
coverage this as others have
stated will help more New
Mexicans access the essential
preventive and acute care
services they need their
provided by New Mexicos
hospitals in our provider
partners should this bill pass
we look forward to working with
OSI and others in developing the
regulations necessary to ensure
that this bill achieves the aims
and it's goals so we stand and
support for House Bill one
twenty two thank you.
Thank you and I'm I got a text
so Gabby if you're if I'm I've
been asked to call on Dr
Angelique to leader and I'm
sorry if I butchered the name
but she thing clinic and has a
minute now so if we could.
Bring her up next.
Okay go ahead drive ten a half.
Thank you
The.
Representative Thompson and and
members of the committee my name
is Dr Anjali teenage I'm a
family physician in the
executive director of cost of
the Saluda clinic in Albuquerque
that serves up folks on Medicaid
and private insurance as well as
a more than seventy percent of
our patients are uninsured many
of them uninsured because they
cannot afford to pay for
insurance or they look at the
out of pocket costs in the year
and it's overwhelming or they
may be uninsured because they
don't have traditional access to
health insurance it's really
frustrating as a clinician to
work with folks who don't have
access to health care and try to
make do when we're in a state
that has so much richness and
we're in the place of a COVID
pandemic that is brutally
affecting our whole community
and also in the midst of a
racial justice awakening many of
our uninsured New Mexicans this
really cuts down racial lines
also also in response to small
businesses so many of my
patients want to start small
businesses of their own or go
work for a small business but
are locked into their jobs
because of limitations around
insurance I know so many people
who would love to build their
own businesses but health
insurance is such a crippling
costs to them we can really be
innovative creative responsive
and meet the moment in the state
for a when it's been amazing to
hear so many people up
positively support this bill and
I stand in support of this bill
thank you.
Thank you doctor for fitting us
in in your and what I imagine is
a crazy schedule next we have
crystal curly.
Hello my name is crystal early
and I'm from making the county
and I strongly urge members of
the committee to support H. B.
one twenty two because it does
support New Mexico families and
it.
Overall just.
It really does impact you know
people and our families that are
struggling with health issues
and don't have access to health
care that they rightfully
deserve and this bill levy it's
those barriers that you've been
experiencing for so long and I
just again strongly urge members
of the community support R. H.
B. one twenty two.
Thank you crystal per record.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Kurt record on the director
Liz from advocacy administrative
New Mexico within us
administrative New Mexico also
speaks on behalf of the New
Mexico conference of churches
I'm here today to offer it to
the ask support for H. B. one
twenty two we certainly concur
with all the arguments that have
been made by the bills expert
witnesses as well as the
previous speakers in favor of
this bill and we thank them for
those comments most importantly
we believe in equitable access
for all people to the rate to
basic health care services and
we believe that HB twenty two is
a step in that direction we urge
your support thank you for
thanks for the time.
Thank you Kurt Nicole Comeaux.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee my name's Nicole
Comeaux and the Medicaid
director
I we stand in strong support of
this bill as many of your call
the Human Services department
was charged with exploring
affordability options coming out
of the twenty nineteen
legislative session and you've
heard reference to the outcomes
of that study from the sponsor
and the the experts previously
at this truly was the best
option to insure so many more
New Mexicans and ensure access
to affordable coverage we look
forward to working in
partnership with the off the
superintendent and others.
With that with the passage of
this bill I to transition that
the many New Mexicans who have
been enrolled in the Medicaid
program throughout the public
health emergency into their next
source of coverage and this
would surely.
Help them gain access to that
coverage and more affordable
manner so again we stand and
support thank you.
Thank you I'm we have seven two
three two eight six.
Madam chair it looks like you
can't that that person can't be
of promoted to talk because of
having an older version of the
zoom okay all right thank you
for that madam chair so we will
go to Cecilia.
Good morning madam chair and
committee my name is Cecilia I
am a disabled person that has a
spinal cord injury I will like
to support H. B. one twenty two
because I use a lot of supplies
for my daily living I'm
fortunately do not have to pay
out of pocket for the supplies
anymore because now Medicaid
pays for these items other
people can use the restroom but
I can't I have to use my
catheter to use the restroom I
used to have to pay out of
pocket for the supply lines when
people cannot afford the
supplies in the state not safe
for these for their bodies
because they can end up with
bladder infection and also
kidney infection and that causes
more on Medicaid this is why we
must support funding to expand
health care to create more
access for people like me thank
you.
Thank you Cecilia Dr Jessie
Barnes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Dr just
depends on a primary care
provider the community health
center in Albuquerque's south
valley and a member of a group
called primary care advocates
for healthy communities the
stand in strong support of this
bill as Dr committed to mention
we are the ones on the front
lines to see day to day the
devastating impacts that on
affordable insurance and in
access to insurance has on our
patients in the communities
where we work we also know that
our patients have not seen any
of the financial benefits as was
mentioned previously of the
repeal of the federal tax on the
contrary they continue to
provide insurance unaffordable
for many and impractical unable
to use it because of high copays
and deductibles we also urged
members of this committee as the
bill moves through the
legislative process to work to
ensure that those who need it
most are the ones who benefit
from this bill that we work
equity into the actual
implementation and that patients
who are excluded from the
exchanges for variety of reasons
including insurance including
immigration status and were
unable to afford insurance are
the ones who are first in line
to benefit from the bill thank
you.
Thank you doctor Barnes I'm this
next name I apologize in advance
stock to you what PTA's do I
it's very wrong but hopefully
you recognize state your name.
Thank you
yeah thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is such you want to say and I'm
the executive director of the
New Mexico Asian families and we
worked directly with the Asian
Pacific Islander community
primarily with refugees and
immigrants and as we all know
this population is
disproportionately and deeply
affected by lack of access to
affordable healthcare and
especially during this pandemic
we've seen has not had fair and
equitable access to resources
and aid which is a deep personal
and economic crimes consequences
for our families and so I
believe that we believe that by
reducing these out of pocket
costs for uninsured community
members will be able to take a
vital step towards immediate
health and safety for
communities so with all that The
New Mexico Asian families stands
in strong support of H. B. one
twenty two thank you thank you
Jeffery Bustamante.
Good morning committee members
Jeffery Bustamante CEO The New
Mexico health insurance exchange
the exchange stand in support of
this legislation for its ability
to address affordability
expand in Romans and help for
New Mexicans get connected to
coverage without restating all
of with insured already I'd like
to highlight a few
considerations first when we
talked with New Mexicans across
the state affordability is the
primary barrier for people to
obtaining coverage or currently
uninsured second larger
enrollment in the exchange
supports long term premium
stability would you heard a
little bit already about and
finally not only with this bill
how many of those uninsured New
Mexicans get coverage but
there's also a benefit to those
currently on the exchange the
greater affordability to our
current enrollees would allow
them to use those savings to
train more comprehensive
coverage or use that money to
address other needs thank you.
Thank you doctor Jamie Majdi
again I apologize.
I thank you madam chair members
of the committee my name is Dr
Jeannie majesty and I'm a family
doctor in Albuquerque I'm also a
member of primary care advocates
for healthy communities I agree
with everyone who spoke before
me but I also wanted to mention
that we are already paying for
lack of access to health
insurance but through
Increase health care costs
related to people only getting
emergency.
As well as through the health of
our communities I just wanted to
share one story of one of the
thousands of people in New
Mexico who is
excluded from the health
insurance system that this bill
would help to solve.
that she is
was not able it is not able to
get health insurance and found
some of the costs during her
pregnancy to to be incredibly
stressful and missed prenatal
appointments because she was not
able to afford before then and
that resulted in her having a
pre terms of delivery because
she was not able to have access
to a system that made it
affordable for her to get the
care that she needed and that
ended up causing increased cost
to our medical system damage to
her damage to her family and it
could have been prevented if
this bill in the system and
better health care affordability
had been president I urge you to
pass this bill house bill one
twenty two thank you
Thanks.
Thank you Christina James.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Christina James and I am a
leader with forward together I
am in support of H. B. one
twenty two because I have a
child that has a heart condition
and has to take medications
every day I have to worry that
if I find a job I may not
qualify for Medicaid and if that
should happen I would like the
option of affordable health
care.
Thank you.
Thank you Valerie Bellson.
Hi good morning madam chair
members of the committee I am a
leader with will work together
action and I serve for H. B. one
twenty two because New Mexicans
are struggling with health care
and want the state to take
action I think everyone should
be able to get health care and I
would like to say that home on
some with the one you love by we
all have a place on New Mexicans
have a place and deserve the
right to get health care I love
going.
Thank you Larry heard ran.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Larry heard and
registered lobbyists with
Christian Health plant
in Presbyterian healthcare
services we actually been having
conversations about this
legislation the concept in these
for for quite awhile with the
sponsor
superintendent insurance HSD and
also the administration and and
Jane Wester the governor's
health policy adviser going and
actually last session and within
those conversations continued
just a couple of things to point
out when we first looked at this
legislation the main concern
from health plan perspective was
two things one was if this is
going to be implemented to
replace the the federal tax or
fees secretary Chardon Clark
described that it was done in
such a way that we could build
into our rate structure for the
next plan your for health plan
members and and by the use of
the effective date in this
legislation that was achieved in
so that way we're not trying to
change insurance rates for
members and health plan your the
second one is something we're
still working on
with all those parties I
mentioned which is the only the
concern we have is if the
federal tax is reapplied what's
going to happen with this tax so
that we don't actually have an
increase that's it it's a little
trickier to figure that one out
we've been having some
conversations with the sponsor
in the administration also to
try and figure out language that
we may be able to insert this
bill and
As it moves forward and we
appreciate the the ability that
they have and and the
conversation that we've had with
the with the sponsor and others
involved in legislation to
transfer can come up with some
language so in the event that
that federal taxes reimposed
that we are aren't increase in
taxes for members but we're
we're moving in the right
direction and we appreciate the
the legislation and what the
goal is and it does benefit all
New Mexicans to have more people
insured and have access to
health care so appreciate your
time and and appreciate the work
of the sponsor and all those who
have been helping on this thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Larry and I am going
to turn this back over to madam
vice chair this morning I think
we're going to call ourselves
the three blind chair committee
so I'm gonna turn it over to
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you Representative for
filling in for me I appreciate
that next there is a number as
someone maybe calling in seventy
three.
Two eight six okay I think we
have to pass over them because
they can't get in okay that will
go to Efia.
Good morning can you hear me yes
we can okay good morning madam
chair and members of the
committee my name is out the LFC
and from the county county.
And as you all know I've been
working on this affordable
health care for four years now
for our New Mexico families and
I made a families.
We still are fighting to get
help with medical bills.
And due to last year my family
was hit with the COVID.
My mom was flown out my brother
was flown out.
They were taken to the hospital
with ambulances also.
And now the treatment go bills
ambulance bills the.
The hot the helicopter bills are
coming in now I had to bring my
mom under my under my we brought
her home.
Is to take care of her.
She's having liver problems
kidney problems and.
Sometimes get
a coherent what I have to take
a.
To get treatment.
And her bills are aren't getting
any lesser.
I've tried to take it to the IHS
IHS can really help us.
And she's under.
And that would take anything
just happen in medical bills and
her and her prescription.
Has.
So I urge you to pass H. B. one
twenty two.
And let's get our families.
Taking care of.
This pandemic really did a lot
that much to all of us in our
home.
Our finances.
And what we and our food that we
struggling with.
And I urge you to pass H. B. one
twenty two thank you thank you
at the next we have lily Irvin
Vitela.
New Mexico first.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is
cleared in the tele and I'm the
president and executive director
New Mexico First and I want to.
just raised up the powerful
stories that others have shared
in support of this I was really
blessed last year to spend.
several months having community
conversations across New Mexico
about health and what's working
for us and what our assets are
and also what are challenges are
what our struggles are and we
continue those conversations
into our health body mind and
spirit town hall and all
together you know I got to hear
from over five hundred New
Mexicans who were on some who
were medical professionals but
most that we're just everyday
people small business people
teachers
Grandparents you name it like it
we really had quite the spectrum
and we made it a point to reach
out to folks in different parts
of New Mexico but there were
some stories that showed up
again and again and from those
stories and that wisdom can
solutions and one of the
clearest solutions was that we
need to do a better job of
including those who don't have
access to quality care to that
access and financial barriers
are real we really believe that
house bill one twenty two is
moving in the right direction in
terms of addressing access to
quality care and I would also
add that you know front and
center and all of our
conversations where the
importance of equity so making
sure that we're not only
extending and expanding access
for those who are we have which
is important but also that we're
extending and expanding access
to folks who have not had access
to care and so the wisdom in
this legislation is evident it's
very much aligns with the wisdom
of community and the strong
consensus recommendations that
came out of our town hall and so
for those reasons New Mexico for
stance in strong support of
house bill one twenty two
encourages you all to this well
thank you.
Thanks thank you next we have a
use do I'm not sure if I'm
pronouncing that correctly.
Yes thank you madam chair
Hello can you hear me yes we can
thank you thank you madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is used here in my favorite
I am massage therapist in
Albuquerque at casa the salute
clinic from which you already
heard Dr Anjali teenage us speak
earlier this morning
I also want to support my voice
my support for house bill one
twenty two.
As a massage therapist numerous
clients will only come to me for
Pat palliative care in the form
of massage when asked by a
doctor or other clinician
despite struggling to move due
to injury or chronic pain that
would be much more viable and
other medical expenses were
covered for them to seek the
support for their own well being
inability to move as we heard
from many other.
From the speakers this morning
it's particularly crucial that
we.
Center that the needs of our
most vulnerable community
members.
Both that costs a salute and in
prior work with the immigrant
community I've seen countless
families who depend on the E. R.
when extremely urgent needs
arise rather than seeking care
before it becomes so urgent so
this bill would allow for
families to have greater access
to Care that would be affordable
and free up ER for true
emergencies for other community
members thank you so much for
supporting the spell.
Thank you next we have leisure
McLaughlin.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Liam McLaughlin I am eight I
am from McKinley County I am a
leader with four together action
I strongly support H. B. one
twenty two because I am a mother
of a wonderful sign.
He just turned five years old
last month.
We are one of the people in New
Mexico that had trouble with
Medicaid in the past right when
he was born when we got home
when everything was going fine
but then later on down the line
he got sick we didn't have
Medicaid then I was only
seventeen at that time
seventeen.
And we decided to take him to
the hospital Rehoboth in here in
Gallup.
I told a friend does that we M.
didn't have Medicaid is there a
way that you guys can help us to
get on Medicaid they said we
understand you can go ahead and
tell the doctor went to go see
them said okay we ended up
getting seen told the doctor I
cannot remember his name I
should have put his name down
but I didn't.
But I told him that we don't
have Medicaid here understood
and he told me my boyfriend and
my son.
I understand this let me help
you we will get through this and
then we will help you get with
Medicaid I said okay thank you I
just want my son to be taken
care of right now.
Couple months later after that
we had the X. ray done on him
are we got
a bill in the mail.
Apple two two months later
twenty two thousand how am I a
seventeen year old girl that
just gave birth to a newborn is
supposed to pay that bill I to
this day I am twenty two years
old I will be twenty three this
Friday.
I have worked in two thousand
nineteen I have tried to pay for
that debt but I am still now
carrying that debt now I have
Medicaid Medicaid is telling me
that I can not they can't help
me with that it has to come out
of my own pocket I was still
going to school then I graduated
two thousand seventeen.
I.
I hope this story help me to
understand that women like me at
that age didn't have health care
after having first.
How are they supposed to kill
them pay that bill.
Just like how I am right now I
am struggling to pay for it and
it is hard and I don't want
anybody like my age there in
that age to have that same
problem and carrying it on and
having that problem do the whole
lifetime thank you for
listening.
Thank you Liane happy birthday
next we have someone from Health
Action New Mexico.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Barbara Webber and executive
director of Health Action New
Mexico and I personally want to
commend many of the speakers and
the stories that were shared we
one of the things that we do it
health action is we have a
program called rural voices
recovery and we hear from six
different parts of New Mexico in
terms of rural communities and
the issue of health care during
the pandemic particularly is
first and foremost in people's
minds and their lack of access
to it particularly in rural
areas.
When we talk about we talk about
the vision of what we want our
community to look like as we
recover from COVID and bring it
back stronger than ever and the
number one concern for a lot of
the communities is access to
health care so if we want to
build rebuild our economy we
want to rebuild New Mexico
stronger than ever we have to
have everyone have access to
affordable health care I think
the affordability fund is a
major step in meeting this call
and we urge the committee to
vote for in support of a house
bill one twenty two thank you.
Thank you Robert I'm next we
have a.
Tania James.
Hello madam chair and committee.
I'm Tania James from Gallup
McKinley county with school work
together action I support we one
twenty two because I believe
that health care should be for
all and this will insure that
thank you for hearing my come.
Thank you time I'm I think
that's everyone I see in
administration but I think
that's.
Not sure who administration
might be.
One of the.
When
we know it is so you're not but
will but I was settled them
don't need will make people is
so you're not only that only
that is active on Twitter Act.
Keep up to the level for so for
you but I am C. M. D. those and
so your mother is a media is
in court you fools Anselmo's
sign used to wear when I think
either in this but other the
work problems and we got it out
in the building that I would be
really reluctant the neon not
then yes it will medical care
the government the whole thing
was the fellow you don't miss
this it is the but almost about
the amendment posted what I'm
like I don't impose is
renewable.
I see Mr redwood dimple and I
put the info I don't know if you
get brought many gay men on that
unless it look at the Manteca
Mrs C. W. yellow loans at and
then select are Alabama even as
a Saudi also make you don't one
girl going to sugar but I'm it
came up with it on us I've been
there E. S. co more Europeans
okay which was for for a lotus
the app for your you all for
you are a true blue him being do
this simply be those emotions
that US yes.
Thank you I'm and we have our
last person for work from
forward together action.
That a band then I stand in that
on the other person behind the
gate at the spa high young
publisher good morning madam
chair members of the committee
my name is part of Craig with
for work together action of
McKinley County.
I stand in strong support of HB
twenty two.
This bill is a path to
healthier.
And a happier state.
And thank you for listening to
my comment.
Thank you thank you we have one
more leroy so.
Good morning can you hear me yes
we can go ahead.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is
leroy so I am from Mexico.
The court leaders for a photo
together action I strongly
support HB suddenly want
because.
Other this bill it is important
to our younger generation we not
need to overlook them.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you to okay I think that's
everyone.
Go back to the panel.
And
Madam chair is there
C. sorry.
Anything you'd like to add to
close before we go to the
committee thank you madam chair
I appreciate that I appreciate
everyone who was here to
to speak up I think this
provides us with an opportunity
for people to access health
insurance who can't access it
now because of affordability and
or they just are not allowed to
purchase insurance on the
exchange and.
Five eight purchasing insurance
it with that's affordable
they're participating in that
and paying for the cost of their
care it is better for the health
of families when they can access
coverage of payment source for
their health care they'll access
health care more easily is
better for our providers to have
a payment source when they see
patients and it is
it is better for the entire
population that gets insured
because the more you have
insured the more people you have
in the to spread the risk on and
the risk pool on the costs that
that ultimately stabilizer
lowers premiums and so I think
this is a win win
I I do want to say that while
we're addressing first those who
are on the exchange partially
because that's where we have the
infrastructure and ability to do
this
those who can't purchased on the
exchange are
are large and diverse kind of
reasons why they can't purchase
on the exchange and I want to
just say it is not completely
and Dr totally undocumented
individuals are many folks
probably the largest group being
daca recipients who are not
allowed to purchase on it health
insurance on the exchange even
paying full price it's not just
that they can't get subsidies
they can't purchase and I will
say I'm you know being
Insuring of folks to the health
and the medical insurance pool I
know that there is not an option
out there that the carriers are
not selling to folks who can't
purchase on the exchange there's
so there's for many people they
have no option they they can't
buy it even if they had all the
money in the world they don't
have the option so I'm I really
urged the support of the
committee so that we can provide
as many people as possible the
option to get our coverage so
that we can support their
ability to access health care
and for our providers to be able
to provide that health care and
with that madam chair I think
will stand for questions.
Madam chair your muted.
Thank you.
and I also raise my hand
accidentally
let's see what else to do
Well first go to at.
Representative Thomson for
questions.
Thank you madam chair and it's
it's kind of not a question I
you know I I keep hearing that
particularly the lobbyist for
the insurance company say all
the prices going to go up the
price is going to go up I'm and
I think somebody said this and I
think it's really important to
To magnify it that all of our
prices go up with uninsured
people when there's
uncompensated care when there
are people whose care is not
being covered by insurance we
all pay that price so I think
that's kind of a red herring
that that is it tempting to
throw us off so madam Madam
chair representative Armstrong
if you are if you would like to
comment on that I would
appreciate it but I think it's
really important for people to
understand that having anyone
without an insurance and getting
uncompensated care is already
costing us a lot more than it
would if we gave them a way to
afford health care thank you
that's all I have I'm thank you
thank you madam chair and
Representative I couldn't of
said it better if you don't if
you are accessing health care
through uncompensated care that
is often reserve for the most
costly care which is hospital
care and not
as easily accessible for a
preventive care and the more
payer sources that we have
that user it is for people to
access the healthcare they need
when and where they need it
thank you.
And director told did you want
to mention anything your hand is
up but I didn't know that might
be from before.
thank you madam chair I do want
to speak to two points if I may
if this first one.
we should all acknowledge that
we are already paying for these
uninsured folks.
Whether it's the hospital and
part of the coral towers
galloping Lordsburg go on and on
and on they're already seeing
these folks in the emergency
room.
Which is the most expensive
place for these folks to get
care.
The cost of that on and of of
uncompensated care gets cranked
into the rates that they
negotiate with insurance
companies the providers so we're
already paying.
For these folks and yet they
don't get the benefit of the
kind of health coverage that
would help reduce overall costs
the second point I want to make
is one that folks brought up
about.
The the percentage the
percentage in the abstract is
pretty meaningless the tax
percentage has to be applied to
the premiums and I'm very
pleased to report through a
considerable efforts of a lot of
folks including staff in this
office we have among the lowest
premiums in the country on our
health insurance
exchange and so we're not only
through this bill trying to
extend coverage we're trying to
do it at the lowest cost
possible.
And as we put more people into
the exchange.
We grow the pool of risk and
that's a benefit to all the
insurance companies who are
already offer their policies
through the exchange so.
It is inappropriate to suggest
that there are some sort of
linear relationship about cost
increases associated with this
bill that simply.
Not the case.
Thank you.
Thank you superintendent
Next we have of Representative
Gail Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair
I.
I have some some questions on
this bill to say the least madam
chair I wondered
Who would qualify for this
health exchange insurance
exchange.
I'm madam chair and
Representative the the folks
that are on the health insurance
exchange now are any individual
that it does not qualify for
Medicaid and it doesn't have
employer coverage they
have to be US citizens and so
There are a lot of people
excluded there's also a small
business portion of the exchange
the shop which we I failed to
mention earlier that
there is absolutely a
possibility as we take this one
step at a time and and see how
much funds we have and and where
the barriers are that we can
devise a way to make it more
affordable for small businesses
to be able to participate on the
exchange as well we don't have a
large uptake of small businesses
but both individuals and small
businesses can purchase exchange
our insurance through the
exchange now.
Okay thank you for that answer
thank you madam chair and does
anyone know how many health
insurance companies are are
there in New Mexico.
Mr superintendent madam chair of
the superintendent that answer
he knows he knows exactly yes
please.
no.
Thank you for that answer thank
you madam chair and is that down
do you know if that's gone down
since the affordable Care Act
was put into place.
Or up.
It has gone up
But only marginally
representative Armstrong okay
thanks we want to close.
At the end of December but no
one is that come in and is on
the exchange now.
Okay thank you so much for that
answer
let's see.
it says in the significant
issues is that their retiree
health care authority states
that the bill may have
significant negative impact.
For the New Mexico retiree
health authority can someone
comment on that.
I'm sure the superintendent can
madam chair but I will say the
the retiree health care sorority
is a recipient and we cannot and
this tax to oversupply and so
they're unaffected.
Okay thank you for that that's I
kind of assumed that but I
wasn't a hundred percent sure if
I and just wanted to make a
statement that we're always
talking about
utilizing federal dollars.
While federal dollars your
taxpayer dollars that's they
they don't make money they don't
I just have money it's money
that is paid in by individuals
and that's federal tax dollars
so I just wanted to make sure
that everyone remembers that and
that's all my questions thank
you.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Marian
Matthews.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and all
the people who participated in
this
in general I am certainly in
favor of expanding health care
and health care coverage but I
am concerned about the impact on
premiums
Of there being that would be a
people who already have coverage
and so if I could just.
I'll ask a couple questions
about that.
I remember last year when this
came up
it was a lot of discussion in
this committee and I voted to
support.
Is it basically a continuation
of the of the of the premium
that was that the feds we're
going to do away with and at the
time the discussion was about
that if we didn't do this all
the insurance companies would be
doing is paying that money over
to their shareholders.
And there wouldn't be any
reduction in premiums and
I have to give superintendent
toll some real credit because
his office at least based on the
on the newspaper stories I
remember reading managed to
actually I said tax expired was
able to get reduction in
premiums for insurance holders
are it in my remembering that
correctly right as
superintendent tell.
Yes you are.
And could you remind me.
Sure what the average or median
percentage was in the reduction
of premiums that you were able
to negotiate.
Well there are greater than the
tax percentage we're talking
about because we put the plants
through a.
Much more rigorous actuarial
analysis that has been true in
the past and I want to give them
credit for being cooperative
with us.
In that effort.
So I'm but just in general how
much would people who had
private insurance last year how
much that their premiums of.
We're we're reduces resolve the
efforts of your office and the
expiration of the tax.
Well on the exchange was I'd say
on average about eight percent
reduction.
Okay and madam chair and
representative I just want to
stress and that was not just
because of of this tax Federal
of sea going away that was a
portion so it was not an eight
percent reduction because of of
this feat going away true.
Thank you madam madam chair and
Representative can't keep going
Representative total
superintendent Earl
you madam chair
So if we if this.
If this bill passes.
What percentage increases there
likely to be for existing.
Customers who have health
insurance and what's the the
likely cost to them.
If I may madam chair
Representative Matthews
it's impossible to know that
because as you're probably all
of where you know most of the
costs that are insurance company
covers in their premiums are
related to medical experience.
And so it's that medical
experience which really drives
premium costs but I would argue
that reducing the amount of
uncompensated care the gets
cranked into rates by providers
you know it has a direct offset.
To the amount that they that
that Kerry would otherwise have
to pay.
I'm madam chair superintendent
so I I understand that argument
and I actually at on a systemic
wide basis I understand it and I
and I don't disagree with it but
that seems to me to be a little
bit longer term than what these
these people who have this
insurance now and who had the
reduction of when are they
likely to see an increase of
this tax goes into effect two
years from now if there is an
increase.
And within madam chair sorry
madam chair it superintendent
within that same period that two
year period is it going to be
possible to expand the coverage
pool so that there may actually
not be an increase.
yes and in fact it's a very
timely question Representative
Matthews.
Because the by an administration
has just announced an open
enrollment period sixty day open
enrollment period the start on
February fifteenth and so we
along with the exchange medical
insurance pool and everyone else
will be trying to drive in
Roland into the exchange and
just as bringing twenty three
thousand uninsured people into
the pole makes that pool bigger.
therefore spreads the risk of
those both of those things
sure helped drive down premium
costs and madam chair and
representative if I could call
on my other expert witness had a
had a comment on this as well
go Estrada.
Thank you madam chair
representative Matthew just add
on to that point if if we are
able to make these investments
into premiums and cost sharing
assistance for New Mexicans the
urban institute does estimate
that we could see affordability
increase for New Mexicans in
particular for those who would
receive subsidized coverage
through the exchange their
health care costs could go down
by as much as forty three
percent.
And those who don't get
subsidized coverage through the
exchange could see their
premiums still drop indirectly
by as much as twenty percent far
surpassing any impact from the
this tax.
Madam chair at.
If I could ask Mister strada
question would you say that
their premiums might drop
indirectly by twenty percent
which which is indirectly main.
What I mean by indirectly for
that specific population is that
they currently do not receive
subsidized coverage through the
exchange right now because their
income is too high but if we
expand the risk pool
Representative more individuals
who are healthier that help
spread the risk across the pool
which then ends up bringing the
premiums down across the board.
And madam madam chair and Mister
strada does that mean they would
potentially see a reduction in
the premium of the estimated
twenty percent.
Madam chair of the Marian
Matthews Representative
Matthews.
They should see that it would be
up to the insurance companies
working with the superintendent
of insurance to help adjust
those rates to be reflective of
that risk pool.
Madam chair a superintendent
toll calls back to you
I'm I am I'm asking these
questions because in my district
I am going to have the number of
people who are going to be very
concerned that their health
insurance premiums are going up
and I want to be able to answer
their questions that if I vote
for this I'm not only done the
right thing for the uninsured
but I've done.
Something that's not harming.
Did the people I represent and
can you.
Expand if you would on Mr status
comment about.
How the insurance companies may
respond and what role your
office will have been trying to
be sure we keep premiums not
increasing for the people who
already have health insurance
well I certainly can give you
our commitment that that we're
gonna do everything we can to
continue to hold the line or
reduce premiums are available on
the exchange this bill will
actually give us all more tools
to do their
you're the largest employer
other than the schools.
You know are typically the
hospitals and healthcare
providers and this is going to
provide direct benefit to them
by reducing their on compensated
care.
Conversely there almost all self
insured so they're not going to
face the prospect of having to
pay the tax because as as noted
earlier whether it's a public
retirement authority of our
state employees or any other
self insured arrangement this
tax does not apply to the.
At all and finally I want to
know the.
The vast majority I will say the
best the majority of the folks
who are covered through the
exchange or people in fact.
you work for small employers.
So this is a way for those small
employers to ensure that their
staff their employees have
access to affordable Care.
I would note.
I'm always ready for an excuse
to come to tell us to talk to
somebody about anything so if
you need me to come up to
explain to your constituents why
this is in their interest I'm
more than happy to do that.
In Albuquerque.
Madam chair representative I
just want to add one more thing
you know small businesses
struggle to have to provide
health insurance for their
employees partly because their
risk pool is small and if they
get one sick person major
illness in a in a relatively
small group the premiums go up
for that whole group because
they have to pick up those
medical costs it is well known
in in calculating premiums and
and that that medical costs that
the larger of pool you have just
spread that risk of all
across the lower your premiums
will be and this effort in our
projections and the study by the
urban institute their
projections would increase would
potentially increase the
enrollment in the exchange by
almost fifty percent that is an
extremely large of increase in
that risk pool of people cross
which of those costs are spread
which should lower costs which
was
because point about potentially
lowering the cost is because the
group to be insured in the
exchange as much greater and so
that I can't emphasize that
enough when you have more people
insured the cost premium costs
for everyone goes down.
Thank you madam chair and at
superintendent total for your
answers
I understand that I was one of
my primary concerns was whether
the period of time would be it
is not not contemporaneously.
And that you could see increases
in the short term and it would
be a long term before you would
start to see the impact of the
additional people into the
system and and superintendent
Thomas is has responded to that
concern and I believe madam
chair you have also so I
appreciate that
I just one more question I think
Twenty three thousand people are
estimated it would where are
these twenty three thousand
people getting health care.
Now if they are getting it at
all can can you just described
this population is to me madam
chair this is an uninsured
population.
Madam chair and does that mean
that they are not on Medicaid
that's correct.
Most.
Madam chair representative
almost twenty percent of the
state is uninsured at this
point.
I'm madam chair that I
understand the figure something
like two hundred thousand New
Mexicans are uninsured is that
right at least at least.
And madam chair will this.
Plan do anything to get beyond
the twenty three thousand.
madam chair and representative
yes we hope so that's that's
kind of the immediate group that
we think will
come on to the exchange and then
we would look for other options
to address those who are
uninsured who can't purchase
through the exchange to try to
get more people insured
it and it's
additionally I wanna noted that
there are quite a number of
people I don't remember that the
number exactly who are on
Medicaid now because we can't
drop them off Medicaid during
the pandemic who wants that the
emergency is over
we estimate it will no longer be
eligible to stay on Medicaid
because we've had a height we've
also had a higher income level
because of during the pandemic
so there will be a number of
people who come off of Medicaid
who then would be eligible to
come on to the exchange.
I thank you madam chairwoman and
and of these these twenty three
thousand people or people who
are employed but they don't.
But but so their income doesn't
qualify them to be eligible for
Medicaid is is that what happens
correct and or or that portion
that I just mentioned that that
were that were on because of the
pandemic who will have to come
off Medicaid.
So so madam chair at the these
twenty three thousand people are
working they just don't make
enough money to afford that is
trash is that right or yes
that's correct okay and madam
chair and superintendent and and
the rest of the panel who
responded to my questions thank
you very much I feel comfortable
now to vote in favor of this
bill thank you thank you very
much.
Madam chair your muted.
Thank you.
I'd like to Representative lord
you have some questions.
Yes I do I thank you madam chair
and I wrote notes all over the
place so forgive me as I flip
around through here I did
impress others ask right now so
one of the things that happened
to me is that I have private
health care insurance and I was
on cobra and it was two hundred
fifty dollars a month and as
soon as they implemented
healthcare under Obama my
premium went to five hundred
dollars a month that I can
barely for now but I'm not
eligible for any is this so that
kind of leaves me in avoid work
I'm not eligible for this and I
still have to pay high premiums
when I called my insurance they
said it was the distribution of
premiums after the affordable
health Care Act so is there any
guarantee in here that says that
once we implement this bill that
I will be penalized and have to
have another raise and my
premium is our guarantee that at
absolutely will not happen to me
or my constituents.
Madam chair if we could have the
superintendent respond.
thanks for the question
Representative Lord members of
the committee.
There is no guarantee.
In the bill and I don't see how
there could be but I can tell
you from our experience
certainly just over the past
year that's likely there would
be some your bid significant
opportunities for lower premiums
on the exchange of course you
would have the ability to
purchase
on the exchange if you so chose
to Representative Matthews
question you know only the
people who are eligible for
Medicaid or Medicare.
Looted from purchasing on the
exchanges or as Representative
of Armstrong mentioned daca
recipients.
But other residents of New
Mexico can certainly purchase.
A premium and I know full well
what you're talking about with
respect to cobra premiums there
and saying and the reason for
that is there's no employer
contribution anymore and you're
having to pay a hundred percent
of the premium on the exchange
the folks who are covered have
the benefit of federal support
for.
Thank you superintendent thank
you madam chair so that leads me
to another question so I did
actually investigate getting on
the affordable healthcare act
and it was anything but when I
checked for me it was going to
be seven hundred and fifty
dollars which is more than I'm
paying with the six thousand
dollar deductible which is
basically major medical care so
because I'm not eligible for any
of these that actually makes
that unaffordable for me so.
Okay I'm madam chair and
representative was just going to
respond that's exactly our point
about affordability on the
exchange it's not affordable for
for many and while the subsidies
currently are for four hundred
percent and lower and we're
going to focus on the lowest
income it doesn't mean that we
won't be able to at some point
offer some subsidy to those that
are a little higher income level
but also as we mentioned because
the
the increase in the number of
people in that we anticipate
being insured through the
exchange you may see some
reduction in premiums overall
that would impact you even if
you weren't having subsidies we
also madam chair and
representative did pass some
legislation last year that
allows the exchange to begin to
mandate some
benefit design on the exchange
that would could include lower
cost sharing or out of pocket on
lower deductibles and so forth
they have not that isn't being
implemented a quite yet as a
next year that'll come into a
fact so I think there are some
other mechanisms as well that
we're trying to address
affordability on the exchange
but you are exactly right for
many many people it's not very
affordable and it turns into a
major medical plan on like which
is why we really want to try and
even those with subsidies we're
still faced with the high
deductibles and we want to try
and address that so people will
access to health care they need
and stay insured I thank you
madam chair representative so
that leads me to another
question currently how many
people are on the exchange right
now.
Slightly under fifty thousand.
Thank you for that and madam
chair representative and
superintendent how many would
you anticipate you would need to
add into this to see a
significant change in this from
actually going for major medical
with huge premiums and huge
deductibles to something that
would actually trying to health
care like with a twenty dollar
copay.
Madam chair representative
that's a combination of things
the that new efforts of the
health insurance exchange to try
and mandate some of those
changes is I believe it's next
year I don't remember if Jeffrey
still on but the superintendents
sits on that board I can address
that and this
effort won't go into effect
until
plan year twenty three so
January of twenty three before
our anyone could and roll with
it the subsidy
a support.
Okay so.
Thank you for answering that
okay so back to the question
have so there's no guarantee
that money premium small race is
there any guarantee that there
is there a lock in in this
program that says we're going to
lock in the rates
on the affordable health Care or
we're gonna say we want them to
lower them to to a point where
it's for for about how are you
going to make sure that the
rates will go through the roof
because I know in a perfect
world right we're thinking of
this is great we had more people
and but I also know the
insurances for profit and that's
not necessarily how to going to
work out so madam chair madam
chair and representative I'm
gonna let the superintendent
respond with all of the of
things that he's required to do
to make sure that premiums track
without costs and and and I
wanna also mentioned that there
is a cap on how much insurance
companies can make and should
their premiums be in excess of
of that so they're bringing in
more money than that they're not
spending it all on medical care
they have actually have to give
refunds to individuals.
Well you certainly right about
that madam chair and to your
question Representative more.
I think we all need to keep in
mind the fundamental.
Issue of insurance and that is
the larger the pool.
Later the risk is spread and the
greater the potential for lower
premiums this year we were not
only able to negotiate with
insurers for lower premiums on
the exchange one of the other
things that we did was
Insured to your specific concern
that for basic services whether
it's our physician visit to our
other kinds of things that the
actual copay amounts were
limited and we were successful
in that.
That is true the total out of
pocket.
Historically has been
controlled.
The federal government and they
are your you're right but to the
point that
Sure Armstrong is making with
the legislation that was passed
last year this fall.
Mexico health insurance will no
longer be a federal exchange it
will be a state based exchange
we just which gives us all much
more flexibility on how those
plans are structured how they're
offered what their rates are
with their out of pocket cars
costs or.
This bill one twenty two okay
this is even more tools
to ensure that we spread the
risk and we lower the costs.
Thank you thank you madam chair
representative so madam chair so
then my questions going back to
that right now there's fifty
thousand people on there and so
my concern is what if we don't
get a mass amount of people in
there and it doesn't do anything
it doesn't.
Raise the rate I doesn't lower
premiums my concern is
that we're not gonna get all the
people that we need to get that
kind of a no but I'm gonna skip
that of it if you want to go to
another question so if we start
taxing the insurances and we
racists sorry to is a three
point seven five percent.
And madam chair and just to be
clear Representative one percent
is already in existence yes yes
yes yeah thank you madam chair
so we're going to three point
seven five so can I ask you
what's going to happen at couple
different sense what'll happen
of one we don't get all the
people in that they want but
what's going to happen if we
build these insurances and
they're like wow we need to make
some profit and then we're back
here in two thousand twenty four
let's say and now we have to
raise the rates on them is that
a possible it could happen that
we have to taxed more because
they're going to raise the
premiums how we gonna balances.
Well I made to the the
representative Armstrong.
Chairman Armstrong was making
earlier.
The rules on insurance premiums
are that the insurance companies
have to pay eighty five percent
of the premium has to go for
medical expenses if they don't
reach.
Reach that threshold.
If there are administrative
costs or.
Even into that eighty five
percent.
Then they have to rebate
premiums back to the
shareholders.
And we had in two companies do
that in a significant way this
past year.
So the incentive there is for
them to keep those
administrative costs.
The low and not to exceed the
fifteen percent of total premium
for administrative.
A cost and again I want to
remind everyone.
The most of this tax is going to
be paid by the Medicaid managed
care organizations not the
commercial insurers.
Thank you France and that
superintendent madam chair so I
like to continue on with that
rebate you said that to the
insurance is again a rebate you
need how much that was ended
that go back to the people
paying premiums reported that
money because by law it has to
go back to those who pay the
premiums do you know how much
that rebate was was it like a
dollar was a ten dollars within
a hundred dollars you know I
don't remember off the top of my
head.
And several months ago I have to
go back and but I certainly can
get you that number yeah and
Missy I had the other questions
all let's go to okay so let's go
to I'm looking at the fiscal
impact reports.
And at the very bottom on the
estimated additional operating
budget impact it says eighty
seven million dollars is that
correct eighty seven million one
hundred forty eight and eight.
Million.
I'm madam chair and
representative
the state share of which is
twenty one million nine hundred
seventy eight so that includes
the federal match that would
come in and this because this
Fund is going partly or this
taxes partly going to this fund
and partly going to general fund
the amount that's going to
general fund is enough to pick
up the state share of of those
of the Medicaid costs.
Thank you thank you madam chair
so on that note please
I I just want to make a
statement that I'm going to ask
another question just remind
everybody that is listening and
and everybody who's involved
with this bill that that's our
tax dollars still no matter what
it's not free money I just
remind everybody that this is
our tax dollars as
Representative Armstrong said
before that this comes people
who work this comes from money
coming out of their their taxes
so I don't want anyone to ever
forget that is not magical money
that we're not getting I still
have to pay for that you
selected a for that we also have
to pay for that so I will ask I
think I'm at the end of one
about to ask.
What I want to say is I I've
said this before and it's always
going to frustrate me to no end
I've brought this before my
grandparents are going to Mexico
they came over undocumented and
they managed to get into their
late age with no insurance and
this this so frustrated the root
cause of all the stuff is the
fact that medical care is too
darn expensive and what we're
trying to get in bed with a
company this making a profit and
this is we're balancing act that
we're trying to do but we do
want everyone to have affordable
health care and I wish that was
the case that everybody had of
affordable health care but.
It always seems to be at the
expense of the taxpayers and if
you guys could ever come up with
the way that we could have
insurance for all that I could
afford to go back to my two
hundred fifty dollar month with
my hundred dollar copay I mean
hundred dollar deductible and my
ten dollar copay that would be
great that would be ideal
without any tax dollars I would
sign up for that tomorrow if we
could figure out a way to do
that but I always get concerned
that I'm gonna vote for this and
my a lot of my constituents are
retired and there aren't so
scary and with was with secular
insurance my own private
insurance and I always worry
about the stern's company coming
around and try to gain a profit
after raising my premiums and
I've also been frustrated course
with the affordable health Care
Act being anything but
affordable this entire time and
I think our grandparents have
the solution somehow the medical
care was a lot cheaper and they
were able to pay for everything
with cash without any subsidy
around any insurance and I
really wish we get to the root
of the problem and make more
competition between health care
so I could go back to having
that really good health care I
had before with out ax dollars
that you guys can do until will
be on board with thank you.
Thank you madam chair if we
could figure out a way to make
medical care as inexpensive as
it was
in the time of your grandparents
would we all be much happier and
better off.
And
madam chair your muted I.
Thank you I don't see anyone
else's hands up but I just like
to add that I really look
forward to this being available
for our state and to use that
money so wisely my son who has
his own business he
couldn't afford to have
insurance any longer so I his
birthday is February fifteenth
so maybe I can get in to go
through the new enroll open
enrollment so look forward to
that in and in the future what
this will bring with that do you
want to stating further close
closing words then demands madam
chair I just want to thank the
audience and the committee for
good discussion and
and we are still having
conversations with with some of
the carriers to raise some
objection and and will continue
to to do so too
clarify their issues or if if
there is an amendment that we
can agree on that that makes
some more assured will we'll
work on that so we're we're
still an ongoing conversations
but I appreciate the
conversation and urged support
of the bill.
Thank you what is the will of
the committee.
Recommendation for do pass and I
will second.
Thank you we have a.
Two passed up by Representative
Montoya and a second by
Representative Thomson it is
there any objection or should we
go for roll call okay we'll go
for roll call thank you.
Rep Phelps Anderson.
No.
Gail Armstrong no one I'd like
to explain.
Representative Brett.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Stephanie lord
no.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes and I'd like to explain.
Representative Rod Montoya.
Yes affirmative.
Rep Louise that offer.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Representative.
And for our yes.
Representative Louise I.
Yes he's excused okay thank you
madam chair Deborah A. Armstrong
yes.
Of.
Two three one excuse.
Thank you madam chair you have a
do pass with a vote of seven to
three and thank you for bringing
this forward and
C. as superintendent Toland
Mister strada for being here to.
You and you have a couple that
one explain about yes thank you.
At Representative Armstrong.
Thank thank you madam chair and
and thank you representative
madam chair at Representative
Armstrong this is something that
I understand the need for but in
the unprecedented time that we
are living right now with
businesses are in all in the
brink of.
Disaster
I just can't put this on them
right now and I'm with you when
you we as a legislature can find
a way to bring back the good old
insurance that we used to have
thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative.
I'm I'm trying to remember who
else wanted to explain the wrote
Representative Matthews Matthews
thank you.
You just muted yourself.
Thank you madam chair there's
many madam chairs of this bill
this morning.
I
I dig I have those four I
I did with a little bit of
trepidation because I am
concerned that we not.
Keep having increases in
insurance health insurance
premiums because it's very very
difficult for people to keep up
And but I understand the concept
certainly of adding to the pool
and that should reduce things
and I also have just great faith
in superintendent told to work
another series of miracles.
Or whatever magic he does in
dealing with the health
insurance companies and also in
our chairwoman representative
Armstrong and when she says that
she's going to continue to work
on this
I have great faith in her first
of all doing at and secondly
doing it with incredible
confidence and concern for
resolving these issues in a in a
positive way and the very last
thing I would say is
Back in the fifties my family
didn't have health insurance
health insurance wasn't common
and my family was was very
strapped by
health care costs when when my
youngest brother was born with
the some health problems so all
those good old days were not
necessarily all those good.
Thank you thank you
representative and I'll also add
that those good old days the
insurance premiums were low
because they rejected anyone
that had a pre existing
condition.
So I appreciate the support
thank you.
Okay I'm thank you madam chair
and thank you panelists we'll go
over the.
Yes.
You're free to go.
Free to move around the country.
Thank you next we have
again are chair of with house
bill one twenty three limited
immunity for overdose programs.
Thank you madam chair and I do
have an expert Emily Kaltenbach.
She can be brought over.
There she is and family remind
me did we have anyone else to
join us.
Yes my colleague Lindsay lasalle
he should be in the Lebanon.
Yes yes okay.
All right and thank you madam
chair house bill one twenty
three.
provides a mechanism for local
government of municipalities or
counties to implement a program
to prevent overdose this is you
know we talked with some and
heard a bill from
Representative Miguel Garcia on
one of our first committee
meetings about
doing a a pilot project for
injectable opioids this as our
innovative way to try and and
get it over doses this is also
an innovative way to prevent
overdoses by allowing a a
program to provide supervision
appropriate supervision for
people to take their drugs.
whether it's injection or
otherwise.
Which the intent of that in that
supervision and then protect
them protect them from liability
for doing so but the intent is
to try and prevent a number of
things one and overdose
because there would be someone
there to respond to to provide
clean us supplies us so that we
try and prevent infection.
Of from dirty needles we trying
prevent HIV and help see from
from thirty or shared needles.
And we take the opportunity to
refer those who are ready to
access our treatment programs or
to access social support
programs that might help
stabilize them and put him in a
position to
to seek treatment and so this is
a safe place to take their drugs
we are not providing the drugs
and but we do provide it would
provide a clean supplies and
needles which that's kind of an
extension of our needle exchange
program if you will by providing
clean needles are and try and in
support of these folks that are
addicted and not
under threat of being arrested
as they walk in or walk out of
us such a program and some and
protecting from liability the
staff or the
municipality or county for
providing I am property owners
from from providing the space to
do this the department of health
would be responsible for setting
up the guidelines.
For how to do this and then a
local government so this is one
of those bills it's repeated
twice on once for municipalities
once for counties would have the
option to develop a program
under that guidance from D. O.
H..
I will tell you this is this is
in some for the United States
this will be cutting edge.
Of we would be the first state
to do this.
I'm not the first municipality
there are some there are some
cities who have enacted it it is
a
longer standing practice in
other countries Canada Australia
I can't name the other countries
my experts will be able to help
with that but about ten other
countries that do this and show
a decrease in
in overdoses and better outcomes
for folks and you know I I think
we need to think bigger we're
one of the largest most
prevalent overdose states in the
country I think this is a humane
way in a good public health
measure to to protect the health
and well being of folks who
otherwise are not just the
overdose but in jails and our
probably paying for private
paying the price in
uncompensated care an ER visits
and so forth for and for the
department of health to pay for
treatment for HIV aids or
hepatitis C..
And so I'm I think this is a a
really good way to try and and
approach this.
I will say that the Legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee in the interim has
come has talked about this and
consider it considered it a
number of years we've had
presentations from from pro some
programs in Vancouver
I believe that there are members
of the department of health has
gone to Vancouver to
observe these programs and and
learn about them and I I'm
hopeful we can take a step
forward and try
to address the overdose problem
and public health problem of
drug addiction with this
approach and with that madam
chair I'd like to ask my experts
if they wish to add anything
family.
thank you madam chair members of
the committee and when we come
up with the drug policy alliance
I'm I would just add to the fact
that there are ready over a
hundred of these programs around
the world and at ten states as a
sponsor thank you madam chair
can there is evidence is robust
in the show these programs
including increasing entry into
substance use treatment and
other support reducing the
amount of frequency of drugs
that are that clients use
would you think public art
disorder and as we know and
we've heard from Representative
Garcia during the drive the
treatment
bill hearing that there is
concern specially of our more
urban.
Our workplaces that the
disposal.
and so I just want to highlight
this program really would
benefit that concern is being
expressed across the park is in
Mexico the other thing I would
add.
The husband works for the New
Mexico Public Health
Association.
Medical definition also does
the.
Engine our programs in New
Mexico overdose prevention and
pain management Advisory Council
actually has.
This works.
they are council that was
created under statute so with
that I would just say that this
these are very critical programs
and the eco actually
exacerbating are overdose death
in New Mexico we know that we
struggled for generations New
Mexico right and so this is just
another comprehensive another
program adds to our.
Thank you.
my colleague Lindsey looks out
really at an actual expert on.
Lynsey did you want to add.
I will I will just yes and madam
chair members of the committee I
will just
add that and as you are
consider.
Bring this bill ten other states
are considering similar ones so
there is certainly a ground
swell of momentum around this
particular intervention to wall
the tide of overdose deaths and
so we certainly hope that New
Mexico will be joined by a host
of other suits the session I'm
in both considering and passing
such legislation.
Thank you madam chair we stand
for questions.
Thank you I
To see if we have anyone in the
audience who would who is in
support of this.
And then.
Okay great.
And then if you would like to.
be recognized to speak we need
to keep it pretty short one
minute if you could you if you
would like to keep speaker
leaves your hand up if not just
take your hand down we.
In C. okay so it looks like
Fernando Trujillo all teachers.
I'm you know madam chair I
forgot to say if those who are
in opposition to this bill if
you could raise your hands up we
can do that next madam chair
okay we'll do that because the
those in favor because I think
that's who these are those are
in favor will speak first
And Fernando Trujillo.
Yes can you hear me yes we can
all right.
Chair members of the committee
my name is looking he'll from
Espanyol New Mexico and I policy
associate Rebelde features
formally are women United I
currently reside in the get
again having grown up in my
particular community up north in
Espanola and all the surrounding
villages and out we all love
that make good money will fall.
Have had to deal with substance
use issues regenerations even
before what we now call the
opioid epidemic for years
families and loved ones have
treated for help and said we had
been further criminalized and
because at one time it was an
investable situation G. roll
call nine one one if cell is
someone that you love was
overdosing not to make mention
the statement statement
preservation brought on by
society in general has pushed
people who use substances on the
ground and behind locked doors
in order to get there the ex of
that the we'll get through this
day.
I was twenty one years old when
I lost the one person I love
most in this world to an
overdose yet just accepted you
will trade we have that learning
and had just got out of with the
we jail stamp where violation he
waited FY is let you go down the
road to get to practice with the
program and grandma which look
to work when she got back home
she bound him with the needle in
the cookie by inside I believe
it be glad as the priest you've
already could be surrounded by
trained professionals where they
can test the substance that they
are using and where they can
have their lives saved by having
the president around them by
having these sites there would
be access to resources and how
when they are ready
globalization obligation
everywhere has never where which
has been evident over the past
thank you.
Both the J. stands in strong
support for each B. one twenty
three.
To save lives thank you.
Thank you next we have Pamela
Blackwell.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Pamela
Blackwell and Representative The
New Mexico Hospital so ciation
we stand in support of house
bill one twenty three it is
consistent with recommendations
and findings of our behavioral
health task force that is
comprised comprised of
behavioral health clinicians and
leaders in our state we feel
like this bill offers
appropriate limited liability to
health care providers who run
these harm reduction of reduced
prevention programs and for
those with substance use issues
what we have seen is in cases in
which a person is in a treatment
program and fortunately a
consumes an illegal controlled
substance in the process of
their treatment the healthcare
provider would then have this
limited liability protection and
the patient could continue to
resume this very necessary
needed treatment of the program
we feel that allowing this
substance use patients to resume
treatment and harm reduction
programs is in fact the best
practice that already exist so
that this bill would provide
needed limited liability to
health care providers in these
cases we ask for your support
for house bill one twenty three
thank you for the opportunity to
comment.
Thank you next we have Steve
Cerro.
Good morning madam chair
Committee at my name's Steve you
said I've been.
Working on
addiction medicine policy for a
couple of decades now and at
that.
Which of of working with is
called him back and drug policy
alliance and and others say
Bernalillo county community
health council The New Mexico's
panic medical association other
organizations that have made a
real attempt to normalize
addiction medicine so that an
individual that is as
comfortable going to see their
position to say that they that
they that are suffering
suffering from opioid use
disorder as if they went in to
say that they think they're
they're a diabetic.
So we've been working on these
things for a long time I have to
say.
I don't think I can improve on
anything that Mr Trujillo said
I'm a person with lived
experience.
I'm actually getting today
you know as I mentioned I've
been working on this for a long
time and of the fact that New
Mexico may be one of the first
states
to really implement or take the
steps to implement progressive
ways to treat opioid use
disorder and substance use
disorder
generally is is just a really
exciting thing and I would urge
you all to vote yes on house
bill one twenty three thank you.
Thank you next we have Rikki Lee
Chavis.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Rikki Lee Chavez I am here on
behalf of the New Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association we want to thank and
recognize the hard work put in
to this piece of legislation by
the Sanchez and by the act of a
cat we would encourage the
members of this committee to
support for those of you that
are new to the legislature or
this committee or this virtual
space New Mexico couple defense
lawyers association are NMCDLA
is a statewide association of
public and private defense
attorneys for years we have
spoke on public policy in
criminal justice reform measures
we work really hard to make sure
that our elected officials know
what the collateral consequences
of legislation are for our
communities and for years we
have also encouraged this body
to recognize that drug addiction
and drug abuse are actually
public hall public health
concerns as opposed to criminal
justice concerns and we think
that this measure takes that
input and move this forward in
that direction to addressing
this as a public health and
public policy public health
policy concern as opposed to
something that we address with
criminal justice processes and
pen and increase penalties so we
appreciate your work we
encourage you to support because
of we do need to address the
roots of our public safety and
our and our criminal justice
system and we believe that this
legislation is a step in that
direction thank you for your
time and thank you again to the
sponsor and her advocates.
Thank you next we have a
collection of Trujillo.
If you can you yourself.
My apologies.
Good morning everyone.
My name is Bella TGO I am the
health promotion specialist at
the affected council and
executive director of the
community outreach organization
that services and.
Because it gives New Mexico the
opportunity to directly impact
the lives of one of our most
marginalized populations which
people use substances reduction
is proving to be a powerful tool
for substance use treatment.
Using this approach to address
the needs of decreased access
will allow us to target this
issue less judgmental and more
successful.
We're losing friends we're
losing family and community
everyday.
With increasing because of the
pandemic.
The more innovative process for
anyone finds himself in this
space thank you after losing.
Thank you is there anyone else
in support of this bill like
this.
Okay I'm million Irvin Vitela.
Madam chair committee members
good morning again my name is
lily Irvin Vitela and I'm with
New Mexico first and I just want
to speak in favor of this
legislation because again it's
aligned with the wisdom and
recommendations that came out of
our town hall specifically
related to strategies to address
toxic stress trauma and adverse
childhood experiences so one of
the things that community is
very clear about is that often
times when we take a more
punitive approach to what are
the symptoms of trauma we're
moving in just the wrong
direction and we're compounding
harm verses alleviating it we're
criminalizing versus treating it
as others have said as well as
the public health issue would is
we know that people who've
experienced toxic stress and
trauma or adverse childhood
experiences are ten times more
likely to inject drugs if
they've had for more of those
experience is at least one time
in their life when we look at
folks who have had those
experiences six or more times to
forty six times more likely to
use I think the drugs and so
what we know is that when we
take people centered non
punitive evidence based
approaches as are proposed in
this legislation what we do is
we give people a pathway towards
healing and I would add as an
aside you know early in my
career I worked in the center of
the whole substance abuse and
addictions as a research
assistant in grad school and I
was able to meet and talk with
many women who were experiencing
the ravages of ID be drug use
and then they had an
intervention that was people
centered it made a huge
difference and their ability to
be well and so when I would tell
people about my research project
that I had the pleasure working
on even though it was really
parts stories to hear every day
what was striking is people say
oh my goodness you know you're
talking to people who.
Are experiencing homelessness
who are many of whom are using
IV drugs who are being
trafficked and you really think
you're gonna have a positive
outcome good luck idealistic Lee
and you know and so I I took
that all in stride but what was
really amazing is that by the
end of our research project what
we learned was that over ninety
percent of the women had
experienced a reduction in use
when they were given
alternatives so when we remove
the fear and the judgment and
the risk to to people who are
seeking care it makes a huge
difference and also it makes a
huge difference for providers
who themselves are often
providing care in very difficult
situations especially if they're
worried about their
legal and ethical risks when we
make the door open for them to
heal verses worrying about
criminal justice issues I think
it reduces the likelihood of
them having secondary and by
Karius trauma and that's really
important if you want to retain
the workforce we have in New
Mexico to to the critically
important work they're doing in
the depreciate everybody support
of this legislation I think it
makes sense for New Mexico and
many other New Mexicans did as
well.
Thank you Leslie.
Now we'll go to opposition those
who would like to speak.
I don't see anyone okay will
then go to the chairwoman
madam chair to
If you like to say it too close
before we go to the committee
I'm madam chair I think we have
talked about it enough and given
an overview so you you can go to
questions thank you thank you
Representative Matthews.
Thank you yeah I do it right
this time you didn't have.
Okay
this it must be my day to talk
in a couple questions first of
all last night when I was
pulling together the information
for these bills I could I could
not find an analysis or anything
on this particular bill and that
so my questions may be sure to
basic because I didn't have that
available to me
I.
The war on drugs has been an
unmitigated disaster for us to
people for the country
And so looking for reasonable
alternatives to try to deal with
drug addiction is absolutely
critical and are the kind of
thing you're suggesting is
obviously one of the possible
ways to try to deal with this
but I do have a couple questions
about it.
First of all one of the issues
that always comes up with these
kind of programs is just a
physical location one and that
is.
In whose neighborhood do we put
this and
What how do we.
How do we make it a safe
physical location for the
neighborhood and for the people
who are participating in the
program.
thank you madam chair thank you
representative for that question
in that specific zoning or
whatever is not addressed in
this but what is addressed is
that it is will be up to the
municipality that local
government municipality or
county to even want to do this
and there they are obviously in
control of their zoning as well
and so I would only assume that
there would be talking about
this publicly in their council
meetings and taking that public
input and to develop a program
that has it placed in the right
place but because they have
control of those local
ordinances and also for
requesting to do the program
that would be up to them.
Thank you madam chair and
I'm never sure right now who's
settlement which madam chair
dressing thank you for that
answer of.
Chair chair.
And madam chair of my second
question is
More and I.
I sponsored a bill on this last
year at the very last moment it
didn't go anywhere but is a
topic that I'm very interested
in and that is methamphetamine
addiction and the apparent
propensity for four we should.
It a lot of violence associated
with meth addiction and people
who are involved in math.
and I think I just this morning
woke up and the radio was
talking about some latest
research that shows a a real
connection to bind the behavior
so one of my is so one of my
concerns is in a in a a in a
facility like this what.
What would you envision it would
any.
It would be open to.
Any drug it to.
Available to any user of any
drug and with and with that
include mass and what kinds of.
Things might be done to protect
of the people who are in in the
facility and
Well that's my question thank
you thank you madam chair for
the question on the call on my
experts as to how it manifests
in other places but this is not
specified as being just an
injection site it's for
any
any drugs
nonprescription drugs so I would
assume that that would be
covered but D. O. H. would
develop the guidelines and so if
there's reasons to exclude
certain things based on the on
the experience in other in other
programs they could make that
part of their our guidance but
Lindsay did you want to add to
that because you may be more
familiar with other programs.
Sure and madam thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee I'm and thank you for
that important question and as a
sponsor noted the bill itself
doesn't limit to two particular
motive injection or a particular
drug and what we have seen I'm
from decades of evidence from
other overdose prevention sites
around the world is that it is
in fact passed to address all
types of drug use including
methamphetamine and to make the
necessary accommodations it is
usually true that people do not
and fatally overdosed from
methamphetamine or other
stimulants that that is changing
as people and are using poly
substances and as
methamphetamine is adulterated
with contaminants like from
small or people are using it in
combination with heroin so from
an overdose perspective it is
still really important to
provide the critical overdose
prevention care for people who
are using methamphetamine and
other stimulants and with
respect to your question around
the house financing associated
with methamphetamine or other
drug use I'm one of the benefits
of these types of facilities is
that they are supervised and so
they have people on site who are
prepared to deal with for
instance math and just psychosis
I'm or other behavioral issues
that might result from drug use
so they can immediately triage
those they can immediately and
provided that care that's needed
for people and to modify their
behavior and they can see
outside resources as necessary
as opposed to people using those
same exact substances on the
street we're they're not going
to have that immediate access
point I'm here and and and to
the help that they would need to
and to change their behavior or
to have just a safe space to be
and while they're having that
experience and so there are
definitely ways to modify the.
These programs and to have them
accommodate all different types
of objects and people use them.
Thank you at.
Nancy and thank you madam chair.
Chair sorry Madam chair.
Madam chair doesn't work.
and my last question is does
this program
Do anything or have any part
that relates to housing for
these folks.
I'm madam chair and
representative I would say that
the at not directly but this is
a point of contact were there
now in a trusted us safe space
that you can have a conversation
with them and referral
to the social support services
that they may need so
Whether it's to
housing supports or other social
supports or getting them
enrolled in Medicaid or whatever
that may be they're in a safe
space where you can you can talk
with them and make those
referrals.
Thank you for that answer madam
chair
How long would they be allowed
to to say at this
Injection site.
What would they be allowed time
to come down from the drug.
Madam chair and Lindsay
consumption if I don't answer
this correctly but as long as is
necessary to that they're stable
and and ready to leave.
I'm thank you thank you madam
chair and then and the
Representative Armstrong for the
answers to my questions and
audio now thank you.
Thank you next we have
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair one of the
questions that I have of madam
chair is.
Is this facility I'm sure the
deal which will take great
Care of complicating rule server
or whatever they need to do on
this but it do you foresee this
as a twenty four hour facility.
madam chair and representative I
think it certainly could be and
that's probably a partly up to
the local government and what
they what resources they have
for staffing but I would
certainly think that there's
probably a need.
Okay thank you for that answer
and then I'm just curious what
is going to keep our police
officers.
From watching who goes in and
out of these facilities.
Are muted then I just did the
opposite and muted myself
instead of unit madam chair you
know we have a lot of harm
reduction programs out there now
we're we're doing needle
exchange and and so forth we've
got mobile units and right and
going into parks where people
are to do needle exchange and
other interventions and there's
nothing I suppose stopping law
enforcement from watching that
now and that the this is
intended to make it clear that
if someone is appropriately
using this this safe space that
it remains safe from our from
law enforcement just picking
them up as they come out let's
say you've got some other reason
I suppose I don't I don't know
but those were trying to make
this a safe space safer than
them being on the street
and accessing of clean needles.
I thank you madam chair I'm with
the gentleman who spoke in the
beginning and criminalizing
addiction
is is not working right now and
and I I support your bill and
we've got to do something
different from what we're doing
now is not working so thank you
madam chair for your answers
thank you representative thank
thank you and next we have
Representative to rass.
Hi you madam chair thank you.
When we get back from from a
deal with the Kennedys were
allowed back of.
real quick so.
The help we are kind of came in
toward but the middle so
read this but I have some so.
Questions.
On the.
H. two.
One was provided a safe place
and.
Hygienic space supervised by
trained staff or person to
consume creatine because and I
just heard it's not gonna be a
limit of what type of going so a
few more questions are
where can those sites B. and I.
don't affect us sorry I again I
could miss that I'm thank you
madam chair and representative
for the question this is really
being left up to local bodies of
government to to establish these
programs and is the local bodies
of government that also have
control over their ordinances as
we talked about for smoking
and and retails on the other day
so it would be up to local
governments yes to the exact
location that's appropriate for
their community.
Good question so we're good
answer thank you madam chair
Representative
so I watched I don't know who's
gonna happen it is I've watched
intervention before and so I
watch that and superset not now
I'm gonna tell you as a fuel
director I can tell you I have a
lot of people who will be I
always want to help those people
expect to see them wandering the
streets
I just first want to express
that I I always want to
encourage anybody to heal from
that from from addiction
And the use of of of dirty
needles their disposal
you've seen firsthand we we we
I officer of limiting to people
are getting married and stuff
and in in our hometown and we
had one court they want to go
out to the big ditch park so
beautiful park.
It could go down to the so many
dirty needles I had another
situation where my daughter went
to course of the stage was on
scholarship at Calvary State
University walking with a friend
on the beach and got stuck with
a needle in her for walking to
the beach so this this does mean
a lot to me but back to my my
statement of I watched
intervention I always see them.
Out of those environments so.
Every time I've watched it
I thank the lord I've never had
any of my children right to be I
have any problems with this but
I've always watched him pull
them out of that environment to
another place to get them to
heal
What is very worried that if
this is a new up I don't know a
lot about go to be honest with
you but let's just say someone
started with one type of drug
we'll see money one are
something that are often they
feel that they want to go to
this particular space to save
space.
Could you.
By doing that the show up and
there's another the loser or
other drugs whether it's
methamphetamines or cocaine or
some other Drug could this
exposed to open the doors to
order a for graduating that
person to all our of your drug.
I'm madam chair and
representative this is really a
means for those two
you know are are suffering from
from addiction to have a safe
place and an opportunity for an
intervention as as so that we
can
prevent the overdose prevent
infections secondary to dirty
years or shared needles and
offer referrals to treatment
encourage referrals to treatment
from it from a safe place and I
I don't foresee that you're
going to get people coming and
say oh well I've got this one
but let me try what he's doing
down there these are really
seriously addicted individuals I
don't think
probably no one
wants that and wants to be that
but they may not have any choice
because their addiction is
something they've not been able
to
to tackle and overcome so I I
see this is a safe place to have
an opportune much greater
opportunity to try and offer
intervention
and in the meantime keep them
from and overdose or secondary
infections and public health
issues.
Madam chair representative yet
it's not that I'm just I can't
my question always is to learn
and and support and I I love for
all of us to to our ideas on the
on on on the table and and the
secretary to propose to just
create the best legislation
possible for state so that being
said so what is the.
This is a drug user goes to the
safe places and continue to to
use drugs over and over and over
and we go there.
But never go to the referred to
for or they never take that
referral seriously or.
Follow through what is the
consequence to that Madam chair
representative.
I'm madam chair and
representative as you heard from
the pilot program that
Representative the girl Garcia
was proposing on our for on our
first meeting there are
individuals for whom there
aren't alternatives that their
addiction is so
long standing that other
interventions there's changes to
the brain quite frankly that
they can't
can't get off of the drug but
we're trying to throw all the
tools and possible interventions
and innovative ways to do this
his is one program to go get
actual prescription grade
and
treatment and this is another
we're we're not providing the
drugs but we're providing a safe
space where we have hope of
intervention.
Madam chair representative
And again I apologize that I
didn't Center president tired
session but does this include so
the caliber of of of
supervision.
Are they gonna be work caliber
and what types of supervision
will be what is it going to be
counseling to try to you know
help them a little further what
what what is the caliber how are
you going to set that up and and
then I'll go to my last
question.
I saw
To order.
Okay here
there's a there's no
appropriation yet the deal which
states it will
require at least one FTE and
associated expense on going and
so and I saw a figure of sixty
four million and so I went those
are three different questions I
started provided you with that
so I'm.
Madam chair and representative
wasn't sixty some million that
was thousand
and you know that the that's a
big difference to that
departments have an obligation
it to say it's it's you know
it's going to take some
dedication to work on this but
they have a harm reduction
program now and I think this is
an extension of that and we have
no opposition here from
Department of Health saying that
they're not supporting this in
fact department of health and
you probably missed that has
sent staff over the last couple
of years before the pandemic
sent staff to Vancouver to
observe and learn about the
program so I'm I thank you
you know is it's not that it's
no impact on them but it is
consistent with on department of
health our goals and objectives
in harm reduction.
And now I've already for.
who's for vices yes thank you
caliber thank you department of
health will develop those
guidelines and recommendations
that than the local governments
will have to follow and putting
together their program but I
think it's probably a
combination of medical personnel
so a nurse but it could also be
a highly skilled
your support who is is trained
in handling overdoses and
referral to treatment and it may
be a combination of both but the
intent is to to trying to
intervene and overdoses one and
two by president by providing
clean supplies and clean needles
are trying to prevent the
secondary infections that would
come from from thirty years
share needles of particularly
HIV aids and Habsi
and then you'd be a conduit for
referring to treatment and to
other social supports so it's
I would assume but I'm not I
don't want to speak exactly for
D. O. H. that it could be a non
health professionals largely but
with access pretty quick access
to our system in place to access
medical care are quickly if
you're dealing with an overdose
and someone who could who would
be authorized to intervene on if
an overdose was occurring.
Thank you madam chair you know
Representative I I I can tell
you know I've always.
Was to instruct you saw because
I feel that
Drug drug dealers target are you
that's our future income and and
and so I've always been against
those type of things because
it's just.
It said it takes a whole child's
life for young person's life of
dealt with it for many many
years again in all and so again
we're just trying to that the
best outcome and right the right
language in this bill
and I love and I'm sorry I just
losses because trying to catch
up that's why I got sixty four
militants we talk about a
million here all the time so I'm
sorry
Of
course never had was so.
Again maybe you have a you can
show me workers so that what I
like to the point that there's
appear there okay sometimes
going to a doctor or nurse it's
kind of a setback in in a way I
can in the can understand but
this is a pure I would I would
assume that would be someone
who's graduated themselves used
means there there there there
are Senator looked up to.
yet.
I'm wondering if there's any way
that that your
I would hope this would happen
but but this pure would maybe
have a network where they can
sell it outside of their yes
come in I was just I'm trying to
figure this out if they would be
able to sell it this is a out
out down the street and then
they come in and somehow
manipulate the system just I
just want to avoid any
manipulation of the systems
really well I'm going with Madam
chair representative at that we
don't have a somehow appear
you're there to make sure that
we don't have a connection of
someone who.
Here is a person that currently
sells drugs this is you know
what I'm gonna make my center
took place it's safe and I will
so I'm in the house but I will
we have another down the street
you can go there but you'll be
safe in here given immunity of
some sort to the dealer himself.
Madam chair and representative
this immunity protection is for
the use of within the center
it's not an immunity protection
for ever outside of the center
and if someone is dealing drugs
and and caught to dealing drugs
or there's suspicion then that's
another a whole different
reasons for for law enforcement
intervention this is a man of
the protection for the user and
this site is not providing the
drugs they have to come with
their own with their own drugs.
Because for some reason I maybe
I missed heard Madam chair
representative it I hear that
there was a program where they
would give them medical grade
drugs.
Sure you madam chair dancer
Madam chair representative I'm
sorry I confused it that was the
program being proposed as a
pilot by Representative Miguel
Garcia on our first committee
meeting that's not this.
Thank you madam chair I I
appreciate it very much and I
appreciate your your hard work
Madam chair representative are
you trying to resolve our issues
with the
Drug abuse in our in our state
and I appreciate this for thank
you.
You madam chair and was there
anything you'd like to say to
close now I think I think not
thank you thank you what is the
will of the committee madam
chair I move it to pass the
second.
Okay we have a due passed by
Representative Thomson in a
second from Representative
Montoya
is there any opposition.
Get rid of this okay no
opposition okay
With that you have a at
consensus to pass unanimous do
pass
And madam chair just so that we
get the recording right I don't
wanna assume anything is I think
Torrez it's probably still call
role just to make sure we have
everyone here thank you madam
chair that is correct because we
have people who we can't really
see their.
Or they didn't reason why didn't
and we've we've provided some
excused absences so I I just
want to make sure we don't
attribute a vote to someone that
they didn't intend to do very
good thank you
Miss Lopez would you take Raul
please.
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Yes.
Representative the.
Gail Armstrong yes.
Representative but.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes Representative Stephanie
lord.
She excuse yes.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Yes.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes sorry thank you.
Representative Louise had off
yes and I would like to explain
level okay Representative Liz
Thomson yes.
Representative Jeff
chair to emperor yes.
Madam chair Deborah A. Armstrong
yes.
Ten in the affirmative and want
to get this.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair and do you
have a do pass it unanimous at
ten and one excuse thank you.
And Representative trousers
wanted to explain is a thank
you.
Thank you no I just again I I
appreciate the legislation and
the effort that we're trying to
do.
Showing drug abuse in our in our
state
well I only had a few concerns
and and hopefully we're able to
address those.
Between now and then and I hope
that there's no abuses of
something that's brought forward
in in good faith to our
communities thank you so much
thank you thank you for your
support thank you committee
members
And thank you
madam vice chair for taking over
for me as a chair we have two
more bills on our agenda but the
Democrats have a caucus now so a
couple of things Representative
Hochman Vigil as bill house bill
one twenty five will be rolled
to Friday and of to be first on
the agenda I have a question
among the members house bill one
thirty two the emergency food
bank of food items yes an
appropriation bill.
And
I'm it and it goes on to
appropriations next.
M. I don't want to cut off
debate or public comment
necessarily but if we have the
votes if there's any objections
to this bill will roll it till
Friday if there if everyone is
supportive of the bill we could
take care of it right now.
Madam chair I think that's an
excellent suggestion I would
make a motion for a due passi if
that's the correct motion thank
you.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair the only
issue I had was in it says in
the significant issues that HSD
doesn't have purchasing power
for food or distribution to food
banks and so if you could
address that really quickly and
actually
Representative and
Representative Ferrari I think
you actually had an amendment to
fix that if we can take care of
all that real quickly let's
let's do let's do the bill.
Eight thank you madam chair yes
that was pointed out by HSD and
we do have the amendment that
just strikes for providing and
inserts
Hi and then also before
nonperishable to insert funding
to purchase and then later on it
strikes for providing again and
to provide and again funding to
purchase so it's made it
consistent.
Yes.
So if we could have a motion to
and that management was are
provided in the twenty four
hours we can have an have a
motion to adopt the amendment so
the men okay.
Everybody second thing in first
thing in is there any objection
to the doctrine of the
amendment.
Okay seeing and hearing none
your bill is adopted and then we
have it had I believe a motion
on the table to a pass in any
objection.
Hearing no objection.
Seeing no objection
Representative you have a do
pass on house bill one thirty
two as amended
ten to zero I'm assuming that
Representative Lord additional
excuse.
Thank you madam chair and I'd
like to thank my expert witness
mag Strittmatter who is with the
of food bank association and all
the people who were lined up and
waiting to be able to show their
support but we appreciate the
committee.
I see Mr that's what counts
thanks so so thank you and I
didn't mean to cut off public
comment but it I assume you
probably have the votes and if
we don't have any objection we
could just take care of it so
thank you everyone we will here
house bill one twenty five first
on our Friday agenda and we'll
get that agenda out later today
so thank you everyone here we'll
see you on Friday.
Happy birthday Roger.
Happy birthday Roger.
Representative.
Representative.
Representative were you here for
the boat.
No I was not I had to take a
phone call so okay so you are
excuse thank you thank you.
But is.
Okay thank you so much.
It's it's a great honor to spend
part of my birthday with all of
you in this process indeed thank
you.
Good afternoon everyone are we
ready.
