It's
your email here.
Many of that generation.
More.
Representative Stansky.
Representative here.
Printed.
And madam chair.
I'm here so Representative
Chavis and heard in our excuse
to make maybe temporarily maybe
for the whole time so
Representative K. whenever
you're ready go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
members my name is
Representative Kathleen Cates
I'm here to present a house bill
two twenty.
as you may know my background is
providing services for
individuals with disabilities
and I'm currently working as a
realtor and have
worked with real estate agencies
on how to identify and modify
homes that are appropriate for
people of different abilities of
this bill will remove the G. R.
T. on home modifications so
currently
then waiver programs you're able
to access up to five thousand
dollars every three years to be
able to perform home
modifications necessary if your
home was built in the sixties or
seventies you're gonna have to
widen the doorways to get
wheelchairs through without
hurting your knuckles maybe a
ramp into the front door even if
you have a small step holier
lift which is the lead for the
toilet or the or the bathtub
five thousand dollars does not
too much it is a very meager
inefficient scary.
budget you have to work with and
then on top of it you have to
take three hundred and fifty to
four hundred dollars out of it
for G. R. T. so this bill we are
respectfully asking that we
waive the G. R. T. on this type
of funding it's a small
population with and the state
that access is this funding so
we're talking about a fiscal
impact of in the thousands a
year and that is it given our
budget we feel like that that is
a very reasonable costs given in
the and the Norma's amount of
help and accessibility we can
provide for our citizens today I
have an expert witness a rich
down can and he is the president
home modification solutions he
can find you inside of all the
different types of modifications
that are necessary from even
like the word bills to switch
from a sound to a light all
these things may become
necessary for an individual to
be able to stay independent and
stay in their home and he can
attest to what the expenses
currently maybe turn it over to
my experts would just go ahead I
morning madam chair and
committee members so yes I'm one
of the owners of home
modification solutions
prior to that I came from the
actual home medical equipment
industry and so brought that
experience into a home
modifications size and partnered
with construction experts to
form this company our focus is
to provide things as a
representative explain ramps to
provide accessibility in and out
of homes the ability to access
to be able to pay it when
there's not the ability to get
in and out of a shower and such
safety items like grab bars.
in bathrooms and hallways and
showers and to keep folks from
falling and and so on and so
forth are pretty much the full
gamut of things that could be
necessary for safety for aging
in place of those types of
things the services that that
we're able to find under this
budget allows people to have a
quality of life of some sort by
being able to get in and out of
their home and such but it also
prevents things like falls it
keeps folks from you know ending
up in the E. R. in rehabs and
nursing home since and so on we
also work closely with the
health plans M. sicos and such
to get people out of rehab and
nursing homes and and and those
types of things to get them back
in their homes as quickly as
possible and those are often you
know at a last minute call paid
by today by tomorrow within the
next week are you able to put a
ramp in in somebody's home so we
can discharge them so we all
know again quality like being
part of it but the expense of
somebody saying in a nursing
home longer staying in a in a
hospital or or rehab facility
for longer terms were able to I
guess faster of facilitate
getting them out even quicker so
that's kind of the quick down
and dirty if you well one.
That's right thank you madam
chair committee we stand for
questions okay is there anyone
in the audience in opposition.
Anyone on zoom who wants to
speak.
In opposition.
Okay not seeing anybody anybody
here in support.
Okay.
Go ahead and come on up and just
to be allowed into the New York.
provider home and hospice
services to a large population
in the Medicaid situation we see
this as having minimal cost to
the state and the maximum
benefit to our patients we urge
you to support this bill.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Gwendolyn
Gallagher aging long term
Services Department New Mexico's
right fifth highest among US
states for the poverty rate for
persons with disabilities
additionally twenty nine percent
of persons age sixty years and
older in New Mexico have
difficulty walking or climbing
stairs so are most vulnerable
New Mexicans face barriers third
meeting safely in their own
homes House Bill to twenty
provides access to is one such
service and an economic
incentive to eligible providers.
Aging and long term services
Department supports house bill
two twenty thank you.
Anyone else in the room okay
anyone on zoom in support.
Chair getting a note that the
forms you can't hear.
Okay what what we what we will.
Okay okay all right so I'm sorry
we had the people on zoom on
mute so I will go back first to
see if there's anyone in
opposition on zoom who would
like to speak.
K. is there anyone on zoom in
support.
Okay so we will go to if you
have any.
Representative remarks about
that the.
Public comment.
No thank you.
Yes I I will just say that
there's a wide variety of ways
that we can maintain and keep
our individuals with
disabilities independent and out
of of very expensive until
they're they're ready to it to
get further help and and this
will also of read
provide safety for them and and
I believe it's a very small
investment.
Thank you
questions from the committee
representative apartment Vincent
Representative Joe.
Thank you madam chair
Representative K. so.
Are these privately owned houses
or Kate the the committee
rentals.
so at Corning to the fair
housing act
landlords must allow tenants to
be able to modify their home in
a reasonable way and so some of
the waiver programs are in
rentals can access this if they
are required to return their
rental back into the previous
condition
and and and that is part of the
federal fair housing act.
Thank you.
Madam chair representative so
how much.
Sorry say somebody wants a deck
and the deck cost the state the
deck is wheelchair accessible
and it's ten thousand Bucks how
does that work.
How does it work so it is it is
definitely I'm so sorry madam
chair and and and committee it
is it is a very difficult thing
so as you may know wheelchair
ramps must be of bills at a
certain grade and so it made
look like a simple entry into a
doorway that you might need a
very substantial ramp to
maintain that grade that it's
not it too steep of a great so
if they can absolutely exceeded
the five thousand dollar budget
and must rely on their own
personal savings or families or
charities to come and help
offset those costs more yes
place to madam chair
Representative so it the
basically the role is one inch
equals one foot of length and
ramp
we do the best we can to to to
get it under that five thousand
dollar budget if it's a trailer
let's say that's it's four feet
off the ground all of a sudden
you exceed the five thousand
dollar budget and so what we do
is we work closely with the
waiver programs with the health
plans and we do everything we
can to provide extra resources
sometimes it doesn't happen and
and we just try to pivot and
provide you know another way to
help the family what we find
very often is a choice has to be
made we go to the home and it's
you have just enough funds to
put in a ramp or you have just
enough funds debate and so you
know we have to work with them
with their clinicians and stuff
and just figure out what's the
best option because you know
we'll do what we can thank you
madam chair representative so.
Initially what you're saying is
it would be a tax credit for
five thousand dollars.
Per year.
So Madam chair representative
the current program we have R.
waiver programs allow up to five
thousand dollars every three
years to do home modifications
the problem what we're asking
today and house bill two to
twenty is that we do not charge
an additional a G. R. T. on that
five thousand dollars so
currently they have a very
meager vote budget of five
thousand dollars every three
years and we're taking another
three hundred and fifty to five
hundred dollars out of that for
G. R. T. because that's part of
their five thousand dollar
budget so this bill is asking
you to wave to the G. R. T. on
that budget thank you madam
chair it's just that I'm getting
some signals from the audience
and it's what I thought too that
it's every five years not five
years I'm so sorry that's okay I
need right thank you yeah madam
chair and and Representative yes
simply it's it's five thousand
dollars every five years and
basically they get to use forty
six hundred dollars of the
benefit because the rest has to
go to tax that's I think it's
easy as I can.
And madam chair representative
whenever they.
Whenever they complete the
project how is that tax deducted
to they have to put in for it
who's going to follow the how to
how do they get the G. R. T..
Thank you madam chair and
committee I will defer to my
experts witnesses well but in in
my past experience is it
individuals who are expert on
these home modifications they're
the ones that are there making
sure that the G. R. T. is
captured and so I'll turn this
over to our expert thank you
madam chair.
Where five point so there's a
list of approved contractors
correct or can it can no project
not just any you know Jo Jo's
construction can do it madam
chair that is correct they have
to go through the you know like
any provider really go through a
provider approval process with
the department health Medicaid
etcetera yeah so the way
Representative chair
representative the way it's done
is is when we submit an estimate
to the health plan and then the
ultimate bill it's a separate
line item it's you know that all
falls within the five thousand
dollars so we'll have the you
know the ramp to the components
the labor at cetera and gross
receipts tax so it's all
identified.
Thank you madam chairman
Representative.
Jones thank you madam chair and
representative case and I'd I
think all of my money questions
were just down so that's good
and and I'm glad to have that
clarified and I think that this
is something I can support
because the the longer we can
keep people at home and out of
facilities I think in the end we
we save more money and it's just
better for people the people
just do better at home you know
they they're they thrive they
have a better life so I think I
can split the screen thank you.
Thank you.
Any other questions I I just
have a personal experience
hello.
Okay
Madam chair Mexico.
I
yes can hear Madam chair
representative thank you for
bringing this forward I think
this is so important to help
seniors or people with
disabilities to be continued to
be independent so that they
don't have to go into a long
term care or nursing home and
this is going to help a lot of
people be able to stay in their
homes and to be able to thrive
so thank you for bringing this
forward in the most of you know
I have a son with autism when he
was young he was what was called
an E. Loper he he would run away
and any.
That things could happen but he
also love to break glass and we
bought an older home and when
the glass broke H. it shatter
and it made big shards and
luckily he was only cut once but
five thousand dollars to.
Raise the fence and and or to do
the the windows didn't happen so
we chose which windows we
thought he was most likely to
break and had safety class put
in though so it may in the it
can be a whole lot of things in
five years to wait for things is
a long time so we want to get
the most bang for the Buck with
those I mean it essentially it's
the state is giving money to the
individual not I mean provided
money to the individual to get
things approved and then taking
back eight percent of it for
taxes it's kind of.
It's crazy but okay I will
entertain a motion.
I'm here to pass up.
Do you want a second
Representative me up okay.
Is there anyone in opposition.
Seeing then you have to pass
thank you very much thank you
and Representative Lord
Representative Dixon is not here
yet so.
She was in here earlier but she
has the meeting so if you're
ready we will go to house bill
one ninety six.
Good morning madam chair can
everybody hear me on this.
Yes thank you.
Good morning madam chair
representative we're presenting
house bill one ninety six this
is what we're calling the
placement stability act and it
would enable parents to ensure
the customer their children and
out of home placements in a way
that is consistent with the best
interests of their child eighty
one ninety six aligns the state
with family first prevention
services act the federal law by
directing the department to
ensure out of home placements
are the least restrictive
placements possible.
H. B. one ninety six to provide
a level of preference directing
the department to ensure that if
a child must be taken out of
temporary custody that the
child's placement preference
order while in custody is in the
least restrictive manner
possible will be we all recently
saw the horrific headlines last
week of foster children sleeping
at the CYFD offices and the
horrific situation that occurred
there.
It is unacceptable and a direct
violation the twenty twenty
class action lawsuit against USD
and HSD in the cabin just
settlement the Kevin S. lawsuit
alleges that.
An effective child welfare
system must include sufficient
numbers of qualified case
workers foster parents and
mental health professionals to
ensure stable and supportive
placements.
HB one ninety six includes a
holistic wraparound model that
facilitates collaborative
between those responsible for
providing care and services
ensures an individual planning
process for each child and
focuses on sustaining
relationships the proposed
legislation of eighty one ninety
six work to support these key
tenets from the cavernous
settlement total for each of the
social security act requires all
states to consider giving
preference to an adult relative
over non related care giver when
determining placement for a
child provided that the relative
care giver meets all relevant
state child protection standards
in nearly all situation virtual
must be removed from the birth
parents home then placement with
a relative or kinship care is
consider least restrictive
option eighty one ninety six
outlines order placement
preference in accordance with
federal law as follows with the
parents with the relative care
giver with the fifty can in
license family foster care homes
and licensed therapeutic foster
care home any licensed group
home or congress care setting
and a license residential
treatment facility eighty one
ninety six also works to
decrease placement instability
once a child has been placed in
state custody absent evidence to
the contrary H. B. one ninety
six state to the court may
presume.
That continuation we child's
placement with his or her care
givers is in the child's best
interest and twenty nineteen our
legislative body passed HM ten
and convened for task force to
specifically look at the
benefits of placement stability
to avoid multiple disruptive
placements their data is
available on the CYFD
publications website includes
placement moves by race and
ethnicity and age.
Further findings are older you
think care have the most most
teenagers in state custody
average placement moved more
than nine moves in twelve
months.
Even more alarming native
American children in CYFD
custody in the year the studies
on average of approximately
twelve placement moves in a
twelve month period that's one
time a month that they're being
moved.
Use with disabilities are more
likely to be placed in
restrictive placement types and
has significantly higher levels
of perceived restriction run
communication movie and
community when compared to youth
with out disabilities addition
males with disabilities
experience a higher level a
restrictive this particularly
those receive DD Services while
white youth with disabilities
also experienced greater
community restrictive for
sickness.
According to data collected for
the recent New Mexico child's
children's law institute
conference foster youth in New
Mexico have the lowest
graduation rates and high school
out of all vulnerable
populations reviewed.
Faster you'd have lower
graduation rates and
economically disadvantaged
Margaret students English
learners students just students
with disability and homeless
youth.
Frequent placement and native
unstable placements on lack of
sustaining relationships like
identifying Kevin just are top
contributors to this historic
low graduation rates of our
foster youth.
According to CYFD is own twenty
twenty two annual report page
fourteen New Mexico's children
in foster care have one of the
highest placement instability
rates in the country.
Our children average seven point
five six movie places and
rolling thousand day a thousand
day time period the national
averages four point one to place
moves in the same period.
Each time a child is moved
this is likely an additional and
unnecessary source of additional
trauma to the child.
When asked about young children
with lived experience in out of
home X. placements want to tell
policy makers that more emphasis
needs to be placed on matching
their interests beliefs and
culture to those of the foster
parent or facility and that the
focus on child protective
services should be on recruiting
foster parents across a broad
spectrum of different beliefs
activity levels and cultures.
As Garrett Garry has been this
the CEO disability rights in New
Mexico said in November twenty
twenty two in regards to the
Kevin just Madam by CYFD in HSD
to meet their goal.
The twenty twenty two annual
report reflects a troubling lack
of progress toward providing
children the care they need to
heal from traumatic experience a
growing to happy healthy adults
unfortunately Kevin as
settlement provides the
framework for how to create a
trauma responsive system for of
care that prioritizes placing
children and secure family
settings with proper supports
and services our children cannot
wait any longer all of us in New
Mexico who care so much about
our children must increase
resolved with the fierce urgency
to make the settlement this
illness vision become reality
for too many children the lack
of progress mean to continue to
languish rather than thrive
eighty one ninety six is a
national best model practice to
contribute to the states.
Stability of children in out of
home placements reducing
unnecessary and preventable
trauma while in state custody we
need to pass one ninety six and
chair New Mexico to are not more
traumatized once they enter
protective services than they
would have been never enter into
the state of care all and
there's one last thing I want to
address and I'll be very brief
on this before I moved to
questions.
Thank you
and insurance representatives I
want to dress a possible
concerns with the Indian family
protection act we actually had
asked legislative drafting
services to ensure that nothing
we were writing on any of the
child welfare built in PT on the
Indian family protection act
under the pews in the collective
Act thirty two eight dash one
eight C. N. M. SA nineteen
seventy eight also separately
states to the extent the
provisions of the Indian family
protection act conflict with the
children's co the provisions of
the Indian family protection
actually ply so subject
specifically the reason we
didn't include
If if the if if the.
was a specific called on the
bill is because Legislative
Council services said based on
thirty two eighty one eight see
the language was unnecessary and
would be a duplication if we
need to change that to ensure
our tribal partners who work so
hard to pass and well last year
on board with this legislation
and ensure stability among all
of our foster youth we're happy
to have that conversation we
should probably include
legislative drafting to because
they're the ones that that the
language was a duplication and
with that I will introduce my
expert witness Representative
back.
Committee members my name is
Maryland that I'm the founder of
New Mexico child first network
and ensuring stability and
improving our instability rates
which are the second highest in
the entire country is a key
priority to improving the lives
of children in foster care thank
you.
With that we stand for questions
the questions okay let's go to
the audience anyone here in
opposition.
Okay if you want to come up and
use the Mike.
Morning tech.
Good morning members of the
committee my name is Lucy the
Campos I a policy co director
with gold futures as an
organization we work with
individuals who are currently
and formerly incarcerated and
families that are going through
the child welfare system
I myself have held kinship of my
two nieces because my sister's
been medically available to care
for them.
And so I also speak from
personal experience our biggest
concern with this bill is that
we know that families of color
experience the wife to you a
very differently CYFD has had a
history of removing children of
color from our communities at a
much larger right
families who choose to support
and care for our loved ones our
little ones
Already have a process rules
policies and procedures to
follow and that is under the the
fictive kinship.
This bill would put family
members caring for the children
at the same category as foster
parents by requiring that we
apply for a foster parent
license within three days of
receiving the children and that
is not something that people who
are doing fictive can want to do
we are not trying to care and
foster parents we're trying to
focus on our family our
relatives to ensure that our
families can stay United and
that the mother of the children
can be reunited with the child.
Forcing licensing
fictive kinship carers would put
us in this same list that other
foster parents are already on
and that might bring more
pressure to us so that we can
take other foster children into
our home.
Additional Chris scrutiny from
the department like we already
face a lot of home visits we
already face them going through
our refrigerators seeing what
kind of food we by checking are
making sure that our paychecks
look a certain way making sure
that our homes look a certain
way and this would only add
additional scrutiny to those who
are trying to care for their
loved ones
any reports of stand to waited
or unsubstantiated can have an
impact on us being able to
continue to care for our
children.
The other children living in the
home so for example my older
sister has her own kids and when
she took over the the fictive
kinship any substantiated report
we were told so Senator
unsubstantiated would have an
impact on whether she could
continue to care for the girls
or do fictive kin in the future
for other children thank you I
forgot to say we have a two
minute timer.
Okay.
Good morning chair members of
the committee my name is Mike if
it's any I'm a policy associate
ripple features New Mexico we
oppose H. B. one ninety six
as personal experience when
child protective services
attempted to take my nieces and
nephews from them on during a
visit to the hospital the
attempted to place them in
temporary foster care because
mom resided on the reservation.
I stood there waving my hands
telling them that I am the anti
and I will take them I felt like
I was yelling in a crowded room
but nobody was listening child
protective services would not
cooperate with my request at
this point my nieces and nephews
were begging me not to leave and
grabbing economy while our
Forsman attempted to get them
into CPS Services Lujan I was in
a panic calling as many people
as I could and looking to the
resources right now I was
finally able to get the native
American liaison with CYFD she
immediately took action to make
sure the children stayed in my
care just that interaction alone
scarred my nieces and nephews
and they still mention that to
the to the state when they visit
me in temporary custody cases we
should always actively look to
families and people children are
familiar with non relative
foster placement treatment
foster care placements and
residential placements are less
stable and the disrupted tile
and families live in temporary
custody situations we should do
everything to avoid
institutionalizing our children
we know that placing children
families helps children's
resiliency and we should
actively look for privative
placement this bill is going to
be in foster care and fictive
kin which again we need to avoid
also for concern in temporary
custody situations we need to
refrain institutions in our
children.
Foster placement and residential
treatment facility is
institutionalizing and causing
harm to our children please
oppose H. B. one ninety six
thank you chair members the
committee.
Madam chair members of the
committee can candidate with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
we stand in opposition to this
bill I want to state that we do
not disagree with any of the
facts as the sponsor laid out
within the system however we do
not feel that this is a solution
to this problem we believe that
this further restricts and makes
it harder for people to for
people to get into appropriate
foster care the other the other
issue with it is that we don't
have enough foster parents as it
stands right now as the sponsor
stated this only restricts the
potential recruitment of more
foster parents this would be a
law if enacted that would be
essentially unenforceable
because there are not enough
foster placements within the
state we strongly feel that
there are many things that can
be done to recruit more foster
parents starting with making the
current foster parents more feel
more comfortable within the
system.
But this is not the solution to
the problem thank you very much.
Thank you
madam chair members of the
committee I merry McQueen and
the chief children's court
attorney for CYFD protective
services at CYFD is in
opposition to this bill.
CYFD with respect to placement
has placement discretion it is
in thirty two eight dash one
dash four it is our duty and
responsibility.
To determine where and with whom
the child will live.
having a checklist that tells us
that preference even though
frankly the checklist is in the
order that is probably generally
the correct order there are a
lot of complex factors that go
into determining the best
interest of the child with
respect to place.
Things like the where their
siblings are placed the
geography of where their parents
are
the complexity of their medical
and mental health needs
treatment foster care for
example
Is Medicaid revenue requires
medical necessity it can't be a
preferred placement for every
child on in order of placement
the other difficulty with this
bill is that it introduces yet
another definition of fictive
kin which is inconsistent with
the if the definition and
inconsistent with other
definitions in the code
we do not believe that this bill
would impact if ball placement
preferences of those are
separate and.
We don't believe that adding a
placement preference checklist
for non Indian children is in
the best interests of those
children.
Although CYFD will always
prioritise relatives and always
prioritize family settings for
children.
We have to be able to take on a
case by case basis all of the
complex factors into
consideration to meet the best
needs and best interests of that
child in that family.
having a checklist is not the
way to accomplish that I do want
to point out that in twenty
seventeen at this time thank
you.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay we will go to zoom is there
anyone on zoom in opposition.
No hands support in the audience
is there anyone here in support.
Okay is there anyone on zoom in
support.
Okay not seeing any hands right
so we'll go to the committee
madam chair before we go to the
I'm sorry.
I wanted to and to address some
of the opposition I agree with
CYFD that what we have in here
is a place the per placement
preference is in the correct
order and I would like to refer
to my expert witness anything
else you'd like to a plan that.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members it was
interesting to hear the feedback
I just want to address that this
is not changing the way we take
children into custody this is
once the children have come into
custody where the preferred
placement is and it is on
alignment with federal law and
national best practices
specifically for the reason CYFD
stated this does not impede F. I
we would never want to impede if
that that is already in the
children's coats at this does
not if you can see the three
pages in front of you this does
not include any definition
effective can so I don't know
where that's coming from
also this isn't including
anything new this is just
cleaning up existing language to
align with federal law so many
of the concerns that were
addressed
avis never this we say that the
best placement this bill exist
says
the best placement shall be with
the parent page one and two
there shall be preference that
with the child placing home
relative when the relative is
available so we all agree that's
not being changed this is
existing statute some of the
concerns that were addressed by
the national association of
social workers about the lack of
foster homes
what we are trying to do is
align the preference of the
placement of these children in
accordance with families first
preservation services act F. the
families first act better a lot
national best practice to simply
say that way any child should
come into care that child should
be in the least restrictive
placement available in this
order this does not take away
CYFD is discretion some of their
questions on the FIR
specifically about discretion
this is not to point any of this
discretion the simply state that
if a child must be in out of
home placement it clarifies the
existing language on page two
point seventeen through twenty
one it clarifies it cleans it up
and it simply exists it cleans
up existing statute that is all
this bill does thank you.
Now we stand for questions okay
Representative Jones.
Thank you madam chair and
representative and this back
I have a lot of questions but
you did just answer some of them
so is there is there is a new
checklist I heard talk about
there being opposition to a
placing children as of a
checklist that is there
something new on the checklist
that this bill is proposing.
Thank you madam chairwoman
Representative Jones this is in
accordance with federal law as
both as you heard from two
opposition witnesses this is the
order of preference that if a
child must be in out of home
placement the order will always
be with a parent that isn't like
that is best interest that is in
the constitution of New Mexico
next is relative care giver the
next would be effective can our
kinship we supported SB thirty
one we support that definition
SB thirty one actually changed
as proposed SB thirty one which
was kinship guardianship there
was a new definition of kinship
guardianship proposed and maybe
that's where the fictive kin
question is there's no new
definition here so effective can
as what's written in here is in
accordance with the children's
code thirty two eight four eight
sorry and then there is not a
checklist this is simply stating
that access New Mexicans agree
we are putting forward the
mandate that if a child must
come into out of out of care
placement out of home placement
we should always ensure that
they are in the least
restrictive placement available
and CYFD should be following
this last as as it exists today
we should not be putting
children that's the entire
families first federal law the
entire point of that is to kick
kids out of congregate care
residential treatment centers in
group homes that is why that
bill was passed at the federal
law New Mexico CYFD just past
there we presented our at our
report to the feds in September
of twenty twenty two secretary
Terry Miss Vigil testified on
that yesterday how we planned to
engage with families first but
least restrictive care is the
single most important piece of
that federal law.
Thank you madam chair
representative and to this back
how many kids are out of state
today from New Mexico have how
many have been placed out of
state.
I thank you madam chair and
representative John that's a
question you would need to ask
for CYFD it is my understanding
based on the last Kevin asked
that there are at least fourteen
I want to say twenty two and it
is worth noting as every time
they come before you the cabin
theme that both Kevin just and
Chris W. who are the lead
plaintiff in the cavernous
settlement are still out of
state in placement they are not
home so as Kevin just continues
to come before you I think you
all have read the press release
our kids are still out of state
in residential treatment centers
in highly restrictive care.
Thank you.
Thank you and madam chair
representative so have any
faster use.
Died out of state.
Basement since since Kevin just
as twenty eighteen.
Thank you madam chair and
representative can you please
repeat that question I'm just
curious since since twenty
eighteen Kevin as having a
foster youth died in having been
placed out of state.
And madam chair and
representative John yes in
twenty twenty at CYFD agreed to
the twenty twenty Madam Kevin
just was filed September twenty
eighteen CYFD sign on the dotted
line for the settlement in March
of twenty twenty in August of
twenty twenty Clara Barnes was a
child in foster care out of
Carlsbad New Mexico died in a
residential treatment center in
Oklahoma that residential
treatment center was owned by
Arcadia which if you remember in
twenty nineteen we sat down
desert hills and that was owned
by Arcadia we had a child we
continue to have this practice
which if you see the press
release from Pegasus legal
services they agree with us it's
it's and I'm happy to send it to
you.
Clear Barnes died and a licensed
and unlicensed facility owned by
Arcadia the state of Oklahoma
themselves did not place kids
with but we in New Mexico did
Claire Barnes this twenty twenty
with our New Mexico use in New
Mexico foster care died in a
residential treatment center out
of state and restrictive
placement.
Thank you madam chair
Representative can you tell me
how many faster use their on the
run.
Thank you madam chair and
representative John this is a
very interesting question
Representative Lord has
introduced house joint memorial
specifically about the crisis
which our foster youth on run
it is my belief CYFD I'm sure
the statistics with us as of
January first I believe it was
fifty five out of the the
hundred thousand eight hundred
it tends to be argues and as you
see right now as Representative
Lord stated in her opening
statement are older use tend to
have the most placement
instability and often that means
they go on the run that means
that their in house tonight
there and on the run tomorrow
and so wanted this bills we
don't want them in restrictive
placements we don't want them
residential treatment should
never be the answer for a child
on the run which I know it's not
your question but it often is
and so there really needs to be
a legislative effort to figure
out why these kids are going on
brand we are their state
guardian we are their custody
guardian because we are in why
are they going on run and how do
we support them with supportive
placements thank you
Representative.
Thank you madam chair
Representative.
Do we still have kids sleeping
in the C. why the CYFD offices.
Thank you madam chair
representative Jones yes we do
every night.
So Madam chair representative
what are we doing to get these
kids back that are out of state.
Thank you madam chair and
representative that's a question
you need to ask LFC.
One more and madam chair.
Does this bill prioritizes
fictive kin over family.
Thank you madam chair
representative Jon snow this
absolutely doesn't this as we've
said before the simply cleans up
the statute if you see in the
FIR CYFD actually thought it was
a good idea based on one of the
Kleenex because again it
mentions licensed foster home at
no point does that change the
preference preference should
always be parents it should
always be relative caregivers it
should always be family first
that is federal law that is
statewide as local law that is
law and so we really do support
the efforts of SB thirty one
which just passed the Senate is
going to catch you guys next
probably this committee first SB
thirty one really lifts up
kinship guardianship families
for the reasons you heard in
opposition really we say if it's
safe to place it's safe to pay
so SB thirty one kinship
guardianship act actually helps
lift up these families and
meaningful way that we think
will address many of what we
call shadow foster care.
Okay thank you very much thank
you.
Representative insect.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative.
So I need after I listened to
the opposed testimony I need to
wrap my mind back around this
so.
If a child goes into CYFD
custody.
And they have a family member
like the anti that was over
here.
Why would she not be able to
take those kids or would she be
able to take those kids.
Thank you Representative I'm the
one with the passion this is the
one with the wealth of
information some of the key to
provide my witness.
Thank you Representative and
Representative I thank you
chairwoman Thompson and
Representative and sent this
bill does not change the way
CYFD has discretion that's a
question for CYFD okay Madam
chair representative so the anti
that was just talking while ago.
She would be able to take her
nephews nieces whatever if her
she advise that her they had a
medical emergency and she they
were at the hospital she would
be able to take the kids correct
and they could stay with her.
Thank you Representative
chairwoman Thompson and
Representative and set this bill
does not change the way children
are taken in to custody it's
only changes once they have come
into custody so that your
question would need to code a
CYFD why she couldn't take them
into custody we agree that a
family is there that is a CYFD
discretion this bill does not
touch the wiki discretion as to
when and how kids come in to
custody.
Thank you madam chair
representative I just the I I
think about that so if one of my
family members went to the
hospital and my nephews were
there And CYFD took them without
them coming to me I would have a
huge problem with that so I want
to be real careful what I'm
voting on here so it doesn't
change any of that.
Thank you chairwoman Thompson
and Representative into this
bill does not change how
children are taken into custody.
Thank you and madam chair
Representative I was just
looking here on page two.
So I heard you say about the
little girl that died in an
unlicensed facility in Carlsbad.
So why why have you stricken
license licensed.
And would you be willing to in
and add license back into the
three descriptors.
That we're talking about Madam
chair representative yes
Representative Representative we
actually had talked about that
about adding license to the
wording into their and if you
have anything you want to add on
there thank you chairwoman
Thompson and Representative
events and I would be very clear
that child did not die in
Carlsbad she was from Carlsbad
she died in a facility in
Oklahoma.
Madam chair representative the
the thing that really captured
me was a child died in on
licensed facility and I just
want to be clear that maybe you
would be willing to add license.
To amend that to to add licensed
facilities so we don't Senator
on licensed facilities thank you
madam chair representative we
actually have that wording right
here that we need to put in
their license and if this moves
forward with changed according
to license in front of all of
those and madam chair set some
new do I have to.
Make a motion to add that
amendment did she just say she
would that settlement I am madam
chair.
TGIF so what she has stated
Representative Vincent is that
she will if this moves forward
she will get an amendment from
upstairs yes before the next
command that's what we're saying
we actually have it's right here
right so we would add amendment
that okay and the only other
question I have as I was looking
at of the F. I. R. and I just
had a question
about youth over fourteen could
you address that.
Thank you madam chair Thompson
and Representative events that
yes CYFD stated that this could
potentially limit their
discretion
In the FIR the fiscal and I the
said this bill could potentially
restrict CAP's ability to
determine the placement that is
in the child's best interest
when a placement with a relative
is not possible again this is
not change that is an existing
statute the four different
issues that they identified
including a youth choice use
voice over fourteen we're not
changing that we're simply
identifying in order that should
be placed with least restrictive
care so exactly for all the
reasons they stated that this
the decision making is still
with CYFD CYFD still has the
discretion at the point of this
bill is to align with families
first preservation services act
FF PSA and simply state that we
as New Mexico as a legislative
body as a public body agreed
identify that the safest place
for children is with family with
parents with relative caregivers
and when that is not possible we
should always err on the side of
least restrictive placement
possible period that is the
point of this bill thank you
madam chairwoman and
Representative events at.
In the last thing that I have to
so I understand fictive kin.
So Madam chair representative
fictive kin who chooses fictive
kin and fictive kin from what I
understand is a really good
friend.
Or what what is the definition
of fictive kin.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
Representative I'm pulling it up
right now it's at its existing
and
Let me just pull it up sorry.
The one that in the.
Madam chair representative that
could be affected can't could be
somebody on the street that
they're familiar with like in
the neighborhood I mean.
Thank you madam chairwoman
Thompson and Representative
Vincent and this is a very
interesting conversation because
it just happened for three
committees in Senate bill thirty
one I have the definition
effective can as exist in the
children's code and for thirty
two ace SB thirty one which
passed the Senate yesterday I
think is thirty two eight dash
four dash to dash E. fictive kin
as definite defined in the
children's code means a person
not related by birth adoption or
marriage with whom the child has
an emotionally significant
relationship it's intentionally
brought.
Child choices.
Thank you.
I got a few more questions now
so Madam chair representative.
That could be a best friend
across the street and our are
those people the fictive kin are
the vetted.
Are they vetted by CYFD to for
the kid to go over there I mean
I have some good friends
whenever I was a kid but maybe
their parents were not quite I
mean are we just deal with did
they give that is my question.
Thank you chairman Thompson and
Representative events and we are
not changing the definition
effective can that is not
defined in here whoever said
that on the opposition side but
I I don't know if they're
confusing it with a different
bill fictive kin as it's defined
in the children's code is going
to stay here fictive can as
defined by thirty two a four
dash to dash E. as fictive kin
means a person not related by
birth adoption or marriage we're
not changing that that is
existing if you have questions
about victims can that's a
question for CYFD again our
perspective is if it's safe to
place it's safe to pay and and
again with CYFD discretion I
know there's a bill that was
going to be here today it's
rolled over C. ideas a lot of
discretion this bill does not
change that discretion this bill
simply prioritizes the order of
preference once in custody and
CYFD and law enforcement may
that see what you make that
decision to take into custody
once that child is taken into
custody in out of home placement
this bill simply design changes
for lines and says what that
order of placement should be
it's a clarification in
accordance with federal law
thank you madam chairwoman and
Representative and madam chair.
That that's what I was leaning
over to tell over not changing
that definition this is already
existing we're not making any
changes to that I want to make
sure it's clear madam chairman
and madam chair representative
just a closing statement I
appreciate CYFD I appreciate
what everybody does for youth
and as a new freshman
Representative coming in and
it's troubling to middle.
I mean you don't real if you're
not immersed in it you don't
know what's going on with kids
and now that I've been immersed
in is it it's if Bobby is
troubling and I hope that we're
able to give CYFD and everybody
that you know needs funding or
whatever to take care of the
kids to where you know they're
taking care of them we don't
have to worry about then be in
our that's all I have madam
chair.
We'll go to Representative
Ferrary David Sapan ski David
Harvey of.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and the staff
One of the things that we've
noticed is the child's preferred
order placement
that worrying sounds like you're
going to give the child's
preference over.
Excuse me recommendations of
CYFD.
Then turned to me now.
Okay Madam chair representative
one of the things reduce amend
the language line to a page two
one twenty three to say the
preferred order placement of for
the child is.
Okay
And.
And I appreciate trying to get
fictive kin as one of the top
priorities but I think there's
other considerations that CYFD
might have to take into account
so I'm.
Not in support of you know
dictating this order.
to CYFD.
With madam chair was a I'm
Representative question just a
statement otherwise I'm gonna
have it's our expert.
We go ahead.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
Representative Ferrary Abbasi
make actually grief with us on
the order and so and we're not
dictating that they must do this
I mean we're dictating the order
of preferences that federal law
we all agree CYFD agrees we
agree the social workers a great
this is in order placement from
most restrictive is the last
place we want to do and it's
interesting I think what we've
been talking about is at some
point even reviewing in interim
committees will and I I know
that have access come before you
how many of our kids are not a
state placement residential
treatment so that this is a
federal law and and so this is
the federal law order of
placement this is best practice
it's also just law and how and
again it doesn't safety might
deem the discussion continues as
the right do they existing
statute as it exists orders out
preference there's three an
existing statute we're simply
making that I.
Madam chair and
Representative in this back so
why do we need this if it's
federal law and CYFD needs to
follow it and they're objecting
to.
Having these restrictions.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
Representative Ferrary I'm very
excited that we continue to have
these conversations because it
is the most important
conversation and someday we will
get this right I'm as many of
you know we have CYFD in HSD R.
in the existing Kevin asked
Madam lost it and I just want to
read the headline it's it's here
but basically
we have now been in settlement
with the cavernous see wrecked
in HSD have for two years they
didn't need a single one of
their thirty four target
outcomes not one single one so
so for two years CYFD and Kevin
just of trying to play nice in
twenty twenty one actually I
think you're one of the sponsors
of the codifying have NFL and
CYFD oppose that bill because
they said give us more time give
us more time give us more time
we don't need to codify Kevin
just we'll just take care of it
in November of twenty twenty one
they had R. twenty twenty two
two months ago three months ago
they had not that one of their
single thirty four outcomes and
again the headline of this press
release which I think you all
receive the email multiple times
is advocates say New Mexico's
children continue to suffer from
the state's delays and failures
they call upon governor Lujan
Grisham to give her full
commitment and long needed
reform and and that press
release includes George Davis
The New Mexico tell take high
interest in past rector child
psychiatry for and I'm children
youth and families get out Gary
has happy and CEO disability
rights where he says this report
reflects a lack lack of
troubling progress Betty I spend
over two and a half years ago
the state made a promise to
Mexico children that it would
build a modern prom responsive
child welfare system that honors
the special protections promised
to native American children
unfortunately this report
confirms what advocates have
been saying with children and
their families all along that we
are not seeing changes on the
ground harmful practices process
including sending children out
of state and having them sleep
in motels hotels and CYFD
offices the cabinet settlement
is a bold commitment that can
only be accomplished if our
leadership has the courage to
get outside of their comfort
zone reach out to build new
partnerships with all
stakeholders and trying new
ideas our children cannot wait
many have aged out.
Summer incarcerated and
unfortunately there's only
thirteen of the cavernous
plaintiffs are virtually
fourteen some are no longer with
us our state has a moral
obligation to do better and the
plaintiff team remains committed
to the implementation of these
crucial reform efforts but again
not one of the thirty four
target outcomes was met by CYFD
in November so it's time for the
legislature to take action which
is what we're saying please help
us make sure that these kids are
at least restrictive care thank
you I'm going to remind folks
that we have we only have
Fifty four minutes left and we
still have to two more bills so
if you could please keep your
questions and answers succinct.
You that's all okay next I have
Representative Penske.
Thank you madam chair.
and Representative
I really agree with the intent
of this legislation to keep our
children out of facilities out
of out of state placements
You know I I that is not a child
welfare experts I have spent a
significant amount of time over
the last couple of years looking
at these issues
I think this bill though has
some serious technical issues
and maybe Sam unintended
consequences that would result
It you know I'll start with the
COVID and I have some questions
but that.
Conflicts with the Indian family
protection act I think it's
significant and I you know I
just read if I
the clause that you cited around
the conflicts but you know the
problem with it the couple of
issues I see with that is one
that's something that's going to
have to be interpreted by a
court of law and so even though.
Council service and and policy
makers did their absolute very
best to reinforce that if I
would be yeah the preferred way
for native use.
That's not necessarily going to
end up being the case when you
have to statutes and conflict
and so I also think that you
know the two years of work that
went into F. power with all of
the tribe's tribal leaders all
of the groups that work with
native children that process
only made that bill stronger and
so I really if if we're gonna
have legislation that deals with
child welfare that touches
native children I think we need
to do that work of consulting
with the tribes in the and our
Peublo ations of working with
people who are working with
those children and families who
were impacted because I think it
only makes about stronger so
that would be a request of money
going forward is to just start
having that those meetings in
those relationships because I
think it's only going to make
the policy stronger
You know I have a question about
the.
The the list here so.
We're we're sort of establishing
this order of preference to
placement but we're not
establishing any increased
State findings of fact or reason
why a child would have to be
placed in a group home
congregate care setting
presidential treatment facility
and it you know to me if the
intention is to stop our
children from being placed in
out of state foster care or or.
Therapeutic facilities
to to really I think we I think
we need.
Some increased criteria and here
and this plane sort of bulleted
list doesn't really put a burden
on CYFD to show why a child
would have to be placed in one
of these other settings that is
non preferred that could cause
you know what adverse childhood
experience that is not
best practice you know and and
so for me I would love to have a
conversation about you know what
is the
What is the increased burden
what are the things that CYFD
would need to show before a
child could be placed and so I'm
just what I'm really worried
that there's an inadvertent
unintended consequence because I
know I understand your intention
and I know you all have been
working hard on this but.
To me it's like if we're going
to take the opportunity to to to
talk about this then we should
talk about what is it that CYFD
has to demonstrate before that
child can be removed from the
state.
Is that make and so I just would
be curious on your reaction to
that.
Yes thank you Representative
chairwoman Thompson and
Representative kanske and your
questions are really great and I
just wanna call attention to the
fact that also CYFD thinks that
CYFD stated in their testimony
that they don't believe that
this would and friends upon if
that and so I want to make sure
that as we have brought forward
just all this legislation that
that is our single number one
priority if that exists as its
own statute and the children's
co to protect the very specific
population and so if you want to
take that Legislative Council
services like let's have that
conversation because I think it
really needs to be had right and
we want to protect the
population another so and and it
question to your question about
CYFD really making that effort
that's why I think that at some
level to Kevin S. lawsuit exists
I can't speak for them I'm not
part of that team but again just
as a child welfare advocate
another bill that has been
requested and again it's again
IT the interim committees and
working very hard on this is
right now every child comes into
foster care as a level one
placement and you have to prove
burden to say whether level two
or level three I've had kids
that I stay put on what should
be a level I like the level one
level two level three placement
is just really bananas I had a
child placed with me who had
been inpatient residential
treatment center out of state
for ten years she came to me as
a level one foster child and I
was a level one placement so
there's a lot of conversation is
to happen around here this was
not meant to be an overhaul fix
because again CYFD properly
gates are promulgate their own
rules and regulations and we we
want that agency to do that they
are the agency that protects
children they are the experts so
this was never meant to say if
this then that they have
rulemaking process for their own
procedures this was supposed
specifically meant to clean up
in accordance with federal law
and national best practice a
simple clarification to ensure
best we best interest least
restrictive placement thank you
Representative semansky
interment.
Thank you thank you for that
response
You know I know we've had a lot
of discussion about rulemaking
in CYFD is rolling rulemaking
and
it almost feels like you would
want to
Make reference to that in this
bill.
Around rulemaking
because again I I just I don't
we're.
We're just putting something
into statute that is really a
preference
And I don't want to
inadvertently and reconfirm the
ability of CYFD to send our
children out of state.
and I I think that.
I am worried that that that were
at risk of doing that
And madam chair Representative
and I do want to agree with my
colleague Representative Ferrary
of the change that you are
proposing on page two line
twenty three around.
that language the child's
performed ordered placement
because I don't I think you
don't want to inadvertently put
into the record that.
stating what a child actually
prefers right you want that to
be very clear that that's the
HSD prioritization so I
appreciate you would be willing
to make that amendment in the
final issue I have is with page
three lines eight three ten.
Where it it says that as a
foster parent or effective can
care giver.
With him the child resided for
six months or more.
Is a person who has a
significant relationship with
the child
you know I think.
Partly the significance of that
madam chair and representative
is this Attorney General letter
from twenty twenty two.
That really states that.
A significant that the court can
consider significant
relationship and Madam chair
representative hi.
Would be concerned because
children don't often have always
have agency over where they're
placed and so simply state being
in a faster.
Current but with the foster home
for six months I don't think.
That as lawmakers we should
determine that that means that
child has a significant
relationship with the foster
parent because the reality is it
could be a wonderful match it
could be a wonderful place.
But madam chair representative
it could also be a terrible
place and we have seen some
stories of some terrible
placements that you know are hot
really really truly haunting but
what this bill would say as if
that child has been there for
six months the court then
consider that relationship as a
significant relationship no
matter what that child says and
so I you know I don't know if
you want to react to that madam
chair representative or but I
feel to me that that that is
probably the most problematic
part of this whole bill is that
because I I do think it takes
away the agency of the child it
takes away the voice of the
child and I think the court
should be able to consider that
as they're looking at the
options for what is happening
with this child.
Yes would you would you could
you comment on that.
Madam chair.
I just want to see some real
quick on that we have we're
gonna change the wording to the
preferred or to place from the
child is and we are in agreement
with CYFD about the placement
preference they also talked
about discretion because we
don't want to flow chart if this
then that and force people's
handed the putting of something
they may not be the best search
the child so that was the main
thing I want to dress and the
mail if you want to dress this
portion right here thank you
chairman tax and and
Representative kanske this is
actually a very an important
part and once again I say that
we're not changing what that
does is as as a different issue
the rest of it is not changing
existing statute there's
actually a case out of house
that you might be familiar with
the task torture cases there
were two separate cases and
house within three months where
a child had been adopted neither
had had home studies and that's
not on us sitting on the side of
the table that's one CYFD so
there's a case actively going on
right now where a child was six
degree relative adopted a
toddler into a home and house
from Utah.
That the adoptive parents abused
and tortured the child within an
inch of his life that child is
actively place right now I've
got a call from CYFD saying can
you help the foster parents can
you help them because we can't
do anything hi Maryland I got a
call from CYFD saying our hands
are tied because under existing
law.
Reunification family first the
adoptive parents have now made
the same level as I have here
because they are now adoptive in
family so I think that this is a
as is this is absolutely a place
that needs addressing in the lot
and so right now CYFD is
actively working to return the
toddler that was beaten with any
inch of his life CYFD called me
to help and try to engage in the
situation these are adoptive
parents the case is ongoing and
open inTaos you can read about
it it's all over the news and so
once again I I would just say
that the discretion to keep a
child in the house for six
months is not ours at CYFD is so
the question for you is why CYFD
keeping a child in the house
that they shouldn't be there
thank you representative
Thompson and representative of
anti I'm gonna remind us we all
now have forty two minutes so
let's not be quite so we're the.
I.
Thank you madam chair
representative I
And you know I I guess I'll stop
with my questions are back I I
would be interested in working
on this bill to working with the
sponsor to improve it bring it
back look at the some of these
modifications because I I am
really worried about unintended
consequences thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
Kate and then Hermio and then.
Thank you madam chair and
Committee I I know that we've
got gone over this but I am not
hearing the answer I think
you're trying to say so I wanted
to just quickly go over the
changes that you were already
agreeing to on page two line
twenty three you're gonna change
the child's preferred order of
placement is child is the
preferred order of placement for
the child that speaking of
place to to replace the two you
keep saying the line that so
there yes we're going to change
that but you're not saying what
you're change well I thought I
did the preferred order of the
placement the child is.
Right that's what the line says.
The preferred order.
The child's out the preferred
order of the placement of the
child is versus saying that it's
the child's preferred okay all
right all right.
also I I I agree with
Representative is hand ski page
three eight through ten I feel
that it conflicts with the
To the can can can a definition
of that of a.
Sorry I have a.
That the American Bar
Association uses and that your
expert witness also gave the
same definition of of effective
it can this is one that a child
has with an individual who is
not related by birth adopted
marriage to a child but who is
emotionally significant
relationship with the child that
is you use it in one in a on
page two but then when you refer
to the same type of significant
care giver give a different
definition one that must reside
six months or more in person and
I believe that that conflicts
and it's also a confusing and
then I also wanted to ask why
within three days.
Would you require a fix to fix
up.
Fictive kin.
who's taking custody of the
child to apply for.
Foster care license an
application foster care license
what is your what is your
What are you trying to
accomplish their.
Chair representative it's
already existing COVID all all
my representatives I mean my
recognized by Representative.
Thank you for a moment I'm
Senator Representative that's
existing code.
That.
Right
thank you very much madam chair.
Members can I make a suggestion
I'm gonna say that so it sounds
like this bill may have some
hope possibly of moving forward
because we're just trying to
matches up with what the the
federal
code ready has and we're just in
place in order seems to be some
heartburn about some other stuff
but we're just trying to clean
this up and do the placement
preference that CYFD agrees with
that's all we're trying to do
we're just trying to make sure
that that is on the books I'm
going to roll it if people are
willing to work with me too I
see not and hence okay alright
that we can roll this bill if
people work with me too so we
can move this forward to so we
can have some clarification.
This for children to get into
line with federal statutes thank
you.
Thank you.
Going to make an executive
decision and put H. B. two
thirty on next because
Representative Ferrary has a
mission on.
That only has can only be on for
seven more minutes so.
Sorry Representative Dixon.
Thank.
Okay okay.
The representative I might
suggest that you just let him go
first yeah that was okay.
So we are on house bill two
thirty.
Thank you madam chair
this is house bill to thirty the
liquor Tax recent differentials
and I would like to introduce Dr
David Jernigan who
I hope will give us his
background in explaining some of
the great national reasons why
New Mexico New Mexico why we
should do this.
Go ahead Dr Jernigan.
Thank you very much can you hear
me yes you're fine.
Super my name's David Jernigan
I'm a professor in the
department of health law policy
and management costs University
school of public health thanks
for the opportunity to testify
today I've worked on alcohol
policy issues for thirty five
years of service in the advisor
to both the World Bank and the
World Health Organization I
should say my comments this
testimony my own views and don't
represent the official position
of my university.
Other people are going to talk
about the level of alcohol
problems in New Mexico I want to
focus today in my testimony on
the expert consensus from around
the globe about the single most
effective thing we can do to
reduce alcohol problems which is
to raise the price of alcohol.
Going to the World Health
Organization alcohol taxes are
one of the most effective and
cost effective ways to reduce
and prevent alcohol problems
alcohol tax increase of also
been endorsed by the task force
on community preventive services
which is the independent body
that conducts reviews of the
science and advises our centers
for disease control and
prevention on effective
prevention measures want to be a
real world example in twenty
eleven Merioles racist sales tax
on alcohol by three percent I co
authored to evaluation of the
health and consumption effects
of that tax increase we found
that average monthly basis of
gonorrhea declined by twenty
four percent or almost sixteen
hundred cases per year that
alcohol sales were three point
eight percent less than would
have been expected eighteen
months following the tax
increase my colleague the Johns
Hopkins are estimated that in
the wake of that tax under age
drinking fell by twenty six
percent underage binge drinking
by twenty eight percent binge
drinking by adults by seventeen
percent and the number of
alcohol positive drivers of all
ages on Maryland roadways
dropped by six percent including
a twelve percent drop in alcohol
positive drivers between the
ages of fifteen and thirty four.
How does all that happen.
Well and public health we
usually like to emphasize that
alcohol is not an ordinary
commodity when it comes to price
it's much more or it ordinary
than many people think and
there's a huge body of
literature research literature
that's demonstrated this basic
economic loss apply the price of
alcohol goes up people drink
less even young people and heavy
drinkers if the price goes down
they drink more we have
literally hundreds of studies
that have quantify just how much
less people will drink and how
much alcohol problems will
decline in response to tax
increases.
Regarding the increase in this
bill we estimate it will lead to
our Presley seven percent drop
in alcohol consumption in the
state of New Mexico and that
will in turn ripple through to a
range of consequences according
to one systematic review which
looked at three hundred and
forty estimates of the effects
of alcohol taxes and prices on
L. correlated morbidity and
mortality simply doubling the
alcohol tax which is less than
of what you're proposing in this
bill would reduce alkylated
mortality by thirty five percent
crash tests by eleven percent
and so on the bottom line here
alcohol taxes save lives.
They also have the greatest
impact on exactly the group
causing the problems which is
the excessive drinkers using a
tool that we developed for CDC
us we estimate seventy five
percent of any increase in New
Mexico's tax on alcohol will be
paid by the nineteen percent of
the state's population or
excessive drinkers forty nine
percent of New Mexico and with
adults who don't drink won't pay
anything the same tool also
estimates that twenty five cent
per drink the increase and New
Mexico's alcohol tax would lead
to a net increase of between six
hundred sixteen and two thousand
injured ninety eight jobs for
the state's economy depending on
how the state spent the new
revenues why because alcohol
taxes shift the funds from a
relatively capital intensive
sector which is alcohol
production and sale to one of
the most labor intensive sectors
of the economy which is
government and health and
treatment services among nine
excessive drinkers these taxes
are also clearly not regressive.
Even among excessive drinkers
the group that will pay the
largest amount of the tax will
be New Mexico's highest income
segment the twenty nine percent
of the New Mexico population
that earns more than seventy
five thousand dollars a year and
the benefits of the tax increase
will probably be progressive
because of going to services
that lower income persons are
far more likely to make use of
that higher income groups so the
message of the science is clear
alcohol taxes save lives alcohol
tax increases like the one under
consideration still are good for
public health and for the
economy based on the evidence I
encourage you to support H. B.
two thirty to preserve protect
and promote the health and well
being of the people of New
Mexico thank you so much for
giving me the opportunity to
testify.
Thank you Dr Jernigan.
just real quickly house bill two
thirty proposes to increase the
modify the liquor excise tax
collected from a tax per liter
gallon or barrel sold to a flat
twenty five cents per drink
right now it ranges from a penny
or less to fifteen percent for
distilled spirits we're going to
raise it so that it's a order
per serving or drink and as Dr
Jernigan pointed out is because
it has such a.
Of the Norma's costs to our
state over one point eight
billion dollars we are basically
subsidizing the profits of of
alcohol industry and making it
so that we have to absorb
but those costs are and plus
we're suffering by losing lives
and productivity
Of so many of our constituents
It requires a taxation and
revenue department to
recalculate the liquor excise
tax rates annually beginning
April thirtieth twenty seven by
usually and also utilizing the
consumers price index to adjust
for inflation.
And it eliminates the rate
differentials for micro brewers
small wine growers in craft
distillers the businesses in our
state and it modifies the
distribution.
It's going to create an alcohol
harms alleviation Fund as a
reverting fund to receive a
distribution equal to eighty six
percent of the
Funds that come in from the
excise tax and it will be
administered by the department
of finance administration and
the money will fund
Different projects that will be
approved by the legislature but
they will be things going to
Human Services Department
department of health early
childhood education and
other education departments.
for different harms which I will
That my expert understanding
Shelly Man Lev explained a few
of those propriet Jex.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much to
the Sanchez Representative.
Or maybe may have been told to
do that that thank you I'm sorry
I know I have a mask it makes it
more difficult I am protecting
the public health and the health
of my marriage so thank you for
bearing with.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Shelly Man
Lev I am the former director of
the Santa Fe prevention lines
and came before this committee
six years ago to discuss the
same issue I thank very much the
Sanchez here and will serve as
an expert as the chair of the
Santa Fe prevention alliance I
was involved in an effort in two
thousand fifteen when we had.
Proximate Li eleven hundred
people per year dying from
alcohol related deaths in New
Mexico that's a lot of people
wanted of every one out of fifty
thousand people in New Mexico
today.
Excuse me it's one out of two
hundred thousand two hundred you
anyway
we do things and and public
health is that out of a hundred
thousand and
I'm not getting my masters I
will today two thousand two
hundred seventy four people
double just what we were
reporting in two thousand
fifteen so in terms of the fund
the aha fund right I'll call
harms of Levi ation Fund this
fund which would be
Eighty six percent of the two
hundred million dollars raised
would allow our state agencies
to really deeply address the
harms associated with alcohol
both in terms of prevention
treatment recovery supports and
the social determinants of
health that lay at the root
causes everything from providing
for prevention treatment
recovery supports for people who
are not currently insured you
know we have a robust Medicaid
program providing treatment to
many people but we know that we
have over ten percent of people
New Mexico who have no health
insurance and many private
insurance's do not provide for
the treatment of alcohol so that
fund could be allocated by HSD
to cover those people to get
treatment and of course as we go
all the way down the spectrum
including screening including
some of the amazing evidence
based approaches that New
Mexico's developed the craft
approach so that all of us
become supporters all of us
become effective people in
helping our loved ones who we
all have.
thank you madam chair Senator
Shannon Pinto has to go back to
committee I just like her to see
if you were to is one of our
sponsors.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee within
my area of the district three
the area I represent not much
has been done on the front end
to alleviate the use of alcohol
abuse in the area we've brought
in quite a few providers into
the area which is on the back in
so that we're not incarcerating
a lot of our young people
earlier last year during our
session we did have a big big
influx we were over two hundred
people that were indicted for D.
W. I. N. that we're going to go
to court and we had nowhere to
send them.
So this is one mechanism in
which are on the front end
really encouraging the committee
to support to be a tool on the
front end to decrease the
consumption in the area.
And you know there's always
going to be this well who's
really funding this what the
consumer my eyes will be however
we decide to tax this
you know I it finding the best
way but it is very important
within my area to reach all
aspects all the way down we
don't think about the the young
children in my area but when the
parents and guardians and even
their siblings are dying from
alcohol consumption.
And that costs that medical
costs and how long they're in
there.
This is just a few a little bit
a drop in the bucket to me two
analysts but thank you for your
consideration thank you madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair I am I I
want to tell the story about
land involved in this and that
is of course I have alcoholism
in my family I like most of us
do.
but this the interim committee
the Legislative Health and Human
Services interim committee
started with the facilitated
process and I was tasked to
write a little white paper about
how to get the source a stable
source of income for prevention
programs treatment programs
within to ended up developing
has the has alcohol alleviation
Alcohol does aha alcohol harms
of the LED ation Fund aha
And and so I did the little
white paper I did not know that
of the leadership that
Representative Ferrary had
already shown in trying this a
few years ago and so we got
together on the committee she
has created an enormous task
force of advocates and of
specialists from all over the
state and and she's been meeting
with them regularly I've during
those meetings and it has been
so impressive and so uniform in
the call to reduce consumption
and this is one of the most
effective ways to reduce
consumption and then the
secondary benefit is to divert
those funds for a stable source
of funds for prevention
treatment and alleviation
efforts so thank you very much
I want thank Representative
Ferrary for her leadership and
for allowing me to be part of
this.
Thank you and I just like to add
that there's a lot of
information in your booklets
that you know we could go over
but since we don't have much
time but it's important to note
New Mexico being number one in
the nation and alcohol related
deaths.
We have to do something.
One in three DS among adults age
twenty to forty nine in New
Mexico are attributable to
alcohol and we.
We buried my knees less than a
month ago to an alcohol related
fall we've been working on this
a long time but we keep losing
people along the way and our
young people are so important
and if we owe that to their
generation and the generations
to come thank you madam chair we
stand for questions.
Thank you.
Okay
anyone here in opposition.
If you want to come up and speak
and I'm going to limit you to
one minute because we're running
out of time.
It was.
Every time.
The.
Your hands are representative of
the state.
Sure that we're allowed to
happen I even think.
There's a date.
Question.
Do not.
Representative Lord you can
always speak and ask questions
but I what I'm asking is that to
not go on for ten minutes to ask
the question that is yes or no
and I'm also advocating the
Sanchez to do the same it does
this do this yes not well
sixteen years ago I did it mean
we we if we can keep it concise
I think we can get through it so
we will we will go with that and
it is totally that chair's
prerogative on how long a public
comment is so thank you go
ahead.
At madam chair members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore
I'm a registered lobbyist for
and has a motion the very
specific noted very sympathetic
to Representative Ferrary is
loss that just wanted to note
that in as a bush is definitely
in favor responsible consumption
there is no doubt that New
Mexico needs to support those
efforts but contained in this
bill I would note that the
increase on the liquor excise
tax for beer is a six hundred
and fifty percent increase on
that product if you'll turn to
page four of your FIR at the
bottom paragraph addresses the
percentages not only for beer
but for the other categories of
alcohol and they are significant
I would say this about this
proposal the increases in the
liquor excise tax are quite
large when it comes to the state
trying to address responsible
consumption for for years and
years and years the revenue
generated by the liquor excise
tax has partially gone to the
general fund it is an Is
approaches perspective that
uses.
A minute goes very fast.
Good morning wow that's loud
start good morning madam chair
members of the committee L. park
registered lobbyist on the
behalf of the New Mexico brewers
guild your craft brewers I want
to stand in.
Opposition of the legislation
while we certainly understand
sympathetic about the public
health issues regarding alcohol
consumption your brewers guild
are in fact among the leading
proponents of responsible
drinking anytime you go to one
of our establishments you will
see that they often have a two
or three drinks limit they want
to make sure that their
clientele on their customers are
enjoying their product in a safe
responsible manner I want to
point out importantly with this
legislation would do would undo
the very important work that
this legislature did Justin
twenty nineteen to provide
incentives so that the craft
brewing industry could grow and
be as successful as it is today
that's time thank you madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Jason Weaks
register lobbyist for the
distillers guild of New Mexico
similar to what Mr park said in
twenty nineteen we created
liquor differentials for local
manufacturers we deem that it
was this body team that was
manufacturing and we also very
much appreciate what
Representative Ferrary and
Senator Sedillo Lopez are trying
to accomplish in terms of
responsible consumption in
trying to promote cessation
however.
Local beer and liquor and
spirits manufacturing creates a
lot of local jobs these are pubs
down the street is our
distilleries around the corner
most of them serve significant
food and its local manufacturing
jobs are good jobs and that
differential is part of the
reason that that industry
continues to grow and thrive in
the state as a manufacturing
industry that that we ship these
products out of state so they
can be consumed by folks in the
new folks come to New Mexico on
the bank and and enjoy a marble
beer or a Santa Fe distillery
that's time gin so for those
reasons we respectfully oppose
thank you.
Thank you madam I thank you
madam chair members of the
committee good morning John
Thompson I'm a registered
lobbyist for admiral beverage
corporation national
distributing company in southern
wine and spirits we stand in
opposition to the bill and to
ask you to post thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm Mary Kay
route registered lobbyists for
The New Mexico restaurant
association and we respectfully
oppose the bill well we agree
that one hundred percent of
revenues collected should go to
prevention and treatment
programs we're concerned that
removing local control I
remitting funds for
municipalities and reducing
legislative oversight over how
this funds are spent may not end
up accomplishing those goals for
prevention and treatment thank
you.
Okay on soon we will go at it in
opposition we will go to
therapists Gerald.
Come up to the microphone and
then we'll come back to Jenny.
This but good morning
members of the committee chair
Thompson my name's had similar
on the intergovernmental
coordinator for Santa Fe County
and I'm here to just present
that are local government of
Santa Fe County in the county
commission has a resolution in
place in support of this piece
of legislation and others like
it that give us the more tools
to help the harm mitigation
within our own local communities
thank you thank you.
Hey.
Anyone else what to speak.
Okay so we will go to zoom to
Jenny.
Anyway.
Hello madam chair and committee
members my name is Jenny way and
I'm an addiction medicine
physician working in Gallup New
Mexico since two thousand twelve
ensure McKinley County alcohol
task force and I
enthusiastically support house
bill two thirty there is no way
to exaggerate the extent of
alcohol related harms in our
hospitals they're far more
prevalent and far more severe
than any of us have seen in any
other setting and we providers
have practiced all over the
country from Atlanta to Seattle
from LA to New York City we're
facing a public health emergency
and I'm not talking about COVID
the one we've been facing for
decades now and only getting
worse they're more elderly
related deaths in New Mexico
than COVID related deaths last
year I never get used to seeing
a twenty eight year old mother
of three in fulminant liver
failure yellow from head to toe
because you click can't clear
her toxins bleeding from every
orifice of her body because she
can't make a protein needed to
clot blood I never get used to
telling her children and her
mother that she is die from a
preventable illness yes a
preventable illness but only if
sound evidence based public
health practices aren't acted
like H. B. two thirty we
healthcare providers do our best
to provide compassionate care
with the resources available
linking them to medications
counseling resources but all
that is not nearly enough to
long we've been in disaster
mitigation we need to shift this
alcohol epidemic towards
prevention we're fighting
formidable forces but our
communities need us to be
stronger and house bill two
thirty shows that we can be
thank you for your time madam
chair and committee members
thank you we have one more in in
person so go ahead thank you
madam chair representative my
name's Linda Atkinson I'm the
executive director of the T. W.
R. resource center and the New
Mexico victim's Rights Project.
I've done this before where we
need to raise hell collects by
tax it would enough back then
this possibly enough but we have
to start somewhere when we have
the harms of that are so
pervasive in this state we end
up at the bottom of too many
lists and I don't care how many
times we say responsible
drinking for someone with a
problem and use it abusively
that makes no sense it goes to
the brain how to make that
decision so I wanted to stand in
support of this bill and say we
really need to rise to the top
and show what we can do to have
a better life here thank you
thank you we'll go back to soon
to roll.
Hi good morning my name is Raul
but advocacy manager alcohol
justice we would like to thank
the authors for introducing this
forward thinking piece of
legislation we're firmly in
support of its passage a simple
tax increase like this where the
revenue was directed back to
those hurt by the product tax is
a popular effective strategy for
harm education on the one hand
the price increase reduces
consumption among people most
likely to be hurt by drinking
and on the other hand it raises
raises a hundred fifty million
every year for prevention
treatment and recovery.
Given the service levels of
alcohol related related harm in
New Mexico the nominal excise
tax increase contained in H. B.
two thirty is a very prudent
step forward to improving the
public health and safety.
For all residents and visitors
to the state we urge that The
New Mexico government to peoples
in the passing of this bill
thank you thank you.
we have Kurt regular.
Go ahead Kurt.
The morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Kirk
record on the director Lujan
advocacy ministry Mexico and the
Mavericks yelp expresses the
position of the mexicana
churches needs the time most of
the state that we strongly
support H. B. two thirty also
the legislation and concur with
the arguments already made by
the Sanchez experts and others
in support we ask your support
for this bill as well I thank
you for the opportunity to share
positions morning.
Thank you
and making McAllen.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee and thank you
to representatives for
introducing this bill I am the
executive director of the New
Mexico behavior health providers
association representing
approximately seventy
organizations statewide
legislative behavior health
services both on large agency
level as well as individual
providers the past were strongly
in support of this bill and
believe that this bill will
allow more people who are
anticipating or interested in
treatment to engage in that and
move forward with that we think
it's opening the window for
increased responsiveness to
treatment efforts and we
strongly support the bill and
thank you for the opportunity to
support it.
Thank you we will go up to
Katrina.
Learning madam chair committee
members my name is Katrina
lacked a I'm the affiliate
executive director of mothers
against drunk driving New Mexico
Ms here speaking in support of
H. B. two thirty through our
ongoing work with the
traumatized victims of DIY and
D. W. Y. crashes on New Mexico's
roadways we know that such
incidents don't just leave the
intoxicated person harms the
leave innocent families children
extended families friends
bystanders and law enforcement
permanently injured or killed
the worst of all this is a crime
as a hundred percent preventable
one victim survivors of these
crashes ask us why something
more can't be done we in fact no
more can be done and that is
through legislation such as this
we had mass support the
prevention component to health
care reform through substantial
increase in taxation on
alcoholic beverages as a means
of covering the cost to society
caused by the misuse of alcohol
mad supports and evenly applied
increase on the tax of wine beer
and distilled that time thank
you you Cindy.
The morning madam chair members
of the committee and city
Sokoman I am an evaluator and
also the director and co founder
of the New Mexico tribal
behavioral health providers
association representing Navajo
Apache and pueblos I am here to
encourage you to vote in favor
of house bill two thirty many
tribal committee members are
negatively impacted by alcohol
related harms even though they
might not even sell alcohol on
tribal land I have the
opportunity as an evaluator to
interact with hundreds of people
some of who don't even realize
that they're drinking is
considered excessive and
therefore harmful.
I really data not affiliated
exposure deaths witness people
living in encampments I am aware
that in Gallup alone on average
there are sixteen thousand
annual admissions into
protective custody most of them
are low income homeless or
unemployed I've spoken to those
who have been able to stop have
found support hope and most most
importantly dignity people with
lower income have more alcohol
related harms and also benefit
the most from interventions like
the one you proposed every
drinkers also benefit because of
priests and their consumption
will improve their health in
conclusion we have a
responsibility as a state to
address and remedy the harms
that alcohol has cost H. B. two
thirty will allow our state
opportunity to in to affect
thousands that I am time thank
you Cindy okay we will go back
to the sponsors to see if they
have any
Thoughts before we go to the
committee thank you madam chair
I failed to record mentioned
that it's been thirty years
since we raised the alcohol
excise tax and when we did that
it was with support of people
like in the audience Stephen
flint and Linda Atkinson who
worked on that we were number
one in the nation Ford D. W.
eyes now we're number one for
alcohol related deaths and this
is something that other states
are also working towards to
raise their excise taxes because
of the great benefits of
reducing consumption and also
using those funds for
Best uses prevented prevention
and treatment.
Forty nine percent of people
don't drink at all those who do
thirty two percent are not
extensive drinkers and eight
almost nineteen percent are
excessive drinkers and it would
help reduce their use especially
a quarter drink is not very much
compared to how much it costs
each of us four hundred dollars
a year in taxes to subsidize
excessive drinking and this is
by every New Mexican whether
they drink or not.
With that we stand for questions
okay
Representative Kate.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for bringing this bill I
just want to re added to it read
eight some of your great
issues that you've brought up
with with the has not been any
tax increase for thirty years
and given that there are so many
bills in the session about
behavior health and it seems to
be an accepted
issue in which the.
Everyone bipartisan government
and private sector has come
together to understand that a
lot most of our issues relating
to the crime to on house to acts
of violence have been related to
behavioral health and substance
abuse the idea that you would be
creating funds that would
actually be able to address what
we all agree on is an issue I am
very grateful so thank you I am
in support this bill.
Thank you anyone else
Representative if the Penske.
Thank you madam chair and
representative
I am delighted at the creation
of this fund I think it is so
needed
particularly to do evidence
based prevention programs I will
say I would love for you all to
look at the impact on the small
businesses the small craft
brewers and distillers we have a
number of them in Santa Fe that
are really small businesses and
I just don't know.
If with such a massive increase
how that is going to affect them
so I would just encourage you
all to to sit with them and and
really go through that because
yeah I think.
it's it it to me it it has a
different type of impact and you
know putting these taxes on some
of these huge companies
Thank you madam chair.
Here can I just respond just
that plea
the quarter US of a drink.
You know they will be able to
pass on to their customers and
most people don't you know think
of a quarter is very much you
know to be able to afford and we
did have the number of years
where they did have the
exception is a micro brewers and
small winery so they were paying
less than a penny before so
because of the impacts that it
has on our you know society in
young people especially we just
think that the quarter as it's
passed on to the person won't
hurt the businesses and
I don't know that madam chair
I've been the I've been telling
some of the lobbyists is invest
on more to reduce consumption
even more so if it cost you
twenty five cents a drink pass
on forty cents a drink in a
joking way but there's there's
some serious to it seriousness
to it in the sense that this is
this is a cost.
We're targeting the consumer
we're not targeting the business
and we're happy to talk to them
nobody has a proposed a smaller
amount to just they've all just
said nothing and no and so
that's a little bit frustrating
but if they want to talk about a
smaller amount they're certainly
welcome to talk to us they
haven't the the response has
been zero we we don't think
anything should change.
Thank you madam chair and.
I love for them to us.
Our.
Thank
So yes thank you madam chair
representative first of all
Representative Ferrary I just
wanna say I'm sorry for your
tragic loss and acknowledge that
before we go on and I know that
we have a serious problem with
alcoholism and and to a
substance abuse here in New
Mexico that we definitely need
to address
there's there's some details of
the bill I want to start with I
do have a lot of concerns about
this bill that I want to have to
address but in the specifics of
the bill there seems to be a a
real complicated changing of
units the the
The wineries here in New Mexico
already have to translate units
from the federal measurements of
gallons to liters milliliters
and so forth but now we're
talking about in the bill we're
talking about translated leaving
that again per to per glass.
And and we're also discussing.
well I I'm concerned about how
in peer review is concerned
there's a fair a real variation
of percentage of alcohol in that
and we're wind is concerned
there's a very I think there's
from six percent to thirteen
maybe fourteen percent alcohol
in that beverage and so the way
we're translating all this per
glass
it seems to not even it doesn't
add up
there there could be somebody
can be allowed to drink a large
amount over here at the brewery
because there's much more
percentage of alcohol in this
drink than over here at the
winery where there's only like
six percent so wondering here
could result in
level in the blood levels of
alcohol that would be restricted
for driving we're just over here
these people are paying the same
amount for their wine but they
could have two or three drinks
and so it's it's really doesn't
seem fair the way these these
measurements of these
translations of units they don't
really add up that that's a
problem the short answer is it's
per during which is for beer
twelve ounces for wine five
ounces and one and a half ounces
for distilled spirits and this
is already of a calculation that
taxed ram has they would just
increase it so that it was level
instead of being one to fifteen
cents
per drink of the different
categories to every category
being twenty five cents per
serving and and I appreciate you
saying that it I did understand
that but what I'm saying is that
that doesn't really achieve the
goal of people not getting drunk
because there is a different
percentage of alcohol and all of
these beverages and so per glass
really doesn't apply and so I'm.
Concerned about that really that
that maybe we're not really
achieving what we want to
achieve because and and you know
who pointed this out to me was
Was a woman who who owns a
winery in my district and she
was concerned about not only
this not achieving the goal but
it's going to require a lot of
extra hours to.
Translate all these units and so
forth and get into compliance
with this bill so
That's one thing and and I I
think we that needs to be looked
at at another thing is
I I don't understand why and I
especially in a year when we
have a huge surplus of funds
here in New Mexico that we
couldn't find a way to.
address alcoholism and substance
abuse with some of those monies
that we have without attacking
or businesses are craft
breweries are wineries in my
district
it's the heart of the wine
country in New Mexico this will
hurt us and tourism and our
economy
I don't think it accomplishes
the goal in our district at all
we are desperately in need of a
Economic practices that that
promote business not restrict
business we already do enough of
that New Mexico and so as I I
totally understand the the
effort to decrease alcoholism
the effort to decrease of
drinking and driving and deaths
related to all of that I just I
just don't see that we need to
be.
restricting business and that to
do it I think we could probably
do both without.
Pass this on to the tourists
that would come to our our
communities to to just have a
glass of wine go to a tasting
room not people that are are
going to end up in the hospital
for alcoholism or so forth and
that sort of thing so so
That's all I have right now.
Madam chair just real quick
the
Taxation revenue would handle
this fine it's only a quarter
during it's not going to put
anyone out of business is state
pass it on to the consumer and
also for tourism they're
probably would like to know that
New Mexico's not number one in
the nation and that
they would be less likely to
suffer as some of the violence
that happens with alcohol
related incidences and also
Another point that
The wineries in the brewers
Well.
Your there's going to be more
jobs that are created that more
people will have into more money
into the economy that can go to
the restaurants and go to the
breweries and
you know if they choose to not
be an excessive drinker
hopefully that they would be
able to purchase their products
to.
And madam chair of with regard
to whether this is a good time
to raise taxes we were tech I
was yes as part of the interim
of the Legislative Health and
Human Services with looking for
a stable source of funding for
these programs because the
problem is because of the nature
of our reliance on oil and gas
we have really good years and so
we've built a programs and then
when we have a bad year these
are the first programs that are
cut and that's why that's the
very reason I was asked to write
a white paper looking for a
stable source of income for this
funds that we've created.
Thank you madam chair now now I
I take it back I do have another
question.
So thank you madam chair and
representative
so explain to me Representative
Ferrary how this would create
jobs.
Because we have so much more
money another two hundred
million into our economy for
prevention and treatment
programs and it would generate
more jobs along that line and
also make it so that we would
have more productivity from
people consuming less being able
to go to work be able to you
know.
Not to come to a lot of the
alcohol related problems thank
you madam chair I think we can
we like I said I think we can
address addiction and to those
things you just mentioned and
not restrict business here what
you're saying is we would grow
government jobs and restrict
private.
Private does not necessarily not
necessarily government jobs
madam chair I'm sorry
but also because there would be
more money in the economy more
consumers and so that will help
grow the economy and a lot of
different ways.
Okay thank you.
Representative Lord thank you
Madam chair representative so I
do quite a bit question this so
can you explain to me right now.
How much money are we generating
and tax dollars from alcohol.
Forty five million.
Forty five million dollars
apiece.
And madam chair representative
of what we do with those with
that forty five million dollars
right now.
a percentage goes to our local
D. W. white groups of kids these
are set up in the early nineteen
ninety three at thirty years ago
and then another portion
Point and then the remaining
fifty percent goes to the
general fund.
Okay I thank you madam chair and
representative I'm looking at
looks like it's twelve percent
the D. Y. grant Fund right now
does that sound.
More than lower than that
because that's what I have
that's right okay.
So twelve percent in.
I think you're just the
representative largest it right
your tend of the proposed bill
or in Albany what's current
rates currently is forty five
percent and that would be it's
it's twenty two point five
million dollars of that
approximately forty five million
goes to the L. E. W. I. programs
that is included that same
amount of money plus a little
bit more because they haven't
had an increase is included in
the proposed bill.
Madam chair representative or
right now you're saying that of
the forty five million forty
five percent of that goes to the
D. W. I. grant Fund and the rest
goes to drug court and some goes
to Farmington so in addition
okay mentor what was what is
that so I'm not familiar with
what is that point two five or
twenty five percent the
Farmington for Adam chair
representative.
I have had a care Representative
Lord as our understanding as it
goes it specifically stated it
says too inebriated persons who
run the streets to support
treatment for a housing or
response for those people in
Farmington it was a small story
fifty thousand dollars per year
that set aside and again that
would be slightly increased in
the current bill.
Madam chair representative so
currently does any that money go
towards any type of re have
anytime of behavioral health to
help people that are addicted to
alcohol.
Madam chair and representative
of lord yes but not enough is
going into this okay then take
wide mentorship I talk about
coming out of the general fund
or something specifically
earmarked like the D. W. D. W.
I. grant Fund is there something
specifically earmarked that is
going to help specifically for
alcohol and chair representative
lord the county seal the W. I.
programs have the ability within
the you know regulations that
are developed by the
DFA to determine where those
funds go with their twenty two
point five million dollars and
then the general fund obviously
so you know how one parses that
out some of that may potentially
be going to the Medicaid match
which provides treatment but
nothing specifically allocated
for treatment in that current
allocation so I just try to get
it Madam chair representative so
with how this is about to
change.
How much money is now going to
be generated in tax dollars and
then what percentage of that
will be earmarked towards
anything for people that are
addicted.
Did you madam chair
representative lord on so the
money that would be raised would
continue the twenty
approximately twenty four
million dollars would go to the
county did of you I. programs as
they are currently the
additional monies would be
allocated through HST and other
agencies and their specific
statements about what the money
would be used for the
legislature would be involved in
approving that and of course
treatment is a significant piece
and a very expensive piece but
in addition prevention and those
social determinants of
alcoholism that are so
important.
K. to chair representative when
hearing it's going to go for
educational departments to try
to stop people from drinking but
I don't hear anything about
specifically going to we're
going to build the world's best
alcohol rehabilitation center in
the whole state that's not
happening correct.
Madam chair representative for
specifically it states and I
believe the sponsor can read
with states that the agencies
which would sure
yes on page seven it
specifically says and that's the
first the first
Purpose listed for these funds
alcohol harms prevention
treatment and recovery services.
And that's the point of what
we're trying to accomplish those
thank you so much for for
highlighting the.
Madam chair representative what
percentage would be taken out of
that fund and I'm going to
assume that there's no
legislation now but you're
anticipating the future that we
might be able to build the
world's best greatest because I
don't see anything ever
happening that's the biggest
problem I ever see we raise
taxes and I don't see it going
to anything we talk about drug
addiction I don't see anything
happen free have we talk about
our call it his CD treatment
programs I'd ask we pass a
medical marijuana I would pass
marijuana we should earmark that
money towards rehab so what
percentage and what guarantees
can you give me that if this
were to pass that there would be
treatment centers built all
across the state of New Mexico
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative lord
there are ready our treatment
centers that need more funding
and we won't be designing and
less it's something that's
recommended we included
the coordinator to meet with the
different groups that are
already meeting right now is
called alcohol policy groups
like Dr way
is of one of the.
Because of the leadership for
that group but there's all
across the state and so they
would come together continue
coming together to make
recommendations and that would
then coordinate with the
different agencies HSD D. O. H.
you know of the others that are
named to decide what you know if
there is a treatment center that
needs more funding or if there
needs to be a secretary to be
built but mostly it's going to
programs that are already in
place for newly created to help
a ratty Kate the harms of
alcohol.
Madam chair representative the
pro my only see or what I've
seen consistently since being
appears we raise a tax and I
don't ever see the money
trickling down to where it needs
to go always my.
It is problem with everything
but going back to
I wanted to reiterate
what Representative Johnson said
so if we're doing by glass.
It doesn't seem to make sense
because there's a glass of
alcohol if you go somewhere
could be eleven percent and some
S. three so that doesn't really
do what you're trying to do
because of somebody has two
drinks of the three percent two
drinks at eleven percent those
are totally different things on
that person that gets in their
cars and drive so can you
explain to me that disconnect in
the sentence madam chair
representative.
I'm madam chair Representative
Lord this is how it's already
set up so taxation and revenue
will just be changing how it's
taxed and and the amount.
Chair representative explained
that he usually probably not
because of the bill because I
read it right we just went
through that with things are
established but it's problematic
in the fact that if somebody has
two three four drinks of eleven
percent versus two three four
drinks at three percent or two
completely different things once
they hit the road to that at
some point that specific issue
need to be addressed separate
from this.
So
Y. E. such a huge increase I
think this is going to probably
want to look at going to be the
highest increase in the nation
why the highest grade increase
in the nation on this specific
tax Madam chair representative.
The.
Madam chair representative we
have we are two and a half times
the national average of alcohol
related deaths in New Mexico and
that hasn't changed in thirty
years and probably before that
before we actually have the data
with that again one out of a
thousand people New Mexico died
last year we need to do
something serious something
stable something focused and
something evidence based and
promising as well to address our
cultural needs so you know if we
could given the cost to the New
Mexico taxpayers the cost to
families and all of us we could
benefit from recent attacks even
more obviously want to do
something that's fair and right
in the chest but the current tax
was not adjusted for inflation
it is actually worth even less
than half of it was when it was
established in nineteen ninety
three when that increases put in
place so this is an opportunity
to infuse significant resources
to do the kinds of things you
are talking about that are
needed and.
Two hundred million hopefully
we'll have the kind of impact if
we use it well so thank you.
Chair chair as the issue of wine
versus peers verses why we're
having a consistent about the
path to abuse takes many forms
for some people it's wine for
some people the entry path is
beer for some it's harder and so
consistency in in reducing
consumption consumption was
viewed as an important value in
why we said it has a consistent
amount for each string.
Thank you madam chair
representative I still see this
problem somebody goes to a
parade they are paid attention
they would drink it's eleven
percent and versus the other
percent that that's a very big
difference when they get out to
drive.
So the question I have the
biggest concern I have is.
Craft breweries so we're known
now is having a tremendous
amount of craft breweries
there are a very important part
of our New Mexico economy.
I'm read about all the great
things that they do because.
I'm a firm believer that this is
what happens all the time we
have got people that are very
responsible the gate of the
motorcycle to go for a ride they
understand their motorcycle they
have one drink to eat food and
then they go back home and then
there's other small percentage
of people have alkaline I'll
call is there going to abuse is
no matter what one form another
they're gonna find a way to
their fix be alcohol or drug
addiction or whatever it is so
look at these craft brewers who
are building our economy and
providing quite a bit of jobs
and.
Building inner Condamine and at
the first thing I thought it was
then they're going to be
punished and I know you're
passing on to the consumer but
okay I'm a consumer I'm gonna go
out I'm not gonna go here
because now it's going to cost
too much in the state home
during their.
I I don't see how that's going
to balance out and help our
craft brewers who are bringing
jobs in here and offering good
jobs with.
Health and insurance and for one
case is not real legitimate jobs
just like they're offering well
I don't know if they're doing in
the marijuana is a no idea
what's going on they're not
there are free for one can a
list of but.
These are not part of our
economy.
And.
I don't understand why we would
want to punish them because most
people I know the go to craft
breweries are not going there to
get drunk they're going there to
enjoy a beer and a really good
beer to it that and so I am very
perplexed on why they were not.
Exempted or lowered or something
in our wineries to because our
wives are also becoming known
nationwide for having great
wines so I want to make sure
we're not penalizing them.
And at the end of the day I'm
looking at.
I don't want these businesses in
New Mexico and I get passing
along but still I'm not gonna go
there because it's now too
expensive just stay home and
direct my our caller I'm gonna
go to a friend's house or
whatever parties or what was
that thing called when they got
read out prohibition that thing
you know they're still gonna be
people there in excess alcohol
they're still always going to be
people there's plenty of
moonshine out in New Mexico I
mean people make mention all the
time so there's always ways to
get around it.
And I don't like raising taxes
and penalizing everybody to get
to that one I'm like we have a
tremendous amount of money in
the first less.
So do have a question madam
chair and representative of what
about I can go online and buy
from total wine everything have
wine delivered are you going to
tax do an extra online tax.
For alcohol on line.
Madam chair and Representative
Lord my understanding is that
they pay taxes and they would
see an increase also.
And people we don't want people
not to socialize and go to the
craft brewers.
If they're not excessively
drinking it will be fine one or
two drinks that's fifty cents I
don't think that's going to keep
people from being able to go and
enjoy the
Going to the restaurants and
breweries that we have in our
state we don't want to prohibit
alcohol we just want to make it
so that it contributing and
also reducing consumption by
excessive drinkers.
Right and I I don't think that I
we have so many other resources
and some of them take it from
marijuana people they got
marijuana they can go ahead
tribute that money but I know we
can't do that that's off limits
for some reason so they went so
madam chair representative so
they will buy online and there's
going to be a special tax at it
is that what I'm understanding
like the special this increase
in tax when they go to buy it's
going to say you're buying in
New Mexico it's now.
This percentage.
Twenty five cents to during
serving okay so I'm okay so how
would that if I bought a bottle
of wine I know I have to do this
one order if I go online and
order a bottle of whiskey or
wine or whatever is there going
to be added tax online that says
there's a special service tax
of.
X. amount for online purchases.
Just the way it is now it would
just miss madam chair I said
mentors all sorry I did no.
So yes this is tax now it would
just
go to twenty five cents to drink
and if it's right now it seven
cents it would just increase to
that twenty five cents Madam
chair representative how do you
how do you calculate that how do
you know how many glasses of
wine or in a bottle is that how
it would work by else's or if
it's okay under yeah there are
certain line it would be a five
ounces per during so if it was
Seventy five ounce okay yep
trying to just trying to figure
out how that would work with the
chair representative so there
would be an online tax.
Okay.
But nothing of somebody decided
to get their car and drive to
another state right I mean
there's not there's no border
checks I can California.
Make it after which people don't
know there are border checks in
California she did know that
they will ask if you oranges but
let's stay on the bill please
Madam chair representative
Hey always fit person like we I
hate it always seems like we're
so behind on everything like why
haven't we been doing this why
are we putting more money
efforts I talked to somebody
mental health the other day
because that mental health
awareness and and they were
frustrated thank you guys pass
all this stuff and doesn't seem
to be getting down to where it
needs to go.
So I'm never for an increase in
taxation and I don't want to
punish our.
Responsible
Directors trying to think of our
many questions they do but it
just seems like I'm going to be
held X. there's a ton of
questions so for now you'll find
time manager.
Representative.
Representative said.
Thank you madam chair.
And Representative in my
condolences your niece thank
you.
You know as I was thinking about
this bill I was just trying to
fill figure out what the the big
motivation was behind it.
And.
The more that I'd listen to it
it's it's certainly not the
prosperity of our small
businesses.
And I literally got hundreds of
emails.
On this particular bill.
And I wanted to share.
One of my constituents.
He wrote a letter.
And this is how it reads.
Our state is been through a lot
in the last three years.
They were some of the they were
some of the toughest I've ever
had in my life there was a point
when I didn't think my
businesses would be around long
enough to see the light at the
end of the tunnel.
Now these these are my
constituents that own small
businesses that have put all
their money into these
businesses.
And why they chose.
Spirits up I don't know but they
did and that's that's where was
that so.
Now I finally feel like we're
getting to a place where my bar
and package store.
Can start growing again.
Our state is in a similar
situation with the massive three
point six billion dollar budget
surplus.
Which represents about forty
percent of its overall budget.
We're in a position to spend
wisely.
And chart the course for our
growth and opportunity for the
future.
While the darkest days of COVID
are behind us we are beginning
to feel the threats of the
recession on the horizon.
You would think this is what
bothers me a little bit you
would think that the politicians
in Santa Fe would be looking for
ways to protect New Mexico one
small businesses who have
already been through so much.
Unfortunately unfortunately they
decided to make raising alcohol
taxes a top priority.
This decade has been difficult
enough and now they want to make
it harder.
We're still dealing with
previous changes.
That the valued our liquor
license.
So on the liquor license they
used to cost.
Half a million dollars and we do
value them so the people that
did buy liquor license were
devalued and they look they lost
a huge asset.
It pleased additional limits on
the products we can sell like
minis.
There are a variety of proposals
to raise taxes whether it's
through change to the overall
structure or new fees they all
amount to one thing.
Making it harder on small
businesses that depend on
alcohol sales to stay afloat.
It's especially shorts short
sighted when you think about.
Who will fill the tax increases
the most.
At an individual level these
taxes are regressive and have
the largest impact on those.
That are least able to afford
them.
At the business level the
legislature is trying to pass
bills that will harm.
Some of our hardest hit and most
vital sectors of the state's
economy restaurants and
hospitality.
As you all know New Mexico had
some of the hardest harshest.
Hospitality restrictions in the
country.
During the first years of the
COVID nineteen pandemic.
There was a time when it seem
like we were adapting to a new
role every week.
My bar which brings in about
seventy five percent of my
business which was shuttered for
four hundred and seven days we
resorted to a Cup to Cup of
covering all of our parking lot.
So that we can build an axe
throwing facility an outdoor
dining area.
Then we lost the ability to have
live music.
Which is a big draw for us.
The musicians we had.
They have been working for years
struggling mightily to make ends
meet.
Through a combination of hard
working low we made it work but
there wasn't a day that went by
without me worrying about
whether we would be able to make
it through the month.
I wear it every night about
being able to provide for my
family.
And what and what my staff and
their families would do if we
had to close for good.
Once COVID started to subside
and businesses started to get
back to us to some sense of
normalcy.
More challenges said in supply
chain issues meant that goes we
depended on every every even
things as simple as bottles
containers and bags were hard to
find inflation meant that we did
not find them.
They would be more expensive
Representative Jones
coming Representative Vincent
let's stay on what I'm trying
madam chair but this is my
constituents this is a big thing
for us because I have lots of
distilleries I have lots of
vineyards and and my and my
constituents are super upset
about this so I I really need to
convey the what this person is
saying summarized sure we'll
talk about comment that's why
well the COVID is bringing it to
the hardships and now we're fix
and add more hardships on to
with a tax it's going to be five
dollars and fifty cents per
bottle.
There's twenty two shots in a
bottle of whiskey and and
they're they're gonna get hit
for every ounce and a half at
twenty five cents that doesn't
mean a whole lot so what I'm
trying to figure out who who do
we pass this on to a pass it on
to the consumers to businesses
do Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative
Denson yes and they're already
paying fifteen cents so at
distilled spirits they're only
going to be raise ten cents and
also provide I know you're
concerned about your
Distilleries and and retailers
but I think we also need to
think about that this is in
twenty ten dollars so it's
probably a lot more than that
now the two point two billion
dollars it costs our citizens
over a thousand dollars per New
Mexican whether they drink or
not.
Madam chair representative if
these bills pass our state we
will see fewer travelers.
Do you agree with that.
Madam chair representative
Vincent no I don't I don't think
a quarter fifty cents is going
to make a big difference for
person sitting down to have a
drink Madam chair representative
and a lot of the committees on
then they talk about equality in
the and you know they talk about
the the people that don't make
as much money are we working
them out of being able to have a
drink with they'll be able to
for that pretty easy
madam chair and representative
Vincent we have statistics that
will show it probably isn't a
book that you were given where
people who are making under
twenty five thousand dollars a
year if they are in excessive
drinker would only see an
increase of fifty four dollars
over a whole year and it's not
regressive because they will
also be the benefactors of most
of the programs that are you
know for toward low income
people so it really makes this a
progressive.
Taxing.
At my last statement Madam chair
representative I wanted to go
ahead.
Representative then presented to
we talk about people coming into
the state one of the issues is
what they see first and if
there's someone in the rated
walking around causing issues
safety is an issue.
Both large most above all if
somebody's going into the
community so once that that
there is a negative impact for
that visit to into the state of
New Mexico they are likely to
pass that along to quite a few
more people.
So we can get an environment in
which it is very friendly to
come into.
Then I see more of an increase
for tourism in New Mexico thank
you madam chair Madam chair
representative in my community
we have an intoxication law if
you're drinking in public you'll
go to jail so we don't have a
problem with that what we do
have is a bunch of high end
vineyards that people.
They set that in their path to
come to different states and
they go to these tasting rooms
and they by our our constituents
drugs.
We have pistachio wine we have
green chili one we've got all
this kind of stuff and no matter
how you shake it it's pretty
easy for us to say that it's not
going to affect them but we're
not in the alcohol business they
are.
So my closing statement is.
Our business has been proud to
call rid also home since
nineteen fifty six.
We're confident that we will be
here for decades to come if
we're given the opportunity to
thrive.
Rather than being nickel and
dimed lawmakers should give us a
break and drop these ill
considered tax proposals thank
you madam chair.
Representative Chavis thank you.
You have a second and your I.
cicadas we have Representative
Travis and David Representative
Kate.
On a couple of.
Both the.
Yes Representative
Representative K. okay
Representative Chavis yes
Representative Ferrary.
Yes.
Representative Hotmail no.
Representative Jones.
No.
Representative Lord no and like
to explain my vote.
Representative the pants ski.
Yes.
Representative Vincent no.
Madam vice chair Herndon yes.
And madam chair Thompson.
Yes.
By a vote of six to four we have
to pass.
Chair and representative for
Madam chair representative quick
I I just don't want to pass
twenty five cents that's great
cumulative on.
Our small businesses and I do
anything to harm our wineries
and craft breweries and I don't
think this is going to do what
it's supposed to be doing to
thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
All.
Sorry I'm so we are in recess.
That was.
rehabilitation chief.
Twenty four hours.
We.
