Here.
Representative Liz Thomson I'm
here.
Representative vice chair Joanne
for our I'm here.
And madam chair on strong I'm
here and I see Representative
Anderson is is on but you Miss
sept away.
Okay so first on our agenda it
is consent calendar on Senate
bill one twenty three I think
people have had a chance to look
at that and no dissenting votes
anywhere through the Senate any
objections to a do pass.
On Senate bill one twenty three.
Seeing none hearing none that we
have a do pass on Senate bill
one twenty three.
And Representative Anderson are
you there.
I don't
care yeah yeah and will tend.
Attendance zero.
One excuse and the next step
then is Senate bill
seventy one and let's see if
we've got Representative two
Higgs.
And just promoted her madam
chair okay and then she has
a couple of
Experts.
City.
Yes madam chair should be
sovereign Hager Nicholas Cordoba
and Nicolas Madison.
And it looks indoors like you
haven't made me a co host yet if
you would do that.
We have.
Do we have all your I think what
are we missing one.
The Nicole Martin was your
concern witness.
It it was Nicholas Madison but
you know he might not be
available this morning yes there
is there.
We got a.
Okay.
Welcome Senator.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee
this is my first House committee
agency on what we're going to
give you easy easy landing here
folks.
You guys seem like you're in a
better mood than than the Senate
is right out.
That you know.
If there's no other way to do it
I don't think anyways go ahead
Senator and present a Senate
bill seventy one and just so
that everyone knows and an
audience to we do have
English Spanish interpreter and
this morning if you
if we have any public comment
and Spanish you can click on the
globe button at the bottom and
you'll hear in English and for
the audience if you need
interpretation one way or the
other you can select that with
the globe button at the bottom
of your screen.
so thank you go ahead.
Thank you madam chair so I'm
here on SB seventy one which is
the patients debt collection
protection act and this is a
bill
That that really does.
Those four main things are the
first thing it does is it
protects low income patients by
creating a ban on collections
for patients who are two hundred
percent or less of the poverty
level I'm very about collections
for medical to act
It also supports that medical
providers by reducing
uncompensated care by
instituting a screening process
for insurance so folks can be
screened to see if they are
eligible for public assistance
for for Medicaid or assistance
programs facility might have and
if they are they can also if
requested get assistance filling
out the applications for those
so that of medical providers are
compensated for that care.
The bill also make sure that for
folks who are sent to
collections that that
collections process is is a
little more equitable than it is
now and it does that by making
sure that our definitions in our
That the collection I always
forget the name of the stature
this report that the the
dictates collections actions
matches that the federal statute
so that I debt buyers are
included and it also closes a
loophole that we currently have
where by statutes and judgments
can only be a judgment is good
for fourteen years but there's a
loophole where a common law
judgment can be renewed
indefinitely for someone's
entire lifetime and this was an
issue that came up in a court of
appeals case were they invited
invited the legislature to to to
fix this problem and so that's
something that we're fixing in
this bill as well so that folks
who are dealing with medical
debt collections those are
hanging over them for their
entire life.
The first thing that this bill
does is it creates some
accountability and transparency
for the use of indigent care
funds are is by creating a
reporting mechanism so that
the department of health and and
the legislature know how these
funds are actually being used
are because right now we don't
so that's that's kind of the the
quick and dirty version of it I
have these experts here to help
me but I think we'll just
they'll be available for
questions and thank you madam
chair will stand for questions.
Hi thank you
before we go to the audience I
just wanted it because it may
make a difference to to folks in
public comment and just wanted
to
let the committee know that the
sponsor and I have spoken and
there is
of an amendment that I want to
offer and I I don't have it
written up so just if if all of
you if you have your copy in
front of you.
this relates to the
superintendent promulgating
rules to establish the standards
for screening and billing.
And
It it seems it seems to me at as
I read that contemplated that
that that the.
Requirements for a small
practice
might be different than for
hospital for how far you have to
go on screening and so forth and
and providing assistance so many
of the hospitals and the many
facilities do this regularly
they screen and can do
presumptive eligibility for
Medicaid and other smaller
practices and and other kinds of
facilities don't routinely and
it might not be
the same kind of requirements so
I talked to the sponsor and
wanted to offer an amendment on
page six line fourteen.
So that it after practices are
comma based on health care
facility type and size comma so
it just give some direction to
the superintendent that.
That to in establishing those
standards it might very.
From the type of facility and
size of facility and then we'll
leave there the rest of that to
to rulemaking
And and we'll take care of that
when we come back a formally
adopting that when we come back
to the committee but I wanted
the audience to know that that
we had talked about about that a
small amendment to to make it
clear that it may not be a one
size fits all for once the
appropriate level of screening
and assistance.
And with that then
Senator if you're ready we'll go
to the audience.
And we start to first on the in
here with a poll of who in the
audience if you'll respond to
the poll if you're here in
support or opposition.
And unfortunately we don't do
this with a neutral so you'll
have to pick one.
If you're kind of neutral then
you got to pick one or the other
but will we will hear from
everyone who wishes to speak.
We'll give you a few more
seconds.
Okay.
Right looks like we've got a
twenty people in the audience
and support and to an
opposition.
And so we will go to opposition
first.
If you are in opposition.
to this
to the bill and want to speak.
Got a hand raised for it for
Anna out Rondon did you want to
speak in opposition.
No madam chair I'm in support
okay if you'll take your hand on
we'll get to you in just a
minute.
And just so first we have a
Kerry a robin Brander.
hello madam chair and members of
the committee I I first want to
say that it's unfortunate always
that we have to pick a side a
supporter opposition could take
Lee when we're still working
through some very specific
issues on the bills so I'm I
guess that I am standing up on
the side of opposition but I
want to say very clearly that we
very much appreciate all the
work that has been done on this
bill we very much appreciate the
amendment that is being proposed
to differentiate between
different kind of health care
facilities and providers are are
issues around the bill are very
very specific at the New Mexico
Medical Society of which I am
the registered lobbyist we need
to make sure that we are
protecting all different kinds
of practice groups and we agree
with the morality and the intent
of the bill we are still
concerned that with out
clarification in the definition
of a health care facility we may
run into some situations where
we have a pediatric practice
that is offering urgent care and
after hours setting and to be
swept into the provisions of the
bill without a specific flow
chart for how OSI is going to
work out the rules so we hope we
can continue to work on those
issues as we move forward and we
appreciate the time of the
sponsor the experts in the
committee thank you so much
madam chair thank you next we
have Jason Weaks.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Jason Weaks
registered lobbyists for optimum
medical group again kind of want
to echo the same points made by
a misprint we very much I
appreciate the intent of the
bill and I think the core of the
bill is to prevent and and and
put an end to predatory debt
collection practices the people
are creating as a result of.
Medical procedures that they've
had that they couldn't afford
those aspects of the bill
absolutely great public policy I
think the screening is good as
well in the billing provisions
are also good the problem is
that those provisions can't
should not be applied uniformly
against all health care
providers because they're not
all created equal in particular
physicians may not have the
expertise or ability in office
to do appropriate screenings you
putting in a position of really
doing something that doesn't
very doesn't come very naturally
and they may not do a good job
at it and it also creates a
resource drain on the practice
the amendment takes care a lot
of that but as misprint pointed
out we still continue to have
some pretty significant issues
with respect to definition
health care provider look for
Health Care facility look
forward to continue working with
the sponsor on those issues and
hopefully we can get it all
sorted out so that we can
actually support the legislation
actively thank you.
Thank you okay now we will go to
those who wish to speak in
support.
And we'll start with Rachel
Biggs and we're going to limit
to COVID to equipment so I try
and we won't cut you off mid
sentence but at try and stick to
us close as you can to a minute.
Rachel Biggs go ahead good
morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Rachel
Biggs policy director
Albuquerque Health Care for the
homeless where federally
qualified health center serving
about seven thousand individuals
without homes throughout
Bernalillo county and we stand
strong support and SB seventy
one think of access to
affordable healthcare as a
primary structural cause of
homelessness and poverty and we
see the impact medical debt has
every day in our clinics and on
street Medicine outrageous
throughout the county too many
vulnerable New Mexicans have
been driven into poverty and
homelessness by medical debt New
Mexico needs this legislation to
stop collections against low
income patients and help
families get connected with
health care coverage they can
pay for their care we urge your
support of SB seventy one thank
you.
Thank you our next Amerongen.
Good morning thank you madam
chair and committee members my
name is Raul Enron did with
former together action I fully
support Senate bill seventy one
and I am very appreciative for
the legislators addressing not
only this issue but also the
chain reaction that happens to
us when we get bad credit
ratings then we have to go to
and get a loan out at the other
predatory into TV of loans and
so.
We are lifting some of these
chains that oppress our people
and I really support
to have the the folks that are
not able to have insurance
and those that have insurance
but also be screened at the
beginning of their health care
service that they're not caught
at the end couple months later
with the outrageous bill
and we all know the struggles
that our families have in New
Mexico
in here in McKinley county
thirty eight percent of our
people are in unemployment.
And and so though we some of us
have Indian Health Service a lot
of our specialty health care we
cannot access because we do not
have that that type of insurance
or access to quality care thank
you so much thank you for
committee members were all work
thank you have a great day thank
you our next we have Bill
Jordan.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee of Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children.
Really want to thank senators do
it again and Hickey for their
good work on this important
issue one of the great successes
of the affordable Care Act was
ensuring many more New Mexicans
people who without insurance
would have faced massive debt
and even bankruptcy when tragedy
struck but not everyone is
eligible and not everyone is
taking advantage of coverage
even worse our New Mexico
businesses are last in the
nation in providing health
insurance coverage for their
employees.
This bill is one more important
step in providing health and
financial security to our
families neighbors and co
workers it's a reasonable and
just request and we thank you
for your support.
Thank you next we have Nicole
Martin.
You're not been a good morning
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Mikel more
in a and then click committee
which is Navajo on the gonna
Pueblo born and raised here into
the territory of just help keen
surrounding areas.
I'm one of the co founders for
indigenous women rising and I
just wanted to
leave a comment today in support
of SB seventy one of the only
access to health care but
medical debt is an enormous
burden on our community one in
five Americans are pursued by
debt collectors for medical debt
fifty nine percent of all
negative items on consumer
credit reports are due to
medical debt the threat of
inserm insurmountable debt
prevent families from seeking
life saving care and this is
something I witness within my
communities you know the thought
of getting that kind of
Scares us from seeking health
care because we don't want to
being having to hello my name.
Just to save our lives so I ask
for your support thank you.
Thank you all right next we have
Genevieve Romero.
Thank you madam chair and
committee my name is generator
madam a fellow four together
action this bill is vitally
important to ensuring the health
of our communities and families
now more than ever it is
essential that we ensure all our
fellow Mexicans have access to
adequate and affordable health
care I know what it is like when
health care is not affordable
two years ago as a sophomore in
college I got a severe case of
strep throat had to go to the
emergency room there was a mix
up between my insurance my
hospital and I received a bill
for fifteen hundred dollars as a
working college student I do not
have fifteen hundred dollars to
spend and this call and
surrounds Paul two years later
as a senior in college I'm still
trying to sort it out I've lost
count of the times right decided
not to seek health care I needed
because of the fear of incurring
more medical debt the last six
years my family's been trying to
get medical that due to a lack
of coverage prior VA insurance I
can't imagine how much worse it
would be without any health care
at all as it caution trying to
improve my economic circumstance
the harsh realities that now my
health care needs have impacted
my credit and economic future
please vote yes on SB seventy
one and support more students
and families from facing the
same circumstances thank you.
Thank you.
On next we have Kurt regular.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee my name is Kirk
record on the Director listen
Abbas mystery of New Mexico the
traffic see mystery also see
some happen Mexico conference of
churches.
I'm here today to support this
state our support for SB seventy
one and I would like to begin
thank the sponsors of this bill
for their continued stewardship.
We also support the halting of
collections against our most
economically vulnerable New
Mexicans and to the connecting
of patients to options they may
have for health insurance
certainly the issue of medical
debt is much larger than the
issues addressed in this bill
but we believe that this bill
makes important strides in
protecting those most vulnerable
in our state for these reasons
and for those others the the
others previously stated in
support I urge your support for
SB seventy one and I think this
opportunity to speak and for
your service to our state.
Thank you a doctor Tasha Barnes.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Dr Tasha Bayern same here
today representing a group
called primary care advocates
for healthy communities a group
of about twenty primary care
providers practicing in New
Mexico we support this bill and
have been advocating for
legislation such as this for
many years medical that is a
problem we deal with on a daily
basis as it often drives our
ability to care for patients as
they will not do for their care
for fear of further bills I have
patients that have it affect the
rest of their life after
speaking care for life
threatening illnesses and it
limits their ability to buy
houses cars and continue their
lights medical bills are very
confusing I have an example of a
provider he went to get a loan
on a house that was denied for
long because of insurance bill.
Yes delivery that was sent to
collections we also have many
patients that you care and you
have insurance or qualify for
Medicaid or other services but
due to lack of screening before
the procedure they end up with
bills which is much more
difficult to deal with after the
process please vote yes on this
bill to help primary care
providers care for our patients.
Thank you next we have Liz
Lopez.
Good morning madam chair
committee members thank you for
allowing me to share my concerns
with you today my name is Liz
Lopez and and the case manager
from SS a loop in the south
valley.
let me just tell you that I have
seen the struggles and burdens
of many of my clients as well as
family members who do not have
medical insurance and typically
end up with extremely high bills
and.
Then they're forced with a
difficult decision of whether to
pay their utility bills rent or
pay into the medical debt which
is usually about thousands of
dollars and all they can put
down is twenty dollars and hopes
that it could even make a dent
you know it is difficult to
reassure them that there won't
be any repercussions and that
they're able to pay their
medical that I'm if they're not
able to pay the medical that.
they also fear that there so
that they will be sent to
collections and thus ruining
their credit intent is a
possibly buying a home or a
vehicle or anything you know to
make their dreams come true as a
case manager who sees this
firsthand and feels they meant
for tonight's argument supporter
SB seventy one thank you thank
you next we have day and are a
Beltran and I hope I pronounced
that it please close to
correctly.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee
yes you did pronounce it
correctly thank you
my name is David and I was done
and I am Health apprentice at
Gus I salute clinic in the south
valley
I fully support SB seventy one
as part of the immigrant
community I have family members
who do not receive medical care
specifically because they are
uninsured and they fear being
sent to collections and later
facing repercussions from not
paying that could lead to
Being sent to court and thus
disclosing their immigration
status in the future the same
goes for patients that we see
daily who often avoid necessary
medical care even when their
conditions continue to worsen.
All New Mexicans should have
access to affordable health care
regardless of income and
immigration status thank you for
your time Sir thank you next we
have Gabby Hernandez.
Hi good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is got
in on this and then I'm a
community organizer because as
senator I'm here in support of
SB seventy one and then back
every second like many immigrant
families my mother did not have
access to any type of financial
support and we had to stick care
it was up to us to figure out
how we would pay thousands of
dollars spent one ER visits I
remember my mom ideas and so
many other families were
essential who are essential
workers needing constant fear of
being sued for unpaid medical
bills having to wait wages
garnished lines please on their
homes and their charisma and
please vote yes on SB seventy
west because no one should have
to risk management assessor was
taking care especially now
during this pandemic thank you
so much.
Jim Jones please.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee meetings and
the Johns and I'm a fellow for
to get action I think the court
SB seventy one as a mother to I
personally struggle with medical
debt due to pregnancy support my
children actually it's been the
only that that I have struggled
with the family should not have
to be forced to choose between
describing their credit or
seeking medical care in an
emergency or maternity care when
they're when they're having
pregnancies and during this
pandemic is particularly
important the SP seventy one is
passive as many New Mexican
families will not only have to
worry about the economic impacts
of the pandemic but also have to
worry about whether or not their
medical care from COVID will
describe their credit or worse
make them lose their home care
G. today to support SB seventy
one thank you very much.
Thank you our next we have
Ramona Urbina.
One of the in the number of I'm
that would have been with us and
we'll them don't mean will make
you go in there for what the
weather is the a keep up in the
list local you're but allies
that this thank you madam thank
you all for your lies Services
and thank you yes yes.
Thank you next we have still
hex.
Hello madam chair committee
members my name is still takes
on the intensive case manager
with the City of Albuquerque New
Mexico sits at the clinic and
I'm here to talk about at the
seventy one jail to support it
we've heard a lot about folks
struggling to choose between you
know paying off their mortgages
paying for food or trying to
trying to knock down these
medical debt bills but something
really really essential in this
bill is requiring the hospital
screen patients for Medicaid
eligibility among other
financial assistance programs
and as someone that does
Medicaid enrollment I know it's
really really simple process for
service providers that can break
down so many barriers for
patients and I think the notion
that hospitals we will be
burdened by this screen
requirement is pretty misguided
because New Mexico HSD has made
the Medicaid application and
screening requirements so
straightforward and user
friendly
and and when we're not screening
for Medicaid or were not helping
people find that financial
assistance on the front end
we're praying on sick people and
there are so many patients that
don't even understand the
program to understand the
qualified and we need to be
transparent with our patients
and we just health care workers
need to be able to work for our
patients in these hospitals and
ensure that they are going to be
preyed upon and I think if we're
armed with the knowledge and
security that our patients
seeking care isn't gonna
financially ruined them our
communities will be healthier
and safer I would urge you to
protect the health and financial
safety of our community members
by supporting SB seventy one
thank you so so much.
Thank you and our last we have
Dr
today how.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thanks for
having public comment
my name is Dr Anjali to.
and run because of this flu
clinic.
Our nation
I wanted to to frame here one
this is a racial justice issue
I'm on the governor's council
for racial justice.
Seoul was in favor of.
Solution that would provide
these protections and we handed
it to the governor's desk and in
this time we.
All of our roles in improving
racial justice this is where
health care comes in and steps
up and supports those who acted
without this legislation second
it's an economic issue this is a
win win and for patients for
families and for health care
facilities and hospitals happy
to provide any arguments or any
kind of counter up for anything
you may be hearing but hospitals
being able to screen patients
means they will be able to get
people insurance and get
reimbursed adequately patients
not going to collections means
that they can get the care they
want we can rebuild trust with
the community as health care
providers and hospitals don't
collect much on patients going
collections anyway so thank you
very much for this time.
Thank you unacceptably rowing
so.
The right on mute yourself.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is
leroy so I'm with for together
action one of the.
Leisure I'm here today because
we strongly support SB seventy
one.
Because every family in New
Mexico coyotes have been
affected by the COVID virus and
so many ways.
In rural areas.
Where do have only small clinics
state state and I'm sending
patients out of town to other
hospital.
A lot later bills start to come
in.
The male demanded to pay up or
else.
At a time like this when there
is no jobs and the center of the
last thing we need is another
bill to pay expressly for health
care.
This bill will help.
And I protection for New
Mexicans to reduce medical debt
and financial hardship during
the spending thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
That was
The last of our public comments.
And
Senator did you want to say
anything else before we go to
questions from the committee are
you ready committee chair thank
you okay all right first we have
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you for the presentation
of this bill
and welcome to our committee we
are.
Usually really nice committee
and we all try to get along the
best we can.
I do have a couple questions
madam chair and senator
Do most facilities and not
already do this type of
screening for patients to see if
they qualify for Medicaid and
other things
other ways for paying for
Services.
So madam chair Representative
Armstrong some do
but not all and what we found is
that the ones that do so for
example nor Lea hospital
they have instituted at this
kind of a screening approach and
it's been really successful and
they managed to cut their self
pay population almost in half by
doing so
but but there are are still a
lot of of hospitals and
facilities that don't do this
and as a result a lot of the bad
debt that that these places are
carrying this is that that
that's going on paid by
patients.
R. for in in Union County for
example seventy five percent of
their bad debt was attributable
to patients who more than likely
did qualify for some sort of
assistance
San Juan read regional Medical
Center forty five percent of
their bad debt is folks who who
otherwise I'd qualify for
assistance so while you would
think that the every facility
would be doing this already
because it's it's really in
their interest to do so
a lot of them aren't and so
that's that's why that's part of
this.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator I'm one of the
problems and and I think I've
brought this up before in in
committee but I may not have I
had a clinic close in my County
and they have an advocate there
to help people sign up for.
Services.
Unfortunately the majority of
those services.
Never got charged and the the
clinic ended up closing because
they couldn't afford to keep it
open we have since our with the
help of several people
found some cares Act money to
help re open the clinic but of
course that's very expensive to
do of pharmacy license and so on
and so forth.
And I'm still having issues
trying to get a funded my my
junior money actually went to
the county to help pay to help
keep the clinic open.
So I I'm concerned about small
clinics in rural New Mexico
about doctors offices that may
not have the ability to do this
also I know of companies that
Madam chair and senator that
contract with.
Urgent I type of urgent care
facility and would they be
mandated to do to to.
Process these.
Ortiz of customers that they
already contract with would they
be required to do that with
every customer that comes to the
door.
So Madam chair representative
Armstrong.
As as far as we were talking
about with.
With concerns about folks being
able to to to do the screening
and and issues with getting
everything processed I the the
guidance that's going to be
provided by the the OSI in HSD I
think is is really going to help
with that and and accounting for
the different sizes and and the
different I kind of approached
us with those clinics are doing
specifically in the some of the
amendment that's going to be
done today I think I think is is
really gonna help address those
issues as far as and and if I if
I'm.
Get your question wrong please
let me now but for folks who it
sounds like they might be
providing services with anyone
of these facilities but their
contractor for them they there's
actually a carve out in this
bill specific to those folks
they refer to as the third party
health care providers I and if
if there's someone like that who
is providing health care
services within the facility but
billion of patient independently
for that
if they have revenues of twenty
million dollars or more than
they're not doing any of of the
screening they just wait to bill
the patient until they get the
results of the screening from
the facility so that facility so
let's say there is
I apologist provided providing
services within a hospital or
within and and or or X. rays.
Taxes providing services somehow
within I an urgent care but
they're actually their own
standalone person and and
they're contracting it's the
hospital or that urgent care
that is doing this whole
screening process and then
they're just providing the
results of that screening
process to that contractor
before the contractor sends out
their own independent bills
because that way the contractor
knows who to that
if they know if this person has
been screen has been signed up
for insurance and they can build
the insurance and stuff.
But responsible for doing the
screening themselves thank you
madam chair thank you senator
that's actually not what I'm
referring to are referring to
I'll just give a for instance
a company that is self insured
that actually.
Pays an urgent care center.
A yearly fee to be able to see
all of their employees.
And they the company covers all
of those costs so is that urgent
care going to be mandated by
this legislation.
To screen every one of those
employees that comes to the door
even though they are on a
separate contract.
So it so you talk about said
that these concierge services
that that did S. yes and and so.
They would offer to screening
but they're not required to add
and if the the person
I'm sorry I'm getting getting
notes I I think one of my
experts would like to to jump
and so I'll I'll go ahead and
defer to to that might this
taker Mr Cordoba.
Madam chair Representative
Armstrong V. requirement to
screen is only for patients who
are uninsured and the extent of
the screening you know whether
it's just a referral to Human
Services Department
you know did will be determined
in regulation by the office of
the superintendent of insurance
on to that amendment that's
before you all today and so.
The screening is required by a
facility within the definition
and then if there's a provider
working in that facility they
don't have to scream it seems
like that's not your question is
about whether an entity that
does both urgent care and other
types of health care would be
covered I think the answer is
yes and then the extent of that
screening is really based on
facility type and size in order
to accommodate those differences
and that's what's in the
amendment before you I hope that
answers the question.
Thank you you madam chair and
senator and expert I I just have
concerns that you know we've
passed a lot of legislation this
year in the in the house and in
the Senate that is and and of
course we want more people to be
able to be covered on on
Medicaid we wanted to be covered
on Medicare we want everyone
covered we've we've passed a lot
of legislation
mandating insurance companies to
do this that or the other
mandating doctors offices to do
this that or the other.
Mandating employers to do this
that or the other and I just
feel like these facilities that
we are going to make this
mandate to
it's it's one more hurdle and
one more thing and what this is
actually going to do is drive
the cost of doing business the
cost of paying insurance and the
cost of
anything to do with doing
business in New Mexico is going
to drive this cost.
I am.
madam.
Chair and and senator
I just have a lot of concerns
about the the cost.
For New Mexicans that are going
to be paying for this.
I would I'm gonna listen madam
chair and representative and US
senator to the rest of the
conversation and see what's what
other people are are talking
about and and and then I'll make
my decision but but as of right
now I'm I'm not supportive of
this but I make it there but
thank you for your answers I
appreciate.
Thank you and before we continue
I'm wondering would probably
should take care of
the amendment because I'm known
to forget about that by you can
get to the end.
So.
Adopt the amendment.
Yes yes.
Madam chair point work of I know
you were just change a couple
things are we going to be able
to get a copy of that to so can
you just explain it one more
time just to make sure I
understand yes I'm I'm happy to
and if you have your.
Copy of the of the legislation
in front of you.
I'll explain it first and then
I'll read what it read what it
says the superintendent is
supposed to promulgate rules
about what the what is required
for screening.
And this of the amendment just
says that that of those rules
and his recommendations for what
is required for screening will
be based upon the type of this
type and size of facility so
that may get at the issue that
Representative Armstrong had if
you have a small rural clinic
that's that that you know that
or just a single the doctor's
office what they're required to
do maybe to find information and
the the about what the
requirements are or what they
qualify for and I'm I'm just
making this up the
superintendent has to do slide
rules but they it may be just
the screening may be here's some
information about what the
qualifications are for these
other programs and here's how
you goes sign up I mean that it
may be as simple as that we're a
hospital finance department may
do something much more
significant it actually help
people get rules so the
amendment is on page six line
fourteen.
So that the line fourteen will
read screening best practices
comma based on health care
facility type and size comma
that includes policies to
prevent.
so it's just making sure that
we're telling the superintendent
it's it's not a one size fits
all.
Thank you madam chair I was read
along with you I think that is
a.
Something in the right direction
I think it it also needs to be
cleaned well I think it has to
be defined a little bit better
but I think that's a lot better
than that what then what's there
thank you madam chair for a lot
explain that to us.
Okay so we have a motion to
adopt that amendment and all
second that and
is there objection to the
amendment.
Not seeing any not hearing any
it will be the amendment is
adopted
and it will go on down to the
rest of the committee questions
and next I have Representative
Matthews.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator do hate for.
Bringing this bill forward
It.
What here.
So I can tell that there's
obviously been a lot of work
going on so let me ask a series
of questions if you don't mind
first of all Mr Nate sure I
understand how this works and
I'm going to give an example and
you can tell me to walk through
how your bill would impact that
so let's say we have a Medicare
recipient and who has parts a
and B. but not nothing else are
low income and they don't by any
additional Medicare coverage
and they go into a
a place where you gonna get your
blood tested
and I know when whenever I go in
to that facility
they do some analysis of what
they think my insurance is going
to cover but then they also make
me sign a piece of paper that
says.
That case somehow there's no
problem with the insurance or
whatever that I agreed to pay
the amount and in fact they take
my credit card and run it and
thankfully give it back to me
but
and then they can go ahead and
because I've signed that piece
of paper they can go ahead and
charge my credit card so with
this bill.
Have any impact and again just
using Medicare but it could be
Medicaid could be anything of
with with this bill change that.
She grunts of actions.
Chair Representative Matthews
To the extent that they could
still charge your credit card as
my one question would be I think
they could still do all of that
except I whatever it is they're
they're having you sign they
could not have you order wait
will waive your rights under
this bill so if you were two
hundred percent or less of the
poverty line you could not waive
away your rights you couldn't
that that would not entitle them
to pursue debt collection
against you
or you would waive any rights to
to enforce this bill so I think
that's that's where in the
situation that the you're posing
that's where it would would this
bill would change that
situation.
At and madam chair Senator.
And with that language be under
this bill would be required to
be in that document so that if I
am a low income person sitting
there worried about whether or
not I should go ahead and have
this yes.
Of because there may be this
additional cost would that be in
the document would they be
required to point that out how
would I as to patient know that
I that it was okay for me to go
ahead and get this medical test.
Madam chair representative so
that this bill does not include
requirements of disclosures of
of that in the paper work.
But what it does include is is
in the bills that you are sent
hi that's where there would be
disclosures about when we see
and find it here.
So it requires billing
transparency and that's for all
patients regardless of.
And it would require and it's
one of my.
Experts has a right in front of
them feel free to jump of.
The one but not the other.
Can require up a plain language
description of the charges
whether you've been screened for
insurance whether insurance has
been built
Created to jump in if I'm
missing any
thank experts.
I'm sure Representative Matthews
I can jump in here real quick so
this should be in section six of
the the bill itself and so I was
senator Duhigg mentioned is
correct it's the plain language
description the date mountain
nature of the the charges
if the patient is uninsured or
has insurance if the facility
screened the patient for
no for these public insurance
programs I if the facility or
third party health care provider
has built or will bill insurance
or public programs I'm so that's
what would be required in the
bill itself.
I'm.
The madam chair
Senator Duhigg in Mr your call
your Mr Cordoba Archie.
Madam chair representative
Matthews that's correct thank
you you prepare before several
times.
Always always very
distinguished.
I'm wondering if it was there
any thought given to requiring
that this disclosure be made at
the time that you're trying to
get the coverage trying to get
the service because
even though I have some
additional insurance and so I'm
much less at risk than other
people are I have certainly had
pause of when I'm sitting there
and they're telling me that this
yes it's going to cost X.
thousands of dollars or whatever
and and that I'm and I'm
personally responsible for it
let's see insurance picks it up
and of course you understand
what insurance picks up if you
just if a patient
I just wonder if there was any
thought about.
It's not about being sure that
people know at the time that
they're trying to make the
decision whether or not to go
ahead with the with the service
with the Sitch with the with the
rights of the health care
provider.
Madam chair representative I I I
I think that that's a good
thought I think that the some of
the and and perhaps that's
that's a subject for a future
bill I think some of the the
complicated parts of that would
be one I if this is just initial
paperwork the folks are getting
before before any screening
processes happen and any
determination of indigent State
ASAP and
that might be that's all that's
information that's only going to
apply to indigent patients and
also this bill doesn't make it
so that patients can't be
charged for these services it
just makes it so that they can't
be sent to collections and and
have collections actions taken
in the events that that the
charges are paid and so we
wouldn't want we want to be
careful about not making it not
misleading patients into
thinking that these are charges
that that will be brought
because because the provider so
can can charge for these
services we're we just want to
prevent for very low income
patients are being sent to
collections their wages being
garnished things like that and
on this point on Representative
Matthews on your question.
the screening requirement is for
those who are uninsured so in
your scenario you're actually
insured and to the extent that
they can determine whether your
insurance is going to cover it
or not that that's not a always
a guarantee but that's the
that's the insurance coverage
issue and not a disclosure or
screening for having coverage
altogether.
so I think there's a there's a
difference when you've got
coverage they don't always know
under present here and they
can't on the percent guarantee
that your insurance's gonna pay
or not pay at
as even if you get prior off
it's not necessarily with
retrospective review from the
insurance company is not
necessarily a guarantee that I
will be rate but that's
different.
Then screening you for having
coverage at all for any kind of
coverage and that and that is
done and in the bill required to
be done up front.
Because the if you don't do it
up front
Medicaid and I can't remember
what the look back period is for
Medicaid but most insurance
companies or other programs
don't do retroactive enrollment
so if you don't catch it in the
in the beginning and screen for
it and trying to get people the
coverage they I get into some
program they may still be stuck
with a with a bill.
What you don't want sent to
collections but because it
wasn't done ahead of time
yeah and and retroactive
enrollment is and always
allowed.
Should madam chair and thank you
for that extra explanation so so
this only applies to a patient
who walks in and is uninsured
and then they'll run the
analysis to see if there's some
kind of insurance that should
cover them some kind of program
or insurance and and so this
bill is limited to that set of
facts is that is it is that what
I'm understanding so Madam chair
representative for the screening
portion of it yes for the
collections ban on indigent
patients if you if you even if
you have insurance but your two
hundred percent or below of the
pop federal poverty line the
collections then it would still
apply.
Okay.
Madam chair Senator
The medical provider can still
charge.
Not for the service and
presumably if someone is qualify
for Medicaid.
they would receive some payment
but they could also be put in
the situation as I understand it
where they would simply have to
write off the entire amount that
is is that correct in my
understanding this correctly.
Madam chair representative
so I I think what what we've
seen is that there are times
where we're both happens where
where they're riding off the
amount but they're still sending
folks to collections for those
stats.
and that perhaps by my experts
would like to address this.
Madam chair representative what
we do know is that about eighty
five percent of folks are
uninsured in New Mexico have
incomes below four hundred
percent of the federal poverty
level and therefore likely
qualify for some form of public
assistance with health care
costs whether it's
you know Medicaid
assistance with credits on the
exchange of facilities are
financial assistance plan or
County Hospital indigent care up
program they likely qualify for
something which is why folks who
have enacted the screening have
greatly reduced their
uncompensated care and so to the
extent of hospital for example
might be writing something on us
that could be happening but
we've also seen that a large
share of bad debt or
uncollectible debt held by
nonprofit hospitals where the
only folks report upon this
right now is held by people who
likely qualify for financial
assistance so that's why that
streaming requirement is very is
very targeted in the drafting
that makes.
And madam chair it thank you all
for the for those answers so.
but the eight in the and this is
sort of what what representative
Armstrong was asking to but we
are going to be in a situation
where there may be some medical
facilities that are going to
write off.
Charges is it might
misunderstanding this.
Madam chair representative no I
I think that that something that
happens now with with this bad
debt for they'll be riding off
less under this bill because
there will be less uncompensated
care
because there will be more folks
who are.
Madam chair Senator thank you
for that answer
This is bill do anything
regarding that late Billings.
Madam chair representative
When you mean when you say late
Billings do mean it I guess
could could you could and then
chair Senator good question
when I say like Billings I mean
when you receive a bill six nine
and twelve months after the
service was provided and just
out of the blue you thought that
this this step was taken care of
and all here's another bill from
X. facility
it's not uncommon in medical
facilities to be very slow and
Billings.
Madam chair representative
that's not within the scope of
this bill but there is another
Senate bill from Senator Brandt
that specifically addresses that
issue.
Okay
Madam chair at Senator
has there been money
appropriated.
It at two it is there money in
the budget now to pay the
attorney general's office and
HSD for
and perhaps the office of the
insurance commissioner of to pay
for their additional cost that
they will incur in enforcing
this law.
Madam chair representative there
there is no appropriation on
this bill
and this this might be part of
of me being new but one thing
I've noticed in almost every
single bill that I've seen over
here is that every agency says.
We need all these new FTEs to do
all of this.
And so I'm I'm I'm not convinced
that that this needs an
appropriation
but it does not have one
attached to it.
madam chair that Senator thank
you
I'm wondering about.
The enforcement but two things
about Forsman first of all I
noticed that you've removed the
any claim of the unfair
practices act from this which
would deny patients the ability
to get injunctive relief as I
understand the law and I'm
curious about that decision and
whether or not you for C..
Injunctive remedies available to
patients under this act.
Madam chair representative yes
so part of the process of this
bill was that before it went to
the floor in the Senate Senator
share and I had extensive
negotiations and and came to to
a lot of agreements one of the
agreements that that we came to
was to take out making a
violation of this act a specific
are an automatic violation of
the U. PA but any the patient
can still bring any.
Claim under law or equity
including a U. PA climb as long
as they meet the facts the EPA
you PA includes a debt
collection actions so this would
not in taking that that language
does not foreclose the ability
to make you PA climb it does not
foreclose any injectable
appropriate injunctive relief
that someone could seek they're
still private right of action
for any appropriate legal or
equitable equitable remedy.
Madam chair Senator thank you
for that answer them in a
clarification
Is there I'm.
In terms of the
Enforcement.
A complaint process to the
attorney general's office has
been in a thought.
you may been maybe it's in there
and I just missed it to prohibit
the.
The the attorney general's
office from taking political
contributions from medical
providers that would be covered
by this act.
I'm.
Madam chair representative I I
think that is a really
interesting idea it's not within
the scope of this bill.
I'm madam chair
Senator so the attorney
general's office was set up set
up a complaint procedure but
could still receive
contributions from the people
likely to be the.
Subject of the complaint.
Madam chair representative I
think that is the case now for
all complaints that the Attorney
General receives can receive I
don't believe there is any
specific Pam on the attorney
general's office taking the
attorney to any candidate for
Attorney General taking
contributions from any of the
the industry that that the AG
overseas but I think that's a
very interesting idea.
madam chair at.
And senator
It.
Ansys
It has is the attorney general's
office on board about taking on
this additional complaint
process.
Madam chair representative yes I
I I I understand is that they
they are as is up aside HSD.
and madam chair
Senator is there any requirement
that the attorney general's
office provide an annual report
to the legislature about their
activities and their ability to
it's a pain relief under the
complaint process that you're
envisioning they would set up.
Madam chair representative not
specifically in this bill
although my understanding is
that they they have reporting
requirements over all to the
legislature and to the extent
that.
Those are already in place I
assume that that that would be
included but also all of the is
all of these complaints would
are also going to be public
record.
Madam chair ed.
Senator thank you thank you for
that answer the act I'm asking
in part because when I was at W.
AG one of the divisions I
supervise was consumer
protection and consumer
protection was a absolute
priority Dan Attorney General
Tom Udall and that's not always
the case with all the Attorney
generals who have been
subsequent so.
Representative I am very
sympathetic to those feelings.
I would love to see that
division of the AG's office
empowered.
Thank you
thank you for that answer and
madam chair that I'll use my
time.
Thank you next we have
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair give me
one second time plug my head
said in otherwise it's can be
hard for people to hear me and
for me to hear takes one second
hopefully it'll work this time
okay.
And we go.
I thank you madam chair thank
you.
That moment to plug that stuff
in when I'm at home it's a
little bit more difficult to do
this.
Okay so my questions for this
morning mostly maready assets
will be fairly brief.
I did a billing for ever.
And all the years that ever did
it I'll be sent one person to
collections because I wasted
payment plans with everybody the
only person ever sent to
collections this person did a
personal injury got thousands of
dollars it didn't give us a
check the only time I ever.
So if somebody's to collections
so I guess.
What I'm trying to figure out
is.
So when somebody is coming in
and we're trying to define
indigent patients
I know it's gonna be different
principal who's coming in to get
a knee replacement.
Or some sort of pellet that
versus where they can sit down
with the person you know when
you do with the medical billing
set down how's it gonna work
emergency care situations how
will that play out for
somebody's incident and how do
they prove that they're it's
indigent when they're entering a
facility madam chair and
senator.
Madam chair representative lord
I so there's going that that's
going to be dealt with in
rulemaking I with with by OSI is
how how the specific to
indigents the determinations are
made.
Okay I thank you for that
because I wasn't sure thank you
madam chair and senator because
that's what I wasn't sure
because normally there's a
process you have to show
something some sort of proof of
income or a lack of income.
So I'm just wondering how
they're going to prove that
whether there now my other
question on on.
Point yes Representative I mean
I think that's a good question I
would guess it's to prove you're
interagency probably can't even
happen up front because you
don't have those documents with
you but before they were to send
them to collections
they would have to follow up
with the individual to get more
information to see whether they
could or not or whether they
were indigent and and would have
to not have to forego
collections of that's would be
my assumption because I don't
think anyone is going to walk in
with their pay stubs in their
tax return and whatever.
Right and I understand thank you
for for that further explanation
on that page I guess it's what
it what I'm trying to figure out
and it's so frustrating when I
when usually when you do on a
doctor's office usually it's a
little bit more personable and
don't reach out to you about
payment plans and I'll always I
guess this grandiose dream that
nobody should ever go to
collections for medical care
lesson that simple like a again
somebody get to check for
personal injury doesn't pay you
then they deserve to go to
collections.
Almost.
That should really be the step
we're taking is that it should
be collection should be the
absolute last resort in the
world right like we don't just
automatically send people to
collections.
Especially as you Representative
brought up that when someone
gets those bills and I've gotten
those because I went to the
hospital last year twice I was
extremely ill it was right when
COVID was coming out and nobody
knew COVID was there and I was
sick for two months went to the
hospital twice and I got built
into your leader I'm getting
bills now stuff and it's
extremely frustrating and I
don't want the recently to
collections I had to call and
cancel that and they didn't miss
ME a bill that's the frustrating
part when you don't get bills
and get a collection notice a
year later you never received
one single bill ever.
Frustrating so.
My frustration rant on that so
the other question that I have
the compact paycheck written
down on.
Madam chair Senator
It's just going to include.
Okay you know how a lot of
times.
Is this going to be a loophole a
lot of times a collection agency
will sell it to another
collection agency.
Meaning they put they might is
there a way that somebody could
say okay this person as a rate
so we're going to sell it to a
medical buyer.
like where they could go after
somebody for medical collections
wait a loophole for them to go
around that I'm sure madam chair
Representative Lord no we
specifically account for that in
the bill we makes the selling of
medical that I within the the
definition of a collections
action so that folks can't do
that exact thing and the other
change that we we make in this
bill specifically to to address
those issues is in the the
definition of who is a debt
collector under that the state's
collection statute we include
language to cover those medical
does that buyers because right
now there is that there is a
loophole they are they are not
considered consider debt
collectors in New Mexico.
Thank you thank you thank you
madam chair Senator friends and
that question
What is it and I and I apologize
if this question was answered
earlier chair and senator what
about slides you know how you
get those bills much later on.
Like from the X. ray department
you're trying to figure out who
was this person I don't member
we're getting an X. ray and they
try to go back yeah I did and
our with the A. because our
outside company that you didn't
do this agreement with can they
get you for medical debt through
collection agency chair and
senator.
Madam chair representative know
that the way that the
collections band is written it
is after neutral so it applies
to any collection of medical
debt no matter who is doing that
so even if they were one of
these third party healthcare
providers that we talk about
who's who's you know like like
you were saying they it's the X.
ray it's separate from the
hospital their billing you
separately let's say the and
they have revenues of less than
twenty million dollars so they
wouldn't even come under this
bill as a third party health
care provider because that
collections banned after neutral
that would still apply to them
and apply so old medical data
for indigent patients.
Thank you for that I appreciate
that question if.
Chairman and senator.
Thank the way it for me would
have been a way better bill and
this is just me is that we said
okay.
You can't send people to
collections period instruments
you really really really good
reason you have to work out a
payment plan.
With people or you're
responsible for plugging the
mentors you think that.
Medical providers would want
that right because you know you
Senator collections you get a
percentage and it's usually not
very much and they take a chunk
of that so I don't understand
why anybody.
We want to go through collection
so to me I think a better bill
would be okay nobody gets sent
to collections for medical bills
because that's not fair anyways
for any of us I got it that
happened to me forty I have
insurance from out of state and
it doesn't cover as well as in
state insurance so I get huge
bills all the time and I hate
when you don't get a bill and
then they sent it's like here's
your collection also like what
happened.
This call maybe give me the
decency of just called me so I
think me the whole system needs
to be revamped you go to medical
care the kind of give you an
estimate will know that would
scare everybody will.
Keep it estimate what they think
it'll be we get car estimates
and I say this this is going to
cost here's a programs that we
have you're so funny we have for
you because you make X. amount
of dollars here's what's going
to cover his which may not and
will work a payment plan for you
I think people be a lot less
scared and that's how it worked
in the real world we knew it was
going to cost we do we can make
payments we did we went to
collections people would be
afraid to go in.
To me I think that would be a
bigger picture to solve for
everybody for me I mean I have
since retired he was a new
engineer insurance but it's
scary when you get a bill for
two or three thousand dollars
and they're like going to
collections right of the bat and
that's not fair we should never
have that ever the medical world
so I would love to see this be
for everyone everyone knows
right up front payment plans get
to be worked out and then it's
like if you don't pay this.
If you don't make any payment
for here we may consider but you
have to go through staffs you
know you can't just send people
on Medicaid collection that's
kind of and my I'll ideal world
Sir do appreciate it but I
think.
I would rather see that bigger
picture where you just cannot
send people to collections
unless it's like three or four
requirements have paid they will
contact you are we've we've
plugged in and all these program
each is that meetings we should
be played people and we should
be sent into collections and you
would think that the hospitals
with want to be on board with
that because like I said the
only get a percentage of that.
That's all the questions that I
had thank you very much madam
chair and representative of
yield my time thank you
Representative Thomson.
Madam chair and thank you and
welcome Senator I'm so.
How long the process to to
screen how long do you
anticipate that that will
lactate five minutes ten minutes
what.
Madam chair representative from
what we've heard from the places
that are doing this already it
should not be a lengthy
extensive process thank you and
the reason I ask that is is that
I'm.
The amount of time that that our
organization spend in their
billing and their collections
and all of that staff so
somebody before had questioned
about how much time it would
take and and if it works well
that time they will save will be
Multitudes more than the time
that they invest so I just
wanted to put that out there and
I wanted to remind folks that
the easy enrollment bill that we
passed in this committee is that
good data.
Partner with this bill and and
hopefully we can get as many New
Mexicans as possible covered
with some sort of insurance it's
good for all of us it's good for
that businesses that have
uncompensated care it's good for
patients it's good for the
health of all of us and that if
the pandemic showed us one thing
it showed us our weaknesses in
our health care system so this
is one way to to you know it's
is it gonna fix everything now
is the easy enrollment bill
gonna fix everything now we take
small steps and we do the best
we can so I just want to thank
you so much for bringing this
and now and you have my full
support thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Terrazas.
Thank you madam chair welcome us
Senator is it do Hey yes.
That's pretty good it's hard for
people to pronounce my the chair
and a few of these people have
already down pretty good so
Madam chair Senator
You know I I think a lot of what
we're doing and have been doing
Is trying to help.
Since and and and and and people
of lowincome I think what
Representative Armstrong
expressed that I'm gonna I'm
gonna tell you I'm really
Happy with the discussion that
was on.
That was had today.
Senator Matthews and other than
others excuse me up
Representative Matthews and the
others had some good questions
and so I think I have some
issues with with this bill and
and and you know what I'm new to
so I I don't want you to think
that I'm just trying to beat you
up but I I try to see it in a in
the big picture and how things
are working and that and and I'm
gonna explain what what I mean
by that I think madam chair
center we we try to make things
better but sometimes
unfortunately.
We create more problems that we
don't see not because we want to
but because it just happens you
know you one thing causes
another so madam chair center to
me this seems to me like a cool
to get.
Bill to sign on to insurance
would you agree with that.
Madam chair representative I
think it is a tool to make sure
that those who are eligible for
public assistance I get that get
the public assistance that that
they are eligible for so that
more medical care will be
compensated.
So madam chair Senator
You know I'm gonna stick on this
and I'll roll over if if that's
why what we're trying to do I'm
looking also hospitalized in the
hospital rules of doctor
providers and for Madam chair
Senator.
I think it would be very
important to me to make sure
that I I had people
be covered or have the
application process ahead of
time so that I could make sure
because that people were covered
so that I can get paid I mean
look.
Madam chair Senator the end of
the day we have to be careful
that has to be balance and that
and we get out of balance it has
consequences and what I mean by
that is.
Everybody.
Everyone wants to be paid for
what they do they'll show up to
work for nothing madam chair and
senator and so we have to be
careful not to get too out of
balance because it will create a
bigger problem
and so and and I think one of
the representatives mentioned
that it could be a problem that
maybe our clinic closes or cause
more hardship on hospitals I'm
gonna is it expresses
specifically for my hospital my
hospitals on the brink of
bankruptcy and they are required
and we've had bill after bill
here
Come to to our committee where
we're required to give more more
people and we're broadening the
scope and verifying and making
sure that everyone that can be
covered is covered in their now
it's not just you know what the
poverty level as knowledge two
or three hundred percent or
whatever percent above that and
so I think yours is two hundred
percent Senator and so madam
chair Senator I guess what I'm
saying is I've I've got it issue
because I've got a I've got a
hospital that's sitting room
literally teetering there and if
I just push it just this in up
enough legislation pushes it
over and how my gonna go home
when I don't have any.
I don't have a hospital for
somebody breaks their armor
or or so forth.
Madam chair Senator I have a my
my my brother in law fell off
the roof yesterday and so I can
imagine that we didn't have that
where were you have to or he
would have gone.
So I guess I'm.
Right now all get it so I guess
where I'm going with this is it
and and you know it's easier to
to vet someone's bill madam
chair Senator then to create
this in your mind and that's the
whole idea of committee is for
us to to to have this
conversation and and just
because you come up with
something doesn't mean it's bad
it just means possibly more
conversation is is is my point
manager etcetera so I think.
If I hearing what I've heard if
we were to encourage.
Encourage hospitals doctors
providers of all sorts to help
people sign up an increase that
would be great.
The madam chair Senator the
problem is not all of them have
the capability or the
infrastructure to handle that
you know your small clinic may
not be able to to do that as as
well as a larger hospital who
has patient advocates that are
working there and can and can
find a little service so that
and so on that point
Representative I just want to
remind you that the amendment we
just did would treat different
types and sizes of facilities
differently as to how much they
needed to do and
at and I'll just say this is
near no
medical debt collection send the
collections for the indigent so
under two hundred percent of
poverty and.
The hospitals or or others if
they're sending to collections
are spending money on sending to
collections to someone who they
probably can never collect for.
From all they do is create ruin
their credit and make them
afraid to seek medical care when
they need to seek medical care
they're probably not collectible
because they're so low income
and it will be far better for
the hospital or clinics if they
can find them a pair source who
will actually pay.
So I I just wanna so that's the
intent of this is to it actually
should be helpful are to
hospitals and in those other
appropriate facilities if they
all take a a little bit of time
to help direct people to the
right place to enroll in
it and they don't have to do all
the enrollment they don't have
to do all the full determination
thank they can't of whether
they're eligible or not but
screening them for here's here's
the income levels if your if
your income is less than this
and here's how you you know what
we use for determining income
you probably qualify for this or
this and if if here's where you
go to get signed in if they
don't already have someone the
hospitals actually have people
that will help you actually
enroll in determine your
eligibility but help get people
directed and help them figure
out what they might be eligible
for will be way better for those
facilities in the long run to
have a pair source prop for
people that they probably can't
ever collect from anyways
because there's there have such
low income.
Madam chair Senator to that
point I agree with you I just
think that.
I'm looking at it so I'm
thinking of I try to put myself
in that person's.
that patient or that what what
we're discussing things here I
try to get on both sides can
understand it madam chair
Senator and so to that point
that you just made right there
is exactly where I was going to
go is that what we're saying Hey
you know what don't.
We're talking some a patient
look you can't get you can't get
called on for for for debt
collection.
What incentive do you have to to
sign up for insurance they're
not gonna call the the they're
not gonna I'm not gonna go debt
collection anyway so why should
I bother to fill this out it's
already happening as we see as
as we speak this is already
taking place let me explain
where I'm going with that I have
I have madam chair Senator I I
had to take my daughter to a
specialist and she got in that
in that accident and one of the
things that was brought up to me
he became a good friend of mine
save my daughter and so I came a
very good friend of his and.
To that point what was going on
he says I'll we were sending
them and getting them just
exactly what you're telling what
you explain to me and you get
some to that point.
And they would never make the
first they would get they would
get approved because they were
on a roll.
Never make the first payment he
never got paid anyway.
So when if we madam chair
Senator given the incentives it
it's almost an incentive to say
you know what what do I have to
bother with I can't get turned
into to collection so why even
bother it's it's it in other
words what I will instead of I
guess madam chair Senator my
point would be state Hey look.
The bill would be better to say
and and again I'm it's always
easier for another person to to
to I guess up.
Look at something entered part
and I'm not meaning to tear
apart but I I see it in the in
the scope of
why don't we encourage hospitals
the bill should say encourage us
bills they must.
Get these people signed up
before.
Get him on the on the rules so
that they can be qualified of
this forty percent of people
that are qualified.
But then we need to get him on
on there too to help you you if
you go out to to your local
clinic Madam chair Senator and
they say look you know what we
we don't have you on here.
We need you to go to this office
here's a here's what you can do
get out your appointments next
week go to this office in in
allow yourself to to get help so
that we can cover you if we tell
them look again madam chair
Senator if we if we if we are
encouraging that there's not
going to be any debt collection.
What is it to that for what what
how does it affect them it
there's no there's no there's no
consequence and in.
The consequences of that we're
trying to punish people.
Has to be some sort of balance
it would be like you took off
the speed limit or you you have
you have a speed limit there but
you can get pulled over why
should I don't I don't care just
I can speed as much as I want
because the cat.
give me a citation and this is
what I write what I mean by that
now I'm gonna get off of that
and exclaims
Madam chair or or asking
questions and so I I saw that
madam chair Senator that your
two hundred percent of poverty
level is twenty five thousand
six hundred dollars is that
correct.
Madam chair representative yes
okay so that being said
So with that if there was a so
it's based per individual
madam chair Senator what happens
when you have income from joint
income from our spouses in the
special income does that mean
that it's fifty one thousand two
hundred dollars
Representative again the the
indigent State determinations
are going to be set by the OSI
in rulemaking so if they so they
may they may determine that
there should be a household
income determination or an
individual one but that that's
something that OSI will will
address that rulemaking and
madam chair Senator this is for
I'll be honest with you I I
think this is what the
legislature's here for and there
has to we can't think of every
little thing but I believe that
statute is safer than than
having an administrator handled
making those decisions when we
forfeit our decision making and
in the legislature then you have
the ability of
the secretary insurance or
whenever creating these these
are these rules and by admin as
as we administrations change so
to the rules and so this is why
I feel that we should take a
little bit of time and maybe
some amendments to clean up some
of that
you know and I see that with
with respect please.
Madam chair and senator I think
that is very important for us to
define some of these things I
know that the the the the chairs
trying to to make this a more
palatable bill but.
Truthfully I mean there's still
a lot of loose language that
could get us in trouble and
again
the ministrations.
A point different people and
with that so does that sort of
the rules the rules change
So.
So when people were
securement are you answer some
of these I'm going to my little.
So madam chair Senator this flow
chart that we're talking about I
think what would be important if
if.
How would you said you thought
of how you would structure this
flow chart that was discussed
earlier was brought up earlier
of who would qualify who
wouldn't qualify who it both I
think the the chair brought that
up in as far as a patient and
their income and their and their
requirements in order to to be
able to fulfill that
qualification and then on the
other side
Madam chair Senator the the
qualifications for a hospital in
that building I have you thought
of what those those.
Barrier should be or that
schedule should be.
Madam chair representative
that's part of the rulemaking by
OSI.
Madam chair representative real
quick just to sorry but to back
back up and speak about the the
household income so the section
for it speaks to an indigent
patient and inception to
indigent patient is defined as a
patient with a household income
of twenty percent or less I feel
so it is already provided in the
definition itself.
Madam chair Senator so again
with that definition again as
two hundred percent of household
income making it at minimum
anyone making under fifty one
thousand two hundred dollars
automatically qualified and
that's an adjusted income.
Is rolled up on that point the
federal poverty level and the
those are qualifications has to
do not just with household
income but household size and so
if you've got a household income
of the fifty one thousand but
there's five kids in the house
in two adults that's way
different done a just a couple
with no kids earning fifty one
thousand so that's all set
federally what those levels are
but is based not only on income
but the size of the household.
Thank you madam chair
Sir Senator I want to call you
representative I'm sorry so used
to that we're changing gears
here madam chair but to that
point it still would be two
hundred percent of household
income of the poverty level for
anyone the way it's spelled out
here at twenty five thousand six
hundred times to the B. fifty
one thousand two hundred dollars
for a couple.
Is that correct.
Madam chair representative and
and I would know that in order
to get assistance for the
exchange of anything that's
actually folks were four hundred
percent of the fall of the
federal poverty level
so we we're giving assistance in
these areas to folks who are or
making twice as much as the
people who would be in touch who
who who would just not be sent
to collections under this bill
are.
Again madam chair Senator to my
point is we want to so the idea
is for us to get out providers
rate.
Less data collection and
encourage people to sign up for
those
Budget so I'll con that we're
services.
But if we do not.
Have something to balance that.
And they have no
there's nothing that that comes
back and and and and reprimands
and for not doing that the point
is we don't need to beat people
up but we need to say Hey look.
These services are available for
you.
If you'll just take a little bit
of time the film out and follow
your because it takes everyone's
responsibility madam chair
Senator we can't just always put
all of the responsibility on
certain groups or certain
individuals and this is what I
keep seeing
and what we need to do is
balance that.
I mean it's literally.
I sat on a I just.
Madam chair Senator I sent on
the on a board for the
foundation board for a
university.
We are struggling to give
scholarships away.
Yeah.
People if we do not start.
Changing what we're doing I mean
they're not even bothering to
take free money this is what
we're getting I mean your we're
we're having a discussion here
madam chair Senator of.
We're almost having to we're you
know.
We're almost twisting their arm
to get something for free.
And then we say well you know
what if you don't know don't
worry about it Representative.
Thank you and I I apologize for
cutting in again but I think
there's a little
misunderstanding that I would
like to clarify if I can see.
Can I make a point of order and
and I want it because I've been
rooted reading my roles and I
just want to make sure are you
are you and and I do this with
respect please madam chair are
you advocating for this or you
Cherry the committee.
Mr Mr Representative I'm also a
co sponsor so I'm I'm trying to
answer the questions also and
keep you on keep on on point and
clarify the information and so I
just wanna make so make the
point that.
Yes
The hospitals are the only
places at our emergency rooms I
should say are the only places
that are required to provide
care for anyone who comes in
until they're stable any other
provider could refuse care if
you don't have a payment source
so your earlier point about were
just incentivizing people are
not to be sent to collections I
can have what though there's no
incentive they still get billed
and they still the provider has
an opportunity to refuse
services if they don't have a
pair source don't cooperating
getting a pair source and never
father bills so
I just want to make that make
that point and
but.
I thank you for letting me a
jump and go ahead Representative
you stop for so madam chair
Senator please I'm not trying to
be disrespectful here might my
point as though to that to that
point that I made is is is a
story that I just expressed what
doctor surgeon a friend of mine
who is expressing his he's
they're coming up and they're
not fulfilling their obligation
and all they have to do is fill
out the paperwork.
and so you are correct that they
can still do that but I think
the.
There still has to be balance
madam chair Senator where we
encourage them to sign up for
these programs because of there
for that reason what we can't we
have to have some sort of
balance were you know they they
will sign up for that.
look I wanna I wanna walk to
different
Dale
So.
You know I was I was hearing
about you know I heard madam
chair center some of the
Some of the the people talking
about homeless a lot of these
people are ready.
Could and can be covered if we
just had a.
Of.
The structure of getting them
signed up and so I just would
love to see the bill still meet
the same purpose what by
focusing more on getting people
signed up in a in a a program to
to make that happen
Madam chair Senator a lot of
people miss there there's the
sign up period and that
the in November December and
then fall off of that and then
have to get on
this the southern the other
insurances that are available
out there
and we are able to to sign up
for that during the the the year
is that.
Can you can you clarify that for
that a little bit better for me
since I don't have all that
White specifically spelled out
madam chair how how that happens
if someone doesn't get signed up
before the the the
Insurance you.
So we have to be signed up.
One month in advance to the year
beginning.
And some people don't do that so
then they fall into
other insurances that are
available in New Mexico can you
explain that a little bit better
for me madam chair.
Madam chair representative I
yeah I think you're talking
about the enrollment period for
the exchange
What this bill is primarily
dealing with this is is really
mostly going to be Medicaid
coverage which does not have a
set and Roman period but but I
do want to address one thing you
meant you mentioned that folks
need to need to actually get
signed up
and that's exactly what this
bill does because what data
shows is that the number one
reason that folks don't get
signed up when they're eligible
is because application barriers
there literacy issues there are
language issues and what this
bill does is it it has the the
facilities assist them with
those applications in
appropriate circumstances so the
number one reason the folks are
consigned up that's going to be
dealt with and folks will get
signed up
but and and you're absolutely
right there needs to be a
process to get folks covered and
insured and that's what this
creates.
Thank you madam chair all get
more pointed it might and I
stuff up and and senator please
I and I apologize I I kind of
lost my way that I was trying to
just but.
I like that part of your bills
Madam chair Senator I just think
the debt collection is the one
that that that I disagree with
the so I saw something to your
bill that.
Madam chair Center about prices
to be posted
is there a reason for that.
Madam chair representative that
you might not have the current
version of the bill but got
amended that was a an agreement
that I made was senator share to
to take that that out thank you
okay and so
I think.
I think I've made my point and I
just kind of got a little bit
off off kilter there for a
minute because I was trying to
to to to clarify some things
also for myself but
again madam chair Representative
Senator I appreciate
All of what you're doing and and
I'm I I see your intent Senator
of what you're trying to do
unfortunately I I I like that
balance and it it
does worry me I'm not you know
because I do at the end of the
day once incentivize them but
there has to be balanced where
if you don't well then you're
gonna be responsible for the
bill I mean you can sign up for
not sign up and then well then
you're gonna be responsible for
a bill so thank you so much for
for my question the answer for
me losing that a got a little
bit down the rabbit hole there
for minutes and I'm trying not
to do that so thank you so much.
Thank you Representative on next
we have Representative of
Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman Madam
chairman I'm gonna be of short
because I've got another
committee starting here in just
about fifteen minutes so I'm
gonna just to ask the sponsor if
if if she can help me with short
answers and they start with on
this screening issue
yes the screening optional or
required under the bill
question.
Thank you madam chairman
Representative Anderson so
discreet so so every medical
provider when you walk in asks
do you have insurance that's
essentially the first step in
the screening then if the person
says no they offered to do the
screening and if the patient
says now I don't want the
screening than they would not be
required to do so they are just
required to make the offer.
Thank you for that and and so
the bill is is taking it further
than that of it or or I might
often the on a on attention I'm
trying to understand in the
screening process madam chairman
is now going to become a
requirement to take that next
step having made the offer to
somebody who has said well I
guess they can refuse period or
they can refuse because they are
uninsured question.
Madam chair representative if
I understand your your question
and if I'm not please please
feel free to to jump in and stop
me
but if if I go ahead and a mask
do you have insurance I say now
they say would you like us to to
take a look and see if you
qualify I say no it stops right
there I say yes.
Then they would go ahead and do
the screening and then let's say
it turns out yes I am eligible
for Medicaid then they would
say.
Would you like some help filling
out that application I say if I
say no.
Again it ends there if I say yes
then they would.
Provide that assistance thank
thank you very much for that I
think I understand now and
to to verify my understanding
then the way it is right now in
in other words before this bill
passes they're not obligated to.
find any screening service.
Once it's been.
Denied.
Madam chair representative yes
that's correct there are some
places that are have have
started doing that voluntarily
and in doing so have have cut
cut their bad debt and cut their
self pay patients dramatically
but it is not required for for
places to do this at this point.
Okay then
thank you madam chairman and up
I I think what I'm trying to go
there is no room for
reimbursement to the of you to
T. or the provider for.
The cost of the screening
providing screening question.
Madam chair representative I I
don't think that per the asking
those questions would be an
added cost that would would
necessitate reimbursement thank
you for that then I'm going to
talk about
let's see Friday not pursuing
there was a comment made Madam
chairman and and Senator it is
suggested that it might be.
This is my word unscrupulous to
be both writing off the debt in
trying to pursue collection at
the same time is there any part
of this bill in your mind that.
Would prohibit somebody
from doing that very thing
question.
Madam chair representative I
think that the collections band
and of itself is go will will.
This will put a stop to that.
Highs with parts for for
indigent patients thank you
thank you for that.
Mentioned
in the amendment
Senator was was size and type
of that made me wonder if it
should be size type and location
of making me wonder are we not
burdening small.
Fighters from the burden of
giving
Adequate accurate screening
information to someone who ask
for this free service question.
Madam chair representative I I
think that the amendment.
I addresses those concerns
even without a specific edition
of of location because frankly I
a small practice in Albuquerque
or small practice in Hobbs it is
is going to be facing that same
issue R. no matter where they
are so I I think it's a good
amendment I'm I'm glad that it's
been added in there but I'm I'm
not sure that adding location
would would change its
application
Thank you for that answer I sort
of felt the same way so I'm not
going to object to that I'm
gonna simply close with this
observation that I think the
idea of a burgeoning not
burdening requiring the Attorney
General on page twelve to do
some additional duties as
Attorney General of enforcement
and establishment of made me
wonder to the impropriety of the
AG taking contributions prior to
or after assuming the office of
from anyone who is a health care
facility or third party
provider or or or debt collector
I suppose medical creditor of
medical debt collector
My questions sponsor is on the
house floor would you find and
find an amendment that
clarifies of the Attorney
General from accepting
political contributions
Friendly or unfriendly question.
Madam chair representative so I
I will say that that I I like
this idea I think a better way
to do it rather than and put
just that narrow provision into
this bill is that there be and a
bit bill that I would love to
work with you on in the future
that prohibits the AG from
accepting contributions from
from any industry that he
oversee is here she overseas
Because I think that is an issue
not just in this bill I think
that is an issue over all with
all with with any especially any
area of consumer protection that
the AG is is tasked with
enforcing those used car dealers
allsorts of there's all sorts of
folks who I think and and I
would not want to I think that
should be dealt with in a
comprehensive way
rather than just narrowly in the
spell and and I would have some
concerns about log rolling hi
with this bill if if it was
written in on the floor Senator
thank you I have to agree with
your answer on that and look
forward to pursuing that in a
different bill madam chairman
that concludes my remarks thank
you okay thank you we have
probably half of us that have to
be to another committee meeting
within the next five minutes and
so Representative Lord for a
second time you have something
very critical to us and brief.
As we need to go to a bank.
Yeah you madam chair and it'd be
very brief if someone could just
explain to me the steps of
training someone to collections
in New Mexico do we have
specific rulings on how you do
it and steps taken order just a
free for all.
Madam chair representative of
all defer to a Nick Madison.
Chair representative it's free
for all.
What a debt collection cases and
there's there's no rules and I
have sympathy for the the store
that you told earlier because
I've had the same thing happened
to me with seventeen dollar
bills medical bills being sent
to collections without any
effort to contact me first I
think it might be useful thing
to address at some point but I
think that specific thing is not
in this bill and it's important
to to put the protections that
are in this bill into place now.
Thank you so much for answering
that that's actually a bill now
I'm thinking of working through
my.
Much for that.
Thank you I have a motion for do
pass a second and the second our
doors your call the roll.
Madam chair that as amended yes.
Representative.
Representative Gail Armstrong no
and I short explanation.
Representative but.
Yes.
Representative bash yes.
Representative the committee
lord.
No.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes.
Representative Roger Montoya yes
Representative believe that off.
No one is short explanation.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
I.
Yes.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong we
go back to Representative of
Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman of.
I just think in yes okay and and
I both
have Armstrong yes.
Bills.
Okay you have a due pass as
amended Senator Representative
Armstrong thank you madam chair
and I'm sorry that I had to vote
no against your first bill in
our committee but I really feel
like I appreciate the amendment
that madam chair put on but I
believe that the OSI needs to
needs better definition to work
with and more
additional road map for entities
to follow thank you madam chair
thank you and Representative
Terrazas.
Thank you madam chair and
senator again thank you I see
your intent for what you're
trying to do we want to help as
many people as we can with you
know you're in these issues I do
want to
let you know that there are some
things that I like to see it see
a continued conversation about
some of the things that I
brought up and others on this
committee and feel that it could
be a very good bill if it with
some cleanup thank you very much
thank you
it you've got your your first do
pass out of a house committee
congratulations and I look
forward to hearing this for you
on the floor.
Thank you madam chair thank you
with that Committee that's our
agenda we do have at least one
bill on Monday and I'm expecting
looking at this on a calendar
that will have several more for
Monday so stay tuned and I will
keep you informed as soon as I
know but I'm expecting will have
a
a pretty good agenda for Monday.
