Is here.
Representative Karen bash I'm
here to folks of late according
Representative Stephanie lord
here.
Representative Marian Matthews.
I am also here.
Representative Roger Montoya.
I'm here thank you.
Representative Lewis.
Representative Liz Thomson I'm
here and.
And.
Madam chair I was gonna ask
Representative Lewis issues
drinking out of a beauty and the
beast cap ship.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Vice chair Joanne J. Ferrary.
madam chair Deborah Armstrong
I'm here and Torrez everyone
who's missing on any votes or
anything today is excuse people
are out
And so
Good morning and
this morning we're going up it
will we got sad news yesterday
and I'm I'm sure many of you
heard superintendent Karen
Trujillo was kids are walking
her dogs hit by a car yesterday.
And what I some Joanne knows
Karen I I didn't know care but
she spent the last two committee
hearings with us as an expert
witness on the
the deaf and hard of hearing
bill that we had to thirty seven
and so I'd like to this morning
just take a moment of silence.
and remember Karen she's not I
think that's the first time
she's ever been to our committee
but she spent two committees
with us to committee meetings we
could have a moment of silence
for superintendent Trujillo.
Thank you thank madam chair yes
you just never know it and it it
brings it home when it's someone
you just saw and so hold your
loved ones near everyone.
Yeah you know it's a great you
know advocate for early
childhood education as well as
an instructor at NMSU as our
superintendent of Los crucis
public schools she works so
diligently to help us get
through the pandemic in to get
kids and so integers back to
school but they're working on
right now so will she will be
very much missed.
Thank you thank you
Representative.
So how are we'll get started
with the first on our agenda is
house bill two oh nine the state
Indian child welfare act
Representative Lewis and do you
have you probably sent it to me
and.
A review of experts for us to
bring over.
Thank you madam chair I.
If you could ask the let's ask
them your expertise in their
hand and then we can find them
great thank you you could just
name off and will.
Background yields Donal answer
Santo we have governor guilty
he'll.
And Cindy are gone.
Thank
you we have
Jacquelyn and Donal in New Delhi
I think we have a long.
Thank you madam chair okay great
go ahead thank you again madam
chair good morning committee
members thank you for taking the
time to hear house bill two oh
nine it is the New Mexico Indian
child welfare act and that this
is something that that the
department of the family used
to.
CYFD children youth and families
department thank you have been
working and what the number of
working on excuse me with the
number of tribes and their it
department really because the
state and what had not been
updated the last time the
federal FY had been updated in
addition to that CYFD has
actually implemented more
practices that we would like to
put into statute of so that
these are practices that now
this state department will go to
work with the tribe's and for
those that are not familiar with
ECWA
really what we're trying to do
here is to ensure when kids get
into the CYFD system and
of proceedings regarding
fostering and adoption are
happening that the tribes that
they are members of our notified
so that the I just notified but
also the families as well really
to ensure that these kids stay
with the tribe of the families
so that they don't lose that
Upbringing of a culture language
and the traditions that are held
by the tribe and madam chair
with I would like to
Have the governor guilty he'll
from the public to see okay
sale little prayer and talk
about his involvement with how
this bill has come about.
Go right ahead welcome governor.
Governor you're on mute.
I thought we had it all down
thank.
You know we're still working on
it but good morning madam chair
morning members of the committee
and
Thank you George ling blue more
representative Lewis for allow
me to say so the worst but but
let Johnny said please indulge
me and that I'm gonna to render
a us a short prayer to help us
with our deliberation only
because this is our way of our
our people and also to welcome
you to a couple of the the
homelands of to secure public
and so I'm sure all of you are
aware of that but I will start
with a short prayer on it gone
to number one hit which is
Sunday but being want to we can
sentiment behind Ag which was
set up that way on it goes down
connect with units to conduct
will get two hundred and a half
million of in game one if you
want to include in that
legislation have built it came
on again in the cool cool thing
with not going to we were just
saying well you'll get on it we
can get to me he will gain would
heal including of the only about
the AC is seconded it thank you
it more that are going to R. one
edit which was founded in Santa
Fe we will be waiting for you
the week but sent out twenty we
will be waiting for you know
about doing of you know
including he's all of thank you
can I just ask the spirit to be
with us to guide us and assist
us in our deliberations to do it
in a good way with open heart of
like you just mentioned to the
death of Karen Trujillo you know
it's unfortunate but we never
know when a guy chairwoman
you're saying we never know when
our time's come so that we could
treat each other in a good way
especially these times these
hard times that we're going
through and so we can be more
respectful of each other's
concerns and issues and and do
it in a good way so with that
let me start by.
Tell me who I am first of all my
name is guilty he'll and yes I
am a former governor of the city
public.
And the currently the executive
director of the eight northern
in public accounts so that
services the eight northern
published here in New Mexico but
I'm also the president of the
national Indian child welfare
association so my experience
with any chart we're well for
has gone up quite a long wakes
up maybe even right after the
Some of the law so the path the
law was passed in nineteen
seventy eight.
Excuse me and the low was to
find common sense requirements
to state agencies and courts to
improve their response to the
needs of our children our
families and acknowledge our
tribal nations sovereignty and
right to be involved in these
matters
more people we have been
rigorously let people but
federal law sometimes.
Keeps us from doing the things
we need to do and so in in child
welfare was passed to protect
those children that were being
removed from their homes for no
good reasons at all and lot of
the the children were being
taken and placed into.
Excuse me adoptive homes.
Sometimes the placement were not
good placement.
Many of our kids were abuse many
of our kids were not treated
right and so it was important
that this legislation be passed
but having said that there were
many kids that were put into the
homes of.
That that thrived in a good way
but even then they have.
Loss of culture and tradition
once they were moved from their
homelands they were taken away
from their homelands and they
lost that identity or that
connection and I use an example
I don't know how many of you
remember heather Thompson a
hundred heather Thompson used to
be the speaker of the speaker of
the
Is the the legal what it called
for governor bill Richardson.
and he's she was a I didn't know
this but she was adopted out and
she was she was placed in a good
home and was given her a good
education at one of those the
eastern Ivy League schools and
if eventually became a turning.
R. and so bill Richardson hired
her as your chief of staff.
And so.
I didn't know this but she was
adopted out and the main point
of for adoption with she said
what I was put in a good home I
lost connection with my Navajo
Nation I knew I was different
because my I was not the same
colors my parents I was start
and I and and but what I'm
mostly mainly loss was the
connection with their try thank
you she went on her way back
home to her put a Navajo Nation
but this is her story
unfortunately that's not the
case with many of our kids many
of our kids that are placed in
homes are are abuse and neglect
it and so this legislation was
passed in nineteen seventy eight
of along with those the law the
rules was promulgated of how to
enforce the initial well for at
and in those rules were not
amended to a more recently like
in twenty eighteen twenty
seventeen twenty eighteen and so
we're improving to any child
welfare act also
and we are not alone there are
many other states that are doing
this because right now the
initial well for act nationally
is being challenged it's been
challenged because of some
states showing that it's.
Not a good deal but that's not
true it's a good deal that
protects our children and so the
challenges are there and that's
why states are moving to create
their own legislation Oregon I
think with this last state that
make that up.
Annexed enacted law
our efforts here in New Mexico
has not distort yesterday it
started as far back this may be.
In the Martinez administration I
provided testimony in that in
Affairs committees throughout
this terms and then more
recently I provided testimony
again of and I presented this
issue to the public council of
governors and the the eight
northern governors let them know
all of the challenges that the
equipment was being faced with
our and so I did make those
presentations and then currently
sits I want to commend Secretary
Blalock and CYFD for their
efforts because this is the
first time I think within a few
years that the state has engaged
tribes to being involved with
the with the state program.
Personally.
I've been working with Senator
Secretary Blalock because we
have a at eight northern it's
called a butterfly human center
and it's our our for lack of
better words a rehab center for
our U. thirteen to eighteen
years so and so we work closely
with the CYFD to make sure that
we're providing the kind of
services that we need to find so
the relationship with the CYFD
department has become.
Greatly in enhanced to do the
work that we need to do the
other part was that the
Secretary Blalock created the
Director of tribal affairs
department before it was just
liaison and so this is
indicative of his concern
interest to make sure that the
the services that would state
provide is going to be done in
the right way and so with dental
insurance you know is that
individuals that is in that
office but not only comes with a
lot of experience with the
member of the coalition of the
coalition
is comprised of any child
welfare workers and the tribal
and I think Jacqueline we'll
talk more about this
specifically but they are
members are in the child welfare
workers and social workers and
to me they're the people that
are in the trenches in the
everyday trenches doing the work
seeing some of the things that
are occurring within our state
and so they have been actively
involved for the last probably
three for four years in fact our
our our association the national
child welfare associations
convenes annual conference on an
annual basis and a couple years
ago.
The New Mexico.
NHL well for us could consortium
was acknowledge and awarded the
recognition from our
organization for the work that
they have done and so this is
we're we've been coming from so
it's not we've been doing this
work for quite a long time and
the of the bottom line an
important thing about this whole
effort is to protect our
children which is our
responsibility to make sure that
they are in safe homes to make
sure that based mainly to be
turned back to their communities
and place them in homes in their
own communities in maybe in
their own families because if we
place them outside of their
we're not doing him justice
because then they lose their
identity of who they are into
our current efforts at the next
level have been to if they're
placed in a non native house or
home and they're treated
properly that to let the person
that adopted these children that
this child is of a of a native
descent into taken to that
reservation or that community
that they come from to make sure
that they don't lose that
identity but more importantly we
want to keep them here at home
because the bonds that they have
created within their communities
of they grew up to be better
members of our community but
having said that we still are
faced with a lot of challenges
in our communities alcohol drug
abuse domestic violence is still
occurring in our committee to
specially with this comment.
Happening in our communities so
our efforts has just been to
provide services and protect our
people in this hard times and
these challenges times so madam
secretary and members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me this opportunity to provide
this testimony.
Thank you governor.
Representative who do you want
to speak next you madam chair so
just so you know to if we could
have Jacqueline yelp speak next
and then also madam chair we
have some amendments I don't
know if you want us to address
those
right now or if you want us to
address them later but once
we're ready for that we have
Cindy Eric on to address that
okay we we should do that before
we go to the audience for sure
okay great.
I'm Jacqueline go ahead and
proceed please.
More.
Members of the committee you
know everyone having a good
morning from the Pueblo of this
letter
and Jacquelyn Elche I am a
member of the public this let us
and a social worker with this
letter social services and the
current president of the New
Mexico tribal Indian child
welfare a consortium.
As governor Vigil stated earlier
the Indian child welfare act was
passed in nineteen seventy eight
enter responding Congress's
response to the alarming
alarmingly high number of young
children are being forcibly
removed from their homes by both
private and public agencies
it was the intent of FY that was
enacted by Congress was to
protect the best interest of
Indian children and to promote
the stability and security of
the Indian tribes and families.
It costs just minimum federal
requirements to apply to state
foster care
Termination of parental rights
and adoption proceedings
involving Indian children and
although these minimal standards
of protections are in place to
specifically address Indian
children in state child welfare
systems the issue of non
compliance is still an ongoing
challenge for tribes in New
Mexico Indian children are over
represented.
In foster care and four times
more likely to be removed in
cases where removal is sometimes
I justify Indian children that
are placed in foster care are
more than likely to stay in the
system significantly longer than
any other ethnic group our
children and state foster care
are less likely to be placed
with family or within their
native communities resulting in
the loss of their culture their
language and their identity.
The safety and well being of our
children is of the utmost
importance for our tribes our
children our state grant our
children are the future of the
survival of our culture and try.
New Mexico has twenty three
sovereign tribal nations that
have the sovereign right powers
and lost to handle matters
involving their members tribes
are the experts in their
communities and have specific
issues with what.
They need and development of the
state Indian child welfare act
is based on the lived experience
of Indian children and families
in the system.
Historically non natives have
forced pre written policies and
practices into tribal
communities that they feel is
best for us this process this
system and practice was not
working for tribal communities
because Indian children
families and communities are the
most heavily impacted are the
people with lived experiences
The New Mexico children youth
and families department
respected and honored the
government to government
relationship and supported the
tribes to spearhead the
development of sick what.
Also known as the state Indian
child welfare act this
development was very unique and.
Not normal to some because the
group honored the thinking
process and input from tribal
leaders tribal if oil field
workers community members and
children in foster care who
represented the twenty three
sovereign tribal nations and
actively part participated in
the process with CYFD and other
experts and advocates in the
field.
The provisions and protections
of the state and in child
welfare Act are going to be on
Federal ECWA for the purpose of
holding the state accountable
for compliance with on the
federal level and to ensure the
safety and well being of our
Indian children and families
centuries and generations and
generations of struggles and
strengths are part of each
child's culture.
Keeping children as close as
possible to their culture
extended family and tribe or X.
dreamily important protective
factors to their cultural well
being.
Without these protections that
are unique to tribal nations to
actively reserves the engine
family maintain extended family
relationships and promote and
provide cultural connections and
participation for.
Children in state care we as
Indian people cease to exist.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative Lewis
thank you for listening today.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair and we
could go now to send the Eric on
to explain the amendments okay
and just for clarification
representative I have in the
share file both the committee
some and the amendment.
you madam chair we're are moving
with the committee set up I
believe.
Okay.
And send you can confirm that
thank you okay I just wanted to
be sure whether we're doing an
amendment or a committee so but
let's let's talk about I'll move
it for discussion and just so
you can before we get to the
audience explain what what
changes have been are being
proposed go ahead.
Good morning chairman Armstrong
Representative Lewis Committee
members representatives and and
all those are present my name is
Cindy are gone I'm an attorney
with the office of general
counsel of children youth and
families department I've been
with CYFD since June of twenty
twenty however I have over
twenty two years of experience
as an attorney doing Indian law
working with tribes as well as
working with use in our system
here in New Mexico.
In regards to the bill initially
the bill
I'm just going to give you a
little bit of background so the
so it is federal Indian child
welfare act mandates or or
mandated from of Senator
Steinborn so large snow Mexico
children's Mexico does have
provisions that make reference
to the federal Indian child
welfare act the bill initially
was House Bill
Two oh nine was initially for of
filed in regards to making this
out of state you child welfare
Act
a new.
Just to stand out from what's
been there so that the
provisions exist now in and
throughout the twenty six
articles of of the children's
coat so this current bill does
actually make it a standalone
article it it stands out
specifically in regards to the
specific factors that needed to
be complied with in regards to
the to the regulations
and initially the initial bill.
started with.
Identifying specifics regarding
placement preferences in
addition to of currently the Ole
information it doesn't identify
specifically what what needs to
be there regards to put as a as
placement preferences
the bill initially started with
cultural contacts in the process
to have
promote the ability of people
and families that adopt children
that are non native families
that if they ended up with
families that are not of their
tribe or their culture to be
able to enter into a cultural
compact through an adoption and
when the child is adopted so
this can be integrated into the
process so they can be
obligated and say that they're
committed to make sure this
child continues to learn at with
the culture continue to have
close connections with the
they're people in addition it
set out criteria as who could
serve on the QEW QEW is a
qualified expert witness who
testifies on behalf it's the
burden of the state to our to
show that the the child the
return of the childhood of beats
to the family or the trials
should remain in the custody of
the department and that they
were if the trial is to return
to the Indian custodian on the
parent that could result in
service or emotional physical
damage the child the set out
specific criteria in regards to
what Q. U. W.
listing that requirement in the
Q. W. testimony is required for
adjudication of abuse and
neglect and I was also required
in regards to the termination of
parental rights proceedings so
those are both of the
proceedings that require proof
beyond a reasonable doubt the
standards are different in
regards to the engine children
throughout the children's coated
States beyond a reasonable doubt
but it again is integrated
throughout those different
provisions
So in for instance it all
heightened standard of active
efforts as it's a heightened
standard but amendments
initially were brought in to
identify specifically what
active efforts were and those
criteria that were listed in
regards to that.
in addition
Notice compliance of looking at
what was of what's required in
regards to notice not only to
the tribe but to the parent into
the Indian custodian.
And the.
In the substitute bill since
there were so many amendments
are we integrated the concerns
from the Navajo Nation the
public government other tribal
nations that submitted comments
and proposed amendments in
addition then that's what came
up for the substitute bill comes
in regards to the substitute
bill specifically and and stop
me chairman Armstrong if you
like if you if you want of
questions is just let me know
not a good stop into questions
but in I'm moving into the
substitute bill.
So the state senator who built
specifically takes those
comments and and
recommendations in regards to
proposed amendments from the
Navajo Nation as well as the
public and other tribes that
have proved provided information
since the bill's been filed and
if in fact they added the full
definition of active efforts
from the federal Indian child
welfare act so this substitute
bill is more specific in
identifying the specific
guidelines of the federal Indian
child welfare act which this
bill
does take into account of the
the the purpose and goal of the
second state in child welfare
Act is to support surpassed
federal Indian child welfare act
mandates the federal Indian
child welfare would be the four
of what Mexico can bring above
and beyond and so I specifically
identifying those details
definitions that were left out
initially in the amended bill.
Reason to know section there's
was some concern regarding the
reason to know verses reason to
believe we those have been
amended to reflect the current
federal guidelines and the law
regarding the reason to know
Stander in addition those brazen
to know standards have been
specifically identified as to
what could be considered what
what needs to be done for
instance specific guidelines for
the court as to domicile of the
family if they live on the on
the reservation on or near if
they have had connections with
the with the family just
specific guidelines that if the
child if there is reason to
believe the child was an Indian
child or there's reason to know
that the child is an Indian
child the even if that's not
confirmed
in the affirmative that the
child is a member of an Indian
tribe that the the.
The state and the courts are
still required to treat that
child as if that child was an
Indian child throughout the
process which would be usable
beyond a reasonable doubt in
regards to those active efforts
beyond a reasonable doubt in
regards locating family beyond a
reasonable doubt in regards to
to notice all those types of
things.
In addition the voluntary
placement and consent changes in
regards to that in regards to
changing so that if the family
withdraws that voluntary consent
that that child is immediately
returned unless for instance a
child is in imminent danger is
always the safety and well being
of the child is waiting in
regards to that more emphasis on
the qualifications of the Q. W.
the crew to W. and when they can
what what they are to testify to
specifically which was left out
initially and to bring forth
those requirements of what the
the standards in regard to
Foster care placements to the
standards by law
Based on on that and the reason
about standards in regard to
termination of parental rights
In the reason to know
definitions specifically what
those are required in.
In addition the good cause to
contrary to deviate from the
placement preferences are group
the costs to the contrary to
deviate from transfer from not
transferring the case those that
the the state is held at
mandated to comply with those
standards and so this for
instance clarify specifically
that if there are prior
proceedings involving that the
Indian child parents and those
proceedings in involved the
filing of a petition for abuse
neglect or removal that those
that cannot be used against him
in a good cause to not transfer
in again and again identifying
pitted predictions as to what to
transfer predicting that the
child would be removed and the
child's placement would be the
the group result in a change of
placement on those predictive
transfer ideas cannot be
considered as a reason not to
transfer in it in addition
perceived cultural connections
with the tribal reservation okay
this child was born in
Albuquerque the family lives in
Albuquerque the court could not
for instance receive that this
child has had no cultural
connections with the tribe or
the reservations because they
live off the reservations of
support not considered those for
the department in not
transferring this case are
complying with the request of
active efforts
Isshin the socio economic status
of of the tribe or the persons
within the tribe of the
reservation that the the you
know he this trial will be going
to a house where they live in a
hold on are they live in a one
home there's no running water me
may be dark flows for students
that are not
Causing more harm or danger to
the child are based on such as
economic sense because of the
poverty would not definitely be
considered so this new bill of
this process to to build us
clarify those specific things.
In addition like I said that I
couldn't remember the evidence
in regards but foster care
placement
Requires the
Lesser standard of evidence and
I can't remember that right now
I just to a legal of blank
and so those are laid out
specifically in regards to the
standards for foster care
placement verses a reasonable
beyond a reasonable doubt for
termination of of
Over a period of rights in
addition
Specifics regarding
can I know that was a concern
from the FIR that was definitely
cleared up well there was some
concern regarding the definition
of that and how it conflicted at
this point time that has been
clarified in regards to other
legislation it's being
presented at this time the
delinquency Act has been removed
because of the factor this is
primarily focus on protective
services it doesn't mean that it
was a the status quo in federal
court doesn't apply into Lincoln
supersede isn't just that the
the the requirement to add that
at this late stage is is
definitely based on the fact
that there's going to be on my
understanding of some top from
the sentencing commission and
others that there would wanting
to read redo the delinquency
coat so there's still
opportunity integrate those
pieces in in addition adding
more information about
transition so you have those
kids that are over use that are
transitioning out of the system
maybe still being in custody at
age seventeen but off also offer
you on the ability for the tribe
to get involved in regards to
yes to planning and tradition
Planning in transition
transitioning for those kids so
that they can continue to be
involved with our tribal
communities.
In addition the tied the line
with regard to the conflicts of
law again federal law does
preempt in regards to the more
step up.
The more protections that offers
for parents however the in
regards to the application of
this law to other laws within
the state we're the bears
provision that states in regards
the well for child custody
proceedings that this law would
be would would trump other laws
in addition federal law does
apply it in the standard of the
protection that they offer to
the extent that federal law
offers more protection is that
that standard would apply so we
don't to overcome that federal
preemption but also the the the
interest in the best interests
in the safety and well being of
the child is always considered
in all those decisions.
Thank you.
He is so madam chair you'll see
that we did make several changes
based on the information that we
received which was explained by
city Oregon and with that madam
chair we are ready to stand for
questions okay thank you we'll
go to the audience first and we
usually do a poll of those in
attendance if you're in support
or opposition to house bill two
oh nine if you could.
Weigh in on that pole.
Can looks like we've got it
forty one or ninety three
percent support and you have
three or seven percent in
opposition.
will go first to opposition.
Those who wish to speak in
opposition.
if you would raise your hand.
And first we'll go to JD
Bollington.
And we're gonna limit comment to
one minute.
Thank you thank you madam chair
this is JD Bullington speaking
on behalf of the Pueblo of the
gonna.
Pueblo of Laguna understands the
good intentions of this bill but
it cannot support it at this
time we're gonna stop strongly
supports an effective Indian
child welfare act believes that
even with the proposed committee
substitute this bill still needs
additional changes before the
public going to can support it
and we have not seen the
substitute the children youth
and families department may be
under the impression that it's
consultation with some tribal
social workers was sufficient
but Laguna pueblo is among those
tribes that require actual
consultation with tribal
government leadership authorized
to represent their try we
recognize that the eight
northern pueblos council has
endorsed the bill but at its
meeting yesterday the all pueblo
council the governor's
considered whether or not to
follow suit and ultimately
decided to not adopt a formal
position on house bill two oh
nine thank you.
Thank you next we have Brian
vaio.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I am governor
Brian bio of the public come on
and I'm here to voice outcomes
opposition to committee
substitute for House Bill two
zero nine.
I commend does not take its
position to oppose lightly we
fully support the need to create
a state version of the federal
ICWA built law we are aware that
in the federal law is overturned
our children and a multitude of
issues surrounding child welfare
will be left in an interview in
indeterminate state if there is
not a state Mexico law.
Ever the amended version of
house bill two zero nine
currently before you need some
serious work on everything from
definitions to process to
placement.
You are aware of the number of
amendments that have been
offered even just very recently
moreover at yesterday's monthly
meeting of the all public consul
commoners consensus was not
reached in support of the
substitute bill to outcome of
that is a clear sign that much
more work is needed for this
legislature to take the most
appropriate action.
Excuse me as governor I have to
deal with ICWA issues involving
optimal children they are some
of the most difficult cases and
the most our registration and
call for making tough decisions
the really are no easy answers
but the bill before this
committee as mobile and cloud
calls out for clarity a task
that can be done during the
interim.
So for now madam chair Alcamo
full of Alcamo stands opposed to
the committee.
Thank you thank you governor.
next will go to those who wish
to speak in support.
If you would raise your hand.
I and first we will go to.
I Candace L..
Hi good morning can you hear me
yes go ahead.
Yeah not on and on the money
again so she gave us that and
the well but.
You should on the eight hundred
in a small bowl Committee
budgeting process with the state
or country with a global funds
good morning chairwoman members
of the committee it's my
relative my name is but I'll but
I'm a member of the next slide
and I'm also a mother I'm all
all of the but the four digit
formally known as young woman
United if you're always part how
to draw a line we know the
importance of keeping our
children safe and within the
homes and communities to
questions about we also
recognize yes that can only be
here than generational impact
and current age child welfare
practices have called on tribal
communities
well that that Campbell one you
have been there at the end of my
provide the tribal nations
opportunity protect their
children almost always we would
like to thank Representative
words of the Bible Division
point and urged the members of
the committee the but the vital
piece of legislation thank you
for your time.
Thank you our next we have Paul
Gibson.
Yeah.
Can you hear me yes go ahead
thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Paul Gibson co founder retake
Our Democracy an all volunteer
organization twenty five hundred
member statewide the checker
Makhosi supports H. B. two oh
nine as it presses and Regis and
Justice it is another
manifestation of call
colonialist assumptions that
state and federal authorities
are best suited to manage
indigenous affairs as a result
too many indigenous children
removed from their communities
and cultures I will this bill
will facilitate local indigenous
communities to match the affairs
related to their children
families and communities while
still ensuring safety and what
bill being of their children I
would also add that if the state
is so concerned about indigenous
children living in poverty and
homes without running water or
electricity the more appropriate
expression of that concern would
be to use some of the historic
surplus and billions in state
tax severance fund and other
funds to address the conditions
of poverty and tribal Mexico we
take our democracy strongly
supports passage of HB two oh
nine but also hopes that Sanchez
will continue to work with
tribal leaders to offer their
input today thank you very much
for your service.
Thank you next we have Karen
what lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen what lock with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we stand in strong
support of H. B. two oh nine we
thank the sponsor for bringing
this bill to include this
information in our state law and
to make for state and federal
law in sync New Mexico needs to
look into economic indigenous
placement for indigenous
children in order to create a
sense of belonging and
appreciation of their culture we
recognize that no bill is
perfect but is a step forward
and understand the parties
involved will continue to work
and make this a better act we
appreciate the efforts to CYFD
and indigenous governor's
governments to make this happen
thank you.
Thank you Karen our next we have
at the Akron.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is that Acheron I in the social
services director for the Pueblo
of Santa Ana.
I'm here on behalf of the Pueblo
and governor Ulises Leon.
Are we would like to express our
support for this bill and would
urge the committee to support
and pass this bill as well we
would like to thank
Representative Lewis for
sponsoring the bill and also
thank Secretary Blalock and his
CYFD staff who have.
Done some excellent work
including us in the development
of the bill and.
We again urge you to support
this bill thank you thank you
our next we have Marci Oliver
Starr.
Good morning my name's Marcy
over start a proud member of the
Choctaw nation of Oklahoma.
I appreciate that there was a
substitution however I. eight.
Just now received it
no one had the time to go over
it so I would respectfully
request that this be rolled into
hello I'm enough time has been
has been had it for people to
review it my concerns are how
many native foster homes that we
currently have and how we
refresh reach fruit and we
change native foster families
the bill is written excludes
foster parents from intervening
in the case of the same foster
parent to child in that
in there for years would not be
allowed to fight for what they
believe is best for the child
they love.
In their life with this family.
In twice and both times it was
about three years into the K. I
anticipate without these minor
without minor amendments
recruitment and retention of
native foster will be difficult
if not impossible I feel that
fear that the bill bill stands
we maybe some children up for a
lifetime of without permanent
state.
Thank you.
Next we have a Secretary
Blalock.
Thank you madam chair members of
the community Brian Blaylock the
cabinet secretary at the
children's youth families
Department Houston support for a
bill that was developed for by
child welfare experts to the
tribes all over New Mexico and
nationally we heard clearly from
the tragedy the priority of for
the tribal nations and something
that they've been discussing
working on for years since the
least twenty fifteen therefore
one of the highest priorities
pursue eighties legislative
session we follow the lead of
the tribes on the every step of
the way sad to hear that that
has been normal practice but
it's something that we have done
in this bill and learned from
the expertise to tribal experts
throughout New Mexico of local
hold for formal tribal
consultation with tribal
leadership to ensure it tribal
leaders were also a part of this
valuable process additional
officers who live in the state
of New Mexico will no longer be
able to make decisions about
tribal youth without the
partnership voice and leadership
of the tribal nations in New
Mexico without the support and
look forward to implementing it
with all twenty three nation so
passes thank you.
Thank you I Terrel in Massey.
Good morning get a better
madam chair that all members of
the committee and Representative
Lewis I am terribly Massey and
current executive director of
the southwest women's Law Center
I am also a Navajo Nation tribal
member and made an attorney and
also in my past life late
oversight of the Navajo Nation
yes and it court programs
so what I wanted to say is that
regarding Senate bill your line
is that it's important for
states to respective follow the
federal Indian child welfare act
and the twenty sixteen federal
regulations and they are able to
make it stronger which is what
we are doing here this bill
passes
so so we really support that the
data shows that there are higher
proportions of native American
children in the state foster
care system and this addresses
that
so madam chair thank you that's
what happened.
Thank you Darling next we have
drew Center.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name Mr setter
registered lobbyists for the
public okay then gained Santa
Clara pueblo as members of the
eight northern Indian public
council Center cynically Pueblo
okay Wingate support legislation
thank you.
Thank you next we have Caroline
Daly.
Ellen you need to you yourself.
You're on your muted.
I will come back to Caroline
next we have Christian are.
Chairman members of the
committee my name is Christian
Radford I am twenty eight years
old and I tribes are Cheyenne
Arapaho hi what and I'm also
part makes you can I was born
and raised in New Mexico I grew
up in a society or any of our
native Americans are
underrepresented especially in
politics and the media our
culture is diminished our
tongues are literally cut when
we lose our languages and our
land is no longer hours.
Just how addiction is a symptom
of poor mental health being
removed by pop Oster Care is the
symptom of poverty and a lack of
resources.
I urge you to keep our children
and our native American
communities I just court these
communities with basic human
rights that include but are not
limited to access to health care
running water affordable housing
it Americans deserve the ability
to break through keeping our
families together is the least
you can do please vote yes on
this bill thank you.
Thank you next we'll go to Judy
Williams.
I will try Carolyn again sorry.
Your one daily.
You need to unmute yourself.
Okay we're gonna move on to Judy
Williams.
Do you need to unmute yourself.
Judy your muted you meet
yourself.
Okay
I'm Eileen Escalante.
Eileen.
You need to you yourself.
Okay Donna can Tana.
Good morning and thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you Representative
Georgene Louis for sponsoring
house bill two oh nine my name
is Donna can Tana a tribal
member of Cochiti pueblo and I
am employed by two fifty Pueblo
at the Indian child welfare case
manager.
And the vice chair for the New
Mexico Indian child welfare
consortium.
The pueblo is a strong supporter
of house bill two oh nine Mexico
state Indian child welfare
well will protect our Indian
children and families to secure
our tribal communities building
ability and ensure tribal
sovereignty within the problems
and try to New Mexico.
She ation to the pueblos and
tribes for supporting this bill
and my appreciation to the if
oil workers and social workers
because they are the frontline
workers when it comes to working
with each unique trial working
side by side with native
children and families.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee have a
great day.
Thank you we'll go to pretty
Duran next.
Pretty Duran you need to on meet
yourself.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is pretty larger out I am from
okailey came walking up low.
I also work for.
And all of the funds Pablo and I
will are in support of house
bill two oh nine.
Thank you next we'll go to and
I'm I apologize if I
mispronounce your name
Michelle but setting.
Hello good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Mike at that city and I live
in reside in Albuquerque.
And I'm a teacher at native
American Community Academy and I
work with indigenous children
from various tribal nations and
I appreciate you are hearing
this are built and I'm asking
you to support H. B. two oh nine
thank you very much thank you
Max thank you Mike I'm apologize
for mispronouncing your name.
Our next we have Hannah Burling.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Hannah Burling and I'm president
of the league of women voters of
New Mexico league stands in
strong support of this bill we
support policies that promote
the well being in full
development of all children in
the league advocates within
every level of government to
eradicate systemic racism in the
harm it causes.
Thank you.
Thank you our next will go to
Shammara lawsuit luti.
Good morning want to madam chair
members of the house committee.
My name is Shanta lost Lucy and
I'm speaking on behalf of is in
the Pueblo I'm also that you
close Representative boards and
tribal social services and not
only do I speak on behalf of the
public but I also am a member of
the tribe
In a member of the Senate Public
honesty can on behalf we are in
support of house bill two own
nine
we would this position for
almost not almost that many of
course in the children have been
lost through foster care from
past cases and with the house
bill two own nine if we were to
go with the hoping for it to go
through meaning we will these
hopes it's not no longer see any
of our children being lost to
foster care we are in strong
support of house bill two online
and on hold just hope that this
bill this bill will surely pass
none that is all I have to say.
Thank you next we have sherry
Bellson.
I could begin our today I am
Joining you as a parent from the
pueblo of Zuni I too am asking
you to support the bill
eight should be two oh nine
please keep the children in
their communities and help
support community support their
children thank you.
Thank you and we'll try once
more Caroline Daly.
I'm sorry can you hear me yes we
can hear you now go ahead I
apologize no problem good
morning madam chair members of
the committee and Representative
Lewis my name is Caroline Daly I
am a tribal member from the
couple of this letter.
A native woman who has raised
Indian children.
CBS foster parent for another
native child from another try.
And a social worker licensed
with the state of New Mexico and
I as an individual stand in
strong support at this critical
bill which gives the tribes and
the state of New Mexico
validation and fidelity to what
I see as a partner decision
making collaborative which
fosters active efforts that
plays the best interest of our
Indian children Indian families
and ending communities at the
forefront to ensure positive and
improved outcomes for the
present time and for generations
to come I never imagined at
twenty two years old and raising
a helping to raise a foster
child from another tribe
this this type of legislation
for the state of New Mexico
didn't exist at the time and so
we have come I feel like we have
come a long ways from the time
that I was a foster parent to
what foster families are
experiencing right now I am
often humbled
by the stories of our children
and their histories as I was
humbled by the story of the
foster parent as humbled by the
story of my foster child that my
husband and I had helped to
raise at the time as I consider
cam
to be the expert considered his
family to be the expert in in
their lot in their in their
lives and this was their
narrative and this was their
story and thank you thank you
Caroline your time is up
Eileen Escalante will try you
one more time.
Lane if you're able to carry go
go ahead.
Good morning chair members of
the committee my name is Eileen
Escalante I am from Mexico New
Mexico and I am a member of the
Mescalero Apache tribe I am here
today in support of HB to on
line at the age of fourteen I
into the foster system I was
fortunate that my sister and I
were able to stay together and
to be fostered within our tribe
we were able to participate in
our culture ceremonies and grew
up with a strong sense of the
long this culture and traditions
unfortunately my brother's
experience was not the same he
was separated from us and
fostered with a non native
family we have reunited after
years of searching for each
other up to the day he struggles
to understand our culture and
being a part of it because he
was deprived from it for such a
long time our culture is is that
at the verge of being extinct
and is it up to our younger
generation to keep it alive
please vote yes on our on HB two
on line and keep our families
and our native culture alive
thank you.
Thank you.
And I think that's that's it for
our public comment thank you for
everyone who was here and
participated let's deal with the
substitute
of first Representative
and it was the pleasure of the
committee I'm sure I move that
we adopt this
Okay is there any objection to
adopting the substitute.
Seeing none hearing none your
bill has been substituted
Representative now we'll go to
questions for the committee and
I have Representative Montoya.
Your woman and Representative
Lewis I commend you for bringing
this bill forward it is in my
words landmark anytime that we
can elevate the safety and
wellness of children in our
state especially tribal
children.
Also the deliberate
collaboration with secretary
Secretary Blalock at CYFD is
strategic effective I'm so proud
of that department how it's
building.
On a personal note I I have the
tribal community within my
district okay Wingate.
And I have worked for fifteen
years with the.
With the children school there I
founded a charter school month
Montessori to K. eight I also
have an after care program where
we interface with four hundred
kids each week.
What's at the center of this
bill is belonging.
Child wellness and well being is
centered in understanding who
one is one's traditions ones
languages and anytime we can
insure that children are within
that body of safety I applaud it
I look forward to voting in
favor of this bill and thank you
for bringing it forward I yield
back.
Thank you representative
Representative Thompson.
You madam chair I just want to
thank the sponsor and say hello
to our city gone who's another
Crown Point girl and this is a
great bill and not I hope you I
wish you good luck thank you
Representative Lewis and madam
chair.
Thank you Representative
Matthews.
If you thank you
madam chair and and thank you
all for the presentation and the
work you've done on this bill
I I did have one question and
that is
how important is it to the
functioning of the is the I'll
call it the system this this.
For.
Designed in the bill that all
the pueblos in reservations are
on board.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Matthews I'm
I'm glad you asked that question
because you know the the public
back my governor has spoken out
also I I'm there are a couple of
others and really you know I
really have to commend the CYFD
the department and the staff
there because they were trying
to reach out during the pandemic
to connect with every single
time and and I think a lot of
the disconnect is there and I
have asked governor violent
others to please provide us with
substantive issues with the bill
so that we could move forward
but you know just.
In in in a large hard being in
the legislature again there's
there's no perfect bill and we
will continue to work on any
issues and concerns that are
being addressed addressed to
because we do want to ensure
that notification is made
through tribes that the work
that CYFD has been able to do
successfully to ensure that
they're working with tribes
continues I don't know that
there is
Complaints about how the process
that they're doing now that
we're trying to put into statute
is at issue here so that's
that's one of the reasons why
we're moving forward to because
and and weighing out the pros
and cons it's really important
that we codify the work that's
currently being done as well as
updating to conform with the
federal it was
Law so that again we don't have
children and that are slipping
through the cracks and not being
reunited with.
Their family from tribes or even
community members from tribes as
well because.
You know I think you heard in
testimony that.
In instances where
unfortunately that happens
sometimes that right connection
doesn't occur and in our last
committee we had governor to
lecture from the Pueblo of
Pojoaque eight who was in the
system and actually was
Lead back to the Pueblo but
unfortunately he still looking
for his siblings that never paid
it back to the Pueblo and just
seeing someone come from where
he wants to now where he is as a
leader of the Pueblo you know
really serves the purpose of
what we're trying to do here
which is that we unification
Representative with the tribe
and the and the tribal
community.
Madam chair representative Lewis
thank you for thank you for that
answer that was really really
helpful
Does the does the bill at well
let me let's see let me back up
and ask the question this way if
there is it is it possible that
there will be levels are tribe's
reservations that are not
participating and if so does the
bill address that and how does
it address.
Madam chair and representative
really it's to require that the
children youth and families
department work with the tribe's
so at that point if the tribe
decided not to participate in
the proceedings and a tribal
member is in the system and
notification is made to the
tribe they still have that
opportunity to not picture not
participate.
And
Madam chair representative in
that case what happens to the
child which system debate system
maybes are on board but they are
they are they still connected
with the.
Or are they do they become part
of the foster care system
outside of the the tribes and
pueblos.
Madam chair and representative I
I I want to say that they will
then state within the state see
why up to the system and move
along with that process but I'd
like Jacqueline yelp page to
come from that place.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you
Representative Lewis for that
question in the event that the
tribe does not respond to the
equinox occasions of their child
being asked to be the state is
still obligated to follow the
provisions in FY so there there
is still law and policy that the
state is going to be mandated to
follow when it comes to the
Indian child so if they choose
if the tribe chooses not to
intervene or to participate in
the proceedings which in fact
the tribe is able to do that at
any time.
the state still has to follow a
number of of provisions that are
in the field so the law still
provides these protections to a
native child if they are with a
non native foster family
there are placement preferences
that CYFD would have to follow
to support
family connections to support
placement family placements with
families relatives or with with
other tribal members within
their tribe or another try there
are also other considerations
are actually other requirements
that a non native placement
would
What would comply with such as a
cultural compact so there's
still some some requirements in
the law that will hopefully
carry out the protections that
will maintain the connection for
the child and tried regardless
if the tribe chooses not to
intervene or fully participate
in the state K. R..
Why is required for
for state compliance and the
department CYFD is required to
follow the law here so there are
provisions that the state would
be mandated to follow when it
comes to the Indian child.
Madam chair representative and
and and expert site this is my
eyes and I can't see I can't see
people's names on the screen
thank you for that explanation I
really appreciate that is the is
the
Is the.
Over time are you expecting that
there will be no native children
of in the broader CYFD system
that that they were all be able
to be placed with ninety
families.
Thank you madam chair woman and
representative so I think just
because of the way
Did Americans are moving to
jobs and and other cities we
actually do have.
A lot of urban Indians has what
we call them so there's a lot of
native Americans living in urban
cities I think I heard recently
that there was like nearly sixty
thousand native American people
in Albuquerque alone which is a
huge amount so I mean
unfortunately just because of.
Not unfortunately but you know
it just because of the
circumstances where we have
native Americans moving closer
for work or for school we're
always going to have I imagine
native American children.
Participating in that CYFD
process so you know I mean of
course it is to ensure that
these kids and if something were
to happen would have that
Way to get back to the tribe so.
I don't think that we could ever
have you know CYFD the state
system not be involved in this
process.
And chair representative Lewis
thank you
I think I'm understanding this
system better
One of the one of the
commentators or one of the
participants talked about was in
opposition to this because there
was no role for cheering.
The voice of foster parents
and eight eight eight.
And I just a last question
because it seems to me that at
least over time virtually any
foster parents would be the
native people perhaps urban
Indians instead of on on the
tribe of the reservation but
I'm is there a reason or what
would be your response to the
lady who mentioned as foster
parents we feel we should we
should have a voice in this
because of course rostrum
parents often become very
attached to the children that
the faster so if you could
address that please.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
Representative math here so I
give so much credit to the
individuals that are foster
parents because I know it's such
a lot of work to raise a child
and you know I know that there's
a bond there but that's why this
bill is also very important
because as soon as the
notification is made to the
tribe or to
but members of of the foster
child then you have that
discussion that are and and
hopefully you know everyone is
aware of the situation what
federal law is required to do
what the state CYFD department
is required to do so that it's
not left in the no so.
Providing that notification not
only to the try but to the
foster parents so that they're
aware of the situation and what
at the state department is
required to do and I think it
brings everyone to working
together and ensuring that the
foster parent does know that
pursuant to federal and state
law that that.
They're gonna have to have that
discussion with the tribe and
members of the tribal community.
Madam chair.
Representative is there in the
bill anything that transitions.
It because there is there may be
children have been placed with
foster parents native children
who have been placed with foster
parents prior to the enactment
of the bill and
Didn't go into it with that
understanding.
That's going to be different
moving forward under the bill I
just wonder is there any any
thought of some transition to
help them
It just it just is probably not
the right word but to dismiss it
the the
And the transition from the
current state of the law to what
it would be under the bill
As as children who have been
previously native children have
been previously placed in foster
homes that are not native.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
Representative I'm gonna defer
to Jacqueline Yelchin again
because she is you know one of
the
folks in the in in the system
and working through that
process.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative Lewis
thank you for the question.
That's a great question and I
say that because this is the
reason for sick well for the
state in the child welfare Act
bill there's non compliance
there's non compliance with with
placement preferences when an
Indian child is placed into
state custody Senator what has
placement preferences and those
preferences are with family and
native families that's not being
conducted in the state system
CYFD has failed to provide that
service to our families when it
comes to to placements so to
address this the bill
strengthens the placement
preferences and it also includes
training a training component
that will work with the tried
and foster families when they
are supporting temporarily the
placement of an Indian child in
their home so foster care is
presumed to be temporary until
their child can return to their
family to their parents the goal
here is not to increase the
homes of native families but
really to engage in active
efforts to prevent the break up
of the native family and to also
begin the early stages of Family
placement searches in hopes of
preventing the child from moving
outside of those placement
preferences so although their
tribes and the state's greatly
appreciate that the care and
support that they continue to
provide our Indian children in
their homes it is temporary it's
not a final solution and that
unfortunately has been the
practice over years that the
state has relied heavily on a
non native family.
He's instead of doing the act
efforts and following placement
preferences when it comes to
maintaining the cultural and
family connections with in their
tracks.
Our.
Sure Representative and miss out
how to use my saying it right
okay thank you I get I get the
sun out of my eyes I can finally
see that see the names
thank you thank you for that
information I just wonder if you
will the in.
There there may be bonds formed
between the child and and a non
native foster parent did with
there still be an opportunity
for.
The
It first appeared to be able to.
Now what happens to the child.
Or have contact with the child I
I I actually don't know how that
works with non native children
But.
Maybe get rid of my phone.
I'm just I'm just wondering is
this transition happens
it is that is that something
that's possible or
not possible.
Madam chairwoman and
Representative Matthews I don't
have the answer to that question
either so I'll let Jacqueline
yell down to that thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee I thank you
Representative Lewis.
Bonds between any race and a
child our our importance and it
indicates that this child.
Has the ability to form healthy
bonds and attachments.
Excuse me with anybody that
comes into their life.
Over all the the issue here is
to ensure that the child has
these bonds and attachments
remaining with their biological
families and their tried.
So again although a non native
families can find these bonds
for the child.
Our hope is that that continued
relationship can continue to
evolve and partner with the
family as their support and
ideally it would be great for
the foster families and the
biological families to work
together for the sake of this
child and it would really vary
and depend on the wishes of the
biological parent or that the
tribal family that the child is
going to be returned to on how
those connections with maintain
but ultimately the purpose here
is to preserve these
relationships and bonds and
attachments with the child and
the biological family and the
tried.
madam chair thank you very much
for that answer I'm and I think
this is my last question the
National it go up is under legal
attack I think that's probably a
fair statement and I'm wondering
if in passing a state or would
there be
similar grounds to challenge a
state statute on the same basis
we're similar bases as is
happening with the national
statute is is this a bill that.
Is going to raise.
Either federal or state
constitutional issues as a state
law.
Madam chair and representative.
Sorry about that
so I believe is that the and
maybe we can defer to governor
Vigil on this too but I believe
that the challenges are really
because folks aren't aware that
Indian tribes are sovereign
nations and that tribal members
are also not racially
identified but they are
politically identified and
having the understanding is of
the utmost importance here to
ensure that we're not talking
about.
Native children as a race we're
talking about them as their
political status belonging to a
sovereign nation so having that
understanding really I think it
is crucial to ensuring that we
protect
Their children as well members
and really ensuring that the
tribe is able to
Retain those native children
that belong to the tribe and
have a state and involvement and
and how these kids are and going
through the system and and and
being part of the tribes so I
don't know of governor you know
if you like to add to that.
Your
governor here muted.
Okay thank you I keep we might
lose and that the but.
Thank you chair of St Louis and
chairwoman of for your there go
those questions
Right now the in in trouble for
act like I said in my opening
statement is under attack and
the reason they're doing this is
they're saying it's a race this
bill and it's unconstitutional.
And however like a
Representative Lewis at this is
not about our
our good group of people
interest group or anything this
is about a sovereign nation and
we just sovereign nations that's
where our position is we have to
be addressed that way not about
a constitution order or are
resistant it's about who we are
as people and in my opening
statement also I also made the
statement about state agencies
and courts to improve that
response to the need of our
children's families acknowledge
our tribal nations sovereignty
and the right to be involved in
this process is and this law of
the somebody said earlier only
codifies to make the the this
law stronger than the national
law so even though if there are
challenges within in the
national level this state law
will protect us from that
happening and that's why there
are nine other states that have
passed legislation in the child
welfare.
Madam chairman Representative
the governor Representative
Lewis as you yeah that's thank
you so much for the answers to
my questions
Of and it yeah I I I I I find I
found particularly the last
statements made by
Representative Lewis and the
governor to be really powerful
statements of of sovereignty and
and data.
your position in this matter and
it's it's really helpful to me
to understand thank you so much
thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative next I
have Representative Terrazas.
Your muted Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Lewis for
bringing this legislation for
and I want to thank actually.
Representative Matthews for her
questions that that helps us
understand and I I really
enjoyed her questions a
that made me understand a lot
more.
My question is I only I think I
only have a couple the first one
it is so I know that your
present your preference this
program so of how the child will
be placed on madam chair is is
set up.
Can I ask what happens if
there's not enough placement and
that does that automatically go
to those families foster parents
that that exist right now.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
Representative so so what is in
place as a higher king of
placement and so I believe that
is correct once that higher key
goes through its levels and the
the existing foster participants
than the the foster parents
would be.
At the lower end of the higher
Kate maybe Jacqueline can
explain that a little better.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you
Representative for less you are
correct in the hierarchy with
placement preferences
basement preferences is not
excluding any non native family
however there is I. R. all of
these.
Hi.
And to ensure that exiled me
connected.
Hi that is going to be a little
more interesting sure that the
state is.
And unfortunately because.
Following past years that has
led to our children just
remaining in the non native
foster placements when they
they.
Majority of them probably could
have been returned or they could
have been faced with family or
another Indian family and I
these are not my statistics but
Permitted I believe that CYFD I
can speak to be a quite units
that they have in addition to
the report internally County who
focuses specifically on the
sequel cases coming into the
state who have numbers that can
speak to the the efforts that
the workers are are implementing
with these families to
demonstrate some success and the
numbers of relative placement
speaks volumes to show that
those efforts to follow the
hierarchy of placement
preferences is in fact working.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative sorry about not
beauty muting of the.
This sometimes I get stuck on
some of the stuff sorry about
that
Madam chair representative so.
You being that what you just X.
explained those that means that
there is there a lack of foster
parents in in those native of in
in in your native placement
right now because it's been
shifted so much as that because
this native American foster
parents to participate in your
in the and it's I want to be on
that I just wanted to see if you
know there's manage you know
because of that lack of war that
the way things were handled did
it get less people
involved in in the tribe's.
And so really what I'm looking
for is just to know is you know
for that or is it gonna take
time I guess to transition back
in and I'm kind of following up
on on Representative Matthews
questions that I think she
brought up a lot of things that
kind of the same page and I was
on.
Chairman and representative I
I'd like Donal answer see now to
address this but really just as
of background before we handed
over to don Ellen is that you
know I think a lot of tribal
members and tribal community
members that
Aren't familiar with the foster
care process so normally it's
you know we're we're we're very
communal and working with one
another so if you know there's
instances where children in need
some help and and the family
usually takes out over but now
when we're having more native
Americans move to urban areas
sometimes that's not always the
families not aware the tribe's
not aware so and and I also
think that folks aren't aware of
of how to become a foster parent
is I think the wire he can speak
more to their efforts to really
addressing these issues.
Chair members of the committee
thank you so much for allowing
me to be here today Division MFA
we might the S. that'll shock
kind of stock I watched the good
morning everyone and thank you
again for allowing me that the
great question thank you so much
for the questions that are
coming forward today so one of
the big things in regards to
native American foster parents
foster parents are vital and ask
Michael what we're
misty else mentioned earlier
they tried the way at the we
really do appreciate the work
that are.
Do in the loving care and
support that they give to the
children in their in their in
their care the focus is on it's
on relatives and and research
has shown us and many states are
moving more toward kinship and
and and then the LFC have stated
earlier historically eight New
Mexico included have not done a
really great job at finding
relatives and so
as as we ship to can get the
care giving that is one of the
things that this bill are really
focuses on because native
children are four times more
likely to be removed and placed
outside of their extended family
discount and and placed in
further away from their tribal
communities that really in the
okay and I think admit yeah cat
also explained earlier it is a
hierarchy of placement
preferences and so we understand
that there are there may be
situations where you go through
those levels and and the child
will end up in a non preferred
placement however the department
is committed to maintaining
contact and and communication
with all parties with the try
with the foster parent you
ensure that are foster parents
get that training and also to
support cultural compact
when those situations happen.
Thank you madam chair and
representative so I guess what I
know that you're expressing all
the things and I and I I I'd
love that you know I think I
think it's very beautiful to try
and and.
Retain your culture and to
respect other cultures and
people so that I think it's it's
a beautiful thing what you're
trying to do
and and so I didn't I think
quite maybe I can hear it right
and
on you you have plenty of foster
families there in your in in the
area to
to Care things madam chair
representative.
At this point I mean if we were
to shift if this I guess my
question clear cleared up maybe
a that that was the best with
the last that Madam chair
representative is there if this
was to be enacted today would.
There be enough foster families
are currently there to
handle the the shift result just
a quick answer madam chair and
thank you Representative so part
of this bill would mandate CYFD
to notify the tribe and to
notify that extended family and
I probably immediate excuse me
immediate and extended family so
that then
That does family members can
step up so and you know we don't
have to go into the foster care
system but really like to the
tribe and and the family members
have that opportunity to step in
and take care of the child in
that case.
Thank you very much so so then
the do they have to go through a
process to get Madam chair
representative do they have to
get a process to go through a
process excuse me to get become
a foster parent and then the.
I don't know anything about the.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative so I believe
this would be different so that
they wouldn't have to because
it's again reunite reunification
with the family Jacqueline would
you confirm that.
Yes so the overall goal here is
facing with families and
relatives and
My apologies madam chair members
of the committee Representative
Lewis I eat these are wonderful
professionals and I get super
excited when we get to share
information on on a quest
so again the overall intent is
to place with families and
relatives.
right now should sick why bees
Law in past tomorrow
CYFD and I'm not a CYFD worker
but I have experience with my
own cases that they currently
are practicing the the thirty
day case review for any non ECWA
preferred placements so the the
tribal liaison will staff these
cases with the counties and
those county workers along with
the tribe's to continue the
efforts in identifying and
appropriate and approved
placement preference so that has
been put into practice for some
time now to ensure that should
stick will become locked to
Morrow that we have already
begun the process to ensure that
the family will we'll be ready
to accept the child or they have
already begun that transition
piece for the child to return
home or to return to of a
relative placement.
It's not about
looking for additional foster
families it's really focusing on
of preserving the the families
and working as a.
Effortlessly with other
relatives that could be a
potential placement for the
child.
And on that point if I can
Representative yeah just jump in
that outside of it well just in
with kids and not we're not
talking about tribal there is
there is a a system if you will
of kinship
of placements and kinship or
call kinship guardianship out
where a preference and that
keeps them out of the formal
foster system and so this is
applying that same kind of
philosophy if you will to native
our children to find a family
members and extended family
members who will take that on
child and support them what they
need but that keeps some it's
not a formal foster a situation
it it's a kinship placement M.
please correct me if I said that
wrong but that that works
outside of the system outside of
native children as well I see
had not and I think I got that
about right thank you.
Madam chair I don't know those
by had not in god's going okay
that makes more sense okay well
thank you very much madam chair
representative on and I guess
the only real concern that I
have is and and it's kind of
like when I think on the same
basis that
Representative Matthews was was
indicating
My only concern was.
Madam chair representative where
those.
As I heard the words that well I
heard there was a meeting of
council meeting will address all
the tribes if I understood that
right and they talked about
filing suit and that was I
understand that correctly.
Madam chairwoman and and
Representative I'm not sure what
you're referencing.
Talking about opposition to the
federal Escalon maybe Madam
chair representative is just one
of the people that work well I
was actually one of the the
tribes of was expressing that I
guess they had a they had a
meeting right but in seem like
it was audible tribes of that is
that the way I understood it
right
Representative yes that's
correct so that is so we have a
number of tribes that belong to
the all public council of
governors and that they had
asked about whether or not they
would like to support this bill
and I think it is my
understanding with the amount of
revisions not everyone was on
board to so that's why I think
we had some tribes saying that
they were opposed and others
saying they were supportive so
it wasn't a consensus I guess if
if that's a better way to
describe what was happening it
was not a consensus among all
the tribes but and tribes than
tech positions individually.
Thank you madam chair
representative I it and.
In an respectfully ask
Is effort do you feel that that
is something that's important to
maybe answer a few more
questions you think this is a
little premature and maybe just
a little I mean I love what
you're trying to do please don't
take that in the in in a in a
negative way
Madam chair representative I I
love that you're trying to do
something for your for your
culture you people I love that a
lot I think it's it's a
beautiful thing always have on
our culture whether it's
religious or.
traditions however it is it's so
beautiful to retain those
investment your family and so I
admire you for that but I just
that's really a question do you
think.
There needs to be a little more
conversation with some of the
track to the.
Our opinion sure.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative so you know I
I I really appreciate all the
efforts that the CYFD dead and
trying to reach out to tribes
and again you know unfortunately
it was during a pandemic where
we weren't having meetings in
person I think then the process
would have been a little bit
different including going to the
all public council of governors
and and others I know with the
eight northern public council
has endorsed the piece of
legislation The New Mexico
tribal state consortium has also
endorsed the legislation and
that's comprised of judges from
the tribes throughout the state
as well as judges in the state
system so you know I I do
appreciate and I do take to
heart the
Statements that have been made
by the tribes that are opposing
but in addition to that there
are still rules to be
promulgated and CYFD has made
the commitment that they will
reach out to every single tribe
and ensure that that process is
followed through that tribes
that have additional input
and I I mean it's you know we're
we're part time I just laid
legislature and it's really hard
to trying get everything and and
everyone
and and and perfect alignment
and agreement and so that's why
we're going ahead in pursuing
this because if if if federal
equity is attacked or if
something happens and it were
really leaving the tribe's at a
disadvantage because we can have
a folks in the CYFD system that
won't communicate with the
tribe's perhaps because there
are no I'm aware of that
political status of the tribal
nations and their tribal members
or because you know they they
just don't want to do at so
really what we're doing here is
ensuring that the state CYFD and
and thanks again to the staff
and secretary for all of their
efforts to try to reach everyone
and again I think now that we
know that some folks out that
they were involved and we will
definitely reach out to those
tribes to ensure now when rules
being promulgated that everyone
participate and help right now
with right at the end of the
tunnel for this pandemic we can
kind of get back to normal and
and ensure that that happens and
and you know as as co chair of
the interim Indian Affairs
Committee I'm happy to address
that as well during the interim.
Thank you madam chair
representative I'm hoping to
hearing back from keep putting
my keep reading this but it
doesn't wanna very and I can
make you think I did I'm sorry
Madam chair representative again
I think I really appreciate your
hard work and I know that you're
trying I see your very sincere
in what you're doing and so I I
I really appreciate that very
much is it it's a I see it in
your heart that you're really
trying to do the right thing I
just it I mean I'm new at this
too and so I'm just trying to
find my way but Madam chair
representative I hope that that
there's a way that you can now.
Come together will still strives
to maybe I know that there's
been a lot of obstacles you're a
hundred percent right about that
this is been different for all
of us and as being new it's it's
been challenging for us to so I
I understand your your your
obstacles and and I the only
thing I can say is I hope that
that you can try to bridge those
gaps and and god bless you in
your in your efforts okay.
Thank you Representative
Barreras.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Lewis for it
for bringing this I have a
couple of really really quick
questions for you and if you've
already had to decide to
apologize I was on to Sam's at
the same time how many it will
cool it was compliant Fuster
homes or in the state.
And madam chair and
representative I don't I'm not
aware of it what compliant homes
but let me go to Donilon to
address that.
Madam chair of members of the
committee thank you so much for
that
for that question in regards to
the order of preference than
placement preference did
There are we do have a
Right of.
Relative placement I'm sorry I'm
just pulling up the
documentation really quickly I.
And I do apologize madam chair I
think I think what I should have
asked was on it will provide not
compliant I apologize for that.
Madam chair and representative
so what we were talking about
earlier and and you might have
stepped away and I get that
because we're all kind of the
you know doing Tuesday was at
once especially hearing our
meetings and being a committee
but but really it's a hierarchy
of placement where they look to
family members whether they are
immediate or extended and then
those from the tribe as well.
Okay I think what what I was
trying to I'm sorry madam chair
and representative what I was
trying to get is is if there was
a number of non relative homes
versus relative homes if that
makes sense.
Madam chair and representative
that would be on an individual
basis so case by case
unfortunately we can't have the
answer to that question because
it just depends on how big that
and dative child's family is how
big their extended family as you
know how bad the tribe is a so
really that would be dealt with
on a case by case basis.
And and if I can jump in that
would be a hard number because
it would depend sovereign
nations of sovereign nation is
so it and there's not
necessarily like a licensed it
was approved home it's it's
what's what's available and
approved and family and
appropriate in a particular
tribal community that may not be
appropriate for someone from
another tribe I understand I
understand thank you thank you
madam chair representative I I
hope my last question may it
makes sense if this if this bill
passes do do tribes plan to take
jurisdiction of all equities
children's cases.
Madam chair and representative
if this path bill passes it will
continue to ensure that what.
Efforts and
That policies that the current.
CYFD program excuse me
department is doing well
continue it will ensure that the
State ecobill is updated to what
is included in the federal
updates but actually make it
stronger so that
there is that constant
communication and cooperation so
as far as jurisdiction it would
be shared between
C. Y. F. day united attacked
Eminem American child is
included in the CYFD system but
then they will continue to work
with the tribal
The tribal nation.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for answering
my questions I also at support
your bill thank you thank you
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this bill I have a couple of
questions are you I was multi
tasking as well but so is their
preference madam chair and
representative on keeping the
children together see if there
was multiple children and an
incident is their preference on
keeping them together.
Madam chairwoman and
Representative there is
preference in keeping that the
children together okay thank you
madam chair and representative
that's a that's a big concern
for me separating the the kids.
I get a little emotional.
The the other one is
In river in reviewing all my
emails from FY foster families
just.
Does the substitute.
Madam chair representative I
don't know if it happened on
your end but yes Rosen okay yeah
thank you madam chair I'm sure
that was a cute picture Madam
chair representative my it's I'm
in the capitol that keeps
blacking out but I'm one of my
my last question is does the
substitute bill address the
right to intervene.
Representative and madam chair
I'm going to defer to city are
not.
Thank you adjournment chairman
chairwoman Armstrong
Representative Lewis
Representative
Gail Armstrong I am in regards
to the right to intervene there
are situations and specific in
the bill on a that specifically
address the tribe's right to
intervene and not only the fact
that the tribes has a right to
enter in intervene at any stage
in the proceedings but the the
if that if they are not a party
and haven't actually intervene
they can still participate in
the process and they can still
be involved in the process so it
would cover situations and for
there is multiple tribes and
maybe involved in regards to a
child and the child it is
potentially more member of two
different tribes so one tribe
may step forward in improving
the other tribe may not but both
tried to be able to participate
have the right to participate in
all proceedings are not just a
disposition but from the
beginning and forward and one
thing that's really interesting
in regards to this is the early
notification on investigation
because upon investigation the
tribes are notified at the
beginning within twenty four
hours of the investigation and
even before the child is removed
from the home at the
investigation stage that is
something that wasn't in that is
not current legislation that
hasn't been the current
legislation so the families get
involved early on and the tribe
gets involved early on hopefully
and if the tribe does not get
involved early on that they
still have the ability to
intervene and participate
throughout the process.
Thank you so much for that
answer thank you madam chair and
representative and miss out on
so one other question I think
possibly Representative Barreras
was trying to pass it but if
there isn't a native family
placement how many equip
preferred placements are there
in CYFD.
Or are there any.
Madam chair and and
Representative I'm gonna defer
to Donna Lynne to answer that
question thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for so much
and and thank you for your
patience with my technical
difficulties here so currently
we have about forty forty
percent of our native children
are in are in relative relative
placement at this time.
Okay thank you madam chair but
do you have any.
That are in the big one
preferred placements in CYFD.
Madam chair and representative
so the goal here is to get away
from the CYFD system and really
work with the tribes there that
the child's immediate and
extended family and then the
other people within the tribal.
Munity so so I I I don't I don't
I'm not understand about like
you know that the equipped
basement but it M. talking about
the hierarchy of placement
earlier there is that higher Q.
placements so that's the
ultimate goal here is to reunite
the child with family members
extended family members and
tribal members.
Madam chair she might be frozen.
And madam chair your.
That there we go looks like
she's frozen and dropped
So I just think
I think we will move on not
knowing when she can jump back
in Representative Montoya.
Madam chair and representative
Lewis I make a motion in two
parts the first part is a do not
pass on house bill two oh nine
and the second is a do pass on
the house health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill two oh nine.
I will second thank you and we
have a we have a second
I'm sorry that Representative
Armstrong got it got kicked off
I don't know if she had all of
our questions answered but
Let's go ahead and and call the
roll.
Anderson.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative brought me but at
a.
Yes.
Representative Karen bash yes.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Yes the madam chair there seems
to be a problem with the
internet at the roundhouse
today.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes.
Representative Roger Montoya
yes.
Representative Louise I.
Yes.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative.
I'm sorry yes.
Representative Manders.
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Thank you I'm I'm having a
little difficulty with my
audio and I know you're voting
you have got.
Madam chair maybe I better pass
on this because I'm one not
hearing the audio and to I am
not
I'm watching the screen and so I
think I'd better unless you need
my unless it.
Madam chair well it will excuse
you representative of Anderson.
Acting house health committee
yeah.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Still not here to showcase the
excuse madam chair Deborah
Armstrong yes.
Of nine to Representative
Ferrary.
I did okay.
Nine and to execute.
Okay thank you Representative
and just thank you for all the
work on this I I I do think it's
really important down and the
other tribes or pueblos that
that aren't on board yet I think
you have time to really study
the sub and and weigh in and
provide input or like you say
even it may be a point of
rulemaking as as opposed to any
changes in the legislation so I
I appreciate that but you have a
do pass on House Bill two oh
nine as substituted in this
committee thank you for taking
the time madam chair and
committee members we appreciate
it thank you.
Okay next we will go to house
bill two fifty and let's see if
we've got Representative Serrato
in the state moved over.
Madam chair while we're waiting
for her to come over can I just
say that she is not through our
entire committee three.
Really really really wants is to
hear this.
I'm sorry it has taken so long I
thought I saw her come.
Coming over she.
Goodness I don't see here
anymore yes anyway she should be
promoted Aristeas there COS
okay.
Representative Serrato you've
hung in for the long haul as if
this one do you have experts
that you wish to join you I do
we have a timing Hernandez with
the Alzheimer's association come
over as well okay.
There are yes.
Okay Representative house bill
two fifty long term care
dementia training requirements
for had thank you so much Madam
chairwoman so house bill two
fifty the long term care
facility dementia training act
on it is a long overdue bill I'm
not just for the session but
beyond for New Mexicans living
with dementia and those who care
for them HB two fifty would
ensure that all direct service
staff administrators employed by
long term care facilities we
would be required to have
additional training in caring
for patients with dementia
including Alzheimer's all this
training would be developed and
overseen by the department of
health the aging and long term
department at longterm services
department identifies having
dementia competent workforce as
an important protection for this
community in fact the twenty
thirteen New Mexico state plan
for Alzheimer disease and
related dementias listed support
and support education and
training for dementia competent
workforce as one of their top
six goals and eight years later
this bill directly addresses
that concern because three
quarters of those living with
Alzheimer's live in nursing
homes and more than forty
percent of those with the at
long term care facilities
experience some form of dementia
we need to expand the training
beyond those units that care for
the most advanced stages of
dementia so currently only
facilities with specialty memory
care units are required to have
training to to to help with
those living with dementia and
Alzheimer's and this would
expand it beyond that because a
lot of times that you know it's
early stages or it's it's not
even a fully identified for
folks on into effect so these
with these memory care units
where they do are required to
have training are make up only
less than twenty percent of all
long term care facilities so
this bill addresses that need to
the concerns of living with
early stage dementia and others
that may not happen that that
that that the depth of the help
that support that are advantages
may need on but New Mexico's
elderly population is growing
according to twenty eighteen
census Mexico's median age
increased to thirty seven years
old
From thirty six and a half years
old and we let in some counties
in New Mexico much higher median
age such as controlling County
which is median age of fifty
eight point one and Sierra
County has more than fifty
percent of households with one
or more people sixty five years
or older I became involved with
this because constituent reached
out to me and introduced me to
really the difficulties with
those who are facing Alzheimer's
we're living in long term care
facilities and once the into the
bills introduced again here for
many others who are currently
caring for loved ones with
dementia according to them into
long term care facilities New
Mexicans I want to know that
those are caring for loved ones
have the the training and the
capacity to to to handle the
challenges posed by dementia bye
bye.
So I'm honored to carry this
bill I hope we can earn your
support and I do also want to
you know thank all very
stakeholders and all those
advocates who have been with us
also on Monday Wednesday and
here today to on their very
dedicated group and I really do
appreciate that we're continuing
to work with different
stakeholders to make sure that
the language is.
Accomplishing so that includes
all of those with direct care
and interact directly with
patients but then also open
enough so that it's not too
onerous for long term care
facilities as well also you want
to introduce my only witness it
that's okay Tom Hernandez who's
the public policy director with
the New Mexico chapter of the
Alzheimer's association thank
you welcome timing go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee a good morning as
mentioned my name is Tommy
Hernandez I am the public policy
director for the Alzheimer's
association's New Mexico chapter
I like to begin of my time with
this first thanking the chair
and the distinguished members of
this committee for consideration
consideration on house bill two
fifty I also like to think of
representative wrote on behalf
of the Alzheimer's association
and all of those who we
represent with this devastating
disease for sponsoring this very
important piece of legislation
house bill two fifty addresses
the state level public policy
priority by the Alzheimer's
association but beyond that it
also addresses a policy priority
that is included in the New
Mexico state plan to address
Alzheimer's and related dementia
as mentioned just before me by
the representative the
Alzheimer's association is the
world's leading Health
Organization on Alzheimer's
dementia our association eight
on most of the pressing issues
growing concern and awareness
scientific research for here
Care support programs many of
which are done statewide and
advocacy for federal and state
level legislation that addresses
again most critical issues that
those with the disease are
facing our policy priorities
madam chair members of the
committee are identified with
strong data collection and
evidence based analysis.
Sadly Alzheimer's and other
forms of dementia are among the
ugliest and most devastating
diseases that seniors are at
risk of developing as age many
believe the symptoms are simply
forgetfulness memory loss read
of displays of confusion sadly
it is those things but it is
much more than that as well mood
swings irritability behavior
changes social withdrawal other
chronic conditions that are
serious these are all symptoms
as well and often those symptoms
mask dementia and other forms
also present for the Mr other.
The distinguished making the
prevalence of the disease in our
state shows that there are forty
three thousand New Mexicans
right now living with
Alzheimer's or some other form
of dementia the data strongly
suggest the majority of them are
living in long term care
communities these figures one
play over the coming years as
the representative mentioned as
the jet data projects that New
Mexico will have one of the
highest largest population
segments of people sixty five
and older that's an important
data point for the committee to
that too please consider because
we know that Alzheimer's disease
the risk grows as you age
however it is not part of the
aging process.
Consequently as New Mexico's
aging population grows we know
that the number of people who
will need to move into these
communities whether it is a
nursing home and memory care
unit or an assisted living these
folks will need to move into
these communities.
A hard lesson learned for the
pandemic is that long term care
residents that preparation an
adequate training is absolutely
critical to care for those who
are relying on these on these
cares this care support programs
with these facilities.
What a family is moving a loved
one into a community there are
many things that they look for
many things that the family
discusses however we feel
strongly that one of those
things that needs to be
discussed among.
Is not if the staff is
adequately trained Iraq with
their loved ones they are
entrusting the care for.
Simply put the prevalence of
dementia is too high and so it's
appropriate for the state to
raise the state training
standards of direct service
staff is needed evidence based
and it is data driven alarming
number residents in these
facilities develop some
important dimensions we also
heard Representative say one
particular data point we find
very very alarming is that
seventy five percent seventy
five percent madam chair members
of the committee of people aged
eighty years old who are living
in nursing homes have this
devastating brain disease
Alzheimer's or some other form
of dementia HB two fifty makes
good policy sense when we
consider the statistics lastly
what are so ciation advocates
for improving the quality of
care we are exclusively speaking
about the residents we most
certainly aim to improve the
readiness among the staff were
delivering this care.
With that is adequately trained
care for residents they better
understand the residents they
are interacting with and many of
the health issues that they
either come into the facility
already having or they develop
during their stay.
As I close I would like to share
with the committee madam chair
that this bill it included
robust discussion with the New
Mexico health care association
many partners across the state
and the aging department as well
on behalf of the Alzheimer's
association madam chair members
of the committee we do hope the
consideration is appreciated and
we respectfully ask right do
pass recommendation on this.
I closed thank you very much
chair thank you first we will go
to the audience and we start
with the poll if anyone here in
the audience is in favor or
opposed to house bill two fifty
if you would weigh in.
Can't I think that's good with
that R. twenty in support and
that's one hundred percent.
No one in the audience in
opposition so we will go to the
audience for those who wish to
speak.
and first we have Vincent
Vargas.
The sun date Vargas.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Senator a lot of us I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico health care association
New Mexico Center for assisted
living we support the intent of
the size of this legislation as
Alzheimer's and dementia care
training is important in long
term care facilities please keep
in mind that there are federal
and state regulations over such
training in those facilities but
unfortunately they don't apply
to a certain segment of the
industry and this legislation is
intended to address that
discrepancy we are grateful for
the response of leadership of
the aging long term services
department as they help
facilitate discussions between
stakeholders so that this bill
can be amended and therefore
aligned with state and federal
regulations thank you to the
sponsor and the Alzheimer's
association for their
willingness to consider the
perspectives of long term care
providers and for collaborating
on making adjustments to this
legislation in an effort to
ensure eventual staff the
eventual statute is it is as
effective as possible thank you
again madam chair members of the
committee.
Thank you the next US act can
Tero.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is actually
think that the state ombudsman
for New Mexico it's great to be
speaking with you again and
standing sorry I'm I'm used to
standing in front of the
committee but we're additional
and speaking in strong support
of this legislation we have
worked closely with Mr Hernandez
and the association in New
Mexico health care association
how to bring about a bill that
is focused on specific levels of
care for very specific
population that is going to grow
in New Mexico and that we need
to be prepared to serve with
dignity and with access to
respect and and well trained
staff of the ombudsman office is
focused not just on the the
concept of resident rights but
as a human need as a New Mexican
The we need to be able to
support bills like this I'm
we're very eager to see a do
pass and if you have any
questions for our office in
aging please do not hesitate to
reach out.
Thank you.
I'm sure readouts and.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I am sure dots and I'm
a volunteer advocate for a a RP
and a a RP would like to thank
the sponsors Representative
Serrato for bringing HB to fifty
forward A. R. P. supports the
comprehensive training approach
in educating long term care
staff who are caring for people
with dementia training and the
recognition and treatment of
dementia patients is essential
for better outcomes for both the
patients and their staff
Hey are the sentences part of HB
two fifty thank you so much for
allowing me to speak.
Thank you next we have Gerald
Hamilton.
Madam chair members the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to comment on this
bill my name is Cheryl Hamilton
I'm currently an owner operator
of a number of assisted living
facilities in the state of New
Mexico also a board member of
the New Mexico health care
association and vice chair of
the national center for assisted
living which represents over
forty eight hundred assisted
living facilities across the
country I I do agree that
appropriate Alzheimer's dementia
training is needed across allow
long term care landscape I
worked a number of years all my
adult life in long term care and
seen a great increase in the
need for Alzheimer's and yes
dementia specialty care and so
that training is much needed
unfortunately there are gaps now
that existed awesome facilities
to fall outside the federal and
a state training requirements
currently exist the sponsoring
the Alzheimer's association that
H. B. two fifty is intended to
close those gaps and as a result
I support the effort to continue
aligning this legislation with
existing state and federal
regulations thank you madam
chair and commitment thank you
next we have doctor wrong
Latino.
Thank you madam chair.
Members of the committee drive
around looking on their merits
professor physiology and former
directors to the gerontology and
also I chaired the Florida
governor's.
Of long term care the advisory
committee on public policy in
the state of Florida retired
here to Florida to New Mexico
last year and I have a I think I
have had over twenty five years
of experience working with
Alzheimer's disease and
community in long term care can
I it's just a fact that was the
biggest issues is a lack of
adequate training for the staff
in in public in the long term
care facilities basically deals
with the training on behaviors
and very frustrating for staff
behaviors are rude and cut and
cause all kinds of serious
problems and we find with the
the staff training we have large
turnover resulting in serious
health care issues and increase
in hospitalization so I do
support and recommend that to
for house bill two fifty B.
without be approved because it
is time that we begin to we
train our our healthcare
professionals thank you thank
you next we have sandy Johnson.
You need to on mute yourself
sandy.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is sandy
Johnson I'm a volunteer advocate
with the Alzheimer's association
I want to thank my
representative John for ari for
her past meetings with me and
other elves armors affected
constituents you always listened
and.
Asking questions I know this
committee is listening to the
facts which should be to moving
HB two fifty forward.
The fact that during the days of
the years so my mother was
living with the disease and five
different facilities with
increasing care hearing needs
and where the staffs well good
in many ways didn't have enough
specific training in dementia
care giving.
We need ongoing training.
I needed to update on Rey learn
how to address my mother when
several years into the disease
she looked at me and said god
you're ugly.
Staff also facilities large and
small need the training this
bill puts forward on how to deal
with those with the disease.
The pandemic is magnified and
expanded how great the need for
this training as so now is
definitely the time for H. B.
two fifty thank you thank you
our next we have Stephanie on
Taos.
Good morning madam chair
honorable members of the
committee and thank you so much
my name is Stephanie this I am
the twenty twenty and twenty
twenty chair for the walk to end
Alzheimer's here in central New
Mexico and six years ago at age
sixty five years old my mom was
diagnosed with Lewy body
dementia and overlapping
Alzheimer's disease one of the
most devastating symptoms of
Lewy body dementia are
hallucinations there have been
times when I sit down to chat
with them up and so share with
me
with my grandparents or her old
boyfriend came to visit both
scenarios are impossible but I
told her hallucinations it's a
difficult disease to what would
suffer through.
Like everyone people with
dementia need meaningful social
relationships direct care
providers need training and
support to understand how to
have good relationships with
people who have dementia a
person with dementia consensus a
care providers lack of interest
or patients without training
it's not uncommon for care
givers to become frustrated
which negatively affects the
quality of life for their
patients the best way to
mitigate unnecessary are
unintended harm it I preventing
problems before they arise which
is why specialized training is
important I stand in support of
this legislation in honor of my
mop in memory of my grandparents
and for all of those impacted by
this devastating disease thank
you.
Thank you Stephanie and thank
you for sharing your story and
all that stuff hard to do
We have Julie Rodriguez.
Thank you good morning madam
chair members of the committee
Representative Serrato
I am a volunteer advocates for
the Alzheimer's association my
mom had dementia Alzheimers
lived with us for three years
before she died in the beginning
it was a disaster because we had
no idea what to do it wasn't
until I was fortunate to receive
training from the Alzheimer's
association but I was able to
understand how to be with her in
her world and that made all the
difference for her and for us
I've seen situations escalate
long term care facilities for
staff which could have been
avoided had they had the
Alzheimer's and other dementia
training I strongly support H.
P. two fifty for the well being
of our loved ones and the well
being of their caregivers thank
you so much.
Thank you next we have Charles
Gregory.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Charles
Gregory and I'm a volunteer with
the Alzheimer's association.
Dementia progressively destroys
those areas of our brain that
help us control our emotions and
behaviors it destroys those
areas of our brain where we
think logically.
Many people turn to the
Alzheimer's association because
they are overwhelmed with
frustration hurt and anger it
what's become of their once
reasonable once patient once
loving spouse or parent.
Speak to any of the hundreds of
caregivers that have gone
through the association's
training program skills for
dementia caregiving and they'll
tell you their stories about how
training makes all the
difference in the world to them
and to their loved ones.
Please pass HB two fifty thank
you.
Thank you and Karen what lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee this is Karen white
and today well I do represent
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter I also represent myself
I'm.
My father is been dealing with
dementia for several years and
it just gets progressively worse
and as much as I love this you
know once vital person.
it is it is something that that
I think everyone needs the
training so that they can still
have a vital relationship with
their loved ones.
It means so much to be able to
provide those I'm to provide
that quality interaction to help
them in their path thank you
very much thank you Karen our
next we have Dana.
you yourself Dana.
Hi good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Dana do Kane and I am here
today as an advocate for the
Alzheimer's association as well
as a daughter my mother was
diagnosed in two thousand and
sixteen.
And the again her primary care
giver and so I have a pretty
good idea of what how important
training is for these this
population
in March of two thousand and
nineteen I decided to move my
mom into a beautiful facility
it's a memory care facility
located here in Santa Fe
during my visits I
I witnessed so many so many
disturbing exchanges between my
stat between the staff and my
mom and it wasn't was due to the
lack of training it was just
heartbreaking to watch
People shoving my mother tossing
her around just because they
lack the skills and the ability
to navigate this this disease I
urge you to please support H. B.
two fifty I think it will
benefit all involved thank you
thank you.
Okay we will go to the
to the not panel first and and
I'm just double checking
representatives that you don't
have any amendments or
substitute thank you madam
chair.
Thank you I keep forgetting to
address that what I need to do I
didn't think so but just want to
make sure and members of that
committee I'm at I'm gonna take
a moment of personal privilege
to speak first and and
Representative Serrato I
actually apologize for
not paying enough attention to
jump on your bill early as a co
sponsor and at and actually
would like to still do that
before it reaches the floor
I worked as a physical therapist
most of my
professional career as a
therapist was in geriatrics and
many many years working at and
seeing patients in nursing homes
as well as home care and I
cannot begin to tell you how
much coaching I had to do for
staff and family about the
appropriate way to interact with
and treat someone with dementia
in order to I have the best
behavior and the best outcomes
for those individuals
not to agitate them and not to
cause more difficulties than
than was already occurring it
was something that I'm quite
frankly have been for many years
shocked at the lack of
recognition from people who
we're supposed to be taking care
of individuals with dementia and
their lack of understanding
about how to interact and so I
really commend you for doing
this and and and I commend you
for making it appropriate to all
staff not just the direct care
providers because the
individuals
our residents and their families
in some way at some point
interact with everyone on staff
and to have that a coaching and
understanding and education at
all levels and understanding
from administration as to what's
going on on a unit and the
difficulties I think is is
critical so I just I I have to
say a stand and support with you
and the in.
In the need for this.
You know all my years I would
have thought it was this but
it's not and so thank you thank
you the Alzheimer's association
and thank you Representative
Serrato for bringing it forward
I stand in strong support and
and thank you committee members
for indulging me to to speak
first I usually speak last and
and not first but.
I felt compelled so first we'll
go to Representative Lord.
Thank you latest a meeting
myself correctly.
thank you madam chair and thank
you very much Representative for
bringing this bill forward I had
not one but two moms dad had
dementia and it is probably one
of the cruelest diseases I've
ever seen in my life I think the
hardest part was when I would
show up to visit them in the
nursing home.
and still just once in awhile
they would recognize you and you
like other pack and they're not
you could I could literally walk
outside of the room come right
back in and they would have no
clue who I was.
It's very cruel and I kept them
both in my home for about six
years and till I could take care
from any longer and it's a very
frustrating process and there's
a lot of guilt in a lot of stuff
that goes along with it
emotionally and you always
wonder are he is the staff fully
knowledgeable and a lot of times
they are there's a lot of great
staff out there.
And sometimes there's not and I
think it's very important that
family and staff and everybody
understands how to deal with
dementia.
Ations because it's not always
easy and it's very frustrating
and they can and it's not their
fault and it's really hard to
watch them deteriorate before
your very ours and it's
heartbreaking
So I just wanna say thank you
very much for the bottom of my
heart for bringing this forward
it very important bill and I
think.
I wouldn't wish dementia on
anybody and anybody in the
family because it is so
incredibly cruel I just also
remind people to that there was
a lawsuit that was one recently
here in Santa Fe so that we can
go and visit our loved ones it
is honest with the COVID
restrictions because I it breaks
my heart to think right now that
people cannot go and visit and
interact with their loved ones
that are in the system being.
So thank you for let me speak
thank you madam chair thank.
I fully support this bill are
muted there at the very end
thank you thank you and and you
are right this is as hard on
families as it is on maybe
harder
than the individual
and next we have Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for bringing this bill forward
I'm sorry I I don't have access
to my photo I've been kicked on
and off so I'm apologize for
missing the last boat
I just wanted to let people know
that I'm in full support of this
bill and pretty much anything
for Mr Tommy Hernandez
appreciate all your hard work
and all your advocacy thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Matthews.
Thank you madam chair I and
Representative thank you very
much for bringing this bill and
I want to give a shout out to
Tommy Hernandez Tommy at the
headquarters of the Alzheimer's
association in New Mexico are in
my district and Tommy and I have
gotten to know each other I
consider them one of my non
profit at constituents
and I he has been tireless in
his work
I would like to and I would also
like to send on as a co sponsor
if that's okay with with that
this but at the sponsor and
Representative Serrato
And I just I kind of forgot
about the that this bill was
winding its way through
you Representative Ferrary and I
are sponsoring a guardianship
bill it's an agency bill on
behalf of the guardian as as.
HSD
and the only suggestion I would
make and it's just a suggestion
is that this training would also
be just incredibly helpful to
people who are serving as
guardians for particularly for
older people and if it could be
made available to them to I
don't know how that would do but
how that would work but in the
process of putting it all
together into the bill if if you
could at least consider the
possibility of making it
something that is available to
the people who serve as
guardians for older people
project and and and
incapacitated people in any
anyway I think that would be I'm
really helpful training for the
people who do that kind of work
I'm and I'm a definite yes vote
on this thank you very much.
Thank you
And a great suggestion and even
even if it's even for families
to so once the training is
developed I certainly hope it's
widely available might be
mandatory for folks in the bill
but I hope it's it's widely
available Madam chairman of it
if I may on that we are a and I
thank you for that point
representative madam chairwoman
that I think that's a really
wonderful suggestion we are
still working with the ombudsman
and the secretary at aging and
long term Services Department as
well as the center of our guests
you know with that whole health
care association to make sure
that we again we make this is a
couple things that the the heart
of the bill remains that we're
making sure we're including this
training for these service these
these as staff members to
interact with for those who may
have at early stages of dementia
but then also that that it that
is it it includes everyone we
need to begin also is is very
focused on so we will take that
in consideration thank you so
much for it.
Thank you so what's the pleasure
of the committee is if I can't
gas.
Madam chair.
And a second from everybody
everybody everybody is there any
objection to the do pass.
Hearing none seeing none
Representative Serrato you have
a do pass on house bill two oh
nine and a number of New Mexico
Sanchez thank you madam chair of
the committee appreciate
everything today thank you.
Okay next will go to
Thanks.
It's eleven o'clock.
We have floor session.
And I apologize we haven't
gotten through our agenda we're
gonna have to adjust but we have
some big bills I think on the
floor and I don't want to get
should give short shrift to
either of the next upcoming
bills I think they're both
really important so I apologize
to the sponsors and to the
audience but I think we better
roll over to sixty nine in two
seventy two to Wednesday.
That's alright Representative
Matthews.
Did you have a comment.
Questions are we meeting on
Saturday and secondly we're
moving over to win state as
opposed to.
Ninety.
Well I haven't had enough coffee
yet Monday Monday.
No we're not meeting Saturday
we'll move it to will move it to
Monday and which means I'm gonna
have to adjust Monday's a
calendar and shift some of those
bills over to Wednesday but
but I I I do think we need to
not rush these bills and trying
to get them done in five minutes
or ten minutes so let's roll
them till Monday and I and I
will send out a revised calendar
for Monday.
Thank you.
Representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair I just wanted to
confirm that we move to do pass
on house bill two fifty yes that
correct yes okay I just wanted
to make sure that someone
thought that they heard a
different Bill number so thank
you madam chair I cute it's not
enough coffee I could've said
something different.
We make you a unanimous do pass
from all present on house bill
two fifty.
We will hear house bill two
sixty nine and two seventy two
will be first up on Monday thank
you.
And I enjoy your weekend members
of what you get of it.
Thank thank you madam chair god
bless you thank you.
