Here.
Here.
I'm here.
Here.
Here.
Here yeah.
I'm here.
Thank you.
madam chair if it's all right
I'll just proceed and now the
representative Nibert is here
before you proceed do you have a
substitute that needs to be I do
and that was the third first
thing I wanted to be sure that
the committee had the committee
substitute let's wait for to be
passed out all right.
Or if you have a copy of the
committee substitute for House
Bill T. and then have a motion
to discuss the substance.
All right thank you spin move
for discussion to discuss the
substitute Representative
Matthews and to tell us about
it.
Yes and we can first like this
to to.
I did you first want to to to
number.
Okay it's point two two five
four four one point five thank
you very much.
Firstly I want to say is that if
anybody looked at HB ten on this
on the website
this bill is totally absolutely
different and it's better to
just put all that out of your
mind.
HB T. and was a this bill that
appears in H. B. two and on the
website was a place holder for
this bill as we spent the last
few weeks putting this bill
together and working with
children youth and families
department I am very pleased to
say that we we have a bill that
is supported by CYFD and they
will add on to that
we thought that was important
but with that
let me kind of go through this
this a little bit
let me start with more than a
more than a century ago U. S.
Supreme Court justice Louis
Brandeis and
sunlight is said to be the best
of disinfectants and the
committee substitute for H. B.
team is an effort to bring such
sunshine to CYFD.
Which is an agent that has
historically and to a great
extent legally been required to
be secretive.
And the result is that when a
child who is alleged to be
neglected or abused dies the
public asked how could this have
happened and unfortunately
almost always there have been no
public answers.
The committee substitute for H.
B. team changes this and several
very important ways.
First we continue to protect the
information that is most
entitled to privacy that is the
identity of children and their
parents who are under
investigation for involved in
proceedings alleging abuse abuse
or neglect and I want to
emphasize that this bill is
limited to child protective
services the agency has a lot
has and much more extensive
working in a number of other
areas but.
To begin the process of of
sunshine into CYFD we are
limited here in this bill to
child and that child protective
services.
the protection for the the
identity of the children and
their parents continues except.
In certain clearly defined
circumstances Richard page five
of the bill
Unlike the current law we differ
also define the circumstances
and to whom reconnected
information maybe maybe given
for example for legitimate
research purposes of which right
now is is not something the
agency is is easily able to do.
we continue also to protect the.
The privacy of a person who
report suspected abuse or
neglect and I think this is an
important change we we are
require that the agency provided
summary of the outcome of the
case once investigation is
complete right now that hasn't
been done to people make
compliance to CYFD and they
don't ever find out what happens
and so they've often feel like
nothing happened.
We other other major changes in
the bill
Both copies and I knocked said
give me just a second here
those are some of the some of
the major changes I've the other
a couple other pieces of we
define
as with the situations in which
there are fatalities for near
fatalities involving children
and then leave a very detailed
requirements as to what can be
done or as to the disclosure of
information in including the
background of the family and
children with the with the
agency
there.
Reporter required they're free
to talk to the press the under
of I think we define it as a
complete and factual information
about what's happened
this is truly a sea change if
you will in the role of the
agency and.
Helping people understand and in
providing answers to important
questions when we have children
who are hurt or die in the
custody of the department.
And with that.
I think that stand for
questions.
because that's a pretty good
overview of what with.
Thank you.
Representative is there any
information by either of your
experts with.
Madam chair I just tell you
that.
The representative from
Bernalillo has worked on this
for many many months and it
through her constant efforts
that you have this piece of
legislation before you I'm
pleased to be co sponsor I know
she's worked hard not only with
the applicants that have
raised the issue but also
working with the agency to try
to come to come with some
accommodations to make sure that
the information does get our the
the the information that should
get release does get released in
the process for that of thank
you madam chair thank you
committee.
Madam chair members of the
committee have been before you
before and talked a little bit
about my experience
I practice in the area of
constitutional rights and have
by happenstance sort of it
developed image practicing CYFD.
As the confidential this bill
largely addresses the
competition to Saudi
confidentiality statute under
the abuse neglect that act as
Representative Matthew stated
and right now.
Yes Representative Matthew
stated the department is legally
required to be sensitive and my
experience that is really
hamstrung the department.
Both in being able to
investigate cases litigate cases
and most importantly protect
children.
And what this bill does is it
changes what right now is a
broad and I think that the tenth
circuit would clearly say on
unconstitutional statute.
As the statue trip now it
requires all records or
information be confident.
And that means that.
It basically requires secrecy
around and everything that the
department does and the
department is subject to that
statute.
And that statute imposes
criminal penalties and so what
this bill does I think really
well.
Is it protects the personal
identifying information of the
children and the families so
that that information may be
protected and the tenth circuit
court of appeals has recognized
that there's a substantial
government interest in.
But then it is permissive in
that it allows the department to
release redacted information in
certain well defined
circumstances where I think the
department would say it really
wants to and needs to release
that information but importantly
does not require the department
to to release that information
meaning that.
If the department has legitimate
concerns around releasing that
information the department can
make that call and so it is not
heavy handed
but it is to support the
department and allow it to
function and release that
information when it is
appropriate and I think a lot of
circumstances where will.
Children.
Thank you.
So we're gonna go to the
audience is there anyone here
who stands in opposition to.
the substitute.
What we're going to the to the
soon is there anyone else those
who stands in opposition to the
substitute for House Bill T. in.
That's the one hand Leslie
Jones.
Yes thank you.
The question first and that is I
I have not been able to see
whatever the substitution was
that was given to the committee
this morning my concern you
specifically on page eight of
the version I have
eight eight nine ten where it's
listening those who can have
access to the information
unreacted
It says a foster parent yes the
then what is it in the lead in
the current version
is.
We yes that we are doing public
comment not not asking questions
well.
Whether that is still the
numbers and that unity has now
that that that that language has
been stricken those without
currently plays with that
officer and or being considered
for placement with us deterrent
and and the and the and the
records
are that was stricken from the
most recent version.
Your.
It is to make public comment out
to ask questions I'm sorry okay
well let me just say than that
do that language is a string and
I'm very much opposed to that hi
I see no reason why you should
not be limited only to those
Oster parents we have an
interest in that particular
child I think that there's just
nothing.
Limiting a faster and that is
very concerning to me and I
would just admitting
specifically that revision.
All right thank you.
I see no further hands of this
we're going to the audience is
there anyone who stands in
support of this position.
All right you can come forth and
you the clerk will time you you
will each have one minute to
respond.
Madam chair members of the
committee good morning my name
is Barbara Vigil I am cabinet
secretary of children youth and
families department.
Children youth and families
department stands in full
support of house bill ten it
brings greater transparency
accountability and collaboration
in our work it is a balance it
is a balance between revealing
pertinent information to those
on a need to know basis on a on
an investigatory bases as well
as providing the public with
more information about the the
hard work that we do at the
department but it does so as
well by protecting the personal
identifying information of
victims and families and so with
that of madam chair members of
the committee we stand in full
support of this bill as a
replacement of our existing
overly restrictive a
confidentiality statute that is
currently in the law thank you
for your consideration.
Thank you chairman and committee
members I want to first thank at
the department for supporting
this bill on this initiative to
really clean up our
confidentiality cloud and the
public disclosure code I want to
thank tirelessly Representative
Matthews and representative
Nibert Representative Matthews
has worked on this for months if
not years I'm currently
according to state secrecy how
New Mexico ranks forty eight out
of fifty for public disclosure
lot and this really does
hamstring that apartment in our
ability to protect children it
hamstrings the public in our
ability to find out what's going
on and and so just thinking that
apartment thanking the sponsors
thanking you all for hearing
this this is a labor of love and
it will bring New Mexico into a
safer place to be able to
protect our children thank you.
Good morning L. madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Allison and cut communis and
I am the legal director of
advocacy Inc we are the largest
provider of legal services for
children in the foster care
system and New Mexico and I am
here in support of HB ten and I
am hoping that you will all
understand how important this
bill is today there are three
things that we really need in
the system transparency
accountability and oversight and
this bill will actually assist
with all three of these things
as has been stated CYFD has had
its hands tied in providing
information to everyone so that
we can see the totality of the
issues in our system.
Right now they are somewhat the
fall guy for everything that is
wrong and that is not the case
we are all part of a
dysfunctional system and there's
no way to show that to the
individuals who actually have
the ability to make that change
this bill will allow that free
flow of information that will
make it possible to make to see
the big picture and make those
changes I'm it also okay thank
you.
Madam chairman members of the
committee my name is Melanie
majors I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
foundation for open government
and I was very pleased this
morning when Representative
Matthews quoted justice Brandeis
and saying that the sunlight is
the best disinfectant.
All this bill does not go far
enough it does include changes
that makes public its some
information now kept secret such
as names and or it will be
announced in support are you in
support of yes ma'am.
The dashboard on the website
also requires CYFD to update and
make accessible basic records
such as the number of children
in the system number of
fatalities Xcerra currently it
often takes paper requests and
when reporters are facing
deadlines to get this
information it's difficult we
are still concerned about one
aspect of the bills that keep
some information confidential
but at the same time we believe
this is the first step a
positive step and we
congratulate the folks that work
so hard on this legislation
thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee Karen Canaday with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we stand in strong
support of this bill while we
have not seen the committee
substitute we do respect the
fact that it it it does that the
bill has originally proposed
does take into effect into
account the confidentiality
needs of children and protection
of the children while allowing
the public to view some
information about CYFD so we
know who they are actually
working like they are like crazy
anyway we stand strong support
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Emily
Martin I'm the director of the
protective services division at
CYFD V. ten relaxes the
confidentiality statutes and
allows for us to disclose more
information to more entities
this changes not only consistent
with recent federal case law
issued in the tenth circuit but
also supports the department and
the entire system and being more
transparent and increases the
accountability placed on us at
CYFD in protective services as
well as the those individuals
that have done harm.
We thank I thank the sponsors
for listening and communicating
and working with us to find the
solutions so that we are able to
release the information and data
while also still ensuring the
safety of children and our staff
thank you.
It's the no further public
comment in support with going to
zoom I see the hand of Carrie
Leigh Cloutier.
Yes thank you madam chair
committee members of this is
Carrie Leigh Cloutier I'm the
CEO of the Travis county cost
the program and its children
advocacy center I stand in
support of this bill and I log
the average because of this
committee and the YP to provide
greater transparency thank you.
Right that is the last hand I
sealed zoom we're going to the
committee it's a question the
okay so first we'll hear from
Representative Thomas.
Thank you madam chair I have a
couple of questions and one of
the things that of.
Got me thinking and that was the
the comment about manage.
Situations where we drive in
from.
Give us some examples of what
that what that kind of
situations those might be.
Yes Madam chair representative
Chavis
Redacted so right now under the
confidentiality statute there
are situations where the
department may release the
information that doesn't account
for any redactions and so in
this situation.
If you look at page
If you look at page excuse me.
Six one twenty four.
This begins when redacted
information may be released.
That section includes that
redacted information mission may
be released.
That I'm looking at page seven
line eight.
To a person who is conducting
bona fide research the results
of which should provide the
department information on child
abuse and neglect that would be
useful in the to the Department
and developing policy and
practice that's the first
situation which protected
information may be released if
you look at page twelve.
Line fifteen talks about she's
realligned fifteen sets forth
section thirty two eight dash
four dash thirty three point
one.
Which now provides for release
of information where there's
fatalities and near fatalities.
This lines up with the national
standard for release of
information and so if you look
at
section B..
It starts on twenty three if you
go to page thirteen.
Starting online sixteen on page
thirteen for a fatality.
The name age and gender of the
child may be released the date
and location of the fatality.
The cause of death if known for
a near fatality this is a
situation in which the child is
still living.
The department may only release
the age and gender of the child
the type and extent of the
injuries and then some of the
information
some other information on the
following pages so for near
fatalities the information that
would be released by the
department does not include the
release of personal identifiable
information so I think madam
chair representative Chavis that
speaks to when they were may
release redacted information.
and chair representative Chavis
The chief you you can contact
the department and report
concerns that there may be abuse
and neglect your privacy will be
protected if you do so and as I
indicated I think earlier at
that point in time when in if
there's an investigation for
whether or not there is
investigation you will receive
a a response as to what the
father wants to hear thank you
to your request if you're
calling just for information
like I'd like to know about this
family or whatever Dan that that
would not be protected the I'm
sorry that would be it they're
not authorized to simply respond
to a phone call and say oh yeah
let me tell you how terrible
Johnny's family is I mean that's
not what we're doing here so
that
and and even then the protection
of the identity of the child in
the family is is critical unless
it's public and maybe cut public
through police reports you may
become public through press and
in those cases then there's a
greater ability to respond.
Thank you we're going to
Representative Lord next.
Thank you
Center and Representative sorry
my I lost my system to make a
call to duty so I'm trying to
get all my stuff organized this
morning so J. D. where we are
thank you for your service so I
have a question I just have one
question on this and I signed on
to this bill so I completely
support it but I want to know
why does Indian family.
protection act but why would
they excluded off of this Madam
chair representative.
Madam chair
Let me give a preliminary answer
then I would ask the department
to perhaps respond further on
this but under the Indian
protection act of once that the
department is aware that it that
the child in custody of the
child in question is native
American then the case is
transferred
under our state law to the tribe
and the department essentially
has no.
K. and therefore it would be
wholly inappropriate for the
department to be trying to
release information that in
effect another jurisdiction has
taken and if.
Madam chair I.
Good question I think.
Divisional Socrates try.
Cognisant and respectful of that
transfer.
Mentors and that leads me to one
more question so did they have
anything within F. R..
That is similar to this.
No I discretion I don't.
Chair and and Representative
Lord I don't believe they do the
if the law is more specific as
to what the department's
obligations are with respect to
native American children and
ensuring that there's that
cultural connectedness between
the child child and their family
and their community
I don't believe that if requires
the jurisdictions the tribal
jurisdictions to disclose
openly to the public.
The information that would be
required by the department in
this particular law.
Thank you.
Thank you we will go to
Representative K..
Thank you madam chair and
representative I just wanted a
moment to say thank you thank
you to Representative Matthews
and I were and and and CYFD in
bringing the representatives
bringing all the stakeholders
together
I have not signed on to this
bill but this might be my
favorite piece of legislature
this session and so thank you
very much.
Thank you Representative how to
meal.
Madam chair and Representative
thank you so much for this I
know that it was hard work and
and I too want to express how
amazing it is to see all the
shareholders in the same room an
agreement I don't think I've
seen that yet so far so thank
you for doing that and this is
one of many
and and I appreciate all of your
efforts.
Thank you Representative Jones.
I just like to add my name to
the list of those that are
thankful for this and the fact
that we all are all in a green
mint and I hope that we can work
over the interim to really
review the entire children's
code and and possibly applied to
the entire code and not just
this one section but thank you.
Thank you I have to.
Representative I have a couple
questions for you as we look at
the comments by the
administrative office of the
courts they are concerned about
the limiting information to
that's going to be made
available to the courts why are
you limiting information to the
point.
madam chair and I think that
their comments are not for the.
This this is a committee
substitute FIR.
let me ask you Mr back.
Better answer than I do madam
madam chair I I don't know a
better answer than than
Representative Matthews of
course she is right there is an
updated fiscal impact report
that that it looks like you're
looking at unfortunately the
analysis did not take into
consideration that that
provision that the
administrative office of the
course was worried about
limiting information to the
courts was removed from this
committee substitute so this
committee substitute does not
include any restraints on course
that were not there and it to my
knowledge having read through
this bill and and and and worked
on it there are no restraints in
the court the and you'll see in
that updated analysis at all
right it also carries over the
comments about worries about
additional FTE ease needed
additional support for the
courts if they bring these cases
in the first additional district
those also were not are not part
of this committee substitute so
a lot of that analysis by the
administrative office of the
courts the concerns about
additional FTEs part not found
in this bill the original bill
was
as Representative Matthew said
was a placeholder but was more
of a transformational change a
ground change and and I think as
the stakeholders and
Representative Matthews and
Representative Iver worked hard
on this bill madam chair they
decided it was better to take
what we have and improve upon
that to allow the department to
start from where they're at and
have the ability to disclose
more information to bring light
on this rather than a total
transformational change a lot of
those concerns the fiscal impact
or analysis are no longer
pertinent to this committee
substitute all right thank you
and Representative Matthews I.
With the Representative Thomas
asked the question about the
neighbor calling to see what I
have to to find out about a
child what if the neighbor
reported the incident or an
incident which caused the lefty
to become involved is there at
what point in time will you.
Actually the bill some
information to the name.
you madam chair.
There's and madam chair there's
a requirement that a summary be
provided at the end of the
investigation and I believe that
time limit on that is it roughly
seventy five days mentoring.
Yes but within seventy five days
and they get a written summary.
Of what's happening with the
case.
What type of summer with that
the Representative.
It was just madam chair give us
just one second to find
information so we can give you
precise information.
C..
Unless the department may be
more.
They have that right at their
fingertips.
Members of the committee excuse
me but I hope.
This page eleven.
Page eleven this page at share
it's page eleven.
He.
Madam chair page eleven I can
draw your attention to this
substitutes
Bill page eleven and if
paragraph now.
Correct.
So the department shall provide
a summary of the outcome of the
department's investigation to
the person who reported the
suspected child abuse or neglect
in a timely manner not later
than twenty days after the
deadline for closure of the
investigation currently the the
maximum period of time in which
it that an investigation may
remain open with an extension is
seventy five days.
And what madam Representative I
think I heard you say that at
the end of every case now there
would be a summary of cases but
explain to where they're going
to be published.
Madam madam chair.
Members of the committee I don't
think we're.
Planning on a publication and
summary is only provided if the
reports of the abuse and neglect
came in from
essentially a private person.
At the rate of eight I I course
I guess you could could also go
to a police
or law enforcement
and.
It I'm gonna leave it to the
agency to talk about what would
be actually do ended but I would
assume would have been fine
well.
Presumably there is may already
be some public information about
this case but I'll let
researchers revealed.
Madam chair members of the
committee I don't believe that
there would be an overall
summary or report issued under
this particular provision of the
law to the public that said the
information that's released that
would obligate the department to
release to interested persons as
outlined in the statute to the
to the public at large
is designed to be more
transparent and we will the
department is in the process of
of of being more transparent
with aggregate information with
respect to its operations but
with respect to this particular
bill I don't believe that there
is a requirement that of the
department would issue a summary
of its work with respect to
fatalities and so forth and so
on that said as I mentioned
we're working on having a
dashboard on releasing more
information in the aggregate to
the Department I hope that's
correct Mr thank madam chair
For the it just with the copy it
that
This bill in section three
thirty two eighty four US thirty
three point one if it becomes
law.
Would require the department.
this is section see on page
fourteen starting at line
twenty.
And so again we're sort of going
down the the final here if you
will so now an investigation.
Has been made it's determined
that there was a fatality or
near fatality that under section
C. upon the completion of that
investigation if it is
determined that abandonment
abuse or neglect because the
fatality or near fatality.
Then the following documents
shall be eight be released upon
request and that lays out that
there's a summary of the
department investigation law
enforcement investigation point
available the medical
investigators report in the case
of fatality and this is as you
can see based on the insertions
here this is already.
Part of the law.
This is amending it to include
situations where there is a near
fatality.
For the department would also
release this information and and
and and that again I think some
some people that obviously is
just falling under the section
of near fatalities where do I
would not be disclosed to the
public or to the person
requesting that
and then says that section three
continues.
Excuse me under section four
than on page eighteen as the
secretary was saying that this
creates
Department dashboard and website
so that there will not be.
Summaries posted quarterly but
data and information will be
posted quarterly dashboard and
then annually there will be a
summary report from CYFD that
will be posted on this website.
With this question for
clarification you are going to
be just by the news media often
what about about specific cases
which the public will have an
interest in so I'm just trying
to understand how you are
commenting on those request.
Madam chair members of the
committee I think.
if you go back to.
Page.
Page six.
Here's the second.
So an exception to being able to
talk about a specific case where
the child's name and or family
information is public occurs we
in
The that information is been
disclosed by someone outside
department for example a police
department a press report and so
forth and once that occurs then
under the revised under the
statute the new statute we help
yes statute
then the department is able to
share a great deal of
information because we no longer
trying to protect the identity
of the child in the family.
And that
because is a reason at that
point it's already out there I
mean we see this happen in the
press all the time did did did
did the the name of the child
the family is published and the
department has to say we can't
comment
and so that's one of the things
we're trying to change because
at that point we're not trying
to protect privacy anymore in
terms of the family were trying
to blame what's happened and
what occurred.
Secretary vino may want to add
to to add or you may want to add
to that but madam chair
It is page six line sixteen
through twenty three the new
sections of the.
That is the second sentence in
that in that paragraph which is
an answer your question Mr Mr
chair I'm sorry in a case in
which a child or the child's
family has been publicly
identified through press reports
a lawsuit or other means the
department may respond publicly
with factual and complete
information about the actions
the department is taken in the
case so again it's not forcing
them to the department to do
anything but I think right now
my impression and and what I've
seen is that department is very
hamstrung and their hands are
tied and so this allows them to
report with factual information
from the.
If they if they choose and if
that person or child or both has
been publicly act.
Thank you.
Is there a motion of this.
This.
Of those.
I second that.
Right of is there any objection
to the motion.
All right.
Of yes.
I'm.
Encourage folks are asked both
of the previous user might I
didn't hear the of the motion at
all of that was that emotion to
four do not pass.
Yes I do not.
House Bill tended to pass on the
substitute okay.
Committee members please you
might even promotions.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair.
All right is there an objection
any objection to the motion.
I see no objection to the motion
we have a due pass I do not
passed on house bill TN and a
new path on the substitute for
House Bill to graduation thank
you madam chair members of the.
This.
I would go into house bill two
seventy eight higher ed
physician shortages
Representative Trujillo.
Madam chair yes.
That in rules okay thank you.
Then the next bill that I have
this house bill four seventy
one.
Alzheimer's disease and other
dementias Council Representative
Garrett see in the room.
Okay I don't see Representative
somebody's.
Representative.
Representative Nibert we're
going to wait for your last two
bills because you are special.
This will do madam chair if
your your bill five forty.
That would be great thank you
madam chair all right so we will
go ahead with that.
Okay thank you madam chair so
how so I forty it is another one
of those are what we call the
medial this came up as an
emergency so the actual title of
the bill now is but he is quite
long
The new sections of the New
Mexico insurance code.
Discrimination against entities
participating in the federal
three forty B. drug pricing
program ensuring that entities
projects participating in the
federal three forty B. pricing
program have access to
discounted drugs.
The pharmacy benefits manager
regulation act to require
reporting declaring an emergency
and madam chair my my experts
there on my only the UNM chief
operating officer and Kate
Becker the UNM hospital CEO
their full from UNM hospital and
madam chair.
We we discovered I believe in
one meeting last week about how
complicated
Pharmaceutical drug pricing
really and I just get ready
because it gets even worse that
no madam chair I will let the
experts take over from there
madam chair do you have a
substitute.
We do.
We we have distributed the
substitute would you please tell
us the to to number.
I four point two point one.
Thank you if they have a motion
to discuss the substance.
This is substitutes for
discussion madam chair right.
We have a motion to discuss the
substitute.
Right go ahead you have one of
your.
experts who will presented
testimony for thank you madam
chair good morning everyone my
name is Mike Chiccarelli a
service chief operating officer
at UNM hospital been with that
organization about twenty six
years and have a had a variety
of roles including as an
emergency nurse so a lot of
experience and health care I
like to take about a minute or
so to discuss how the three
forty B. drug program and its
relationship to the bill that's
before you today on the first of
start by thanking you for
listening to our discussion
today and we're happy to answer
any questions you may have at
the end.
Forty B. is a federal program
that allows seeking that health
centers to purchase medications
at a reduced rate and apply that
savings to enhance patient care
and services and particularly
access to care.
the reason for the bills
pharmacy benefit manager or PBM
sees are often called our
beginning to a road the program
by reducing the discount the
safety net hospitals received
from medication purchases
therefore reducing health care
and health care access.
This bill protects safety net
health centers there's
approximately six hundred
seventy five qualified entities
in in in in New Mexico
specifically and will allow them
to maintain or expand access to
populations that they serve
without any cost to the state of
New Mexico.
So that concludes my comments
madam chair and
Representative stand for
questions of the others do you
have any comments I don't have
any additional comments were
just happy to stand for
questions okay.
The madam chair we will go to
the audience in opposition is
there anyone here in opposition
to.
House Bill five forty.
Okay what would you please come
forward you will each have a
minute to speak and there is a
microphone for you.
And please use the microphone
and you'll have one minute.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee this is my name is
Jonathan Buxton pharmaceutical
care management association we
are the national association
Representative PBMs we stand
respectful opposition to this
bill today the three forty B.
program is one is a very vital
program that has become a victim
of its own success the rapid
growth of hospitals have because
and contracting pharmacies have
caused it to become a very very
expensive the second largest
prescription drug program for
the federal government in the
nation and so as our company's
work to make sure that we are
protecting that program we need
to know whether these scripts
are
three forty B. scripts or
regular script so that we can
make sure that we follow the
contracts we have this program
needs to be protected and it
also needs to be monitored
because otherwise it will
continue to be under assault
from those who are trying to
stop the program in addition to
that there is a whole section of
the bill that is unrelated to
three forty be related to PM
reporting and would not have
taken out thank you very much.
All right thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Use me good morning my name's
art hollom a registered lobbyist
for GSK GlaxoSmithKline
pharmaceuticals.
House Bill five forty is going
to hurt the very people that
this program was put in place to
help.
Remember these three forty B.
drugs were primarily to be used
by safety net facilities these
are the FQHCs like Albuquerque
health care for the homeless Ben
archer health center first
choice community L..
This for facilities to serve the
vulnerable uninsured indigent
populations now you've got CVS
and Walgreens who want to take
access to the ability to buy
things at wholesale and sell
them at retail and the entire
notion of a lemonade in
discrimination what they want to
do in eliminating discrimination
is removed the modifier that's
placed on all these three forty
B. drugs so that they know which
ones were brought to discuss.
Work.
The discounts are given.
We're strongly and.
Okay good morning madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is Pat block speaking on
behalf of prime therapeutics and
we rise today and respectful
opposition to house bill five
forty three forty B. program
requires drug manufacturers to
provide significant rebates and
discounts and Drug prices to
covered entities manufactures
providing these rebates and
discounts require insurers to
provide accountability that
there is no double dipping with
the rebates they offer.
That they offer three forty B.
introduce excuse me in addition
to the other rebates and
discounts they provide outside
of three forty B. we propose
legislation that would prohibit
our ability to utilize three
forty B. claim modifier because
that's how the payers provide
transparency and accountability
to ensure there's no double
dipping on rebates it's already
part of the standard claim
adjudication process nationwide
we also have concerns with the
PBM regulation language it
doesn't really fit in this bill
and we will always oppose
legislation that takes one
specifically to the chain and
ask for more transparency of all
leaving the rest of the system
opaque and lastly on the topic
of transparency were concerned
that there was no FIR provided
to the public on this bill thank
you.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee Jim Kelly for hard on
here and behalf of strategies
three sixty the registered
lobbyists for the biotech not
technology and and innovation
organization the federal three
forty B. program was enacted in
nineteen ninety two to provide
steeply discounted rate to
certain qualified hospitals and
clinics this is intended to
support these facilities and
help them care for uninsured and
underserved underinsured
patients covered entities are
able to Spence discounted drugs
to patients and receive
reimbursement by commercial
payers of the full price keeping
the difference and providing a
revenue stream for these
entities additionally three
forty drugs may only be
dispensed patients that are
covered by these entities for
this in the and the reasons
previously mentioned weight
respectively propose that this
legislation thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Charley mark is
registered lobbyists for the
liability.
Eulalie respectfully opposes HB
five forty.
Which would require
manufacturers to extend three
forty B. pricing to all contract
pharmacies as was previously
stated.
Further more HB five forty
raises the same constitutional
concerns as nearly identical all
being litigated in other states
and there's currently litigation
across the country about many
factors obligations under
federal three forty B. law with
respect to contract pharmacies
given the ongoing litigation HB
five forty is premature The New
Mexico should allow the court's
time to resolve this issue
before considering any of let's
legislative action thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
So we're going to assume if you
are in opposition to house bill
of TN.
I'm sorry.
House Bill five forty the
substitute to hide House Bill
five forty then please which is
hand.
Larry Stantec.
Good morning madam chairman and
members of the committee members
speaking on behalf of the New
Mexico business coalition and
opposition to house bill five
forty as mentioned this is a
very complicated issue should
not be presented in the last
days of the session with no
analysis whatsoever righted.
At three forty the program was
to help low income and uninsured
patients as hospitals and
clinics.
Access this town advises
revocations but other organisms
reduce the mentioned is not
working the process from some of
these places are not in the
house on patients to complicated
issue should not be done in the
way that it's being brought
forward without proper analysis
we need to propose also I worry
thank.
Thank you.
Jackie Cooper.
Kate Caitlyn.
Loss of Rio.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Caitlyn Morello and you are
accuracy policy with the
pharmaceutical research and
manufacturers of America or
pharma.
We agree that it is important to
ensure the three forty programs
truly benefits of the safety
that that serve underserved
communities in New Mexico
unfortunately we are opposed to
this legislation because it
further distorts the three forty
program which has here from
mission of the safety net
program.
On the second largest general
prescription drug program
without any guarantee that a
manufactured as house help three
forty patients this L.
exacerbates existing problems in
the program the portion of the
bill that mandates you actor
ship reportedly drugs at three
forty prices to contract
pharmacies the only benefits
contact pharmacies nearly half
of which are located out of the
state not patients in fact I are
just for our.
Sixty percent.
In.
And I don't see any other hands
up.
For opposition is there anyone
here in support of the bill
please come forward.
And they use the microphone.
And you will have one minute to
speak.
Thank you madam chair and
members my name is Dan weeks or
Representative New Mexico
hospitals association of the
association of support of this
legislation.
I'll be very brief I just want
to read you a list of the
hospitals that qualify Lincoln
County
Medical Center Presbyterian
Hospital University of New
Mexico hospital UNM Sandoval
regional Cibola General Gerald
champion that's no grow.
Silvercity Sierra Vista in truth
or consequences so coral.
Dancy triggers into can carry
Espanola Holy Cross Intel's
northerly and Lovington plains
regional Clovis Rehoboth in
Gallup Rosewall General that's
in Patel's San Juan regional
Farmington Santa Fe Medical
Center sentences and you County
that's a statewide program is
designed to help state to their
care hospitals which also
disproportionate share that
means they serve a
disproportionate number of low
income patients thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee leader and
registered lobbyists for
Presbyterian healthcare services
Mr weeks hit on all all of the
rural hospitals that
Presbyterian serves a lot of
times you think a Presbyterian
as I the rostrum downtown
Albuquerque but we have a lot of
rural hospitals throughout the
state that benefit by this
program so that we think is a
good piece of legislation and
urge to pass thank you madam
chair.
Madam chair members of three my
name is David Roddy on the
health policy analyst for the
New Mexico primary care
association we represent F. Q.
eight seats in the state with
over two hundred sites in thirty
two counties serving throughout
the seventy thousand people one
in three New Mexico's uninsured
our clinics benefit from the
three forty B. drug program they
do pass the discounts on to
their uninsured there are many
clinics in Albuquerque Santa Fe
in every area of the state that
utilize contract pharmacies
heard us a has very strict rules
requiring that any revenue that
may be generated from column to
to non uninsured patients must
be used for the purposes of the
program to serve the uninsured
the from the people of New
Mexico we strongly urges
supporters Belan.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Larry Martinez I am the
registered lobbyists for
Presbyterian medical services we
have a close to fifty clinics
across the state which serve a
disproportionate number of low
income people as well as
Medicaid eligibles and we are a
three forty B.
a program participant we
strongly support this
legislation because we do pass
on to all of our patients the
any discounts that we are able
to secure for medications we
turn no one away as do all our
fellow federally qualified
health centers regardless of
their ability to pay we serve
everyone and we are the health
safety net so we strongly
support this legislation thank
you.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee my name's Nathan
bush I'm staff at the university
of New Mexico I do.
Representative the university on
both some state and federal
issues so I just want to
underscore that the integrity of
this federal program is very
important this is not the first
state that is attempting to
address this hopefully
successfully with the state
remedy for these work arounds
that are being developed by the
industry at stake I also want to
underscore that there are many
oncology drugs for instance at
the UNM cancer center that are
affected by this program and
again we rely on your oversight
and your intervention to protect
the integrity of the program and
finally I just wanted to also
say that you NM does have an FIR
submission on the bill we're
happy to share that with you I
believe we brought copies today
we have analyzed the bill and
this is an institutional
priority for us thank you.
Thank you we're now going to
the.
zoom is there anyone here on
zoom in support of the bill.
Okay I see no hands we're going
to the committee the first yes
Representative Ferrary.
You madam chair hello I.
Just wanted to say with all of
the health you Mr hello thank
you Mr Mrs interim committee
work on you know
lowering prescription costs on
to our state and is it actually
programs like this that I think
this is a right
Legislation that we should all
support but madam chair and
representative Tauzin I wanted
to ask you can you explain how
we heard from the different
hospitals essentially our rural
clinics in Presbyterian
how this bill will make it so
that we can see the full
advantage of the federal three
forty B. program by making sure
that we
have the lower costs of over the
prescription drugs they might
need to prescribe.
Thank you Representative are you
madam chair I'm gonna let the
experts
Answer thank you.
Experts could you hear the
question I've had difficulty
hearing the full question
Representative Ferrary would you
please repeat your question.
Senator my question is it how it
is
Bill will make it so that we can
see the full advantage of the
federal reporting the program by
making sure that the lower
prescription drug costs are
there.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee so I believe the
question is around
How this bill helps with the
program as intended and so
what's happening as I mentioned
earlier the the pharmacy benefit
managers are slowly chipping
away at the amount of a discount
that is applied to these
prescription drugs and so
speaking for university hospital
that amounts to about twenty two
million dollars per per year
chipping away and so the idea is
this bill would actually support
the full program as intended
such that we would receive the
full benefit of that program.
Again to provide access and care
to the citizens of New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair of that's
all we just want to make sure
that was clear to everyone thank
you all right thank you we're
going to Representative Jones
Representative child is.
Thank you madam chair and
representative and and experts
I'm I'm just curious this is big
you know it's very confusing a
lot of information here why is
the.
As an emergency bill.
This and this will whoever wants
to answer do hear her question
representative Thompson.
Michael madam chair.
Excuse me it is an emergency
just as it was just stated that
it may cost you went up to
twenty two million dollars if we
don't take care of it so then
we'll have to find twenty two
million dollars to continue to
continue to care for the
patients that you would have
coverage as well as other
clinics and hospitals.
Thank you.
Okay.
Thank you and and I'm trying to
understand that if it's costing
UNM
I could okay of and move on from
that to like I get that in my
head better but how would this
hello this enhance patient care.
I'm sorry.
Representative how this patient
care up.
I'm just going to let the
experts.
Okay thank you.
So you all just answer the
questions thank you thank you
madam chair so as I mentioned
earlier
you know.
The hospitals and and health
clinics of receiving this money.
are providing care throughout
the state of New Mexico both in
rural settings and in urban
settings.
the money goes toward as I
mentioned multiple times
expansion of that care and also
the the provision of that care I
think that
What we're what we're seeing is
that health centers will excuse
me ultimately have to retract
some of that activity in order
to keep up and so the benefit of
this program is is in a matter
speaking
keeping health care stable with
the New Mexico.
Okay thank you Madam chair
representative and experts I
would that I'd like to know more
about the modifier can you tell
me about removing the modifier
and have what that has to do
with this bill.
So I'm actually not clear on
what modifier was being referred
to with specific modifier Madam
chair representative.
Do you know what I'm asking.
Thank you madam chairman page
three yes is so in I believe
it's to do for is the paragraph
you're speaking about
in that section with that
language does is actually
maintain the current federal
requirements for reporting so
Medicaid does require that
modifier we need to make sure
that we don't have duplicate
drug discounts between Medicaid
and between three forty B.
patients so we do have that
modifier in Medicaid contracting
but this actually language in
the bill is consistent with what
the federal reporting
requirements are we has happened
over time is the PBMs have
enhanced more and more
requirements on the health care
providers honestly to try to
push back on the program and
limited in a way that her so
which is the federal agency that
governs.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative and experts
So.
How can we be sure that at the
modifiers removed there's not
some double dipping going on how
do we ensure that.
Thank you madam chair and
representative and I think the
chair doesn't she what she wants
us to go ahead and answer right
okay.
So thank you for the question
so the the responsibility for
enforcement of compliance by the
covered entities which is to the
health care providers are rests
with her son the PBMs have taken
on additional.
Action I would say to try to
narrow the program is that
particularly mentioned is
further wrote the benefits that
are available and so it in terms
of the transparency that you're
seeking I think that person is
the appropriate entity to
provide regulations on what
should be happening there and
over the last few years we have
seen person become much more
active in providing regulations
around that.
Okay thank you madam chair
representative in experts a how
much is
so how much of the hospitals a
lot of market their prescription
drugs that they would get if
this bill actually passes.
So madam chair members of the
committee typically that it
there's a range depending on the
on the drug itself it's anywhere
between twenty five and fifty
percent.
Madam chair representative and
experts but this changed with
this bill change that and anyway
and and is there
Would there be transparency
around that.
How do we know okay let me
rephrase that Madam chair
representative experts how do we
know that if the modifiers
removed that we're not that
there are hospitals or contract
pharmacies that are over
charging which would undermine
the whole purpose of the three
forty B. in the first place.
So madam chair members of the
committee so I think CEO backers
answer that says is regulated
that process now and will
continue to do that going
forward
if the modifiers removed.
Okay thank you for that Madam
chair representative experts I
don't even know what percent is
I'm must admit I I'm really
struggling with all of these
abbreviations and acronyms and
such explain that to me please.
I apologize.
So madam chair members of the
committee that's hearses a
federal agency that falls within
health and Human Services and
enforcement of the
three forty B. program since
nineteen ninety two is been in
the office of pharmacy affairs
in herself and so over the last
thirty years that enforcement is
continued they're the ones who
defined what covered entities
are they're the ones to do an
annual sort of review.
And I think that one of the
things that makes for forty be
confusing is there is a lot of
federal activity in that space
and so one of the things that
people often ask as well if
there's federal activity why do
you need state enforcement right
and when we think about what the
purpose of this bill is the
purpose of this bill is the
federal program expanded
especially do portable Care Act
to include critical access
hospitals and other providers
that's why there's been such an
expansion and three forty that
you heard about from.
Those critical access hospitals
of those rural hospitals they
need.
Three forty B. provides but with
the expansion of the program
Madam pharma and the pharmacy
benefit managers became much
more activated in trying to
restrict the availability of
those discounted drugs to the
providers so the states and
there's about twenty states so
far that have adopted these type
of anti discrimination
provisions.
The states had to step into that
sort of a gap I would say
between rehearses created the
program and where an individual
level the pharmacy benefit
managers in the states have
tried to restrict access to it.
Hopefully that makes sense it is
it is a very complicated subject
well I have to say that it's a
little bit.
This is it's a lot and and I'm
I'm really I really discouraged
by how much information there is
that I I I I know this is super
important because the the whole
purpose of three forty B. to
begin with was to to to to
benefit patients who are very
needy and it looks to me like
there's a possibility a real
possibility that that is not
going to be happening if we
remove the modifier and that and
I and so I'm not even sure about
about supporting this that when
we continue
how many contract pharmacies
does you have three forty B.
contracts with.
Yeah I don't know the exact
number at somewhere between
fifty and sixty.
So Madam chair representative
experts is that that's all over
the state.
correct so well did it so you we
contract with contract
pharmacies such as Walgreens
would which could potentially be
a across the state yes.
Okay
Madam chair representative and
experts
are these hospitals already
getting three forty B. pricing
and so how will they benefit
from the.
Members of the committee if I
understand the question
correctly the hospitals do
currently have three forty B.
pricing and what we're seeing
from the pharmacy benefit
managers is refusal to honor
those three forty B. pricing
arrangements so for example if
the contract pharmacies those
are for the convenience of the
patients hi that so the patients
can access drugs in a location
it's community where they are
and by pressing back on each of
those it takes patients out of
access to this three forty B.
directs.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair.
All right thank you we will go
to Representative Chavez thank
you madam chair.
Question.
The patients were impacted.
Impacted it if this legislation
is passed so my question is in
terms of uninsured patients for
example we know that uninsured
patients chair representative.
they are trying.
That insured patients rate their
their costs are higher so under
this program do the are the are
the savings passed on to the
uninsured patients for example
would they get their of their
drug free for example from UNM
H. madam chair representative.
Madam chair members of the
committee so.
I think that when we look at the
three forty B. program and how
it fits into the healthcare
delivery system it's hard to
narrow down to specific patient
so as you know we provide
discount programs for patients
indigent patients in particular
and we do help with those
medication cost I think looking
at the global view of the larger
view.
reducing programs a sort of
reducing programs it's it's
across the board so specific
areas would need to be cut to in
order to to to appreciate the
savings that were that that we
are not getting from three forty
currently.
But Madam chair representative
so how yes the question maybe a
little bit different however
that how are the savings passed
on to patients for example who
are uninsured or are they.
But Sir are the savings is
passed on through our programs
right so we offer programs to
provide care to any citizen of
the state of New Mexico so that
that's how that savings is
passed on it's the delivery of
care itself.
Madam chair representative so
then if I'm in education I come
to you NMAG I have no money for
medications I've been in the
hospital for a week I need.
Many medications and I don't
have the money for what happens
in that kind of a situation
under this.
Madam chair and representative
as if I can answer that question
if an indigent patient comes to
UNM they are qualified for you
care you care is a program that
means.
Program we provided eighty two
point three million dollars in
uncompensated.
So that three forty B. money
gets rolled into that
uncompensated care money three
forty B. only applies to
outpatient drugs it doesn't
apply to an inpatient stay so if
you have to think it's our
holistically from the patient's
perspective an indigent patient
is going to be covered under UNM
care so it's not gonna be just
their drugs it's going to be all
of their care.
Representative what if the
Care this hospital help them
qualify to the.
What do they do Madam chair
representative Cephas I'm
actually really happy to talk
about you care and we spent
several years working with the
Bernalillo county health care
task force on making sure that
our financial assistance program
is very active in reaching out
to identify folks who need that
help and to make sure that they
get rules with that assistance
and we do that in multiple
languages and we do that through
really in person touch.
And then I just have one
question Madam chair
representative if the bill isn't
passed then you and that you an
MH would experience either a
twenty five million or twenty
two million dollars
decrease it annually recurring
revenue is what what I have here
and then later on you said
twenty two so I'm assuming it's
around that ballpark right so is
that because madam chair
representative then you an image
would have to pick up the cost
of
of the
prescription drugs is that why
you would experience a decrease.
You madam chair and
representatives of is the the
decrease is because we don't
have the benefit of the
discount.
So that means that we don't get
the revenue from the discounted
drug sales if that makes sense.
Thank you madam chair all right.
Representative Lord
Representative vents the.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and experts real
quick can I get your names in
who I didn't didn't listen up
like I said my assistant when
off duty and I didn't get your
names and information.
Thank you madam chair
representative learned my name
is Kate Becker and I am the CEO
of UNM hospitals.
Thank you madam madam chair
Representative Lord my name's
Mike Ceccarelli and C. O. O.
thank you.
Okay.
With the message to keep
directed could question so.
I understand that manager this
is a huge bill with a lot of
stuff that need to be gone
through and I'm very very very
frustrated that there's no FIR
which is so not fair I have no
idea what the fiscal impact is
going to be in New Mexico and
that's not for us as
representatives it's not fair to
the people I have no analysis
and this was literally just
dumped on us chair some trying
to do the best I can with a lot
of questions that I have on a
bill that is very complicated so
I'll try to be more laser
focused on on what I'm asking
and I've written down a lot of
my questions
Okay so let's start with.
So I've done a lot of billion
over the years if I understand
with modifier there's there's
like a code and then you add a
modifier so that's basically to
say that this drug is a
discounted drugs that correct
Madam chair representative
experts.
Yes that's correct okay so madam
chair representative the problem
that I'm having is if let's say
the code is nine thousand dash
H. B. to say that this is a
discount a product we take that
off because which stands now
somebody gets it and there's a
way to see for oversight that
this was a discounted product at
the committee numbers you know
it's not ten dollars but if it
was ten dollars and it should
stay ten dollars because is
discounted my problem is we take
that modifier of how are we
supposed to know that this CBS
that gets this for this really
cheap price is now charging
three thousand dollars how how
we gonna know if it does not
require madam chair and
representative an expert.
Madam chair representative lord
what the federal government
actually requires as a modifier
for the Medicaid patient
population so when Medicaid when
a Medicaid patient receives a
three forty drug there's a
modifier required and so that
continues to be required under
this bill as you'll see there's
an exception for Medicaid which
is consistent with what the
federal regulations currently
are.
Right now I'm trying to stand
tough all these federal
regulations that we have on top
of that causes a lot of moving
parts it's not that
straightforward
Okay so it.
Trying to figure out which.
So many.
so three forty B. is ready
federal program how do we know
that we're not going to conflict
with the federal laws if we have
something here.
So Madam chair representative
lord and three forty is a
federal law in this bill
actually make sure that we
remain compliant with the
federal law not that we are in
conflict with it so three forty
B. as a ready effective and we
have that going to raise prices
how how why isn't why this is
being thrown at us right now is
an emergency without any
analysis FIR fit so supposed to
be so important why with those
details left out Madam chair
representative experts and how
exactly is this bill going to
benefit anybody because again I
see that we're taking up this
modifier that scares the heck
out of me that people will get a
hold of this and charter
tremendous amount more money so
what how how is this bill
benefiting if you guys are ready
using the three forty B..
Madam chair Representative Lord
the purpose of this bill is to
stop the pharmacy benefit
managers from refusing to pay
the three forty B. introduce the
contracted prices on the drive
so what's happening right now is
the PBMs are using that modifier
to not pay the three forty B.
providers what they would have
paid under their contracts and
that's the deferment and Revenue
that we're seeing so the reason
that we needed is because we're
seeing much more aggressive
behavior from the pharmacy
benefit managers and the
challenge from that is there
taking away money from the
safety net providers for whom
three forty B..
How's it possible the hospital
is ready in the three forty B.
program this is already
happening how how explained how
house is happening then why do
we need this if there's already
three forty B. in this is
happening white why suddenly now
do we need this the hospitals
already party.
Here Representative Lord the
hospital has been enrolled in
three forty B. for more than
three.
Recently that we have seen such
aggressive action by the
pharmacy benefit manager.
He probably politically
incorrect
they have seen a window of
opportunity and to try to as the
affordable Care Act expanded
availability of three forty B.
two more of covered entities to
more rural hospitals for
critical access hospitals.
The pharmacy benefit management
companies decided they didn't
want that expanded availability
and rather than go back to
Congress at the federal level
and get the law amended so that
they could get what they wanted
instead and a ground level
interacting with the providers
they're restricting what they
pay the providers so just like
Arizona Colorado other states
what we're asking New Mexico to
do is to protect us from those
predatory practices to make sure
that the safety nets of New
Mexico have access to the
benefit the three forty B.
intended to be a.
Madam chair representative how
do we make sure that if that
modifiers taking off that there
is gonna be the opposite effect
that those prices aren't
suddenly going to go up because
if they simply sell this now to
see Walgreens CVS and Out
modifiers out there how do we
make sure that our indigent
patients are suffering by the
prices going up.
Senator at.
Representative Lord it if I
understand your question
correctly how do we understand
that the patients are actually
be receiving the drug at the
correct price is a major yeah
basically we we want to make
sure that if we're taking this
modifier off of these things are
floating around we don't know
that these are supposed to be
discounted or having rebates and
CVS's I'm gonna buy these
because these are super cheap.
Big big box pharmacy of the that
big box pharmacy buys these at
that rate how do we know that
they are going to Jack up the
prices and are people that need
this the most especially our
indigent people at the low
income people are not going to
get for lack of work screwed
over by an increase in the
prices I understand your
question so I think it's
important to understand that
there's Sir three legs to the
stool of the three forty B.
program first the an entity you
have to be a covered entity
that's number one so so
Walgreens for example
would not necessarily fit into
that do they have to be your
patient a patient has to be
cared for by that entity.
And I think that it's defined as
it made its of the electronic
medical record except for a
and number three has to be
outpatient which I think we
mentioned so that this doesn't
apply to inpatient only
outpatient medications and so I
think to answer your question as
long.
Holding to the rules of herself
following those three rules it
would be difficult for that and
the reporting person that would
be difficult to to achieve thank
you madam chair representative I
have information that seventy
five percent of the three forty
beacon.
On them I'm very very concerned
about there not being a way to
make sure that we understand
that that modifier is what's
happening because what I don't
want this is to have the exact
opposite effect of what we want
we want to make sure that our.
You know honestly the more than
about.
All the stuff in this help the
more realize what if there's
just so many a second octopus
with ten there's so much stuff
going on and I worry so much
about we put more stuff in there
and nothing seems to be getting
done of the way it's supposed to
and even if you have the best
intentions it doesn't end up
that way because we start this
and this and a committee in this
and all this oversight so what
I'm gonna do is I want to finish
with
What pharma said.
The pharmaceutical research and
manufacturers of America
respectfully opposes HB five
forty which would require
manufacturers to extend three
forty B. prices to sell to all
contract pharmacies in New
Mexico important oppose this
bill because it's further
distorts the federal policies
allowed for for profit
pharmacies verse aving intended
for safety net and for lowering
drug costs low income and
vulnerable individuals super
important for the more HB forty
raises the same constitution
concerns is nearly identical law
which is being litigated in
Arkansas and so I'm kind of at
the point where I don't think
this bill is the fit that we
need especially don't want
something done when there's only
nine days left and especially
don't like and not about you
guys at all I just it's
frustrating when I don't get an
F. I. R. I don't get an analysis
I see farmers against this I
have all this information why
this is not going to work and
all I really care about at the
end of the day as wire
pharmaceuticals so expensive and
I don't want to make sure that I
vote for something and then I
voted for this model for to be
removed and also and people take
the medications like I see that
big box is involved in this at
seventy five percent and I was
sick yes and I want to make sure
Madam chair representative
experts that we aren't hurting
our most fun of people without
I'm finished thank you madam
chair madam chair that the
federal program it's not like if
we make one change here that the
whole federal programs is going
to have to postal.
Thank you madam chair.
I guess the good thing about
going towards the lasses most of
my questions have been answered
and I share the the same
frustration the that
Representative Lord does I
really like to study my bills I
like to study that my FY ours
and I think we owe that to our
constituents to make good sound
decisions especially when this
is such a complex issue and.
You know as as a a new person
coming in when you find out
about modifiers and PBMs and all
these people fighting over Mets
and then I look at my
constituents.
Here's my question who's making
the money on this.
Madam chair it Representative or
experts madam chair that that is
not part of this bill.
Madam chair representative.
The experts.
What I'm trying to do how do I
vote on the bill.
Whenever I see you know and and
especially whenever I'm trying
to get my mind wrapped around
these bills.
And I'm send up here by my
constituents to make sure my
constituents are getting the
benefits of these drugs.
And if we all whenever you hear
the people talking about they
just talk about on the floor
there talking about how high
insulin is I voted for the
insulin Bill.
Because these.
We please stay on the bill and
ask questions we have a whole
look into to get through.
Representative.
Again madam chair that that's
the for us do I mean there's no
there's no debate here I can't
get my point across.
And I'm trying to get my point
across but I'm always gavel down
whatever I'm trying to do it so
With that I'm done Madam chair
representative can.
Thank you madam chair thank you
of madam chair also and expert
witnesses a just a couple quick
questions.
So this bill that you're
presenting today this is the
first time we've had this bill
for the state in New Mexico is
that correct.
Madam chair and representative
K. yes it is and is it a similar
be bill to our neighboring
states in Colorado and Arizona.
Madam chair representative K.
yes it is.
And and and it's my
understanding that the state New
Mexico has anywhere between
forty seven and forty nine
percent of our citizens that are
on Medicaid health plans those
who were on health plans is that
correct.
Madam chair representative K.
HSD would be that I could into
the microphone they can't hear
you Madam could turn it toward
to Representative K. I'm I
believe those numbers
approximately correct okay and
and madam chair representative
is the committee we have and and
we have a a twenty percent or
twenty plus percent poverty
poverty rate in the state
correct I mean I understand that
you may not know understand but
it is actually in your bill you
you you reference it is that
correct.
Madam chair representative K.
yes that is correct so given the
lay out of our state and and the
individual patients that would
qualify for this kind of program
they're gonna get their
pharmaceuticals for anyone who
is around whether or not it's a
mom and pop or a big box store
correct it has nothing to do
with who's this first scene the
pharmaceuticals it's who's
receiving them is that correct.
Madam chair representative K.
three forty be the covered
entities are the providers but
yes it has to go to a patient.
Right thank you.
Representative surf and ski
thank you madam chair and madam
chair
yeah we're delving into the I
think one of the most
complicated aspects of
healthcare delivery which is the
from that manufacturer to the
patient for pharmaceuticals and
all the years in between I just
had a few.
Clarifying questions you don't
I'd I'd.
I I feel like the program is
sort of being distorted on both
ends one with these differential
reimbursement rates based on
three forty being pricing which
I think is concerning.
But the other pieces I I don't
it and maybe you can help me
understand if you stop patient
you MH you prescribe the
Whatever amok Cicilline which
maybe it is a three forty P.
track.
They go fill that prescription
at Walgreens.
which is in contract with U and
M. age forty UNM medical
providers.
But then.
If this bill is enacted the
reimbursement rate for.
Walgreens.
Would be the same as if you got
a prescription filled at.
Yeah laughing million in Santa
Fe or selfless care center in
Santa Fe.
But there is there a requirement
for that additional funding what
it's going to an entity like
Walgreens that does not have a
social welfare purpose or
nonprofit purpose what happens
to that profit margin is that
reinvested is there what is the
requirement for.
Reinvesting that additional
funding.
There are a lot of questions I'm
just trying to figure out excuse
me but
You want to start at all.
Madam chair and representative
semansky.
the the covered entities for
three forty B. R. the providers
in this case will be on HSD
example the provider contracts
with the pharmacy so that the U.
N. H. patient the Secretary
growing mentioned the the
patients have to be one of our
patients so they have to be
accessing care with us you can't
just be they showed up at
Walgreens from no where and got
a prescription they have to be
you an image patient that's what
creates that connection and so
Walgreens dispenses the
medication but it's essentially
dispensing it on behalf of you
an MH if that makes sense.
Yes madam chair madam chair but
is that Walgreens purchasing its
own stock as a contract pharmacy
of the three forty B. provider
at a discounted rate but if if
this is enacted they would
receive so say they get.
It for ten dollars
Yeah whatever pharmaceutical
distributor.
And they want and they're asking
to be rid of reimbursed at the
state fifteen dollar rate that
all other private pay patients
say or you know other private
insurance patients would.
Potentially receive that five
dollars doesn't go to you and
does it or have it that's what
I'm not understanding in the
context of these contract
pharmacies madam chairs and and
thank you for the question so
and actually does go back to to
you and maybe specifically in
your example and so Walgreens in
your example would get a
dispensing fee essentially which
is a smaller fee then comes back
to the hospital.
So madam chair and and madam
chair is that because the
patient is presenting you and
care as their.
Operate health care coverage or
is it just because the
prescription came from you and.
And this is madam chairs and
that thanks for the game for the
question so this is where it
gets a little complicated so
because it is a patient that is
covered under the meets all the
criteria for being our patient
eccentrics are.
Going to a covered pharmacy or
one that we're contracted with
that's how the relationship is
formed.
Walgreens distributes the drug
on behalf of us in that example
and then the money comes back to
a hospital.
This.
Okay thank you that is great.
So that with the at my last
question.
Here is our this section the
folks have been asking about
madam chair madam chair
page three lines ten through
fifteen.
How does that interact with this
identification process is needed
to say that a patient came from.
State law familia Care came from
UNM if we're removing.
Identifiers.
It.
It and maybe I'm just not
understanding this.
Secular item for.
But how is what the in that same
situation like in Walgreens
situation how would they know.
That the patient was.
Coming from you all.
Primarily because it would be on
our prescription.
It's on our prescription
electronic prescription we
transmit to the pharmacy.
Okay.
I.
It between now and Judiciary
madam chair madam chair I'd like
to just make sure that we're
insuring that the additional
revenue.
That would be received by
contract pharmacies
participating in three forty B.
is actually required to be
reinvested in either the
prescribing entity or yeah I
don't see that addressed in the
bill and.
You know I I have.
With this year dramatic
expansion to all of these
contract purposes I just want to
make sure that.
That funding isn't going back
into private corporations and is
going back into the community
and the intent of this.
Original program which was to
support.
Nonprofit governmental entities
in providing health care to and
pharmaceuticals to patients that
can't afford them.
and I I think one other thing
I'd like to suggest is a
requirement that the.
Patient be charged.
Something close to what the
three forty be priced is.
If they are charged at all based
on their health care coverage
plans.
And I don't have I I'm happy
Madam chair madam chair I'm
happy to visit with madam chair
sponsor just to see if these are
relevant concerns or maybe I'm
just being paranoid but.
Thank you madam chair.
and and Representative the panty
I'm not a hundred percent
certain but I'm pretty sure that
the federal program have all of
that line out or just for those
exacting if the experts could be
found just that you need on
that.
Okay do I have a motion.
I'll make a motion to for it to
pass on the.
House Bill.
I'm so sorry to five forty.
This bill.
Do you pass on House Fauria
substitute thank you to table.
Okay we have a table in motion
on on the
On the on the substitute for
House Bill five forty.
All right then please call the
roll.
Table.
So.
Representative.
AS to table.
Us no.
Representative business yes the
table.
And madam chair no to table.
What is the result.
Of the community.
What is the result.
Seven.
So it's the the table the motion
fails Bible seven to three with
back of the motion that was a
motion a do not pass on house
bill five forty in a do pass of
the substitute for House Bill
five forty is the second on the
most.
The second there is a second on
the motion please call the roll.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator are.
Yes Representative how to me
and.
No Representative Lord no.
No.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes Representative top assess
explainable thank you madam
chair representative I voted for
this bill because I I'm I
believe that it will come help
patient care at that you NMHA
but I also want to basically to
give you all a message that I am
extremely angry that UNM.
Civically of Santa regional in
your affiliated with them have
have chosen to spend.
At least a quarter of a million
dollars against workers who have
decided to organize I think that
money would be better spent
providing patient care thank you
all right thank you what is the
result of the.
Yeah it's the vote is seven in
favor three again to have a due
pass thank you.
I'm here for just a second yes.
Thank you madam chairman uses
opportunity to point out why we
need to have a year round health
and Human Services Committee and
with the full time staff.
Meetings that we are expected to
learn about in a fifteen minute.
and that that that's it's just
this is so complicated that
trying to do the health and
Human Services Committee on part
time basis with no staff this is
what we are up with thank you
madam chair.
This is.
Were you referring to.
Hold my cards on so we could
hear more back talk to them we
could you.
So could you please do that
again.
Yes so we were seventy.
We're on house bill four seventy
one Alzheimer's disease and
other dementias Council
Representative Garrett and
Figueroa and Representative
Garrett is here and to introduce
the bill and her experts thank
you madam chair of.
I am here to Representative
house bill four seventy one is
that Alzheimer's disease and
other dementias Council will say
right off from this start
there's no fiscal impact my
expert witnesses include Tom
Hernandez is the public policy
director of the Alzheimer's
association here in New Mexico
and Kara Ortega who's the
director of the office of
Alzheimer's and dementia care in
the aging and long term services
Department of this bill creates
the Alzheimer's disease and
other dementias by three council
to be administratively attached
to the aging and long term
Services Department it directs
the secretary of the department
to point voting members of the
council to term of two years and
the bill provides for the
composition and duties of the
council including stating a
creating a state plan that
recommends strategies to improve
Alzheimer's disease and other
dementias Care in our state I
know from the FIR that in
nineteen in twenty twenty there
were forty three thousand New
Mexicans age sixty five or older
with Alzheimer's disease and
they have been cared for
currently by eighty five
thousand unpaid care givers
which you can imagine our our
family members and I want to say
my commitment to this bill comes
from my first introduction
twenty five years ago when my
husband's grandmother who had
Alzheimers fed rat poisoning to
her husband this is the kind of
thing that's the worst case
scenario but as a result my
mother in law myself studied a
lot about Alzheimer's my own
mother when I visited her of
when I was not living in
California near her I smelled
chocolate malt intersperse and I
said mom what's the total your
purchases.
Well you know I was going
through the drive through it
Carles hamburgers and I went the
wrong way and I hit the building
and that's when I realized you
know there's kind of women of a
certain age they know how to
conduct themselves look good and
then when you're with them you
realize that this applies to men
and women you realize
something's a little bit off so
this is a really important issue
and I'm gonna ask Tom Hernandez
to make some brief remarks in
care or take a I will be really
short.
We thank you madam chair thank
you members of the committee
thank you sponsor representative
of care for bringing this bill
forward simply put we would like
to summarize he'll Services he's
like to summarize this bill is
really achieving two things one
empowering the legislative body
in the years to come with
policies recommendations
barriers that we are facing when
we are tackling this disease
here in our state and second to
that second to empowering our
legislative bodies with the
strategies that we are carrying
out is accountability is we're
very pleased to see that a lot
of the work being carried out
that is included in this bill is
currently being carried out by
this care or take at the office
of Alzheimer's at the aging long
term services department what
this bill aims to do is ensure
that the great work that is
being done by the stakeholders
including the Alzheimer's
association being led by the
ageing Department continues with
this legislative body
legislative bodies to come
future administrations come as
well so we're simply aiming to
disqualify a lot of the great
work has been done today as we
continue to tackle this disease
our ultimate hope with the
Alzheimer's association is that
one day we can repeal this act
it does get passed because our
ultimate vision is a world
without Alzheimer's disease we
are currently pursuing many
treatments at the national level
and at the state level we know
that so strategies are only
achieved when accountability is
our attached to them and as of
this bill brings forward thank
you madam chair thank you
members the committee.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee again my name
is care taken.
the up eighteen a long term
Services Department stands in
favor of it in support of house
bill six four seventy one this
legislation will support the
mission and work currently being
done by ale TST in the office of
Alzheimer's and dementia care
again as Representative Garrett
stated in twenty twenty there
were forty three thousand
American New Mexicans age sixty
five and older with Alzheimer's
disease and dementia and this
number is expected to increase
to fifty three thousand which is
a twenty three percent increase
by twenty twenty five in New
Mexico the death rate is five
hundred sixty eight for
mortality rate of twenty seven
point one percent if passed
Advisory Council would assist
the agency on aging long term
services department with
identified various trends and
providing support to the state's
population of individuals with
Alzheimer's and dementia care
the council would also help to
support the state's role in
providing and facilitating the
long term care familiar
caregiver support and assistance
to those with early stages and
early onset Alzheimer's disease.
With that we stand for questions
madam chair thank you very much
we got to go to the audience is
there anyone in opposition to
house bill four seventy one.
Sen no hands we're going to the
zoo is there anyone in
opposition to house bill four
seventy one I see one I see no
hands go back to the audience is
there anyone in support of house
bill four seventy one.
We have one person to.
The morning madam chair
representative my name is Tina
to Kane I'm here today on behalf
of my mom she's in a memory care
center here in Santa Fe.
And I am in support of this bill
I desperately need your help
those in these communities
families like mine we
desperately need support and
help and oversight so I urge you
to please support.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Julie Rodriguez I am a volunteer
public policy advocate for the
New Mexico chapter of the
Alzheimer's association and I
also had those experiences with
my mom who passed I was one of
those unpaid caregivers that to
hear about and my mother had one
of the worst forms of
Alzheimer's so I am completely
in support of this bill we need
your help it is is only going to
affect our state further and
further as we go on thank you
thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the.
House
I money's best handles on on the
northeast regional manager for
the Alzheimer's association and
I would say that my dad passed
from this disease last year the
impact that I get from calls
daily to my office here in Santa
Fe it's a it's a huge problem
for our state we really do need
this task force can place of
that we can have more meaningful
discussions and that we can give
recommendations back legislative
body I appreciate the time thank
you I'm in support of this bill
thank you we go into the up to
the zoom I see Jackie Cooper
with your hand up in support
Jackie you'll have one minute.
Thank you madam chair members
who are involved.
representing a or P. if you're
being a Mexico's support of the
need for everyone and religious
underpass that will thank you
very much thank you Stephanie
tell us.
Good morning on a woman madam
chair honorable members of the
committee my name is Stephanie
may is I am a constituents I'm a
member of the board of directors
The New Mexico Alzheimer's
Association about almost
importantly my most important
role and the right information
and life is that I am a mom and
I'm a caregiver for my mom who
lives with wi fi you madam
overlapping members I want to
thank Representative Harris for
introducing me to additional and
I want to say as a care giver of
a level one living with
Alzheimer's disease and I
strongly support also the work
seventy one the Advisory Council
will be a crucial step in the
fight against Alzheimer's
disease and other forms of
dementia it will provide a
platform for caregivers like
myself we can have our voices
heard and are concerns addressed
it'll enable the state to better
allocate resources and implement
policies that will improve the
lives of those living with this
awful disease I urge you all to
please login or F. House Bill
endorsed.
Mondays in the sandwich
generation like myself thank you
our families Senator comments.
All right we're going to the
committee first as the
representative of Ferrari is a
little Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative you're reading it
just forward of I think this
will be very helpful for all the
things that of need to be done
to radically this general
disease I was just wondering if
why do report date was
the body of the twenty twenty
six and I know they didn't do it
sooner but and what does it
really regularly exactly three
years.
To be able to do.
Yes madam chair members the
committee and Representative
Ferrary thank you so much for
that question we are very
pleased to report to the
committee today that just last
year twenty twenty two the
stakeholders fighting this
disease here New Mexico
including the ageing Department
did publish a robust and
comprehensive one that is being
nationally recognized for a lot
of its framework out of our DC
office speaking for the
Alzheimer's association that in
twenty twenty this plan provides
a multi year I believe it is
four year yes I'm getting
another from the edge Department
of four year strategic plan now
the this plan will carry us up
until twenty twenty six which is
the date that's listed in the
bill before you that would be
the next time that we hope to
publish an updated state plan
with new strategies new
information new data points and
and many other things that we
hope to bring to the legislative
body to to suggest
recommendations and and that ask
for our necessary investments I
hope that answers the question.
And I would just said madam
chair representative that it's
no later than July first twenty
twenty six so it could come
early but no later than.
Representative madam chair and
representative of you the
reporting of each year to the it
is our own health and Human
Services Committee.
Madam chair and representative
that can be done.
Thank you and if I may add to
that madam chair representative
I I believe that the year that
we're looking at on page five
line three the reference to July
one twenty twenty six I believe
understanding is that that would
be the next publishing for the
next version of the state plan
however the bill I believe the
language does call for annual
presentations of of of progress
of barriers of
other needs that the task force
would need to continue to bring
meaningful positive outcomes to
caregivers and those living with
the disease so those are
standing of the reference of
twenty twenty six is that would
be the next state plan being
published however leading up to
that date there would be annual
seven page seven there would be
annual yes thank you
Representative pointed out on
page seven there would be annual
reports to the Legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee as well as the
legislative finance committee
which is found on page seven
beginning line one thank you.
Thank you you madam chair I
appreciate that.
Is that all Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you chair thank you
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair
representative thank you for
bringing this bill for.
Two parents one head just wanted
to mention it's so incredibly
hard of never.
Parent and you can walk in the
room and for sometimes just from
they recognize you maybe not at
the right age and the walk other
income back them no idea who you
are and assist.
And.
Stand on this and how to best
care first to fully support this
I agree with Representative
Ferrary I would love to hear a
report enter interim committee
what you guys are finding in
your study even if it's not much
of anything just we have an idea
where you're going what's going
on with that so thank you fully
support this bill.
Representative.
Representative Mentzer thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative here for bringing
this forward hi for sure stand
for this
one thing I want to tell you is
working on an ambulance for
twenty five years.
When you go to the when you're
in the field and you have care
givers they're taking care of
people with Alzheimer's and
dementia.
And something happens and they
get away from you in an accident
occurs the guilt that's put on
the care givers is probably one
of the saddest things I've ever
seen so I stand in full support
and I appreciate you bring this
legislation.
All right thank you we'll go to
Representative to this kind of
all the commotion just.
All right this but then seconded
is there anyone in opposition to
the motion.
Sen no opposition you have a new
path thank you thank you
committee.
The move quickly to of
committees.
House bill one thirty two as of
mid and with the committee
substitute.
Oh sorry Senate Bill thank you
Representative for.
It is the committee so for the
committee set up with Senate
bill one thirty two is amended.
Introduce yourself and your
expert in you may proceed thank
you madam chair representative
members wait just.
That.
All right thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm Christine
or yes the representative from
PED house and I have my expert
Kelly hearing from a plan.
I want I'm here to present SB
one thirty two which addresses
that rising rates of sexually
transmitted infections by
eliminating costs for copays
Policy deductibles and cost
sharing for preventive care and
treatment of sexually
transmitted infections many New
Mexicans do not seek care for S.
T. eyes because of high out of
pocket costs.
This is a huge problem because
as T. eyes get really expensive
and much more serious if you do
not treat them in time this can
lead to problems like
infertility and other infections
and diseases so this bill
removes that barrier and with
that we stand for questions.
All right thank thank you very
much.
Is there anyone in the audience
instead of support of this bill.
Of please go for it.
Hurry.
And you have a.
One minute.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is with
the limited in on this I'm here
on behalf of the quality New
Mexico the state's LGBTQ
advocacy organization so getting
tested for STI's on a regular
basis when you're sexually
active is the responsible and
healthy thing to do but
unfortunately for many getting
tested and receiving treatment
is not accessible for countless
reasons such as lack of
education or financial burdens
for current friends people the
stigma surrounding our community
and STI's causes shame within
our community I can say that
from personal experience as a
queer then.
on top of all of that co pays
great financial burdens and yet
another barrier to accessing
this critical care all health
care should be accessible to
everybody for this reason I ask
the committee members were in
favor of this bill thank you.
Thank you.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee my name is heather
Smith I am speaking on behalf of
both features a reproductive
justice organizations statewide
we stand in strong support of
this bill just like Victor ahead
said it just creates a better
access for the preventative
measures and for
The treatment of yes MSTS so
thank you very much please put
the bill.
Thank you very much we're going
to the this is there anyone in
support of the bill.
I see one hand.
And I selfless service loss of
but I don't see a name.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is and I'm
from that we could hear you can
you speak louder are turned up
your money.
Yes.
Little bit please proceed to.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is he lock and
I'm from the south was with Law
Center removing barriers
accessing as healthcare is
absolutely imperative allowing
diseases to going treated can
have disastrous effects like
becoming more susceptible to
other infections and even
infertility this bill is a step
towards reducing high rates of
STDs in New Mexico and this was
Clemente Los Santos Law Center
strongly support at the one
thirty two thank you thank you
Representative of Janet
Williams.
Hello chair and members of the
committee on with set a new
national organization for women
and we strongly support
additional thank you very much
thank you we are going to the
could.
Representative Lord
Representative Kate
Representative Lord okay Madam
chair representative so I have
some questions on this so I'm
looking on the first page of
this bill and it says relating
health care and acting sections
health purchasing Act and that
it also says in New Mexico
insurance code nonprofit help of
is this apply to all insurance
throughout the in state that
this would be a mandate and how
insurance can.
Appropriations chair
representative over just to
certain plans thank you madam
chair representative can want
you take this Madam chair
representative thank you for the
question so at this applies to
all health insurance plans that
are regulated by the New Mexico
insurance exchange it does not
cover federally regulated plans
but anyone any plans that are
regulated by the New Mexico.
And this is already covered by
New Mexico Medicaid okay so
madam chair representative
course exited billing for a lot
of years how does is not put
yourself out as an insurance
company because when I work for
medical doctors you could not
not collected deductible or
copay unless you're gonna get
for everybody you couldn't use
your discretion on that so how
do you plan on getting around
with the insurance companies
Madam chair representative.
Representative we worked with
the insurance companies on this
piece of legislation and maybe a
couple of amendments to be in
line with the way that they need
to operate that is why you see
that committee sub for Committee
sent and we've so they are fully
on board with this plan ensuring
that we did create at an
exemption for high deductible
savings plans with health
savings accounts because in
order to operate the have to pay
their deductible so unless of
federal rule changes about those
high cost savings plans they
will pay a deductible they will
pay a copay until their
deductible is not
So madam chair representative so
we're just singling out as TI's
but not like cancer or a.
S. T. I. so we get the special
discount is that what I'm
understanding madam chair
representative of this bill
focuses only on S. yes some
insurance and that's going to be
my biggest problem a couple big
problems because one when I
worked in an insurance bill and
it was a huge deal all the time
that you could not act as
insurance company you can't say
what you're going to pay forty
two and you're gonna pay thirty
five you pay this they had to
collect the copay they had to
collect the deductible or all
this and they were being
considered in insurance so
that's the problem I see the
other thing I see is this is not
fair to our madam people are
cancer people are people they
it's not fair to everybody else
who has other things going on so
I can't support this cause is a
singling out one and eliminating
others I can't go back to my
constituents say well my mom
died of cancer why doesn't she
of this or my my family has
Alzheimer's and they have that
so I just one second support
this because we.
Right thank you Representative
lord Representative Kate said
that Representative Ferrary.
thank you madam chairs and and
Representative and and thank you
for bringing this legislative
legislation forward I understand
that just you guys are of
communicative disease and
and it is something and where is
a public health concern and so I
absolutely understand why this
set.
distinguishes this from of other
diseases that we cannot infect
each other with I just want to
bring to your attention if you
be able to look at the FY are I
really appreciate all the hard
work you've gone into it in the
amendments it's just that you've
got one thing that they ask you
the OSI is recommending the
build mended to also present cat
catastrophic plans on your
insurance.
Just just because there was a
federal case that that that the
new want you to clarify that and
and that's all I have thank you.
Eight Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair in the
ring this forward I think my
question is will there also make
this available through our
Schoolbased health centers.
Thank you madam chair and
representative we talked about
this in Senate health as well
school based health centers and
the care that is provided
they're determined by the school
boards and the individual
districts so this bill doesn't
mandate or prevent that but that
would be handled that individual
school to.
Right thank you very much all
there.
Right thank you I see no other
questions from the committee is
there a motion.
Thank you manager I'd like to
make a motion for to pass we
have a motion for the past thank
and the second is there any
opposition to the bill yep yep
would you please call the roll.
Yes.
Ferrary is yes.
No.
Lord.
No.
Yes.
Vincent no.
Yes.
Yes what is the vote.
Three.
The vote is seven in the
affirmative three of the
negative for a committee
substitute for Committee
substitute for Senate bill one
thirty two is amended you have a
new path.
Revenue of rivers.
Senator Robert we are ready for
you.
That's
not here a point of personal
provisions been very
entertaining watching what you
guys are saying about in the
chat that you don't realize that
I'm in thank you.
Thank you madam chair do one due
to twenty four to twenty three
first.
Senator laborat Rio two twenty
three Senate bill two twenty
three is amended.
Thank you madam chair Senate
bill two twenty three.
Is a bill that will.
Prevent us from having to
address this issue every four
years.
In current statutes the child
support guidelines are set forth
in statute and every four years
they get updated by this body.
What we're intending to do is to
allow the agency.
To set those
update those child support
guidelines.
As necessary within certain
parameters and that way it will
alleviate someone like myself
having to come before this
committee every four years to
get an update of those child
support guidelines.
And the with me today is your
meal the acting secretary of
Human Services Department in
between a crack and and I'm
gonna mess up for her title but
she's director of the child
support division that close
enough yes and so with that we
stand for.
Thank you is there anyone in the
audience and stands in
opposition to this bill.
Are going to zoom is there
anyone of them in opposition to
the bill.
But back to the audience's
innate anyone in the audience in
support of the bill.
Going to zoom is there anyone of
the with support of the bill.
CNN we are going to the
committee is there anyone who
would like to speak.
Seeing no one wishing to speak
is there a motion.
I move that we do passed I'm
sorry Joanne for I'm sorry
Representative Ferrary does have
a head up.
This.
I'm sorry that it appears the of
the pandemic cross the top
doesn't save the correct of
bills were on can you
Senator so we will send the bill
to twenty three as amended the
child support schedule changes.
Thank you for that guy to
questions about it thank you.
Okay did you have a question
Representative Ferrary.
Both local madam chair I thought
agency to know what will we run
thank you all right thank you
Representative how to DO.
All right is there any
opposition to the bill by the
committee Sen no opposition you
have a do pass thank you we are
moving to Senate bill two twenty
four Medicaid is mandatory
medical child support of Senator
Diamond.
Thank you thank you madam chair
I'm still in the lower house the
Senate behave Committee upset if
you call me as soon as.
In any way Senate bill two
twenty four is a bill that
should have a fiscal impact
statement that shows that we're
saving the state of New Mexico
money right now
families are four people have to
pay five dollars and the cost to
collect the five dollar fee
greatly exceeds the amount of
money the state collects for
that the the federal government
has allowed states to no longer
charge at the so most of the
changes you see in this
legislation is to
basically make reference to the
federal of statute and it causes
the elimination of that fear to
give money I still the same two
experts with me.
So madam chair that we stand
for.
Thank you Representative Nibert
is there anyone in the audience
and said that opposition to this
bill.
Is there anyone else who is that
who opposes to the bill.
By going back to the this is
there anyone said that support
of the bill.
Going to the zoom is there
anyone who stands in support of
the bill.
Saying no comment there I'm
going to the committee
Representative Kate.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you minority with the
Nibert I really appreciate you
bringing this and I really
appreciate your expert witnesses
really took the time to educate
us outside of this committee I
think that's why we are not full
of questions and so thank you I
will support this.
All right thank you
Representative Thomas make a
motion for a new path of all
right we have a motion for a to
pass in the second.
do we have anyone in opposition
to the bill.
All rights in no opposition to
have a new path thank you thank
you madam chair and I told you
it would be quick.
Thank you for your patience.
The committee still stand in
recess until Friday morning at
eight thirty.
