No, she's not here yet.
represented Ferrari here.
Representative Jones here.
Representative Martinez.
Representatives, uh, Senna
Cortez, Vice Chair Herndon.
Terry Thompson, I'm here.
OK, so, uh, first I will
announce, excuse me, that 4:34
has been rolled at the request
of the sponsor. So if you're
here for that we're not gonna do
it. So with that, we will start
with Senate Bill 6.
OK, good morning, uh, Madam
Chair and Madam Vice Chair and
ranking member, whoever that
might be. I don't, I don't know
who that is exactly on the thank
you very much, Representative.
I'm a Senator Michael Padilla,
thank you very much for allowing
me to come join you all today.
Um, I have to say that this, uh,
piece of legislation I'm
bringing before you is a
continuation of a bill that I
passed approximately 4 years
ago, that provided uh support
for aging out foster youth from
the ages of 18 to 21. The reason
that uh we did that was because
we found
that uh approximately 77% of the
children of uh former foster
children wind up in foster care,
their children do. And what this
legislation does is it provides
things like housing,
transportation, uh, health care,
higher education, uh, help with
the legal system, uh,
understanding the credit system,
behavioral health, um, and if
you have some sort of a legal
issue, you need to further uh
handle after your age of 18.
What we found is that when the
legislation was passed, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, uh, we have about 350
or so children that are aging
out of foster youth every year,
uh foster care every year, and
so we've had an uptake rate of
of very successful, about 70,
80% of the kiddos actually get
involved in this, but what we
found is that an inadvertently
didn't do this on purpose or
anything, but we found that the
children that were being
fostered in another state or
their cases weren't quite
complete or they were had
suddenly become removed from the
um foster care system, but
and still needed the supports at
18, were not eligible for this.
So there's about 15 to 18
children that that we're sort of
left on the field, and uh this
is one way to help those kiddos.
So, uh, that's, that's
essentially what Senate Bill 6
does. It complements the work
that's already been done, and I
think that, you know, I've
disclosed in the legislature in
the 13 years that I've been
here, I've said it a couple of
times. I grew up in these foster
homes, 7 different counties, the
all faiths home in Albuquerque,
that that was our last orphanage
that we had here and uh you
could be the wealthiest child in
New Mexico.
And when you turn 18, you don't
know anything.
Uh, if you are the poorest child
or a foster kid in New Mexico
and you turn 18. Can you imagine
having zero safety nets, 0
nothing just to back you up and
to help stand you up. So a lot
of these kiddos wind up in
trouble, and this actually helps
to fix that. States that have
done a portion of this, I wish I
could tell you this was an
original idea, but it actually
is not. Um, we have about 17
states that are doing something
similar to what I proposed here.
Ours is the most comprehensive,
but some provide housing, some
provide housing and
transportation, some housing,
transportation and healthcare,
but we do, we basically do it
all here.
And uh those states have seen a
reduction of about 77% of their
kids going into foster care when
the child, when the young adult
was a former foster kid. So very
positive for New Mexico. The
funding mechanism for this is
through the Title IVE program
and the Chaffee Act, and I have
to tell you, this is probably
one of the things I'll take with
me when I leave this building
for the last time, one of the
big 3 that I'll be very proud
of. I just wanna, I'll take any
questions.
OK, thank you. So we will, I'm
sorry, Madam Chair, I, um, my
co-sponsor, I did invite uh
Representative Eleanor Chavez to
be a part of this, uh, this
effort this year, and I think uh
she may have helped me when I
did it the first time. I can't
quite remember now, but um, I
just want to thank her for
agreeing to be a part of this
with me. Thank you. Thank you.
OK, if you are on Zoom in
opposition, raise your hand.
Anyone in the room in
opposition.
OK, Signon on Zoom in support,
raise your hand in the room in
support.
If you'd like to speak, please
come to the center.
One minute time limit.
Madam Chair and committee, um,
we are, I'm Laura Beta, CYFD
associate Director with Boring
Connections. We're in full
support of this bill. It will
allow our young people to have
access to strength-based case
management, financial services
and support to support
education, employment, housing,
parenting, um, and allow them to
have a safe and stable
transition into adulthood. CYFD
is in full support. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Scott Patterson
Ala Torre with CYFD. We are in
full support of this bill. It
does produce future uh
advancements for
Reducing the, the likelihood
that folks will enter into the
system and it also allows the
folks that we're working with to
transition into adulthood with
some of those tools that they
may not have already had, so
we're in full support.
Thank you, and I don't see any
hands on Zoom, so questions from
the committee.
Representative Anaya.
Madam chair, if there are no
questions, I would like to move
a do pass. I would like to. So
we have a motion for a due pass
on this oh.
Oh, OK, well, let's, I'll take
the motion then I'll come back
to you. OK. So we have a motion
on the Senate Bill 6 as amended,
um, from representative Anaya in
the second from Representative
Kate, and we'll come back to
that motion, Representative
Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Padilla. Could you
briefly explain the funding
again? I know you, you said that
at the very end and I, I, I need
to have more on that. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair and
Representative Jones. So
essentially what happens is when
the state can certify that a
child has been enrolled in the
fostering connections program we
provide that proof, if you will,
to the federal government and
through the Title 4E program,
which is one of the largest
funding mechanisms for fostering
across the country. Uh, we
become eligible to draw down on
that.
And I would say that the first
year that we implemented, I want
to say we probably were able to
cover about half or so of the
expenses for that 350 children
that that their former foster
youth that enrolled in the
program. Now per child, we're
able to receive somewhere around
80 or so. So it's, it's, it's
really a great deal for the
state if we participate in this
because then you also heard,
like I said, the long term
benefits are reduced numbers of
foster kids down the road.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Were there other questions? OK,
sing and we will go, go back to
the motion of a do pass.
Go ahead and call the rule.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative cases, yes.
Representative Eleanor Chavez.
Yes.
Representative Nicole Chavez.
Yes.
Representative Ferrari. Yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senator Cortez?
No.
Uh, Vice Chair Herndon. Yes.
Chairwoman Thompson, yes.
We have an 81 do pass. OK,
you have a do 8 to 1. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, have a good day.
OK, we will next go to HB 4.
08
Representative N Chavez.
OK, go ahead.
OK, good morning, Madam Chair,
fellow colleagues and
representatives. House Bill 408
is a simple bill that would
support CYFD in their efforts to
study the costs and
reimbursement rates associated
with providing community-based
foster care placements and
foster care treatment for
children in foster care. So
today, foster parents are
volunteers who receive a per
diem maintenance stipend rate,
averaging around $22 per day per
child. Um, we know that
daycares.
receive upwards of hundreds of
dollars per day and residential
treatment care facilities for
most of our acute youth received
thousands per day. So we've
heard a lot of this session
about increasing maintenance
rates for volunteer foster
families, but without data
driven information. We are at an
impasse to increase daily or
monthly maintenance stipend
rates. So as you know, quality
foster parent recruitment and
retention is the foundation of
fixing our broken
and getting kids out of the
offices. So this bill came
directly from one of the
recommendations from the SM5
task force to improve outcomes
for children in foster care and
behavioral health supports and
supports one of the key targets
for the Kevanas settlement
agreement.
Um, in the corrective action and
arbitration. This need is to
recruit and retain more quality
foster parents. So this bill
would require um the study
considered costs associated with
providing for safety and
emotional well-being of the
children, payments for
reimbursement for the cost of
providing food, clothing,
shelter, daily supervision,
transportation, and other
expenses. So this bill has
$100,000 appropriation but is
mentioned in the FIR.
this bill is actually codifying
one of the one-time
appropriations of HB 2.
So that we can strike the
appropriation now.
We stand for questions. OK,
let's go to the audience if you
are in Zoom in support, raise
your hand.
And if you are in the room in
support, raise your hand.
OK. Same thing for opposition on
Zoom if you're in opposition,
raise your hand.
Anyone in the room in
opposition.
OK, seeing none, I will go to
the committee. I have
Representative Kates.
Anyone else?
OK, go ahead, Representative
Kates. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, Representative
for bringing this, uh.
I'm, I, I am always love
gathering data.
And, uh, I appreciate your
amendment.
Um, we're gonna, I'm gonna go
over some things that I think
are missing.
Can I get a I'm sorry
I'm sitting here looking at it.
I just need a motion to discuss
the amendment. OK,
Representative Anaya, go ahead.
Do you want to confirm the
number, madam Chair? Um.
No, I think we're good, but it
can, if I can interrupt you, do
you want to explain your
amendment or do you want to go
on with questions. OK, we can go
on with questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
only got a half a cup of coffee
today as well, and so thank you
very much. Um, I do appreciate
your amendment. Um, I do think
you need another amendment, so
let me walk through it. One is I
appreciate the fact that you
moved the report from December
to September. I'd like you to
consider June or July. The
budget is usually baked by
September. So if you need a rate
increase, they're going to need
the information before.
September to make sure that it
gets into the budget. So if
you're doing another amendment,
please consider that. Um, also,
um, on page, you're talking
about um
You're talking about the.
gathering, so you're you're only
providing CYFD $100,000 to
provide this data for you every
5 years.
I, I, I love this idea, but just
so you know, cause I've done
other data bills.
It's so see what I see has a lot
of responsibilities, and now
you're adding a very big report
for them to do as well.
Typically doesn't necessarily
mean it has to. Typically, a
third party.
Company statistician,
non-biased, is the one that
gathers.
The data and see why it must
provide the data for them, but
they're the ones that usually
typically um file that data,
analyze it and then uh reflect
back the report to you. You're
asking CYFD to do this every 5
years, $100,000 is not really
enough for an FTE or a couple
FTEs for them to do it, and then
they don't want an FT because
it's only 5 years, and it's a
lot of work, so, um,
Well, I guess they could always
use an FTE but they'll find
something for them to do, but
they can't, there's a lot to do
it, so I will just ask for some
structural changes, and then,
and then please look into other
programs. I don't know of a
place that you gathers these uh
cost analysis for only $100,000.
They're usually $250,000 plus.
So if you um could make those
changes, I mean, I love the idea
of it. You're also missing,
there's a, a, uh, one of the
services you're talking about is
the treatment foster care, which
I believe is a Medicaid
reimbursement rate, so that
means you need to um put a
trigger in here.
I, I don't know, you don't need
to, but you may want to.
Asks CYFD to be required to ask
CMS or a rate change based on
the data every 5 years.
You see what I mean? So CMS will
make that decision, but you have
to ask CMS. They, they won't and
so if you, and I don't know if
it's CYFD who makes the request
to CMS. It might be our Medicaid
department that does it on
behalf of CYFD. So I'm not
really sure all the processes,
but those are some of the
details to make sure that this
bill is successful in giving you
what you want it to be, but I
applaud your um initiative.
So thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
To seeing no further questions,
I'll entertain emotion, so
moved.
OK. Representative Senator
Cortez and the second by
Representative Jones. Oh, first
we have to adopt the amendment.
It,
it's Friday, so moved OK, is
there any opposition to adopting
the amendment. Singing, you have
been amended bill, um, and then
we will go back to the motion.
Is there any opposition to the
motion for a due pass.
I see and you have a due pass.
Go ahead.
Thank you, I would strongly
encourage an amendment before
your next committee. Thank you.
OK.
So by uh
Oh, at 9 to 0, you have a due
pass. OK.
8.
No, there's not.
I
So next we will go to um
House Bill 420 Representative
Herndon.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, it is our honor to
present House Bill 420 before
you, uh, thank you for the
opportunity to do this is we
take a critical step in
supporting reentry housing in
New Mexico. So every year, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, nearly 1800
individuals are released from
state correctional facilities,
many without stable housing,
especially if they release
individual is not on parole or
probation. So
without immediate support, they
face higher risk of
homelessness, unemployment, and
reincarceration, which strains
public resources and law
enforcement. House Bill 420,
which is before you today invest
6 million in in transitional
housing and housing
stabilization programs already
established in New Mexico,
ensuring that returning uh
returning citizens have a safe
place to live for up to 6.
months as they rebuild their
lives. This is not just a
housing bill, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. It's a
public safety and workforce
development bill, which reduces
recidivism and strengthens
communities. In fact, House Bill
420 has a related bill, House
Bill 419, which together provide
a comprehensive approach to this
population, so the House Bill
419, if you haven't had the
opportunity to view it.
Focuses on employment. So we're
looking at the employment and
housing. It's a full circle,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
And I urge you to support House
Bill 420 and we are ready for
questions. I do have a, a, I do
have a, a uh expert. I'd like to
introduce her and she's here to
help answer questions.
Mm, thank you, Madam Chairwoman
members of the committee. My
name is Nina Chavez. I'm the
director of government relations
for Goodwill Industries of New
Mexico and I represent a
coalition of prison reentry
providers from across the state,
um, as well as a county um
program with Bernalillo County,
we've been working on, um, this
work, um, for about 12 months
now, so thank you for the
opportunity to be here and
represent the coalition.
Thank you. So we will go to Zoom
if you are in opposition, raise
your hand. Anyone in the room in
opposition.
OK, and seeing no hands on Zoom,
on Zoom if you're in support,
raise your hand and I'll come
back to you in the room in
support.
If you'd like to speak, come to
the center, please.
My name is Asia Corwin, and I'm
a senior at the University of
New Mexico.
And a relative of a former
formerly incarcerated person.
I urge you to pass HB 420 as a
means to reduce the chance of
reoffending and extending
support to one of our most
vulnerable populations. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Amaka Tupman and I am a
junior at the University of New
Mexico.
And I strongly support this
appropriation, um, addressing
and traditional housing needs of
the entry population is a
critical critical for ensuring
successful reintegration into
society. A housing stabilization
program will provide attention
support to those in need,
helping reduce recidivism and
promote long-term stability,
this investment is not only to
improve digital lives, but also
to benefit our communities by
fostering safer, healthier
environments.
I urge you all to support this.
Thank you. Thank you. And on
Zoom we have winter.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Winter Torres, and I am
the CEO and founder of New
Mexico Eviction Prevention and
diversion. I have been talking
to Goodwill Industries about
this bill and um along with its
cohort 419 for a few months now,
and I just want to communicate
that um the organizations
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Winter Torres, and I am
the CEO and founder of New
Mexico Eviction Prevention and
diversion. I have been talking
to Goodwill Industries about
this bill and um along with its
cohort 419 for a few months now,
and I just want to communicate
that um the organization
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Winter Torres, and I am
the CEO and founder of New
Mexico Eviction Prevention and
diversion. I have been talking
to Goodwill Industries about
this bill and um along with its
cohort 419 for a few months now,
and I just want to communicate
that um the organizations
support strong support as um
housing is a continuum. It is a
complete continuum from one end
to the other, and we
all need to work together to
address the, um, not only the
public safety outcomes, but the
housing stability and impacts on
family, and with that, I urge
you to support the bill.
Thank you, seeing no other
hands, uh, questions from the
committee.
Representative Jones.
Um,
in Chavez E Chavez
representative Senator Cortez,
did I see your hand? OK.
OK. Anyone over here? OK, so
we'll
So we'll start with
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Herndon
expert, um, I, I, the obvious
question would be, how can we
make sure that this is really a
hand up instead of a handout.
Can you explain that a little
bit more the networking
involved, please.
Madam Chairwoman Representative
Jones, members of the committee,
um, over the last 1012 months,
we've been working with a
variety of state agencies and so
healthcare authority taught us
of two specific programs that
coalition members that we've
been working with have utilized
specifically for this
population, so reset and Fresh
Start are roughly about 2 or 3
year old programs now that have
very specific eligibilities for
individuals who are being
released from the prison system?
And so once they are um eligible
and um flowing through a
provider who's able to provide
up to 6 months of transitional
funding to cover the costs of
that, um.
Um, housing, what they're
allowing is um the client and
the provider to partner with
other social services to
stabilize that individual, so
they'll cover the rent in the
meantime, they're also getting
workforce development services
or other stabilization needs
like, um, um, soft skills and
technical skills, um, job
placement interviews, support to
retain those jobs, um, because
of that training and case
management and peer mentorship,
so all of that working together,
starting with that housing
enrollment in one of in some of
these providers program.
um, just really allows that
length of time, which is a very
large amount of time for someone
to make sure they're stabilized
the 1st 45 days and 60 days are
essential, that stabilization,
so um that's the beginning of
how all of that works together.
Thank you very much. um, thank
you and Madam Chair, and our
representative expert. So is, is
the money is receiving the money
dependent on being involved in
these other uh services.
Madam Chairwoman Representative
Jones, um, if I'm understanding
your question correctly, in
order to get the wraparound
services, um, can the
individuals get the housing as
well or vice versa.
Um, Madam Chair, what I'm saying
is
Can't could, is it possible for
a person to receive the housing
without engaging in any of the
services. It's a better way to
put it.
Madam Chair, representative.
Uh, Jones members of the
committee, um, are partner
providers and just like goodwill
with our case management, we do
a comprehensive approach to what
someone needs, and we want to
make sure that the long term
success is the priority. That's
that that's where that hand up
really happens, so um in order
to be eligible for some of these
programs, there is a commit,
there there are commitments to
making sure you are going to
receive medical assistant
treatments, and you are going to
um get job placement, um, so
there are requirements and.
ibilities in order for them to
access that funding for that 6
months of housing support.
Thank you. And could you maybe
expand on those requirements
just a little bit more for me,
please. Madam Chairwoman,
members of the committee,
Representative Jones,
absolutely, um.
I can also follow up with some
of the other providers like New
Mexico reentry Center on YDI and
they can, um, I can follow up
with the committee if that's
possible, um, at Goodwill, I can
speak to the fact that because
we do wraparound services and
required to understand if they
need behavioral health, if they
need housing. Um, we are a
workforce development first
nonprofit in in the reentry
coalition. We know that that
success is not possible without
meeting the other needs in an
appropriate order. We have
clients and other programs, for
example, with um veteran.
who are unhoused that no matter
how many times we support with
workforce development alone, um,
and housing, we understand that
behavioral health has to be
addressed first, so we don't
rush a client, so we make sure
our case managers are
prioritizing their needs and
barriers in an order that helps
them achieve their success. So
ours are consistently, um, one
on one with the case manager
requirement, if you will, in
order to um make sure they're
going through the program
successfully.
Thank you very much and thank
you, Madam Chair.
OK. Next, we have Representative
Nicole Chavez. Yes, Madam Chair
Representative, um, I just have
a few questions. I know as a
freshman I'm not as familiar
with the bills that you've been
working on and then you referred
to a a separate bill from this.
So can you explain to me? I, I
understand that this budget is
for transitional housing for
reentry and um me above anyone
who works with both CYFD
individuals that are
incarcerated as well as adult
and.
incarceration. I want people to
get programming. I want them to
have rehabilitation. I want them
to have stable housing because
we are going to be next to them
at the grocery store. We're
going to be next to him at a
movie theater and I want them to
know something else other than
generational life of crime or
poverty, but I just want to, I
guess, have you explain to me,
does this tie into making sure
that they are working that they
are getting help that they are
getting behavioral health.
If they need it, um, or they are
going to school or, you know,
vocational trade. How does that
tie in here to make sure that
that as representative Jones
stated, we are giving them the
assistance so that they can help
themselves through something
more.
Madam Chairwoman, members of the
committee Representative Chavez,
I will, I'll I'll start an
answer and then hope to continue
to refine it
So I, I believe you all received
a copy of this in Your Materials
and so um at the very end you
can see, um, a proposed um line
item budget and so how they work
together, um, and how I'll start
I'm responding to the question
is that, um, we really focused
on best practices case manager
loads loads, um, peer mentor,
um, capacities, best practices
from the coalition, so.
by responding to how they are
most successful, they typically
between case managers and peer
mentors are on average um able
to serve between 40 and 45
people each, um, so by leaning
into best practices on how
they're most successfully going
to um
Respond to them immediately,
have a pattern of successive
communication and consistent um
accountability with that
relationship, right? There's a
commitment when they when a
client signs up um for next
steps at Goodwill, for example,
um, weekly starting with the
immediate moment, their weekly
meetings that drive that roll
into monthly that turn into
quarterly as they are successful
getting that job placement, um,
and retaining the positions, so.
Um
That level of commitment to the
clients is first and foremost um
a priority and because they're
doing the wraparound services
and identifying the other
barriers, those are all in
constant conversation and so 419
is allowing, uh, would allow,
um, those providers to increase
their staff, to do more,
especially outside of the metro,
while the vast majority of that
1800 individuals are releasing
from across the state into the
metro, we want to make sure
those um providers have that
staff to consistently serve.
everywhere across the state. And
so by doing that in tandem with
also increasing the amount of um
funding to support the housing
need, which is, um, and I'll
finish that real quickly, um,
we're able to respond sooner and
faster with everything that's
required. And so, um, the last
thing I'll say right now is, um,
The 6 million was um identified
because of the um, the coalition
saw a higher demand for these
programs, these programs are
being spent down Fresh Start and
reset with the healthcare
authority within less than 2
quarter of the year and so.
As we're in constant partnership
amongst the providers, um,
before we even started this
work, we were already seeing the
outcomes and success, so at
Goodwill, I will say that 5 out
of every 6 individuals that
enroll in our workforce
development program are not
reoffending and at the same time
our case managers already have
had a relationship with
organizations like YDI New
Mexico reentry Center to refer
eligible individuals to their
housing programs.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you. So 4:18 sounds like
it's, it's for a budget for
providers to to widen the
availability across the state.
And then this gives the
transitional housing support. So
I guess my question again is,
where are the firewalls or where
the check marks that they can
continue to get funding if they
are going to college, working,
applying for jobs, are we just
going by the mentors.
Like report a month, do we even
look at that or are we just
handing it out?
Madam Chairwoman, members of the
Committee Representative Chas um
to make sure I understand we're
talking about outcomes so that
individuals are not reoffending
and they're not just utilizing
this for a moment and then.
I,
um, I will say first um that at
Goodwill.
Once you go through a program,
if you do reoffend, we want to
keep in touch because we are in
those facilities, we want to
understand what happened and
refine those services and figure
out a new um pathway for you,
um.
I would say that all of these
providers are very open to
outcomes. I know at Goodwill,
we're analyzing how we compare
to state rates of recidivism,
um, workforce placement, job
placement, job retention, so at
Goodwill, we are looking at very
rigorous ways to understand that
someone is being successful,
we're hitting all we're
addressing all the barriers and
their needs it, um, and I'll
stop right there for now, but I
would like to follow up with
more information. Madam Chair
representative, I guess my
biggest question is where giving
them money for housing, but what
turned
on the trigger, like how do they
qualify? I want to know what the
firewalls are, the checklist for
them to qualify in order to say
yes, we will give you the funds
because you are doing what you
need to be doing and what you're
supposed to be doing and really
trying to, you know, turn your
life around and get help.
Madam Chairwoman, members of the
committee, Representative
Chavez, thank you for your
patience with me. So fresh
start, um, the eligibility for
Fresh Start um through
healthcare authorities Behavior
Health Services division, it's
so first of all, it's moving in
assistance and eviction
prevention assistance, and you
have to be diagnosed and
documented opioid use disorder,
currently homeless or at risk of
homelessness. Those are the
eligibilities for Fresh Start
for their funding for the 6
months of support.
Um
They're only available to
individuals currently receiving
behavioral health services,
recovery services, or
medication-assisted treatment.
The reset program also at
Healthcare Authority focuses on
providing housing-related
services and behavioral
services, and those individuals
have to qualify under 3
different, um, elements, um,
serious mental illness
diagnosis, not just an
assessment, but a a a diagnosis.
Um, uh, history of sexual
offenses and or um geriatric
parole.
OK, those are all the questions
I had.
Thank you, Nick. We have
representative Eleanor Chavez.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, I really
appreciate um the fact that
Folks who are coming out of
prison are going to get some
additional support and also
appreciate the fact that.
Um, housing is recognized as a
basic need to to stabilize them
coming out.
The question that I have is with
regard to um I think the trash
in in the information, it says
it's a transitional transitional
housing.
For 6 months. So are you able to
continue to support them if they
need it after those 6 months are
up.
Or is that sort of like a hard
deadline?
Madam Chairwoman, members of the
committee, Representative
Chavez, um.
I, um, can certainly get back to
you with healthcare authorities
process on if someone needs
additional help from those
programs.
Um
At Goodwill, we are a workforce
development program first. Um,
so I would have to probably get
back um in response to the
healthcare authority if someone
does need assistance, but I
would also say that best
practice when everyone is
working together, we are just
like at Goodwill's veteran
service program, um, most people
do tend to need between 3 to 9
months of service and we're able
to really get a high majority of
them stabilized and moving
forward to independently, then
take on affording that housing.
And Madam Chair and members of
the committee and uh
Representative Chavez, I've
watched individuals in the
transitional housing and in
these programs. So you remember
that this is a two part program.
One part we're giving them
access to employment because the
whole idea is so that they can
ultimately become independent
and work and be a fully
functional part of a committee,
I mean a community, I'm sorry,
and so if they need additional
assistance after 6 months,
they're gonna get it.
They need to stay in the
transitional housing longer they
will, but the goal is to make
them independent, and that's why
it's, it's fully uh wrap around
in terms of employment, then
housing, and then all of the
other additional uh healthcare
assistance that they may need.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and then I also
see on um
the
Yes it's page 3 or 4.
Um, where it, where it has a
list of who you're working with
now and then an expanded list of
uh correctional facilities.
Um, are there
Do you know, Madam Chair
Representative, how many other
correctional facilities might
also fit into a um in a list of
expansion of facilities.
Madam Chairwoman members of the
committee, Representative
Chavez, um, this list is for the
prison facilities that
corrections department oversees.
Um, we have Bernalillo County's
flame program as part of the
coalition. They work exclusively
with MDC, um, and we have had a
quite a few conversations of how
the the funding could support
expansions to jails, pretrial,
and youth services as well.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
Hey, Representative Kates.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and, and thank you, uh,
Representative for bringing this
forward. Um,
Over 20 years ago, I worked this
program for Goodwill Industries
in New Mexico. So I very much
appreciate it and I believe it
kind of runs, let's ask, let's
ask if it runs basically. So I'm
so happy to see that you have a
6 month period. I know there's
been other versions that have
been 90 days and things and you
really need that extra time. Um,
So individuals are just so
people can visualize you you it
provided an excellent uh answer,
but I want to say when people
visualize, they're getting case
management services and
providing some kind of stability
with through behavioral health
and uh and housing, correct?
Um, Madam Chairwoman, members of
the committee, Representative
Kates, um, if I'll I'll start my
question and my response, and
then uh definitely refine it,
um.
What I'm understanding your
question to be is just how it
all, how it's all working
together, not just at Goodwill,
but with the other referrals, so
a, a goodwill we are a workforce
development program, next steps
for um the reentry population,
and we work closely with um the
other providers to address the
housing and.
So, well, I apologize. Will you
repeat your question? No, thank
you very much. I, I'm just
trying to walk through the
process as a a a lot, there were
a lot of questions about that
just so that we understand and,
and um my experience when
working with individuals from
corrections, they come, they
have a case manager, the case
manager, uh, uh, uh, confirms
they meet the criteria and uh
assesses their needs for
behavioral health and housing,
correct?
Madam Chairwoman, members of the
committee, Representative Kes,
yes, so like good and then they
are placed in job education and
job education may be as simple
as
you show up to work on time. Do
you have appropriate hygiene.
Are you able to communicate to
learning spreadsheet data entry
or uh, you know, uh, trucking,
uh to be CDL. So those are your
employment skills than training,
correct?
Madam Chairwoman, members of the
committee, Representative Kates,
yes, many of the providers,
including Goodwill and Bernalo
County's Flame program go into
facilities, pre-release up to 90
days.
and provide up to 6 weeks of
workshops on soft skills and
technical skills once
individuals are released, a
goodwill case manager will will
be the same case manager from
pre-release to post-release for
up to 12 additional months to
continue that work of skills
training, job placement, job
readiness, um, job, uh,
retention. OK, so thank you so
much, Madam Chair and
Representative, um, I guess so
you, you went to the step front
and you go for job placement and
then you check in with the
individual to make sure.
Cause you might have been able
to do everything. I find that
these individuals are so ready
to stop making the decisions
that they've been making in the
past and they just need to have
a path and some support as your
statistics have shown many of
them are uh successful because
of this. So, but once you get
the job, I, I revert back to my
old ways when I'm under stress
and so you have sort of a check
in.
period as well as their
maintaining their job to make
sure that they are understanding
how to deal with uh there's a
new coworker, there are new
skill required at work, correct?
Madam Chairwoman, members of the
committee representative cases,
that's correct, and that's what
makes the hand up so successful
is the consistent accountability
and relationship between a case
manager and the client as well
as the wraparound services with
peer mentors.
Thank you very much. Thank you
so much for this program and
thank you, understand that you
cannot stabilize or change
without housing and so I very
much appreciate it, thank you.
Cortez. Thank you, Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, I just have
one question. Wasn't there 13
million in HB 2 already allotted
toward this initiative.
Members of the committee on Mata
chairwoman, um, Representative
Senna Cortez, um, House Bill 419
has 13.5 million, um, yet to be
appropriated in house Bill 2,
that's for workforce development
expansion, and then this bill
House Bill 420 has this $6
million request for the housing
um housing portion, I am aware
of a line item in house bill to,
um, we are reconciling with LFC
corrections department
Healthcare Authority, um,
For this retry population, what
that is meant for, if it's
facilities are programmatic, so
they'll be two different
initiatives.
Or 3
It will be
Madam Chair, madam, vice chair,
madam chair of the committee,
there will be 2.2, OK.
OK, that clarifies my question.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair Representative
Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative for bringing
this forward. Um.
I feel like, you know, as we're
watching somebody's story
throughout their lifetime and
how they get to this point,
right? You have children who
start with a bunch of ACEs. We
try our best to make sure that
we have prevention programs, um,
to make sure that folks are not,
um,
You know, going into the school
to prison pipeline, but in the
event that they do, they're
incarcerated. I feel like one of
the biggest gaps that we are
missing as a body in terms of
funding is actually the reentry
programs. Um, what happens after
incarceration? What happens
after you need to return, um, to
society as a whole. Um, and
Madam Chair Representative, if
I'm not mistaken, did you, did
you name um the New Mexico
reentry program as one of the
stakeholders that you work with.
Madam Chairwoman, members of the
committee, Representative Anaya
among the various coalition
members is New Mexico reentry
Center. Thank you. um, I thank
you for the clarification on the
name. And the reason I ask this,
um, Madam chair and
representative is because I
actually met with them um prior
to session, and one of the
things that was really shocking
to me was they.
We're hosting a fundraiser in
which their goal and they would
be so excited if they got $1000.
And I was so pissed. I was like,
are you kidding?
Like they success results are
amazing and as are those from
Goodwill and this entire
coalition. So I thank you for
bringing it forward. My
question, um, is when folks um
enter into your reentry program
are in the housing portion, does
that housing also encompass, um,
their children if they have
children.
Madam Chairwoman, members of the
committee, I will confirm with
multiple coalition members, but
that would be absolutely yes, I
mean, based on um how Goodwill
does our veteran emergency and
transitional housing program.
Yes, it is absolutely vital and
important to recognize that part
of the success of an individual
is to recognize the needs of the
complete family. Great. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative E.
Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm do
pass.
Do I have a 2nd. OK, so we have
a
A motion for a due pass on.
House Bill 420 by representative
E Chavis in a second by
Representative Amaya, um, is
there opposition?
OK. Take the roll, please.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative cases, yes.
Representative Eleanor Chavez.
Representative Nicole Chavez.
No.
Represented Ferrari. Yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senator Cortez.
No.
Vice Chair Herndon, yes.
Caroman Thompson, yes.
The vote is 72. OK, by a vote of
72, you have a due pass.
Thank you. And next we will have
Representative Luhan on House
Bill 439. And just a reminder if
you got here late, we rolled
over 434 at the request of the
sponsor.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um.
When there is an emergency, we
know to dial 911 and dispatchers
who answer the call are often
the first point of contact in an
emergency. 911 dispatchers have
the unique opportunity to help
callers as they wait for the
first responders to arrive.
House Bill 439 will ensure all
dispatchers are trained and able
to coach bystanders, standards
to perform CPR, cardiac arrest
is a leading cause of death,
with more than.
350,000 out of hospital cardiac
arrests occurring each year in
the United States. It strikes
suddenly and without warning,
and what happens in the first
few minutes can mean the
difference between life and
death.
With EMS response times in many
rural areas of our state, the
need for CPR to be initiated
prior to EMS arrival is even
greater.
Dispatchers can coach calls with
real-time, step by step
instructions enabling those
calls to become lifesavers while
awaiting EMS arrival. This is
known as dispatcher-assisted
CPR.
A telephone CPR. Our goal is to
ensure that all dispatchers
receive this training, and as a
result, all calls are provided
with this important life-saving
instruction, even those without
previous CPR knowledge can
quickly be instructed. Thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee with that I'll have my
expert introduce himself.
And Madam Chair, I just have to
go next door to meet forum, and
I'll be back.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, you know, for
every minute without CPR
survival from a certain cardiac
arrest decreases by 7 to 10%,
you know, studies published in
the Journal of American Heart
Association and the New England
Journal of Medicine have shown
that dispatcher-assisted CPR
increases survival rates and
improves outcomes for victims of
cardiac arrest, especially when
CPR is init initiated quickly.
Dispatcher assisted CPR is also
an effective and low cost
strategy to improve certain
cardiac arrest survival, yet it
is underutilized 25 other states
have adopted this policy for.
We're all there at 911
dispatchers, the most recent one
being Oklahoma, they adopted
last year, uh, this, this is the
most effective way to improve
survival rates, especially in in
rural rural state like ours
where EMS responses response
times could be longer. Thank
you, ma'am Chair.
Mahesh, you forgot to introduce
yourself.
Oh, I'm, I'm sorry, Madam Chair,
this is my seat, the American
Heart Association. Thank you.
So we will go to um in
opposition on Zoom if you are in
opposition, raise your hand, and
I'll come back to you. Anyone in
the room in opposition.
OK, seeing none either place on
Zoom in support, raise your hand
in the room. OK. OK.
So we have
We had.
I guess we have no one. So I
will go to the committee for
questions, Representative Senna
Cortez. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair, Madam Vice Chair. Um, I
didn't see an FIR. Is that, was
that placed anywhere?
Representative, it is in your,
is it in here? Yes, OK, I didn't
have it whenever we printed it
up. Um, I do have a question,
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair.
How is this funded and paid for?
Madam chair, Representative
Santa Cortes, you know, uh.
We, we have a list of submitted
to you. It's training resources.
And you know, some of them are
free like NTSB and the uh.
Offered by one offered by uh.
Michigan is also free.
And and these are online
courses, but the FIR from uh uh.
DPS says, you know, they they
have a recurrent 6000 or.
35,000, uh, but our
recommendation is like, you
know, it, it could be
incorporated into, you know,
the, the, the law enforcement
academy right now certifies.
All 911 dispatchers through
basic training.
And we're suggesting that this
be included in their curriculum.
And is is a 44 hour block.
And every 2 years they can do
like a refresher course they
could do online. Uh, we, we, we
feel the, the.
The financial impact is very
minimal.
And, and, and the.
So, madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair expert, I just wanted to
make sure I understood who's
who's paying for it again.
Madam
Madam Chair, um, representative.
So that would be under uh the
budget for DPS and so with the
funding that they are, yeah, if
that's the.
answers your question. Thank
you, yes, ma'am. Thank you so
much. Um, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair Representative
expert, um, how will the high
quality training be determined?
Yeah, Madam Chair Representative
Sennacortes, like, you know,
there there there are set
guidelines, you know,
evidence-based guidelines that
that are implemented throughout,
you know, this course, and, and
they're offered by NTSB, it's
offered by several, you know,
uh, EHA American Heart
Association, and so they, they,
they fought, I mean, they, they,
they follow those guidelines OK.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair Representative
and expert, um, who will monitor
the training and the
certification.
I think
Madam Chair, uh, representative
Senator Cortez, like, you know,
the, the, the there are several
entities, you know, that certify
this, and then you go through
the training through them, and
then, like, you know, training
the trainer like, you know, the
people who instructed the
Law enforcement academy will be
trained in this course, and they
will, you know, uh, teach the
911 operators and, and it's a
certified course and you know.
Yeah.
And madam chair just like any
certification that you get if
you're working for the state,
then it goes into your, your HR
um.
Uh
Information, it's held there and
also the where the
certification, uh, the national
certification where you're
certified with, they would
update it and they would, um,
they would remind you when you
need the updating as well and
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
representative and expert, so
which exact entity?
Madam chair uh representative
both. So when you have a
certification and you work for a
state agency if you're CPR
certified, then you have to
present and how you can hold
that certification or
documentation of it with your
employer and also the national
certification, whoever is doing
the, uh, whoever you're getting
certified with, much like just
like CPR, they would, um.
They would have that information
and upon your, your, your
renewal time, they would inform
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And Madame Chair, Madam Vice
Chair Representative and expert,
how.
How frequent would the trading?
Madam Chair Representative Senor
is it's it's once you're trained
in this, you know, every 2 years
you can do a refresher course.
Perfect. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
representative and expert, that
concludes my questions. Thank
you, representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for bringing this
forward. Um, I was wondering.
Is it hit and miss right now,
Madam Chair and um
representatives and expert has,
um, whether or not you're um
person, uh, at 911.
We have this kind of training.
Uh, thank you for the question.
So you're asking if our of our
uh
telecommunication I want are
already certified, is that to
clarify.
I'll pass it on to I mean or
Madam Chair,
is it?
We
If you're lucky enough to have
someone who is responding to the
9/11 call could be able to give
you those instructions.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Ferrari, I think right now are
911 operators are not trained in
this, uh, and
Like, for example, in
Albuquerque, sometimes you, you
call 911, you, you get an EMS,
ah.
Trained operator, and they can
assist it, but it's a hit and
miss.
Uh, you know, one example, like,
you know, that there was an
incident.
Where, you know,
You know somebody overdosed and
there was no heartbeat and and
this color con I mean the
dispatcher can assist in, you
know, CPR.
So it's a hit and miss. I mean,
it's not consistent.
And Madam Chair and um reps and
has, um, so will this training
be more than just learning how
to do CPR, but how to, you know,
um, instruct someone how to
Madam Chair, yes, so the, the,
the instruction is, is key to
this as they are, are they the
color online that you're with to
be able to administer that
instruction over the. Thank you,
Madam Chair. That's all my
questions.
But
Representative, um, and Chavez.
Madam Chair Representatives, um,
Mm
Did you already talk to EMS, the
fire department's
telecommunications and see how
they would coordinate the calls
with dispatcher EMS versus just
the 911 operator. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you for that
question. I think there is
already coordination as is when
somebody puts a call in, um.
Unfortunately, I've had to call
911 several times in my in my
lifetime and so uh upon uh EMS
getting there or there's already
coordination, so those, those
guidelines are already set and
and that communication is
already in place, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, I,
I'm just worried that um the 911
operator wouldn't have.
The education or the medical
background and um
For forgive me, um.
My son was shot.
The bullet hit the top of his
lung.
The first thing they did was
tell them to give CPR.
They, he died in his own blood
because they were giving him CPR
instead of rolling him on his
side and just puncturing.
Um, because teenagers don't know
what they're doing, um, and they
were doing what they were told.
And so,
It could have saved his life had
they not told him to do CPR and
asked for proper care and
instruction, so I am very
concerned because this could
actually hurt somebody instead
of help them, Madam Chair.
Representative, I, I understand
what you're saying in any
emergency situation, we have to
use the best information and
knowledge that we have at hand,
and I, I'm very sorry that that
and that was unfortunate that
that happened, I I I feel you,
um, however, um,
More lives would be saved if
there is more education, as
you're saying and more
information available to those
um bystanders if you will, uh,
upon calling a 911 uh number. We
also have a good Samaritan law
in place that stand that that
supports those bystanders to do
the best they can with what they
have.
This would give more information
and more training so that
There's better information.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So this just
goes beyond um because I, I'm
CPR trained, we have them come
to our building um and train
many of our co-workers, and we
get recertified every 2 years.
This would be beyond that to
actually ask those specific
questions before just saying.
Do CPR first. He's not
breathing, correct?
Madam Chair
As outlined in the legislation,
um.
From, uh, section in section 2,
it, it gives the.
The criteria here of what they
tell the public safety tell
community trainer would be, uh,
um.
the curriculum
Of each, so on page 2, I'm
reading um uh section 2, line 22
to begin a public safety
telecommission training, the
curriculum of each basic
telecommunicator training class
and in-service training each
year for the telecommuter show
include and then it lists A
through H.
Um
With H being the new information
uh stating high quality
telecomuter cardio pulmonary
resuscitation using the most
current nationally recognized
emergency cardiovascular care
guidelines, training on high
quality telecommunic
telecommunicator Cardiopulmonary
resuscitation so shall include
instruction on out of hospital
cardiac arrest protocols and
compression only cardio.
Pulmonary resuscitation. So
that's those are the guidelines,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee representative Chavez.
This additional training.
would actually encompass what
happened with respect to your
son. So that the question would
be asked, is there, is the
person bleeding? What else is
happening rather than just a
direct statement begin CPR. So
you're exactly right. That's
what the additional training
would do.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, Representative.
Representative Eleanor Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, move
would you pass.
I
OK.
We have a motion for a due pass
on HB 439 by Representative
Eleanor Chavez and the second by
Representative Anaya. Is there
any opposition?
OK, no, you have a due pass 9 to
0.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members. Next we're going
to House Bill 441.
And that's Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee. Um, uh.
Today we're talking about House
Bill 441. Um, this in in Acts.
The interstate practice of
dentistry and dental hygiene and
improves public access to
dentistry and dental hygiene
services. This is a compact, um,
for this reason, and I'm gonna
let my two experts introduce
themselves.
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee, Christina
Fisher, Associate director of
Think New Mexico. I'm just here
to help answer any questions.
This is a compact bill. I
believe this is the 8th that
you've seen. Thank you all for
your patience with them, um, and
again, um, happy to answer any
questions.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Tom
Scrippsma. I'm the executive
director of New Mexico Dental
Association and.
And again, Madam Chair, I would
like to publicly thank you uh
for giving up this compact to me
to be able to carry, uh, we're
co-sponsors on it, but again,
showing my appreciation for you
willing to uh be able to share
some of these great things in
the state of New Mexico. Thank
you, Madam Chair. We stand for
questions. Thank you,
Representative. Um, I always
like to.
Give work away.
So, um, we will go to Zoom if
you are in opposition, raise
your hand.
And I'll come back to you in the
audience in opposition.
OK, seeing no one in support on
Zoom, raise your hand. Support
in the room.
If you'd like to speak, I will
take 5 for 1 minute each.
No requirement to speak, but I,
we were noted that you are in
support.
So go ahead and come forward.
And you'll have one minute.
Good morning. Um, Madam
Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Barbara
Posler. I'm a dental hygienist,
and I am the chair of the um uh
council on regulation and
Practice for the New Mexico
dental hygienists Association.
And that association supports
this bill for license
portability for dental
hygienists, increasing the
workforce is one of the many
strategies that can increase
access to oral health care
services. Other strategies
include reducing regulatory
limitations on the practice of
dental hygienists to allow
better access to preventive
services.
The end goal being the health
and well-being of all New Mexico
citizens.
The New Mexico dental Hygienists
Association supports
House Bill 441. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Roy Soto.
I'm a registered lobbyist for
Cor Healthcare Services, an
organization that provides
dental care services to
low income kids, children, uh,
throughout the state in
underserved areas. We support
this bill. We believe that it
will open a lot more
opportunities to have our kids
get dental services throughout
the state. I would like to note
that I had the pleasure of
the vice chair of the board of
nursing some time back, and we
were able to work out the MOU
for the nursing compact, and
that's been one of the thing.
Proud moments of my life to be
able to do that. We support this
bill, we think it'll help, uh,
provide adequate dental services
to
The 33 counties that are
underserved at this point in
time. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Next, I will go to
Zoom. I have Matt.
Matt Rossetto.
Go ahead, Matt.
Yes, ma'am. Can you hear me?
Yes.
OK.
Thank you. Um, thank you all. My
name is Matt Rossetto. I'm with
the American Dental Association.
Um, we simply wanted to thank
you and the committee members as
well as the New Mexico Dental
Association for bringing this
forward. Um, there are currently
10 member states of the DDH
compact and 16 other states
including New Mexico, have filed
the legislation in this session,
so we're looking forward to New
Mexico joining that cohort, uh,
and we appreciate your support.
Thank you, Matt Schaffer. Thank
you, Madam Chair, uh, Matt
Schaffer with the Council of
State Governments. um, I would
echo all the statements that
have been made up to this point.
Um, CSG was the primary drafters
of the compact in partnership
with the American Dental
Association, American dental
hygienists Association through
funding from the Department of
Defense, so I just wanted to
reiterate, um, this is widely
supported amongst the
stakeholders in organized
dentistry and also provide
significant benefit for
military families, uh, and I'm
available for any technical
questions about the compact
should they arise. Thank you.
Thank you, Matt. Adrian Gomez.
Good morning, committee members
and Madam Chair, Adrian Gomez
for the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce and I'm here
to testify in support of HB 441.
Uh, the healthcare authority
says the bill may help, will
help increase the number of
dentists and dental hygienists
available to patients.
With Medicaid in New Mexico,
which improves access to care,
especially in the underserved
areas.
This
This bill helps make New Mexico
remain and competitive, uh, the
chamber is pleased to support
this bill as it aims to bring
more care to New Mexicans. Yes,
and we ask you to vote to pass
it. Thank you so much for your
time.
Thank you, Adrian, Jessie Hunt.
Hi ma'am sure, can you hear me?
We can, but you're breaking up a
little bit. Go ahead and if it
gets bad, we'll, I'll let you
know.
Well, I'll just go super
briefly. I'm here on behalf of
the Association of Dental
Service Organizations and just
echo everything that everyone
else is saying, especially for
increasing provider availability
in rural areas. So thanks so
much for bringing this forward,
Madam chair, and um
Thank you, Jesse. Um, OK, I'm
gonna, I have Representative
Senator Cortez.
Anyone else? OK, go ahead,
representative. Madam Chair, if
there are no other questions,
I'd like to make a motion for a
due pass, please.
Uh
Uh, I, OK, so Representative
Senator Cortez with the motion
and representative Nicole Chavis
with the 2nd.
On House Bill 441. Is there any
opposition?
Seeing none.
You have a due past 9 to 0.
Thank you, Madam Chairs, a
chair.
Uh, now we will go to HB 461,
prior authorization process
exemptions, representative
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I do have an
amendment, but with your
permission, I'm going to
introduce the bill and then
explain the amendment during the
introduction, so everyone knows
what we're what we're trying to
accomplish. Go ahead, OK, uh
great, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, prior
authorization is a process in
which a healthcare provider must
obtain approval from a health
insurance plan before providing
medical services to patients.
While promised as a way to
contain costs.
In the health care system, prior
authorization has turned into a
bureaucratic nightmare for
providers and patients alike,
delaying necessary care for
patients and creating hundreds
of hours of red tape for
providers.
House Bill 461 starts to solve
this nightmare by establishing a
process through which a provider
can earn an exemption from the
requirements of prior
authorization.
House Bill 461 would establish a
six-month evaluation period. If
during that time a provider has
a 90% or higher approval rating
for all their prior
authorization request for
outpatient services, the
healthcare provider could then
apply for an exemption from all
prior authorizations for
outpatient services moving
forward.
The insurance company would
retain the right to audit the
providers to ensure that they
continue to meet their 90%
approval rating, and of course,
if the insurance company
suspects fraud, waste, or abuse,
they could revoke the healthcare
provider's exemption exemption,
excuse me, um, Madam Chair, I'll
now explain explain the
amendment for 202, uh, the
number is 231-439.1.
OK. Uh, Madam Chair, the
amendment clarifies on page 2,
line 21, that this bill would
not apply to pharmaceuticals. To
explain the purpose of the
amendment, I'll introduce my
expert witness, Carrie Robin
Brunder with the New Mexico
Medical Society.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
and members of the committee,
uh, as the representative said,
Carrie Robin Bruder with the New
Mexico Medical Society, you
know, a lot of work has uh
happened on pharmaceuticals over
the last 10 years, uh through
step therapy, step therapy
reform and other bills related
to prior authorization, even one
just last year. I think there's
probably 5 other pharmaceutical
bills out there right now. Uh,
so that's not to say that more
work doesn't need to happen on
pharmaceuticals, but what we
really wanted to focus on in
this bill was tests.
Surgeries, advanced imaging, and
procedures. So we're talking
about things like amniocentesis
for a pregnant mothers that
maternal and fetal medicine
doctors have to order, make
their patients wait 4 or 5 days
to actually receive because they
are having to go through a prior
authorization process. We're
talking about MRIs for torn
ACLs, feeding studies for
toddlers, lumpectomies for
suspected breast cancers. All
of these procedures are things
that have delayed care because
physicians and uh nurse
practitioners, other clinicians
that are ordering these
procedures have to wait for
approval from the health
insurance companies. So, uh, we
believe that this is a very
focused way to start talking
about those procedures through
the prior authorization process.
We negotiated this amendment
with AHIP, um, it gave some
assurance to the other insurance
plans as well that are.
you explain what AIP is. Yes,
ma'am, of course we have some
new members, AIP is the I'll,
I'll probably get there, uh,
acronym incorrect, but it's the
association of Health Insurance
Plans, um, so they're the trade
organization that really
represents all of our health
insurers in the state. Um, we
felt like this was totally
appropriate to give assurance to
the other insurance plans that
the intention of this bill
really is to focus on that
procedure side. Um, it's
something we haven't
necessarily really done before,
um, so we think that that is is
something reasonable for this
bill and I'll hand it back over
to Representative Gallegos just
to tell you a couple of more
highlights before I'm ready to
help answer any technical
questions.
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair, I'll
just add one more thing, uh, you
all received a handout that is a
survey completed by the New
Mexico Medical Society in the
fall of 2024. They asked their
members statewide to describe
the impact prior authorization
has had on their patients. I'll
point out some quick highlights.
Almost 100% of physicians report
prior authorization delays.
Care in some way.
98% of physicians report prior
authorization has negatively
impacted a patient's clinical
outcome, and 58% report that
delays in care caused by prior
authorization led to a serious
adverse event, those events are
are things like hospitalization,
permanent body damage, a
life-threatening event, or even
a death.
I think, I think it is beyond
time that we trust our
healthcare providers to make
appropriate medical decisions
for their patients without
waiting on the insurance
companies to grant them
permission to treat patients
with the medical interventions
we know these patients need. And
with that, Madam Chair, we're
ready for to stand for
questions.
OK, on Zoom, if you are in
opposition, raise your hand, and
I'll come back to you in the
room in opposition. OK, seeing
none either place in support on
Zoom, raise your hand, and I'll
come back to you in the room and
support.
If you'd like to speak, come to
the center.
the Mars registered lobbyist for
Blue Cross Blue Shield of New
Mexico. We want to thank the
sponsor, Ms. Brunner and the New
Mexico Medical Society. We've
worked in negotiated hard on
this piece of legislation so
that we're able to administer
it. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Linda
Siegel for the New Mexico Nurse
Practitioner Council and the
nurse Smithy, um, association
and Gamma, and we stand in
strong support. You may remember
those of you who are here about
5 years ago, we had to have a
bill passed that mandated that
if a provider wanted to had to
do, needed to do an ultrasound
on a pregnant woman that they
had to get it immediately. They
didn't have to get
preauthorization, and that is so
true.
some of the other procedures and
tests that, that need to occur.
Providers just don't order them
for fun. Um, it's, it's a
diagnostic tool and as has been
said, it can certainly impact
the health of the patient and it
consumes so much time of the
health care provider's practice
getting put submitting requests
over and over again. So thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you. So
on Zoom we have Katie.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Uh,
my name is Katie Rayon. I am the
co-owner of Interventional Pain
Associates in Albuquerque, um,
currently for the procedures
that we provide in clinic. Um,
if the patient's insurance is
Medicare, um, just straight up
Medicare or if they have a
federal program, uh federal
insurance, they do not require
authorization for any of the
services that we provide, but
99% of
the services we provide, if they
go through an MCO, they do
require prior authorizations.
This is often, um, met with
delays, uh, as we speak this
morning, we just got a stat
authorization that was sent to
the insurance company that was
denied without the option for
our provider to even have a peer
to peer review, um, this is for
somebody with a spinal cord
injury who is losing function,
these prior authorizations, not
create like a significant amount
of work in office, um, they,
they lead to um worsening
conditions for our patients. We
are in full support of HB 461.
Thank you. Thank you, Doctor
Barbara McEnaney.
Thank you, Madam Chairman,
members of the committee. I'm
Barbara McEnany. I am a medical
doctor specializing in cancer
and I run New Mexico Cancer
Center. My practice has a 98%
approval rate for prior
authorization, but it costs us
over $300,000 a year to get
that. I can hire more clinicians
with that money. The AMA has
shown that the average primary
care physicians spends 3 work
weeks a year.
prior authorizations to get
other people paid, radiologists,
hospitals for surgeries, and
others. We don't have enough
primary care doctors to waste
their time on getting prior
authorizations. I support this
bill and I hope that it will be
passed from this committee.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Zoom user.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I'm sorry, my
name didn't appear up. Um, this
is Angelina Via Adams. I'm
president of the New Mexico
Medical Society. I think, um,
the sponsor for bringing this
bill forward as to echo on some
of the points, you know,
physicians spending less time
doing prior authorizations, um,
will improve access as they can
use that time to see more
patients and provide additional
care. Also, it will um improve
patient outcomes, um, with
Increasing delay in care as
mentioned, uh, and then
hopefully could even unburden
some of our emergency rooms
which are so overburdened as we
outpatient physicians and
clinicians can expedite
outpatient workups, uh, so that
they can efficiently um receive
care and not need to go to the
emergency room because of um
delay in approval of these uh
procedures. So I urge, um, all
of you to uh support this bill.
Thank you for your, uh, uh,
allowing me to speak today.
Thank you, Nat Dean.
And congratulations for getting
your name, Nat.
Mm.
And Madam Chair, members of the
committee and the sponsor in the
interest of time and my
challenges with speaking right
now. I was stand in support.
Thank you.
OK, so on the list I have
representative Ferrari,
Representative Anaya,
Representative E Chavez.
OK, go ahead, Representative
Ferrari. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you, Representative
guy who goes for bringing this
forward, um, my uh concern is if
the um doctor has to have a 90%.
Um, approval, um, on their, you
know, what they submit for prior
authorizations.
Is there a chance that they
could um
Not
Submit for approval certain um.
Things that would take them off
that.
You know, approval of ranking of
90%. Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Ferrari.
I, I, the first thing I would
point you to is on page 2 line
25 going on to page 3.
We've been really careful that
we are making this 90% approval
rating.
Approved upon initial submission
or after appeal. We have heard
feedback from, from, from some
of our sister societies that
there was a contraction with
insurance companies when they
first passed exemption bills
where they would just in that 6
month evaluation period, say
deny, deny, deny, deny so that
somebody couldn't meet that 90%
approval, but after appeal, they
are meeting that approval
rating. And so we think we have
solved that loophole that maybe
you're
identifying by having this
language about initial
submission or after appeal to
make sure that they can't just
be taken out of the running in
that 6 month evaluation period
that, that has solved the issue
in some other states that have
moved before us.
Um, that's good to know. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all for bringing this
billboard. This is clearly a
problem. Um, I do have a couple
of questions. Um, how do we come
up with 90%?
Madam Chair and Representative
Anaya, the state of Texas
actually has done the most work
around prior authorization
exemptions. They have a 90%
approval rating threshold there.
What we have heard from our
members is their approval
ratings are far beyond 90%, um,
but we really felt it was
important to have an earned
benefit, right? We understand
that we don't want people just
ordering tests if they're not
necessary. So we thought
90% was a strong threshold
that's been proven in another
state. The insurance companies
have been able to implement it
that way, but it is also giving
enough cushion room where our
clinicians are meeting that
threshold in a very significant
and positive way.
Thank you, Madam, yeah, I was, I
was like how many folks are
actually meeting this. It seems
like a very hard threshold to
me, which is really good to hear
that um many of our folks are,
um, and in that vein, um.
I, I was just wondering, I, I
hate prior authorizations
generally. Why wouldn't we just
get rid of them?
But I think,
I think Madam T turn
representative and I, uh, that
would be great. I, what we're
hoping is that
We can use this bill as a way to
prove that we have many of our
clinicians meeting this
threshold and they are not
increasing cost to the system
and hopefully after we have the
data from this legislation,
maybe in 5 years, we will be
back at the table saying now
it's time for us to get rid of
them entirely, but we view this
as a step in the right
direction. Big fan. All right,
um, question, I'm really glad
that you cleared up that or
after appeal. Um, I'm also
wondering, is, like, would that
be retroactive as well, so
somebody, let's say who's right
under the 90% threshold, um,
would that be retroactive, they
could appeal something, you
know, within the last 6 months,
um, after this bill goes into
effect.
Madam Chair and Representative
Anaya, the evaluation periods
are gonna happen every 6 months
of the year. So we'll have an
evaluation period, you know,
January to July. If you didn't
meet the threshold in that first
six month period, you then will
have an evaluation period in the
next 6-month period. So if you
need it in the next 6 month
period, then you can apply for
your exemption. So I think that
if the appeal was on something
that was happening in that 1st 6
month period.
and then you got approval, let's
say July 4th, right, for
something that you ordered on
June 30th. That claim would be
in that 1st 6 month period, so
you could meet that threshold.
But if you were say at 85% for
that 1st 6 months in the 2nd 6
months of the year, you would
have a um establishment period
to be able to apply for the
exemption.
Great. And then my last question
is on page 4.
Um
Let's see, Line 3, it talks
about a random sample, and I was
wondering if there are any
parameters around the random
sample. I know you said not
fewer than 5, not more than 20,
um, but I'm also thinking about
the fact that if you do 5 and 1
of them is not approved, that's
already.
20%, um and so I was wondering
if there are any parameters,
just seems um
A little bizarre to ask the
person who just denied you to
figure out what random sample
they're using. Um, so if you
could just, um, address that.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Anaya, OSI will
have to promulgate rules around
this bill. And so I think that
clarification is something that
we would like OSI to make in the
rules. However, I will point out
to you later on in the bill, if
there was a denial, if let's say
you already had an exemption,
and then they do this random
sample and they, the insurance
company says you didn't
the 90% threshold, you have an
appeal process that you can go
through with an independent
review commission and that
independent review commission
can say that was not an
appropriate revocation of the
exemption. So I think we
guardrails and rules and we have
that appeal process at the end
with the review commission to
solve any of those egregious
actions. Thank you. And I guess
one last question, Madam Chair
and Representative, um,
Before any of the folks who
might be taking advantage of
denying claims, is there any
sort of action taken against
them or responsibility that they
have to hold.
Uh, Madam Cha not in this bill,
but that is the purview of the
superintendent insurance a
provider can always file a
complaint with OSI and they
already have a procedure in
place um with that complaint
process within OSI.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Eleanor Chavez,
thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
have some questions related to
the amendment.
Uh, and so basically the
amendment
removes outpatient services and
then um
Or actually it it inserts
outpatient services and then
talks about what it does not
include.
So my question is, does that,
does that amendment then
Excuse me, um.
Speak to um um
Prescription drugs like for
cancer.
Madam Chair and Representative
Chavez.
Yes. What we have done with this
bill is we have said this should
be focused on.
Testing procedures, surgeries,
other encounters with the
patient outside of
pharmaceuticals. There is
legislation in the Senate right
now to say there would not have
to be prior authorization on
chemotherapy drugs. Um, we think
it's appropriate to have the
pharmaceutical conversation kind
of in that pharmaceutical bill
versus this bill where we're
really focused on the procedure
part, because there has not been
legislation at all to date
that's focus.
focused only on the testing
procedures, the surgeries,
everything else that we're
talking about in this bill, but
yes, this bill would exclude
cancer treatment because there's
separate legislation in the
Senate that's dealing with that.
Representatives, we have been
Um, chipping away at the, the
pharmaceutical part of it, and
those are huge fights every
time and so I'm assuming this
was taken out just to make
to, to stick with the procedures
and surgeries and not get the
mess of pharmacy. Yes, madam
Chair.
No, you're, you're fine. So I
think, no, go ahead.
No, I, and, and the reason,
excuse me, the reason that I
raised that is that
Um, my, my husband was diagnosed
with oplastoma. He ended up
passing from it.
had a big fight with the
insurance company over his chemo
drugs, and the only reason he
got chemo drugs for the, for,
for probably about a month's
period of time was because they
were donated to us.
by his doctor. Um,
The other example that and and
and and I'm sure that he's not
the only one.
Um, so I think at some point in
time, I'm hoping that this
legislature passes.
Those kinds of um uh
restrictions in terms of I I I
agree, I don't think we should
have any kind of
preauthorization if a doctor
determines something is
necessary.
People should get it.
Um
and then I experienced the
situation, I had shingles, the
doctor prescribed some cream,
you know how painful that can
be.
It was authorized, like,
4 months later.
I didn't need it anymore.
So I mean this game of, you
know, pre-authorization, I think
really causes additional pain
and puts people's lives at risk.
So again, I'm just hoping that
we can deal with it sooner than
later. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. And I need a motion
to adopt the amendment.
Oh, OK. What we'll adopt the
amendment and then we'll come
back to Representative Jones,
cause I can only remember one
thing at a time, so.
So, so I have a motion from
Representative Benaya. Is there
any opposition to adopting the
amendment, you have
amended bill and I will go back
to Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all. Um, I thought we did, I
thought we removed prior auth
for chemo drugs last year. Did
that not go through?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, there was
legislation, uh, that was
sponsored by Senator Maestas
chemo drugs, my recollection. I
was on maternity leave last
year, so bear with me if I'm a
little foggy, but my
recollection is that bill when
it was introduced, had chemo
drugs in it, but through the
process, chemo drugs were
amended out, which is why there
is now separate legislation in
the Senate trying to tackle
chemo drugs again. Is that
right, Madam Chair, I was a
co-sponsor on that, and we, we
it up, I think with um.
Oh
Behavioral health meds and um
the uh thank you, I couldn't
think of that autoimmune. So as
I said, we've been chipping away
through the years and each one
has been a major battle and
frequently we have to.
Throw away part of the good bill
to get it passed.
So anyone who wants to take up
that next session, you could,
I'll give you each a drug you
can work on.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so
I'm curious about.
Um, healthcare professionals.
Can you tell me who, who are the
healthcare professionals
specifically. Madam Chair,
members of the committee, that's
a great question because that
was one of the feedback things
that we took from um our
partners at the insurance
companies in the prior
authorization act, uh, in the
definition section of that act,
a healthcare professional is a
licensed healthcare provider,
but it excludes hospitals.
Um, so we are making sure that
it's all of the individuals who
are actually doing the orders
for tests, procedures,
surgeries, etc. um, that are
captured in this legislation.
That's also hand in glove with
the outpatient services. If
someone's admitted to the
hospital, there's a whole
different process that's used,
um, and that
Honestly, isn't, there's not
that many delays cause if you
have to be admitted, you have to
be admitted. So we're focusing
on the actual people doing the
orders for these procedures.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
OK, I will entertain emotion.
Uh, Madam Cha, I move, I do
pass.
On House Bill 461 as amended.
Correct, Madam Tara.
Thank you. I'm just trying to
keep myself in in working order.
So we have a motion from
Representative Anaya and the
second from from me, from
Representative Herndon.
Is there any opposition?
OK, seeing none, you have a due
pass 9 to 0.
Yeah
OK, and we are going on to our
final bill and look at us just
chugging along, I have to
congratulate the committee for
we are getting through a lot of
work.
Um, do we get breakfast next
time, Madam Chair? I'm sorry.
We're so good. Do we get
breakfast next time, Madam
chair.
We get Saturday off.
And, and I'm, and just I'm
thinking of moving us back to
8:30. So, so since the since the
agenda is out for Monday, we
won't do it for Monday, but I'm
hoping for Wednesday, um,
because we are so caught up. So
thank you and kudos to the
committee. So, um, minority
whip, minority leader, not whip,
with the lovely jacket.
Whenever you're ready.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members once again.
Um, with me today is my expert
to Marilyn Beck. We are here to
present House Bill 463, which is
the perinatal investigation and
Support Unit. Um, before, uh,
Excuse me.
We are creating a pilot of
perinatal investigation and
support unit within CYFD to be
solely responsible for following
up on potential child abuse and
neglect.
Reports from hospitals
responding to our substance
exposed newborns in New Mexico.
As you know, fixing the systems
gaps in Cara has become a
relenting mission, this session.
When
When we're, when we were
reviewing the LFC program
analysis, hearing from the
healthcare providers, nurses and
family members, it's clear that
the role there is role confusion
between the healthcare provider
or nurse called CYFD to report
concern reports a reported
concern of child abuse and
neglect pursuant to the
Children's code, how statewide
central intake or SCI flags that
call.
And then what happens next?
Under the public health
approach, we are working to move
the plan of safe care, support
team to DOH.
But CYFD remains responsible for
the investigations, allegations
of abuse or neglect.
Investigators under COFD play a
very specific and important role
because it rests solely on them
to make.
The allegations or flag to
determine that if there's child
abuse or neglect. Our nurses in
the healthcare providers and the
healthcare providers in the
hospitals focus on treating
patients.
There's certainly been confusion
and frustration about the what
role.
What their role has been in
Kara.
If the process works as it was
designed to work, nurses treat
patients.
If a nurse or a healthcare
provider has an immediate safety
concern about a potential child
abuse or neglect. We want them
to call SCI or make a referral
to the experts CYFD to assess
the allegation. The bill, the
bill is works to create a pilot
just.
prenatal experts.
Of just prenatal experts and
licensed social workers.
Who would answer those calls.
This bill does not change our
current process. It just works
to ensure that when a concern of
abuse or neglect is flagged for
substance exposed infant, the
expert responding to our state's
to our state child protective
services unit, CYFD is best
qualified.
To respond and assess. The care
Public Safety health approach
remains, remains untouched. The
pilot unit is just for those
911.
calls.
Of immediate safety.
And we should absolutely want
trained qualified, specialized
workforce in this moment.
I want to clarify.
CYFD investigations does not
mean removal.
It's the lever.
In the process that begins to
assess and support the word
support.
And our statute is very
important.
If we are going to really get
serious about fixing this
crisis. We need to build back up
the department with
trauma-informed, qualified
professionals responding to
emergency situations, and I
believe this bill is a good step
to protect and support our
babies and their families.
want to
And with that, Madam Chair, we
stand for questions. You have an
amendment?
Pardon me. Yes, ma'am, I do.
Do, do I have a motion to
discuss the amendment.
Uh
OK. Representative Senator
Cortez.
Is there any opposition? OK,
seeing none, go ahead. Uh, Madam
Chair, uh, members of the
committee, the number on the
bottom is 231423.1.
Oh, I'm sorry. 3 2.1.
Don't make us all think we're
losing our minds. I need food
this morning
too.
Um
And um really all we're doing is
adding the word professionals,
um, or
Licensed social work on page 1
line 25 after professionals
insert or licensed social
workers. OK, I need a motion to
adopt the amendment.
So
Oh
Representatives.
Um, is there any opposition to
adopting the amendment.
and you have been adopted an
amended bill.
And with that, we will go, um,
Boy, we zoom just emptied out, I
guess. So if you are in zoom in
opposition, raise your hand if
you are in the room in
opposition. Raise your hand.
OK, seeing no one in the room
and if you're in support, raise
your hand on Zoom, nap if you're
in support, raise your hand.
So, so go ahead in the room, is
there anyone in support?
OK, so I guess we will go to
you, Nat.
Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
Sponsors.
Uh, I am.
I am in support. I
I think that the conversation
and discussion will be robust,
so I will leave my simple
comment uh support. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair, members
of the committee and sponsor.
Thank you, Nat. So I will go to
the committee for questions, OK?
Representative E Chavez.
Anyone else?
Anaya and Kates.
OK, we'll start with that.
Go ahead,
representative.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair. So
there are multiple bills
addressing
For lack of a better word, the
chaos and dysfunction at CYFD.
Um, and I think that this bill
kind of adds to that.
Um,
We passed the bill out of here.
I don't remember what the number
is anymore, but a bill that
moves.
Hera from CYFD to DOH.
But it also includes um the MCO
care coordinators.
So my sense of what's happening
with this is that we're
layering.
Stuff on top of stuff, making it
even more impossible to get
things done in what you're
proposing to do already takes
place or should already be
taking place at CYFD. You've
already got an investigation
unit of workers or intake
workers. I don't remember any
more what that unit is called,
but they're the ones who receive
the
Um, reports of suspected abuse
or neglect.
Those workers are already
supposed to be.
Doing what your bill proposes to
do. So I'm not sure why
establishing another unit will
improve that process.
The second piece is, I
appreciate your amendment,
adding licensed social workers
in there. However, the
department is having a really
hard time recruiting social
workers just because of their
reputation.
Um
So my question is, in view of
all of that,
Your bill is asking for an
appropriation of $100,000
correct me if I'm wrong.
Um, and it's supposed to be a 2
year pilot project.
So you, you're proposing to
create a new unit. I don't know
how many, what size that unit
you're proposing for the entire
state and then it needs to be
broken down by county also,
correct?
So, so can you answer that?
What, what, how are you going to
establish a new unit with
$100,000.
And what size are you looking at
in terms of the state in total.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
secret, um, I can draw your
attention, um.
Madam Chair Committee, I'll
eventually get it at Madam Chair
committee members,
Representative Chavez, I can
draw your attention to page 5 of
the FIR, um, really the
appropriation was to begin this,
but the money already exists in
the budget. There's $7.7 million
for CYFD to match federal title
for um prevention revenue, which
is why the wording in this is so
specific. There's also 231
million for protective services.
To answer your question about
why
this needed, um, right now, the
investigators are, as you know,
are the intake unit are not um
they,
they qualifications are not
separated by subject matter, and
what we've learned in the Kara
evaluation is that nurses call.
There's a lot of conflict.
Who should be assessing if it's
abuse or neglect, and a lot of
that is being and CYFD has said
the nurses should assess or or
there's a lot of concern or we
over mandating report this body
themselves said do nurses have
bias.
What this pilot does is directs
with intentional autonomy, the
department to create a pilot to
ensure trauma informed qualified
perinatal professionals, be it a
nurse, a social worker, to be
the absolute subject matter
expert in the hospital rooms on
these very specific cases.
Madam Chair representative to
answer that question, those
those subject matter experts
should already be in place
within the investigation unit,
and I see you shaking your head,
and there's a reason why they're
not in place.
Because we don't have the
expertise at CYFD to basically
create those units, right?
I, I just don't, I just don't
have a really good sense that
this is gonna help the situation
there.
Um, there's a reason why there
aren't.
Specific
Content folks who are designated
for Kira.
Because you're investigations in
some counties.
I'll take Bernalillo, for
example. Um, it's probably the
biggest county you're gonna get
care of babies, you're gonna get
other kinds of suspected abuse
and neglect, and those workers,
if they're trained right, if
they are chum informed if they
are licensed social workers
should be able to respond and
investigate any case that comes
in and make a decision in terms
of whether or not that family
needs to be followed up.
The other piece in terms of that
I wanted to point out too is
that when an investigation takes
place, if abuse or neglect has
been determined, then.
That case is then.
Um, assigned to a permanency
planning unit. So that, that
family gets the resources and
the support that they need to
return, hopefully the child
home.
And we know that that's a
problem right now, because we
don't have the numbers of
workers employed at CYFD to
begin with.
Um, a couple of months ago
maybe, CYFD was probably down to
maybe 15 workers and they had
over 700 kids in care just in
Bernalillo County.
The numbers have gone down since
then. They've been able to hire
a few more since then, so really
those numbers fluctuate and
again it's because of the chaos
at that department, and I think
that although well-intentioned,
the numbers of bills that we're
seeing with regard to CYFD are
maybe creating a little more
pressure, um, a little more
chaos, a little more uncertainty
for the workers who are there.
And in the end, we may be
creating a situation where those
workers are going to throw their
hands up and basically just
leave.
Um, uh, this is not a bill that
I think is helpful to see YFD
even though you say the money is
already in there, um, I know
that they've asked for
additional money, and in the
past they've
Money has been they've they've
sent money back.
Um, they're not able to comply
with the Kevin SM. I think it
goes on and on and on. Um, it's
not a good situation. I
appreciate your effort for
trying to maybe make it a little
bit better, but I don't think
this bill does that. Thank you,
Madam Chair Representative.
Thank you. Next, I have
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, I will.
Uh, voice my same concerns as,
as it deals with moving to
Department of Health. I know you
know this, Madam Charan
representative. I would like all
of these to be moved out of
CYFD, um, but I also had a
question about, let's see, page
one, line 22.
Um, essentially we're saying
we're going to investigate and
assess all reports, um, that are
essentially listed in subsection
A of Section 32A 43. Um, I was
wondering what is listed there?
Um, and I asked this because we
keep saying these are only very
specific cases that we're
talking about, but at the same
time, the language in this bill
says all reports of substance
expose newborns statewide.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
that's current law right now.
We're gonna look it up if we can
and see exactly, well, like, you
know what exactly what it
states. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, because I, I
know we keep talking about very
specific cases, but it doesn't
seem so. Actually seems pretty
wide-reaching, um, all reports
across the state. So those two
things combined, it going to
CYFD, not in DOH and all
reports, um, just has me
concerned about this
legislation. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, we have the,
OK, go ahead.
Yeah. Thank you, Madam Chair and
secretary. That's actually
current law, Madam Chair, and
Representative Anaya, um,
subsection A of section 32A-4-3
is the mandated reporting law,
so that's existing statute, so
nurses call.
When they call to statewide
Central intake, the hotline,
that's pursuant to existing law.
Thank you, Madam Chair um
representative, and I do have a
follow-up question. Um, I'm
imagining this is a section of
law that we were trying to amend
in the previous bill. Um, one of
which the, no? OK, thank you.
Um, the reason I ask this as
well, and Madam Chair
Representative, you know this,
I'm really concerned about, um,
the false positives that we're
seeing really across the nation,
um, and so, Madam Chair,
representative, I would imagine
that is a mandatory report, um,
and so Madam Chair
Representative.
I would imagine it would fall
under this as well. Is that
correct?
Thank you, Representative Anaya,
and actually it was part of that
conversation that led to the.
Nurses call a lot.
And the the calls are screened
into the hotline. This in this
bill ensures that there's a
pilot unit statewide and however
the department wishes, again
they have the funding that for
your concerns, the we want the
trauma informed resident nurses,
the RNs, the social workers, um,
to be so expert to say yes, this
is abuse and neglect, or no,
this is, this is, this is
something that we can assess and
support. So really we want to
make sure that it's not a police
officer who started yesterday or
Someone in the birthing suite or
in the nurse when these calls
come in, the entire point of
this, and that's why it's called
investigation and support, is
that when these calls come in,
we want to affirm and support
your direct concerns, really
having this be the superhero of.
Of these cases. He's so expert.
There are 14 birthing hospitals
in this state. There's a pilot
for that, but we want this to
be, if a call comes in.
To make sure we're in support
and if you look at the FIR and
the agency analysis, both
Department of Health and ECECD
are in support of this because
it actually lends itself to the
public health model. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Cha
Representative, um, would you be
amenable to moving this into the
Department of Health.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
this triggers an investigation,
CYFD is in charge of the
investigation part, uh, and
always has been and probably
always will be, so, um, the
support part will come from
others, but these are in 9/11
cases specifically, and this,
this has to stay under CYFD.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I maybe this is
circular questioning, but we
keep saying it's 911 cases,
we're at the same time, we say
all reports. And so I'm just a
little confused, Madam Chair
Representative, um, but thank
you for answering my questions.
Representative, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you very much, uh,
Leader Armstrong, I thank you
for your presentation. Um,
I am so hopeful this session,
because we have so many bills.
We're going to, we're gonna
figure this out and come
forward, but I will say I do
share my concerns with my
colleagues here that have
expressed just because there are
so many um issues and, and just
as my uh as representative Anaya
just said all reports.
And then you just said 14
birthing hospitals. So you're
gonna get all reports from
14 birthing hospitals.
Uh
For $100,000.
You're gonna be able to file
that report that just, that's
from licensed social workers or
nurses and RNs.
It
It, it just feels like it's not
flushed out, but may I be so
bold as you presented a bill,
um, I, I can't remember now the
weeks or it might have been 2
days ago or a week ago.
That would that had a reporting
element in it.
Is that bill moving forward?
Where are we on with that bill?
Uh, Madam Chair, it was House
Bill 343, uh, and, and
representative, um, it's moving
forward, I believe it goes to
government next. I've asked for
it to be scheduled and haven't
heard anything. And we have a
long, you know, a short time and
a long way to go to get it
across the finish line and so,
um, Madam Chair and
Representative, as stated
earlier, that the CYFD
department has is supposed to be
doing this already. There's a
lot of money in CYFD. They can
do this.
This is just really creating the
pilot to be specific for the
reporting to make sure. Now, a
3:43 passes, there's some
reporting, but this, this is
just shoring up all the other.
Uh, bills that have been flying
through the the house and and
the Senate. So they, the they
have the money to do this. And
this is really trying to get
Madam Chair Representative, the
best
People making those decisions.
Possible.
No, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, leader. I, I really
appreciate.
That the intent of that and in
your amendment to show that that
you, you are honing in the
right, you know, we want, we
want the top level emergencies,
we want this is reporting
factor. We want expertise.
I, I just don't, um,
It doesn't seem to be flushed
out in here is the reporting
mechanism, and I'm sorry we're
talking about another bill,
Madam Chair, thank you for your
indulgence, but HB 43, the
reporting mechanism in HP 43. Is
it not for 911? Is it not for
emergency?
Thank you, um, Madam Chair and
Representative Kates. That's the
question. Under federal law,
every substance exposed newborn
has a notice or notification,
the department, that's what
we're moving is the Department
of Health. So every single under
federal law for us to get those
grants, you notify Department of
Health.
If there are additional
concerns, you make a report to
see why.
And they're they're two
different, they're every single
baby born substance exposed is a
de-identified notice to DOH and
so we've moved out of CYFD and
we're putting it just to see
what uh that that's what 343
does. If there are additional
concerns, um, that's where this
comes in.
Thank you so much. I, I'm, I'm
so sorry that it's not clear to
me. I share uh my colleague
Representative Chaves' remarks
as I'm, I, I'm just fearful of
it muddling up and already
muddled place instead of trying
to clarify, but boy do I support
the intent. Um, I don't know if
you're willing to roll it and
see if we can work with some of
the representatives to see if we
can shore it up, and I don't
know if we have.
time for the agenda I to share
your anxiety as an I hate these
last several weeks, we will
start realizing what we can't
get through, and we do need to
get these things through. So
thank you very much.
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you all. really appreciate
the conversation. I see this
very clearly.
Having been in the position of a
nurse.
Discharging a baby to a home I
thought was dangerous, and I've
heard from nurses, so maybe this
is good to add this to the
conversation because I think
this is
This is who you're talking
about. These are the the the
children that you're talking
about or going home from the
hospital.
The, the nurse sees.
It's a dangerous situation, she
calls the hotline and can't get
an answer.
Or gets an inappropriate answer
or someone who's not an expert,
would that be the situation
you're discussing or you're
addressing?
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, um, we know from
previous testimony that a
majority of the plans of safe
care like Representative and I
have mentioned, were made for
cannabis or nicotine. So every
single baby that would be born
would get substance exposure
would have a plan of safe care.
We know that.
I mean,
Maybe a baby born exposed to
nicotine would not be an
imminent emergency situation
when cabinet Secretary Doyle sat
here. She mentioned that 12 of
those calls last month or in
December were 911 calls.
This would be when those calls
come in from the hospital, they
do still go to CYFD. They have
to go to CYFD. They're the
investigation unit. I think your
hand out in front of you shows
how that is, um, this is
ensuring that the person on the,
the receiving and who's
discharged or goes to the
hospital, works with the nurses,
is a qualified person to say,
yes, this is just nicotine and
we can
Screen them out.
Or 911, this needs to go down
the loop if that answers your
question.
Thank you.
Maryland and so Madam Chair, do
you think
Having this in place would have
prevented some of the deaths
we've seen recently with infants
who've gone home with the
families that nurses thought
were dangerous situations.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
representatives, we know.
That this could have prevented.
Yes.
And, and we're all tired of
babies dying.
There's no other words.
To say, except we're tired of
it.
And um I, I know everyone in
this chamber wants to fix it.
This is one tool in the toolbox
to help get that done.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
If the other bills don't pass.
Would it be essential to have
this in place to, to prevent
more babies from dying.
Most definitely, Madam Chair and
representative. Thank you,
Representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Chavez.
Madam Chair representatives does
is CYFD supporting this bill?
It is my understanding that CYD
is supporting this bill, Madam
Chair and secretary, they're
also in the audience. Um, thank
you.
Thank you. Um, I guess my next
question is, what is a current
investigator, um, what are their
qualifications at CYFD.
Madam Chair and secretaries, you
would need to ask CID that.
Scott's here.
Not to throw him under the bus,
but he's right there.
If you'd so indulged Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I cannot speak specific. Could
you please introduce yourself.
personality, director of Family
Services for CYFD, which is the
preventative portion of CYFD. So
I'll speak uh representative to
some generalities of what their
requirements are.
Knowing that that is not, it's a
division I work with, but not a
division I oversee.
So the requirements for
investigations are to be able to
be trained in specific um tools
that
Address is the situation safe?
Is this family safe? What are
the things that they need, um,
educationally they go through, I
think in other hearings in in
this hearing how you all have uh
talked about the training
academy that is really teaching
those skills to determine is
this how safe is this family
safe, what else do they need
educationally, I think the
recommendation has been and the
suggestion has been making sure
that they have the training.
Social work
Associated uh training as well.
Hopefully, Representative Chavez
that somewhat answers your
question.
Mm
Thank you so much. I think so. I
mean, if they're trained,
there's good investigators and
this is truly gonna help, I
think, a crisis that we're
having with babies dying, um, I,
I don't.
See an opposition to this bill
and if we're not coming.
And I do this at work all the
time when my employees come to
me with an issue, but they're
not giving me solutions. That's
not helping the problem. So
let's do anything that's gonna
get help in the right direction,
and I think that this, this
legislation or or bill will help
in the right direction. So thank
you so much.
So before you go, are, are you
prepared to say that CYFD
endorses this bill.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative,
Representatives, we are working
with the um.
With the, the person bringing
forth the bell to potentially
make some adjustments to it, and
we do support it. We think it is
a good idea to have a
specialized trained unit that is
a pilot to be able to respond to
the specific needs with specific
training.
Thank you. So I, I just have a
question. So, Ms. Beck, you, you
referred us to page 5 of the
FIR.
Um, and, and you stated that the
money is in CYFD, so I'm
assuming that it's in at YFD,
it's there for a purpose. So if
we use it for this instead of
what it's therefore currently,
what will pick up what it's
paying for now.
I'm sorry, can you ask that
question again? Yeah, so, so you
said the money is there.
And if you use that money for
this.
Law.
What is going to take its place
within CYFD, those funds that
are currently being used by some
other programs, some other, um,
I, I don't know what, but, but
when you take out, you've got to
either replace or cut something
in.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
um, they've.
COFD is reverted tons of money
and uh and it went unused in
2023, the legislature made an
appropriation for opioid
settlement revenue, including a
million dollars to implement
safe plans of care, and it went
unused.
I, I understand that, but is, is
that the money that you are
targeting? Yes, madam Chair, the
and, and CYFD as said spoken
earlier, they're supportive of
doing this. They want to
implement this. They want to to
do some other things we're gonna
meet after this if this bill
passes and and make some other
changes, um, listen to them what
they what they really want us to
do.
Uh, Madam Secretary and, and
members of the committee on page
5, it says in 2023 again, um,
the legislature made
appropriations from the opioid
settlement, including 1 million
to implement plans of safe care
for substance exposed newborns
and 1 million to establish safe
care home visiting, which is
eligible for federal
reimbursement, both
appropriations went unused and
reverted under this bill, which
says it must be a Medicaid
reimbursed, evidence-based title
4E.
Funding service, this would be a
under the safe care home
visiting. So we're trying to
access those funds by being
explicit in the language, those
funds exist and they've been
reverted previously.
Thank you for that. And I'm
assuming that part of the
reversion is because they
haven't been able to hire staff.
So if we take the money away,
that will continue.
Uh, Madam Chair, that, that's a
possibility. We all know right
now that um
Finding workers is really hard.
We all know that we've got,
you've heard tons of legislation
in front of you to, uh, you
know, build up our behavioral
health program for, uh, to keep
and retain behavioral health
workers. We've got, um, um,
All kinds of legislation to help
build this up. And so we're
hoping that we're incentivizing
people to do this.
OK, thank you. That
Representative Chavez. that
prompted another question. If
CYFD supports this.
They want to see this kind of a
union. Why, why do we need
legislation? Why isn't, and
maybe that's the question for
CYFD, why haven't they gone
ahead and and um created this
kind of unit already. Why do we
need legislation? Uh, Madam
Chair, uh, Representative, a lot
of times we wish that they would
do the things this is codifying
it in law.
To do it.
Madam Chair Representative, I,
I, I'm going again say I think
that speaks to the chaos and
lack of expertise at CYFD. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
OK, I will, um, accept a motion,
so moved.
For a do pass as amended Madam
substitute motion to table. OK,
um, a tabling motion takes
precedence, so will you call the
role a a yes vote is to table a
no vote is to continue
discussion.
Representative Anaya.
Yes to table and explain my
vote.
Representative Cates, yes to
table.
Representative Eleanor Chavez.
Yes.
Representative Nicole Chavis.
No, Representative Ferrari.
Yes, to table, I'd like to
explain my vote.
Representative Jones.
No to table.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez, not
a table.
Vice Chair Herndon.
He's the table, I'd like to
explain my vote.
Chairwoman Thompson, yes.
We have a 6 yes and 3 no. OK. So
this has been tabled.
And Representative, if you, if
you meet with CYFD and um we can
pull it off the table, if, if,
if you come up with some things
and, and talk to members of the
committee, and I'd be willing to
put it back on if you, if you
can get some of these things
figured out. Thank you, Madam
Chair, I appreciate that. OK, so
we representative Anaya to
explain her vote briefly. Madam
Chair, representative, I did
look up that section of law. I
know we said it, it was only for
9/11 cases, but I looked at the
section of law that you were
referencing, and it also
includes just suspicion as well.
And so I would really like to
see a tightening up of that
language, um, and move into the
DOH if at all possible, Madam
Chair, and, um, representative.
Thank you.
Representative Ferrari, um,
Madam Chair, and uh.
Madam Leader, um, my concerns uh
were what you expressed for CYFT
to get those changes. So thank
you.
Representative Herndon.
Madam Chair, my expression was
the same. I, I would like to see
CFD and the changes and they
brought back.
