There is yes I barely hear.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Representative Roger Montoya I'm
here good morning to everyone
good morning Representative
released that also just.
Representative Liz Thomson I'm
here.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
I'm here and I'm driving so I
have bad service okay.
just you know I'm presenting a
bill for Senator Gallegos in tax
and revenue this morning so far
not here that's why okay great
thanks for let me know.
vice chair Joanne Ferrari I'm
here.
And madam chair Deborah A.
Armstrong I'm here.
Okay and I see and we have our
first of folks here for Senate
bill two seventy nine
Representative Johnson you're
putting that one on correct.
Your muted.
Here we go yes I am madam chair.
And we ran my C. R. I see we
have us under Frank and Ralph
McLish and
and I don't remember is there
another expert that you wish to
join us.
Also may have Dr Jeremy admins.
And superintendent Linda
Trujillo.
I see Linda I'll bring her over.
And
You said Dr Jeremy.
Yeah I don't see him.
Okay.
Watch if he shows up I will
bring him in.
Okay go ahead.
Thank you good morning madam
chair and committee members and
to everyone on the same call
today we have before you house
bill two seventy nine and is
that my co sponsor is of the one
and only Senator o'neill and I
think he's having a competition
with Senator Ivy Soto because
the bill is eighty three pages
and seems to have the longest
introduction however.
This bill will repeal that off
the osteopathic medicine act to
amend the medical practice act
which will authorize the New
Mexico Medical Board to license
and regulate.
The practice of both medical
doctors and the doctors of
osteopathic medicine.
The New Mexico Medical Board and
the doctors of osteopathic
medicine are in agreement with
this merger both agree that the
New Mexico Medical Board has the
establish ten year of staff in
the profession of licensing and
regulation there is agreement
that both the medical doctors
and the osteopathic doctors are
equally respected in the medical
field.
And both provide quality health
care they are both fully trained
and licensed doctors and both
must complete a residency
training and both must pass a
licensing exam.
And we should also be proud of
our medical college for L.
college of osteopathic medicine
which is located in Los crucis.
All college works very closely
with the New Mexico State
University and is the only
medical coverage in the United
States focused on health care
and southwestern New Mexico so
we have that benefit as well
with that madam chair committee
members I stand for questions.
Okay would you like your
expertise to give an intro.
Just sure okay wonderful okay.
let's start with asunder Frank.
Good morning
chairman women and members of
the committee.
I'm Sandra Frank and I am the
executive director of the New
Mexico Medical Board I've been
with the medical board about
eight years The New Mexico
medical board is in full support
of this merger about seventy
percent of U. S. states have a
combined I DO and M. D. board
but New Mexico has separate
boards and we feel that the New
Mexico Medical Board has a staff
of about seventeen people who
specialize only in the
regulation and licensure of
physicians we have about ten
thousand overall licensees that
we currently regulate.
About nine thousand of those are
M. P.'s and our expectation is
that there will be about the
yield will have about a thousand
physicians that will come into
our jurisdiction and we believe
that we have the staff and the
specialty already set up we will
we recognize them as equals if
in medical hospitals and other
entities they are considered
equals and we believe that if
they are regulated by one entity
this will help with efficiency
and fairness for both
professions and with that thank
you members of the committee.
Thank you.
Ralph McLish.
Thank you madam chairwoman
of Armstrong and members of the
committee the osteopathic
community support Senate bill
two seventy nine is substituted
by the gesture Senate Judiciary.
All we believe that the bill
shows true parity and equity
between the two professions.
Of the positions practice side
by side in hospitals sit on
hospital boards together they
both have a little bit scope of
practice and the Senate bill two
seventy nine was negotiated in
good faith between all parties
and the agreement came so we're
going to merge.
Thank you thank you thank you
superintendent Trujillo do you
want to add anything.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee for
taking the time to consider this
legislation as is already been
stated there was a lot of
discussion there's been a lot of
effort put into coming to
consensus on this bill and I'm
happy to say that this morning I
got a text from of the lobbyist
for the Burrell College and she
said that she stuck in traffic
but that I may present to the
committee of the for all
colleges in full support of this
prior to today however I will
say that the student body wrote
an editorial opinion in full
support of this and sent it off
to the Las Cruces sun for
publishing so this is one of
those bills where you great
fully have so many interested
parties that were willing to
come to the table and everybody
seems to be happy in the and and
the department the regulation
lock licensing department and
the governor fully support this
merger and will work to make
sure that it's a smooth transfer
of responsibilities
as of funding and all of the
things that we currently have we
will make sure that it's a
smooth transition transition
thank you madam chair thank you
and I know that senator nail
hate scope of practice bills if
and competition between
different kinds of providers
unless everybody's on board so.
okay we will go to the audience
and we start with a poll.
Just to get a sense of who's in
the audience and whether they're
in support or opposition of
Senate bill two seventy nine.
Or give them a few seconds that
looks like we've got it
we there's four in the audience
and support and no one in
opposition.
And so if there's anyone in the
audience who wishes to make a
statement if you can raise your
hand will let you make a
statement.
And we have first up dealtaker.
Go ahead down madam chair this
is Dale G. and and I wanted to
speak on this bill just on
behalf of me my association did
not take a position on it but I
did want to say as a former
board member of the osteopathic
medical board that I want to
support this bill
it's time for that merger it's
time the osteopathic Medical
Board really worked hard work
well but it can benefit from a
professional management
perspective with professional
evaluation staff
and I'm not saying that they are
all the staff was not
professional but they were
covering too many boards and the
medical board's really belong
together so I do want to stand
in support of merging the
osteopathic board with the
Medical Board thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Dale.
And it looks like that's the
only public comment we had so
we'll go to the Committee and.
First I have Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for bringing this
legislation forward I just have
to say that I appreciate
I believe it's director Linda
Trujillo reaching out doesn't
happen a lot across party lines
when you know you have the votes
and so I appreciate the clean up
I appreciate the hard work and
effort that you're you're
putting forth trying to make it
better and this is the way.
Legislation should work so
that's I didn't really have a
question just wanted to give.
Let's uh Google does their thank
you.
Thank you thank you
Representative our next we have
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and
thank you for bringing this
forward Representative Johnson
and Senator o'neill I of being
from Austria's just we're very
proud of Burrell College and we
are I think.
it's nice to see Representative
Trujillo here with us and.
I know I don't know your new
title totally that was our
intent superintendent intended
open right so it was it
madam chair and superintendent
was it PLR that is not able to
make it.
Yes she's wonderful she's been
so supportive in our community
and you know different things
and even hosting are at interim
committees and.
Right so I'm glad to see this
merger I think it's going to be
a great thing to have included
and we're just joining seventy
percent of other states
so I guess that's like thirty
five states.
Of we would like to name them
all no I'm just kidding so
anyway I'm glad to see this and
thank you for bringing this
forward that's all madam chair
thank you thank you.
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman madam
chairman that I to I just want
to echo
my enthusiastic support for
Senate bill two seventy nine I
wish we could see more bills
like this move through the
legislature
it is great to see these
important up provider
communities come together up
because I think it only speaks
to a better health care for all
New Mexicans so madam chairman I
too appreciate the Sanchez and
all of those who have
contributed to making this bill
reality and look forward to
sending in a long thank you
madam chairman.
Thank you Representative and so
I'll add my my kudos this is a
a national trend and even even
the education the residency
mechanisms and so forth have
have become more aligned and
we've tried always treated them
equally in New Mexico at least
in my memory so it it makes
great sense so thank you.
what's the will of the committee
and we do pass hello.
And a second
any objection to the do pass.
Okay the course of the also
everyone present voting in favor
and you have a unanimous do pass
out of house health and Human
Services Committee and on to the
floor.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and committee members thank you.
we're going to do three
seventeen next the behavioral
health costsharing no behavior
health costsharing
Representative Burris is doing
three sixteen and I told her we
would roll over it and put it
last as she's she is getting her
vaccination and hopefully we'll
be back in time and if not then
I will put it on for her so we
have among the attendees I know
I saw senator Hickey wheels you
over.
Good morning senator.
Good morning good morning and
remind me who your experts are
that you want
market apps dean may or may not
be there.
And
Sam I'm sorry I don't see them.
Okay.
It will be here in just a moment
okay and we had it's very
someone from the American
psychological or the the state
to I behavioral health
association so let me ask the
audience if you're here to be an
expert on this
to assist Senator Hickey if you
would raise your hand and we can
provide you.
Are castling Karimi.
Thank you.
And.
Thank you madam chair and
senator is I have passed after
the first presentation in ****
we had a it's a boatload of the
proponents and I've asked them
that just narrow it down to one
it's a quick interested time so
it we won't have a lot of people
here today but I think the bill
will speak for itself and I
think mark may get on one.
I want to thank thank you very
much I am yes.
Is here let me just promoter.
Okay we've got a okay very good
madam chair and Senators it's a
little in my honor to take
multiple years of experience in
health care
which led me to identify that
one of the roots of a poor
health
and then a number of other
things not finishing education
crime and what have you is a
lack of access to behavioral
health and behavioral health a
lack of access to behavioral
treatment and substance use
disorder treatment to which
which one time New Mexico led in
the number of opioid gas in the
country and understanding that
the behavior a house really
affects physical health and as
we'll see in a bit
untreated undiagnosed behavioral
health substance abuse
conditions drive up costs of
chronic disease by a factor of
two to three and that two thirds
of these patients do have a
common current at least one and
very often many more chronic
disease conditions thus raising
the cost of health care but the
size of the.
Call it a a statewide pandemic
in New Mexico is reflected by
the fact that you're analyst
actually raised a seventeen
point four percent of New
Mexican use report severe
depression twice the national
average and sixty two point nine
percent of them didn't receive
treatment of New Mexico dot.
Our
treatment eighty six percent had
some form of insurance but many
could not afford the out of
pocket costs for treatment of
behavioral health issues
including addiction which is one
of the reasons why I'm bringing
this bill
The a couple of other very
interesting facts are not
interesting it really kind of
sad tax the suicide rate in New
Mexico is twenty five per
hundred thousand versus the U.
S. average of fourteen
per hundred thousand thirty
eight point seven percent of
serious mental.
No misdiagnoses did not receive
any mental health treatment
recently and the American
psychological association survey
telephone survey in the state
demonstrated that eighty one
percent of people who hand one
of these two situations and just
as a fact another unfortunate
fact is they are very often
related because people self
medicate with.
substances drugs alcohol in
order to deal with their with
their mental health but eighty
one percent had cost concerns so
given all that there is an
opportunity to do something to
really increase the number of
people who are able to receive
behavioral health treatment and
our
substance abuse disorders I had
the honor of leading the coop
program here in New Mexico and
also serving on the high risk
pool and that particularly in in
the co op in our second year of
operation we decided that out of
pocket expenses were a huge
Barry here to folks being able
to receive both behavior health
and substance abuse and also
turns out to be chronic.
Disease as well and so we made a
policy to do away with
copayments deductibles co
insurances and outpatient
treatment I. O. P. which is a
intense about patient which is
state court of substance abuse
therapy and also very very
important you have no copays on
medications to take that barrier
way and
talk about the results of that
and in a moment that what we
propose to do based upon that
experience and based upon
research in the literature which
is I'm not going to drag you
through that today but very very
impressive and our.
Direct consensus that if
behavioral health and substance
use disorders can be brought
under control you can reduce
chronic care costs by two thirds
and again I didn't set everyone
articles I sent to the
chairwoman
and I co sponsor Representative
day Hochman but what this bill
would do is specific to the
following
it would remove all copays
coinsurance deductibles of
behavioral health and substance
use disorder treatment programs
including I O. P. as I just
mentioned inpatient
hospitalization which is usually
detoxification in substance use
disorder but certainly for very
severe behavioral health a key
components residential treatment
center care which is a form of
therapy will people spend thirty
to ninety days are living with
their peers and getting constant
counseling and they they live at
a location and parcel which can
be a mix of living there and not
living there but still getting
the intensive and it would
remove as we did at New Mexico
health connections and not sure
how
we being made are having stepped
down
little over a year ago that
removing all that co pays on
drugs and including that few
handful of brand name drugs to
be used for psychotic
situations.
As this is a New Mexico program
we cannot affect Medicaid but
that's okay because Medicaid
currently has direct access
without any of these copayments
we have no authority over
Medicare so they're excluded and
we have no authority over the
federal employees health program
I'm proud to say that the high
risk pool a couple years ago
adapted to this form of
approaching those patients
eliminating those financial
barriers what what effect would
be.
In small group and that's about
three hundred fifty thousand
people also insured and fully
insured self insured becomes
important because it includes
the I. back which is a hundred
and sixty thousand people on the
state those of the teachers and
the retirees and state employees
all Exchange BayStars be well
New Mexico plans both on and off
the exchange and also small
group exchange based plans so by
eliminating that the
You would think that that there
is a huge financial impact well
we went back and with actuaries
to look at the amount of cost to
a premium of taking it out of
the pocket of the patient and
putting it into the pocket of
the insurer and the actual
prevent per per month cost
member premium can cost anywhere
from.
Now in the exchange almost
nothing but
and in commercial plant other
commercial plants it's about
it's about one to three dollars
to the premium and when you're
paying an average premium of
three hundred to four hundred
dollars per member per month
that is really pretty small so
this is not a high fiscal impact
in absorbing this cost sharing
the but again remember that
the current of that that you're
going to more than make up for
the cost because of the impact
on chronic disease and its
gigantic and I know the FIR
scored this they they do static
scoring not dynamic scoring and
in static scoring
they noted that okay there's a
couple million here a million
there that the state would have
to absorb what they didn't do is
just have in looking at the
literature which again is very
consistent consensus oriented
that they would more than make
up for that absorbing that
question they would actually
save money into the tens of
millions of dollars and so this
is a savings plan now for the
state
The
so the appropriation is really
not anything now the other
question is how do we know of
people are doing this
well first fully insured plans
is completely in the interest of
the health plan as it was it New
Mexico health connections
throughout the result of doing
this led to those two companies
having an emergency room visit
right.
Fully a third less than any of
the other
carriers in New Mexico and not
only an emergency room visit
right that also ended mission
right and when you add those two
together just as their years
talking millions of dollars let
alone the impact on chronic
disease so
the I I think those are really
the the the key components of it
and
I will stand for questions and
can go into a lot more detail I
can cite the studies for you the
Milliman study malam is one of
the top.
Our actuarial firms in the
country said that are doing this
would lower costs.
anywhere from seven to about
fifteen percent that's pretty
phenomenal
and that's in a a package that I
sent to the chair twenty and
here's the other interesting
thing you will hear some
opposition from some health
plans on the other hand
when I was talking with
Presbyterian about it they do
have a program called
collaborative care which is
dealing with behavioral
substance abuse disorders and
chronic disease together and
when they do that they have no
copays are they understand the
value of that in getting people
in the other very interesting
fact is that the state hospital
association endorsed this plan
and and again that includes
Presbyterian in love less
because I think they understand
that.
Number one
it's in the best interest of the
patient and number two what I'm
hoping especially as we have
such a diverse behavioral health
providers and substance abuse
therapist in the state that they
will start engaging and programs
and start to put the investment
in both Senator not so much.
Is that developing the programs
and people and so that we can
get much more treatment going
around the state and also we're
learning that telehealth of
behavioral health substance
abuse as we learned in the echo
project is very very effective
in those could grow as well so
it's a win win win win for
everyone saves money R. it's
good for the providers so they
can spend more time seeing
patients and collecting
deductibles and
it.
is a I win for the hospitals and
potentially being able to bring
these services but the most
important thing the most
important thing and and this we
all live within one way or
another to friends or family and
extended family it reduces the
suffering of the individual
and as as family members and
friends we know that we suffer
along with them and it reduces
that as well and and now I stand
for questions.
Thank you would you like your
experts to give any opening
remarks or just wait for
questions.
Is that a brief opening remarks
and subtract.
Dr obscene.
Madam chair members of the
committee of the very brief as
the senators at well articulated
this investment in terms of
taking care folks upstream by
eliminating cost share for the
member is an investment total
health and total outcomes for
the population it is very
similar in in town in in in in
intent with what happened with
the affordable Care Act by
making preventive services forty
two folks who enroll in programs
in this at carriers getting it
reduces any barriers to
accessing preventive care in
this context we're considering
all behavioral health services
preventive care because it
prevents bad overall total
health outcomes can help people
get the care they need upstream
finally health plans have
opportunity should there be
abuses which some folks at the
localized concerns about that
they through through
credentialing means to make sure
that the behavioral health
providers are of the quality
that should be in our state.
People are fearful that that may
not happen if you just open up
the floodgates as some have
alleged you have means is a
carrier to intervene and make
sure that the right providers
are in your network and are
doing right chair and through
utilization management it's the
activity of a health plan you
make sure that be a
conversations and prior approval
that the members to patients are
getting the care in the right
setting by the right provider
and it's the right services it
should not be a burden borne by
patients and members do at a
financial mechanism it's up to
the plans to make sure that the
members get the care in the
right place for the right price
at the right turn in just the
right service finally add we've
heard loud and clear that why
while we do everything to
increase coverage for New
Mexicans it doesn't matter if
you can't find care and in fact
this elimination of a cost share
burden for which is an
administrative burden on the
providers themselves behavioral
health providers this is an
additional aid to supporting the
growth of behavioral health
providers in our state because
it is a costly administrative
burden to manage that
costsharing membership so
briefly those are the points I'd
like to make and I'm happy to
answer questions as well.
Thank you and it looks like we
lost Kathleen.
I'm here you're here are there
you are.
Sorry about that I thought you
disappeared I'm not I'm haven't
had enough coffee this morning
go ahead Kathleen.
Thank you so much madam chair
and members of the committee
thank you for this opportunity
to speak on this very important
Senate bill three seventeen my
name is Kathleen hear me and I
am the co owner of the New
Mexico based behavioral health
care company called behavior
change institute I'm also board
member for the New Mexico
behavioral health providers
association and I'm here today
representing my own agency as
well as the providers
association both of which
strongly support SB three
seventeen through our many years
of service we've observed that
cost share on intensive
outpatient services as a total
barrier to accessing medical
medically necessary care and for
our particular population which
is individuals with autism this
often results and children
falling behind developmentally
and beaker escalating sometimes
to the point of losing placement
in daycare or school
hospitalization and chronic
readmission and costly
residential care for our
particular service because it is
intensive outpatient it's a
family is receiving care five to
six days per week their total
cost share can be upwards of ten
to fifteen thousand dollars per
year just for the copayments and
like to point out this is in
comparison to twenty nine
percent of the New Mexico in two
thousand nineteen median income
so on behalf of the individuals
with autism and their families
my agency and the behavior
health providers association we
strongly urge you to support
Senate bill three seventeen
thank you.
Thank you thank you and members
of the committee I did sit have
the articles that Senator Hickey
provided me I did have
circulated so you should have
received by email and they're
also on the share drive so for
a background additional
background information.
So are we ready to go to the
audience Senator yes okay thank
you and we start with a poll on
to get a sense and this would be
equivalent to raising hands if
we were in person doctor who is
here in opposition or support.
We'll leave that up for a few
seconds San.
Okay I think we have it
looks like eight in support and
to in opposition.
And we will start it.
Among those who are opposed to
wish to speak if you would raise
your hands and will.
will give you time to state.
And starting with Brett more go
ahead Brandt.
And it I'm not going to cut you
off because I don't think we
have a lot of people speaking
but if you can try and keep your
comments as brief as possible
will still run the clock so you
have an idea about how much time
trying wrap up as soon as you
can after the one minute.
Thank you very much madam chair
I appreciate the indulgence at
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Fred war I
am a registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance plans
and we stand in opposition to
Senate bill three seventeen I
would stand in opposition the
Senate bill three seventeen
because this concept of having
no cost sharing is something
that hasn't been done in other
states and it really is a
concept that we haven't looked
at in New Mexico I would urge
that the committee give serious
consideration to looking at this
concept in the interim and I'm
not using one The state study
things in the interim but this
has greater implications because
when you talk about paying for
health care you're talking about
the premium dollars that folks
pay and then insurance companies
reimburse providers but then you
also talk about cost sharing to
eliminate cost sharing
completely would have a ripple
effect through the system that
we don't totally know what would
happen this is understandable
that people need care in this
area but what we're talking
about is how we pay for these
things you will see that there
are significant costs identified
in the FIR in those costs would
definitely ripple through the
system the other thing that I
would note and this is something
that we recently identified is
if in fact I have a a need for
these types of services and I
know that there's no cost
sharing I could go get a plan
that has a very high deductible
and thereby reduce the amount of
premiums that I'm paying and so
would those types of
complications would be very
difficult for health plans to
absorb I would know this as well
that there is one company in the
market currently offering these
types of plans it's true health
in truth out is providing this
option this bill would eliminate
choices for consumers by forcing
all.
Health insurers to do the same
thing and we think it's just the
wrong policy and that it needs
to get looked at thank you so
much for the intelligence madam
chair.
Thank you our next we have
Sarah Baca bridges.
Good morning madam chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Serra Baca and I and the
parents with thirteen year old
child with autism as well as the
marketing director for bridges
autism services we are an agency
has served individuals diagnosed
with autism and their families
in Albuquerque and Rio Rancho
through behavior and applied
behavior analysis over the years
the legislature has done a
tremendous job in providing
support and opening doors for
families to have access to high
quality behavioral health
services which includes applied
behavior analysis therapy
although several doors with your
support have been open there are
still looking for providing an
equal access to many families
this is the families who have
commercial insurance I speak to
ma'am many families each day who
are calling excited to get their
child the help that they need
and start therapy as soon as
possible families who have a
tough two year old child just
diagnosed with autism well I've
read and seen what intensive
earlier early intervention the
reply behavior analysis can do
for their child many of these
families are based the decision
on if they can afford to provide
their child with much needed
evidence based therapy which has
been scientifically proven and
confirmed to provide their child
with a better quality of life
more times than not the decision
as to opt out of therapy because
of the financial constraints it
will put on their family of the
twelve years of being part of
the autism community in New
Mexico I have worked with many
families who cannot finance.
To have their child in a BA
therapy I too am one of those
parents had my son had access to
therapy at two years old when he
was diagnosed I am confident
that at thirteen he would not
need as much support in school
and in the community that he
needs today I urge you to
support this piece of
legislation and thank you for
your time.
Thank you.
Our next we have Marlys show
it's.
Madam chair members of the
committee Marcia it's registered
lobbyists for Blue Cross blue
shield of New Mexico again rural
health services are critical to
our members especially now in
extended access to telemedicine
to ensure that our members are
able to receive these critical
services throughout the state.
All the all out of pocket costs
for behavioral health could have
large financial implications
that would result in higher
premiums especially for those in
that fragile coalition Market.
Additionally this bill has a
very broad definition of
behavioral health and recruit
outpatient inpatient branding
prescription drugs we appreciate
the Sanchez intentions and
expertise but believe that
health plans you have what this
bill you to design plans that
meet the needs of their members
and ever changing environment.
Also note please that health
plans not all health plans have
delivery systems which they can
shift costs for these reasons
and the reason stated by Mr
Moore the cross the shield in
New Mexico stands in opposition
to this legislation thank you.
Thank you now anyone that wishes
to speak in support you can
raise your hand.
Anyone wishing to speak in
support.
Hi Ellen pines.
Thank you madam chair Ellen pods
representing the disability
coalition and we stand in strong
support of this measure it's
very well established that out
of pocket cost sharing at the
point of service is a barrier to
accessing care and to and
hearing to treatment once it has
been recommended this bill is
aimed at removing or at least
reducing those barriers and we
support that we also support the
portion of the bill that calls
for reporting a reminder that
this is a five year project and
that there will be regular
reports to evaluate it which
will provide New Mexico specific
information in order to answer
some of the questions that have
been raised by the opponents and
we urge the committee to support
thank you.
Thank you next we have Schardin
Berman.
Thank you and good morning madam
chair and committee members my
name is Sharon Berman and I'm a
civic engagement and policy
manager at New Mexico First and
I'm a registered lobbyist for
New Mexico first thank you for
this opportunity to speak in
favor of Senate bill three
seventeen.
Removing financial barriers for
New Mexicans to have access to
health promotion prevention
intervention and treatment is
the basis of many of the
consensus based recommendations
that hundreds of New Mexico New
Mexicans created at our health
body mind and spirit town hall
last year.
Removing barriers for New
Mexicans to have access to
behavioral health services and
saving our state state
significant funds is clearly a
fiscal win win for all involved
also and just as importantly it
is the right thing to do for New
Mexicans and the health of our
state on the whole and if this
is indeed the first time this
will have been done in our
country let's set an example
currently the simple we're
sending is that one of our
counties has the highest rate of
suicide in the nation let's
instead choose to leave by
supporting visionary legislation
that allows New Mexicans health
and our state budget to thrive
thanks very much to the sponsors
for bringing forward this bill
we ask you to support Senate
bill three three seven team
thanks very much thank you our
next we have Jim Jackson.
Thank you madam chair good
morning everyone of that Jim
Jackson for disability rights
New Mexico Senate bill three
seventeen will make these
important mental health and
behavioral health services more
accessible to people and in our
state this is a particularly a
critical issue
we appreciate actually the broad
definition of behavioral health
services and eliminating these
cost sharing requirements will
will really make this these
important services more
available and we encourage the
committee support thank you.
Thank you.
Hi Joel Davis.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Joel
Davis on the policy chair for
elevate the spectrum statewide
nonprofit all volunteer board
members.
The reason advocacy and
awareness for autism for the
reasons of the the experts
stated the sponsor many of the
other advocates we support this
bill for those families on the
Medicaid bubble they can't
afford often to get the baby
health health supports they need
for their their children with
autism as we all know early
intervention is the key this
would help to break down that
barrier so we ask you to support
this thank you.
Thank you I'm sorry what
McDaniel.
I hope I and what's your name.
That's okay good morning madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Charlotte but when
you I work with Juliana who I'm
here today on behalf of the New
Mexico behavioral health
providers and we ask you to
stand with us in the Sanchez and
strong support is going to three
seventeen thank you.
Thank you Charlotte.
Okay.
I think that's all of the public
comment we have so we will go to
the members of the committee of
us Senator there's anything you
want to say before we move to
questions.
Yes madam chair and senator is a
one piece at forgot to mention
if the reporting that we've
asked for the FIR says that
there will be a cost in fact
what we will do is use data that
health plans already collect so
there's really it's just it's
assembling at and we will have
to health plans and the OSI and
the LESC come together to
identify how to best file the
number of people diagnosed
decreased emergency room visits
etcetera very easy to ascertain
so there's really no cost I
offered to some of my junior
bill money to LFC that said now
this is pretty easy we've got it
and so I just want to do that
last bit of clarification but in
summary and and I'm happy to
answer questions I think this is
an important bill particularly
for the state which just
significantly disproportionately
suffers from both of these
issues thank you very much thank
you and just before we go to
members of the committee I'm
gonna go back to the audience
because we have the
superintendent till.
and go ahead superintendent.
Okay in this.
Yes we can hear you.
thank you I'm honored to be the
second superintendent your
committee is heard from today.
I'm also coming to is.
From work all too many New
Mexico families who.
Suffered probably preventable
loss.
Because of inappropriate or lack
of access to.
Behavioral health services.
I want to first say that
The governor.
The our office support.
The concept of limited access
to meet of removing their access
to.
Health services I also want to
commend the senator and note
that I be hard pressed to think
of anyone else in New Mexico who
can speak on the subject.
With the authority and
credibility the he does.
We welcome of the stories that
the Senator just made reference
to but there is a cost to us of
doing those actuarial.
Studies and that cost is not
included in this budget.
so that's a concern I think
like all the Mexicans we
recognize that there is a
tremendous workforce shortage.
Senator substance abuse
I've worked personally with the
ever health providers
association over the years to
try to have an impact over that
and I do believe this bill
would.
Encourage more providers to
deliver the services which is a
good thing.
to three questions that I have
that perhaps Senator.
can answer.
One is all the members of this
committee know we already have a
book well every property have a
law order books the server has
to be mental health parity and
plans in fact.
Well the plants have to
demonstrate to the OSI internet
you're basically that there is
no differential.
Between their rules axles the.
But access.
We're actually are a little
concerned.
In terms of the term have laws
gonna come into play here the
law was passed for
understandable reasons because
mental health and behavioral
health services did not get all
parity.
There were more limited
carsharing was higher.
We will specifically address
that right now if we're going to
remove all co pays reduces Dr
Paul thank you doctor bills and
all.
All four.
Representative behavioral health
diagnoses.
What does that mean for the
whole side of things so again I
don't have an answer for that so
we need to look at a property.
Some legal interpretation on but
throughout that we have to deal
with.
We also
Responsibility for approving all
of the rates on the New Mexico
health insurance exchange.
Well I agree with the good
doctor that over time this will
save money.
Care center we are concerned
about the short term impact.
The
use of estimated.
This bill passes as the what
that cost impact is and
therefore have much time to do
it because they're proposed
rates are due to less and may.
Have to be approved in the final
way.
On the blog so that's again
something else we need to look
at.
Removing.
All cost obligations.
At least in the pharmaceutical
world
may result in the plants praying
for very high cost brand name
drugs when there are Peter quill
what's available at lower cost
now we're.
We'll have to wait and see what
the experiences but I do have a
concern.
That.
In our FY are.
To us is extremely personable of
course we did not begin to make
an estimate was to cost to the
individual carriers.
Both.
Senator and.
Dr abstain noted the true health
is doing this already so they
might have lessons for all of us
to call impact your claim under
sure years but it is something
the the need to be looked at a
starting.
Right.
kudos to Dr Hickey for question
yes out of the box proposal.
We would like that kind of thank
you.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Yes may I answer up the.
Questions there is brought
forward by the superintendent
certainly go ahead thank you
thank you Mr into project
superintendent for your support
and your identification and and
as you know in in health
insurance.
Change is glacial and because
it's always kind of been done
the same way
so this is difficult for other
plans to conceive a but to
answer one of your questions and
I'm sure I can't speak for Mr
abstain but I can speak for
myself it plans need guidance
and how to implement this
immediately it's actually are
not complicated at all it all
has to do with the concept of
care management and Care
management terms of diagnosing
people care management in terms
of being sure that no one is
abusing the services
and true health New Mexico
health connections before we're
very successful in.
Limiting those type of
situations and so there really
wasn't a cost secondly I would
remind you that we are not
looking at a big cost up front
if that people will have time to
build this and and again they
will build and hopefully some
more care management but to
their benefit as you know
that is a quality expands that
counts against the.
She Channell stopped here but
explain to him that is covered
under the eighty eighty five
percent of medical costs so by
adding care managers to do a
little more oversight and
coordination and that can be
done right away there is
immediate pay back during the
year and again I would direct
you towards the
Twenty seventeen
shaped by the employer coalition
noting that New Mexico health
connections and about a hundred
twenty to a hundred thirty
visits on average per thousand
people per year when the other
health plans for up in the one
when seventies and mostly one
eighties the national average of
two hundred and eight and it
kicks in right away so their
actuaries can look at the
literature the same way I did
I've got a staff of about a foot
and a half at home demonstrating
the impact on chronic disease
our actuaries that through the
years have been able to do that
and as you know New Mexico
health connections at and then
later to health and some of the
lowest cost on on the exchange
in regards to pharmaceuticals we
do say that generics will be the
preferred drug and less there is
not a if there is not a generic
drug than brands can only be
prescribed
in that situation and that's a
handful of psychotic drugs
psychoses drugs they're they're
far and few between and when we
look at the actuarial impact of
it
it's pennies as a matter fact
doing away with the copays on
the generics cost on a per
member per month basis.
Forty cents I would also say
that actual warily
I don't think you're gonna have
to do any other studies that's
what the plants have to do and
improve their points when they
put the cost in
I would look with suspicion at
they said oh this is going to
raise our costs I think you can
simply say well go look at the
experience of true out and come
back and score accordingly so I
hope so satisfy your your
questions again I do not think
there will be a cost to you
onset someone will have to
collect and formally put
together to quote report the
data to the legislature and to
the governor's office but the
data we're talking about already
exist in the plants is nothing
new and really out of the
ordinary in fact some of it's
already collected by the
employer lawyer coalition today.
Thank you we'll go to questions
from the committee and first I
have Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator Hickey for bringing
this legislation forward this is
a giant left
so first off I would I would
really highly recommend that we
study this during the interim
because I'm I'm nervous about
this such a large left without
Having studied it without having
everyone at the table so let me
just start off by saying that
the other thing Senator is I'm
curious madam chair is what is
the way is there a waiting list
to get in to behavioral to
access behavioral health in any
way shape or form as far as as
far as your list goes in the
bill.
Is that directed to me yes Sir
yes Sir yes Senator the we we
certainly don't have the
capacity in the state that we
need
over all but here's what happens
to the waiting list people and
and and I do know
folks who very recently a vast
to get into I. O. P.'s to get in
to.
The R. T. C.'s and in fact they
do get and within
a few weeks to a month but
here's the problem is that folks
drop out.
Because I can't keep up with the
costs and so that keeps it
pretty fluid but again this is
an opportunity particularly for
health systems with significant
dollars to invest in expanding
services and that is probably
the only way it in the moment
we're going to.
Bring people to New Mexico to
help them fulfill those services
and I think as we.
You.
At.
It's their interest to do that
we will also be able to reduce
the waiting list in regards to
you say it's I have the left
the are there there are some
carriers around the country who
also do this they're finding the
same results of this is the
first for an entire state but I
would.
Ask you to look at the data that
Representative Armstrong sent
you particularly the grant that
the and that demonstrate that
mast I meet the huge reduction
in emergency room visits and
admissions and so the pilots
been done we're there we're
ready it's just a matter of
everyone adopting it and the
only up front costs are going to
have is more care management and
that will pay off substantially
as it has for true health and
having some of the lowest rates
in any given year.
Thank you Senator and thank you
madam chair but my concern is.
And and I know that you've
talked about this you know I've
I've worked really hard with the
a couple of a couple I believe
there Google I'm I'm not a
hundred percent sure but they
came from Colorado trying to get
licensed for behavioral health
and they specialize.
In child suicide and they cannot
get a license here in New
Mexico.
Because of the burdensome
regulatory aspects of how of
what we're doing this was
brought to my attention this
last summer madam chair and I
did everything in my possible
power to try to help them get in
front of the committee even be
heard they didn't qualify to
check all the boxes but they
could not even get hurt in front
of the the commission and so I I
was gonna run real legislation
to change the reciprocity for
behavioral health here in New
Mexico but thanks to
superintendent Linda Trujillo
she saw that and they did change
some of it are they didn't
change it enough in my opinion
but they did change some of it
but the this this couple is
still not able to be license
they want to be here in New
Mexico so I personally do not
think that it is about access.
I know there are some madam
chair and senator of course they
cannot some cannot afford the
copays.
But the majority of people that
have copays is the minority in
the state of New Mexico.
And those are the people that
are going to be picking up this
tab.
And we have passed legislation
through this committee offer the
house for we had one last night
on the house floor that is going
to be.
hindering insurance companies
and the people that actually pay
for insurance.
To what with all of these this
this money they're gonna it's
gonna have to be made up
somewhere and until we have what
they call socialized medicine
where everyone is has the same
then these few people will be
paying for everything and I I.
Of course feel for the people
that can't I know in my
community Senator and and madam
chair there's a waiting list to
get in to behavioral health
anything to do with behavior
help there's a waiting list so I
personally do not think that it
is about the copay it's about we
need more specialist here in New
Mexico and I I just cannot
support your bill I don't have a
lot of questions but once again
madam chair and senator we are
hindering the insurance
companies and the people who pay
for insurance with paying for
this thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman Madam
chairman of up I had the
opportunity in listening up
earlier to this bill presented
in another committee while I was
waiting my turn.
I find the bill of very
interesting that the senators
brought in I do have a few
questions madam chairman and I
just a.
Ask the senator and and anyone
responding to my non medical
a direct questions to try to
keep the insured because we have
another bill here today Senator
I am interested in.
What is the difference between
the term cost sharing and co
pays.
I'm not
in my mind there exactly the
state is that correct or not.
Yes it is costsharing includes
copays coinsurance and
deductibles.
Thank you and on the term
deductible that that that one
was to mention that I'd I failed
and to to get get leave within
the first hearing could you just
briefly review the impact of
this bill on of what I think
most people.
Rather dread which is the term
deductible or or is deductible
and co pay the same thing
question thank you.
In essence for this bill yes
they are the same deductibles
what you pay out of pocket
before your insurance kicks in
in any situation
but the the deductible like the
copay would be waived under the
spell thank you senator and then
also in the deductible concept
is sort of an idea that that on
an anniversary date say January
first there's thousand dollars
maybe that's for certain types
of physical care but I I know
you're aware of it just to in my
confusing the term deductible
with that as well or does that
still exist question.
Yes the deductible for physical
care certainly exist these are
only for behavioral health and
substance use disorder diagnoses
thank you senator
then my question Senator goes
like this I think okay.
So we do away with co pays for
behavioral health.
and and for all the reasons you
have articulated which which
makes absolute sense to me.
About reducing of you know the
barrier to access and the the
sort of ancillary benefit that
comes from of someone receiving
behavioral health you need to
behavioral health reduces
physical help requirements
subsequently I I I think it's
it's it's.
It's a very
I'm pleased to hear of that
connection and that recognition
so I think okay who's going to
pay now of.
The the insurance companies
would absorb.
Of this added cost and increase
the premiums on those who buy
health care insurance
or I also was thinking Senator
this morning that what prevents
the insurance companies from
saying we're going to reduce our
health care.
Budget or or.
Portfolio to those who seek
behavioral health care kid can
they not regulate their costs in
that area as well difficult
question please.
Yes as simple answer actually no
mental health parity requires
them to offer all behavioral and
substance abuse services that is
under the ACA they must provide
those services are and again a
concept that I really want to
get across and urge you all to
read the scientific studies so
this is data driven this is not
impressing you have been data
driven that and as stabilizing
behavioral health and substance
abuse will significant agree the
reduce the our cost for chronic
disease co morbid chronic
disease by a factor of two to
three and literally the net net
at the end of the day for this
self insured state our programs
they will say they will save by
doing more they will say that's
the same concept that doctor
interesting brought up doing
behavioral health intervention
and those who need it and
finding those who are
undiagnosed because there's
spending money that is a
preventive service and
preventive services reduce
downstream costs.
Thank you Senator and and.
Okay now let's see that makes me
wonder all I want to ask a
question my could madam chair
Senator on parity of mental
health parity which I I remember
was a senator Peter Domenici
from New Mexico was a great
champion of a few decades back
and the very pleased to hear
that term tossed around
particularly in light of recent
statistics showing Hey if you
give mental health parity it
will benefit physical health I
I'm not asking you to
Representative cover that again
but I I I just very pleased with
that statistic however
When we look at parity I happen
to have a chance this morning to
look it up in the definition big
state or condition of equal.
Especially regarding status or
pay and I think okay parity in
pay and what if we take the
copay off of behavioral health
does that not suggest that in
order to gain weight gain parity
we must take the copay off
physical health professionals.
I'm glad you brought that up
Representative and I'm glad that
you recognize the contributions
of senator Domenici to
behavioral health
I I have the honor in the late
nineteen eighties of
implementing the first VA
clinics are outside of a
hospital in rural areas in New
Mexico through legislation that
he sponsored and he insisted
that in each clinic we have a
mental health counselor and kind
of that was the beginning and
then he got to parity parity is
when you bring the behavioral
health up to the offering of
services and the attention to it
and the word the reason that we
it is not equal and this I think
the superintendent hopefully can
rest assured and is that this is
a moratorium so it recognizes
that that there is the cost
sharing by that it's only for a
period of time and I think you
will find that the health plans
understanding how much they're
going to improve the health of
not just behavioral but that
physical and the savings that
they're getting and they're
competing with one another that
they're gonna do this all on
their own so this is giving them
a learning time but the use of
the word moratorium does not put
it into the category of the two
are equal.
Thank you senator Madam chairman
of pursuing that concept a
little bit further goes
something like this.
What do we have any estimate
what the dollar impact is on the
insurance companies in New
Mexico if they.
For go.
Copay requirements is it a
concerned about the copay.
Revenue loss or is it a concern
that.
No copay will increase of.
A patient utilization under
their health care plans and
drive it up in terms of a
greater volume or is it just the
front end loss of the copay
Senator in your you travels with
this bill have you heard any
comments on that please.
yes I if I if I understand your
question
when did you know what per
member per month means our
premium per member per month is
yes three four five hundred
dollars right so when we went
back and actuarially looked at
how much of.
Mimi am we were potentially for
going in true health by doing
this it ended up out of that
three four even thousands of
dollars for some a couple and
and who are older on the
exchange that the when you
spread it across all the members
of the plan or that particular
type of plan it has about a one
to three dollars impact on the
premium now.
What needs to be again I want to
bring back that when you treat
behavioral health you also treat
the chronic disease and when you
lower the chronic disease costs
it is a factor dramatically
larger than the one to two
dollars and again if you look at
the Milam an article that I sent
to you you will see them
estimate savings overall of
seven to fifteen percent in
terms of cost.
Thank you very much for that
Senator follow up question up
when you say one to three
dollars is that a per per per
per per.
Participant is that one to three
dollars in the time period of
per month per person or could I
have just a little more
information.
DM is per person
per month and so so if I'm
paying four hundred dollars from
my insurance
and and I'm in the planned on
doing the actuarial studies in
the pandemic SA okay because
we're going to cover the
services but again the whole
concept of insurance is that the
whole cover the few.
Such as it's well known in
commercial insurance that fifty
percent of the premium dollars
are spent on two and a half to
five percent of the sickest
individuals and trails off and
then there are twenty to thirty
percent
who never even using the
services in a year that's how
insurance works so but then
that's all tracked out we're all
paying in
about the same given our age and
so forth and when you do that it
ends up being adding a dollar
potentially but again that
dollars are going to be added
because it's going to be made up
for in the savings in the
chronic care it's only one to
three dollars per month.
Thank you senator Senator I'm
I'm gonna start ramping up with
just a few more questions one is
we heard a comment this morning
on credentialing and I think to
myself no there there can't be
any connection between this bill
and credentialing yes that is
that correct Senator.
That is correct they are
separate activities and
credentialing is done by the
health plan obtaining a license
this through the state.
Thank you senator David up
another question on sort of
filling in the blanks all I hear
this morning a little bit of
discussion about generic drugs
and in the end I think you know
what this this bill have to do
with
Prescriptions were written for
for prescribed drugs.
Could you revisit that
connection one more time please
absolutely happy to thank you
very good question so generic
drugs are
allowed to be sold after a
patent period usually around
seventeen years of whenever the
brand name was virtually like
ninety nine point eight percent
of prescriptions and behavioral
health substance abuse have
generic drugs so the costs are
very very low compared to the
brand is a matter of fact when
true health eliminated the copay
for all generic drugs in
behavioral health substance
abuse it was a going back to PM
PM it was forty cents just forty
cents and the brand names which
are definitely more expensive
and the new breakthrough drugs
are coming in treatment of
psychoses
they they are more expensive but
there's so there there's such a
tiny bit of utilization of them
because they're really in terms
of psychosis versus severe
depression bipolar etcetera
the cost of that is also
minimal.
Thank you senator
Senator.
Earlier I heard a comment about
all parties at the table.
And it it did make me think of
that you Sir have been working
on this bill for some time.
And I was just curious what your
reaction would be if if the
question is have you tried to or
brought all parties who have an
interest in this bill together
to talk about your legislation
previously quest.
I have reached out to
Presbyterian which is one of the
largest to insurers in the state
there are national health plans
and they all right health plans
specifically for each state so
this is no hassle for them to
make a little bit of change no I
did not reach out to all of
those parties.
And and but but but this is
really important we have told
our counterparts here in New
Mexico who are supplied most of
the.
Services through their insurance
plans they have known we have
done this they have no and that
we have have these dramatic
differences improvements in
emergency room visits remember
those are volunteer types of
activities and but as I said the
the insurance industry is very
very slow to change and adopt
innovation
it's the.
I can't tell you exactly why
I've worked for sick now I work
for one of the largest Blue
Cross is in the nation was there
senior vice president for
anything medical Medicare and
Medicaid
it's just it's it's they're
they're usually pretty tough
bureaucracies for innovation to
break through on but this is
been now into all of the other
insurers in the state as there
are participants major insurers
in the employer coalition thank
you thank you senator I'm gonna
conclude now and just make a.
A brief remark at a at one on on
the glacial pace of of insurance
companies I course think well
that's probably not all bad.
But in the face of of change
which you're bringing in this
bill it is it is certainly a
push back I think of the of of
implications that of I heard
some of the insurance comments
your insurance company comments
and I think you know of I can
see where the concept of no cost
sharing of has implications way
beyond what I can contemplate
this morning
I think that
Of your bill.
is is.
Address is a tremendous need in
New Mexico Health Care in to put
it simply Sir we come in we
listen to of funding
requirements changes in the laws
new laws relative to opioid.
Alcohol addiction illegal drugs
of the suicide
of depression and I just thank
you know here is a bill that is
making a sort of what I consider
to be an evidence based
solution to why it's a good idea
to not collect.
Up to require insurance
companies in New Mexico not to
allow copays and of I thank you
that yet either dresses the
bigger issue in a way where we
have very few answers and yet we
spend of an amount every year on
health care services in New
Mexico that are that is a
staggering number and and it's
growing so I'm I'm going to
support you build this morning
because I think it it it it
dress is a tremendous need in a
broad way up and I hope we can
have the desired results and
last I hope that the chairman
will include this issue on the
interim.
whether this bill passes or not
because I think further
Understanding of this remarkable
connection between behavioral
health services to New Mexicans
actually drives down the cost of
of the much more expensive I
believe physical help side of
the equation so madam chairman
that concludes my remarks
Senator I wish you the best
thank you.
Thank you Representative and
feel free to have a discussion
with your brother in law I think
you will validate all the
concepts that we're staying here
thank you.
Thank you next we have our
representative Thompson.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator.
First let me thank you for your
assistance with my bill last
night and at on my.
Mail order pharmacy bills I'm
and it welcome to that we we've
got to start doing dynamic
scoring club in the legislature
and and here's your bill that
that talks about the same thing
so we have one more ally who's
going to try and figure out how
we can how we can do this
instead of those in a sky is
falling it's going to cost this
much when we never take a look
at what we're gonna actually
stayed in terms of dollars and
let's not even take into account
madam chair he was suffering and
quality of life and all those
kinds of things but but I'm glad
we have we have such an expert
to help us that move move our
legislature forward in that way
and madam chair I I'm not sure I
have questions I just wanted to
talk a little bit about.
Behavioral health mental health
parity I mean it sounded so good
and and as the mom of a kid with
autism we soon found out it
didn't mean what what it said M.
no I passed a bill I believe two
years ago health insurers were
saying they didn't cover autism
after age twenty two well you
know I wish someone would have
told me that autism quit at age
twenty two my son would be in a
totally different place so I do
have to pass that bill that says
no homework at you know you
can't cut off behavioral health
services of any type for any
type of diagnosis just because
someone gets older and and then
miss madam chair someone said
something about copays not being
an issue copays are a huge issue
for people in New Mexico even if
it's only fifteen dollars if
it's something that you're doing
like I applied behavioral
analysis for instance I mean
that's I can't remember it's you
can be up to forty hours a week
and if you're paying a fifteen
dollar copay every day five days
a week that's seventy five
dollars a week that's a lot for
a lot of families so so indeed
copays are a hindrance for a lot
of folks
and and madam chair back back
back right after the behavioral
health system was decimated I am
Senator Mary Kay Papen said
let's let's be chair of the
behavioral health subcommittee
so I was made chair and senator
John Arthur Smith that that
Legislative Council meeting
planning in terms that well okay
behavioral health subcommittee
fix behavioral health in New
Mexico you have for one day
meetings in the year but fix
behavioral health well needless
to say I didn't happen and we
worked on it and I lost my
reelection that that time and
now and we work we're getting
back to it but we have still
have a long ways to go and madam
chair I think that's all I have
but I think this is.
Wonderful I'm in New Senator
Hickey if if you can figure out
a way somehow convince our
colleagues that I'm to look
beyond that those numbers on the
FIR two what what will actually
do state I think we can spend a
lot less time worrying about you
know this guy is following the
more time worrying about make
sure that people get what they
need and this is a great deal to
do that so thank you so much
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative next I
have Representative Montoya.
Madam chair and members and
Senator Hickey first of all I
just wanted to comment how
wonderful it is just a freshman
to have a form like this to have
such rich dialogue on such
important legislation.
Senator Hickey your this.
Free life to becoming a senator
is evident you have dedicated
many years to understand these
issues and I am so thankful that
you are a member of our Senate I
support this bill I just want to
speak briefly.
From someone that works on the
ground with prevention and I
know from my experience that
when we invest in prevention
down the road well.
Lives are saved costs drop it is
maybe a leap of faith to some
but to those that are suffering
in the moment and access to
behavioral health is essential
and critical to the notion of
the lack of providers I have
seen.
Powerful work being done by
those who emerge from the
darkness of substance use and
incarceration in peer support
workers who are perhaps an army
waiting in plain sight you know
to to help them lift to help
them find higher education and
become some of these providers
down the road the the power of
that lived experience is
irreplaceable it isn't the most
effective piece I've seen so in
closing I want to be as short as
possible I look forward to
supporting this with my vote if
I could deliver this directly to
the governor myself I would I
yield back.
Thank you Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator for bringing this
important legislation forward
can you tell me if someone has
it is going out for you all
health and they're referred to
go to such as acupuncture to
help will that also do not have
a copay.
Madam chair and.
Our.
Very good question acupuncture
is within that die it isn't a
treatment category separate from
behavioral health even though it
I I agree that it could but it
would not be covered under this
bill because this bill would
only cover diagnoses in
behavioral health and
the there was some concern that
if if we just start with
behavior health where we end in
terms of dropping the copays I
mean at the end of the day.
that you know it it it it's hard
to say where to make that
distinction but in and of itself
to behavioral health and
substance abuse is such a large
issue
and if acupuncture could help
that would be great but I I do
have to say no it would not be
covered because as specifically
covers behavior health
diagnosis.
Thank you and madam chair and
senator I was you know
Seeing so many court ordered
behavioral health you know
people have to go
for
You know treatment would it this
also be covered even though it's
court ordered.
Yes again it is the the what
would when they go to get a
quote the help it will come
under the CPT codes of behavior
health covering this so yes
court ordered would be covered
the people would not have
coverage out of their own pocket
very often the people who are
ordered to do that you know one
visit and it's done because they
can't come back for the next
ones because it's too much to
pay.
Oh great I'm so glad to hear
that and I agree with all the
different things that you
pointed out why this will be
such an advantage for especially
chronic disease and also with
Individuals with developmental
disabilities and
To have access you know to this
it be
also to be more frequent you
know that they won't have to
worry about treatments and
things like that for such as
students and young people with
autism but I think also do you
think this increase access to
behavioral health will help to
remove this statement against
you know people seeking
behavioral health services.
I hope and pray
I can't tell you how I I mean I
could do them let me let me be
very straightforward these are
issues in my family.
And I and I have lived through
them and and not only do I have
great empathy for those who are
suffering but I have tremendous
happens empathy I'm a I am a
steady Alan on go or and
getting families to be relieved
from the stresses is also very
important and as all that
happens is I discover in the
years that I've been going to
Alan on it's out in the open and
you just feel so good so I'm
hoping we as a society can get
to that point to get rid of the
stigma because of behavioral
health yes weather environmental
conditions that can exacerbated
perhaps very often it's hard
wired addiction is hard wired
it's a disease it's classified
as a disease and the more we
begin to think about it is heart
disease
the bipolar which is so common
depression and and I am finding
many more people our being open
about the fact once they have
gotten into cognitive and
medication therapy are they are
willing to be more open and
we'll get there one day but this
will absolutely help move us in
that direction thank you for
bringing up that question sure
thank you madam chair thank you
senator you'll also think
Senator Steinborn to.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Terrazas.
Thank you madam chair.
The committee in center good to
see you again
no I just up you know this is
this is a very sensitive subject
because that at least for me and
more for your business we see
momentum out of
suicide.
Drug abuse and I I am a hundred
percent with you guys if there
is a problem in in how all state
is the best this.
And it axis I mean
two you know I hear different
sides and I guess it depends
where we live in the state I
know that it might just have the
state sometimes I've had a I
remember one.
Particular a twenty four hour
period right five suicides.
And it and they didn't have to
do with one particular state
issue I would just it's just
things that we deal with in it
and it's it's I really would
like to see
us.
Of our our suicide rate by
reducing it you know and I and I
know what you're trying to do I
am by doing this legislation I
just have some questions and
want to share some some of my.
Just some questions first of all
I heard someone earlier say
that in catch it because you
keep some of it was freezing on
roads the whether it's my
internet connection but just
getting some fragmenting
Madam chair
Center I heard something about a
Medicaid bubble doesn't Medicaid
still require a copay.
Madam chair and representative
now there is no copay for
services or deductibles or car
insurance in Medicaid services.
So in that close behavioral
health and substance.
Madam chair Senator that was my
understanding I just want to
make sure I I just don't
understand the money keep level
how could I ask Madam chair of
center how many in in a
percentage how many New Mexicans
are on Medicaid.
I believe madam chair and
senator and I stand for
correction from anyone in the
committee
I think
and the F. Matt it's forty three
percent I'm not sure that
includes chips
and I think that's correct
senator about forty three
percent.
Madam chair center are those
would you consider those
probably I would consider those
maybe you'll agree with me those
who are the most in need for
financial assistance is that
would you agree with that.
You madam chair and
representative yes I mean they
are because of the federal
poverty level below hundred
thirty eight percent for adults
and and and children at that
can't remember it's quite a bit
higher yes there is definitely
financial need and and
assistance there but I can also
tell you there are a number of
people who qualify for Medicaid
who
are are eligible and and not
signed up but also on the
exchange which has about to
ranch I think it's going to go
up this year substantially with
the help of the federal
government cutting many premium
is and half there will be a
large number of people who have
not bought insurance who are
eligible to purchase insurance
on the exchange and and get
assistance and they will
definitely be assisted by this
and again
families and and small
businesses something about small
businesses do not get subsidies
per se
and they you know about well
they're they're working and
sometimes are covered they're
definitely going to be able to
get assistance from this.
And as we go back to the the the
figures in the beginning
there just so many New Mexicans
eighty percent said that
financial barriers no matter did
make a distinction on whether
they were Medicaid eligible
where have you you know did not
found the coinsurance copays
deductibles to be a financial
barriers and
and that thirty eight almost
thirty nine percent
serious illness just didn't
receive mental health treatment
this last year so again there
would be a large number affected
by this Madam chair Senator
Hickey did that I
Sure you say that.
How many percent of I.
I did hear that did you say
still there was a percentage of
people that still on Medicaid
we're still concerned with
copays is that what you no no no
no no I'm sorry I I don't want
to miss misleading of the
exchange which is people who are
above a hundred thirty eight
percent of the poverty level and
that can buy insurance and they
they do get subsidies for out of
pocket costs they diminishes it
goes up to two hundred and fifty
percent of the poverty level.
So madam chair Senator
and if your ride a juror if
you're at a hundred thirty nine
percent.
You can you get a hundred if
you're at a hundred ninety
percent a hundred excuse me
thirty nine percent what happens
you get kicked off on Medicaid.
Okay thank you for recommending
us are yes yes if you make a
dollar over the threshold you no
longer eligible for Medicaid.
madam chairs etcetera I think
that's one of the issues that I
think you should be up there
should be a curve there there
should be some sort of us dared
wait you know.
Ability to kind of work your way
out of that I I I agree for
instead of just a drop off
madam chair Senator so just I
understand so
when it comes to Medicare.
What is a copay on Medicare for
such searches a service.
Madam chair and representative I
can't tell you that I do know
that Medicare is a federal
program and we are not allowed
to legislate on a federal
program the same for the same
goes for the seventy thousand
employee federal employees in
the state of New Mexico this
will not affect them yes we have
no authority.
Madam chair Senator so my
question to you there is if we
can't legislate with this
legislation that you bring forth
would have no impact on all
those who are who have Medicare
is that correct.
Madam chair and representative
that is correct and that is an
issue that
I hope might be brought to the
attention of our new
Representative out of the first
congressional district as well
as our other representatives to
Congress and are Senators to
help work out an ad on the
federal level.
madam chair Senator.
Could you give me the the
percentage of people that are on
Medicare just so I can get my
numbers and in my mind right.
How many people on Medicare in
our state.
Percent Sir.
Madam chair and representative
and I.
Very willing to stand for
correction I think it's
somewhere around twenty.
Percent plus.
when you add in Medicare
advantage Medicare supplemental
and straight Medicare.
Madam chair
Senator so we have forty.
Three percent on Medicaid that
are automatically covered you
have no copays we have another
twenty plus percent that we
can't this legislation will
help.
We have a certain percentage of
people who are getting.
You mentioned the federal
government
I guess insurance plans that are
outside of that and so would be
fair for me to say that.
Eighty five percent may be.
Question on ninety percent of
the people.
For this legislation seems like
it's not gonna do anything or
they're they're already covered
or this legislation is going to
affect.
I would say that there is a
approximately sixty five percent
that would not be impacted
and the when you add those two
together so that means thirty
five percent tax will be
impacted and are roughly that
the again in something new like
this
it sometimes you have to start
small and again Medicaid is
covered but I also think the
important point here one one of
the important points that I put
together my own money because of
my experience is that this will
attract more provision of
services to be delivered as
commercial payments are higher
than Medicare and Medicaid and
in doing that there is just
cautioned that is always gone on
and in health care and this will
attract.
More our health systems to
provide the services to meet the
demands are that sometimes is
difficult to me.
Chair Senator think I think what
I'm
I think from what I because I
just sat there and I was
listening to to everyone's
conversation it was to.
Was this legislation chair
Senators to.
Help those who are most in the
who.
Cannot afford the copays and
costsharing measures
I thought that was the purpose
of this bill did I misunderstand
that.
It certainly madam chair and
representative they certainly
will benefit but let me also
point out that
addiction therapy.
Is not cheap.
And families I I can tell you I
have personal experience having
paid initially top dollar
and and I would not say I'm in a
not so well off category this is
gonna help families all the way
across the spectrum
many people who go into
intensive outpatient therapy
and then follow up therapy it
can get into the thousands and
thousands of dollars in when
you've got and middle income
that's a lot of money.
Madam chair Senator so does
Medicare cover those those
services outside of actor.
The services you just mentioned
Sir at and Representative if we
can focus on what is covered in
this in this bill and and not
what the programs that are
clearly outside chair is outside
of this Medicaid is outside of
this we still have another bill
to go
so if you can just on on the
bill thank you well I was just
trying to to to madam chair but
I was trying to figure out is
does Medicare cover those costs
outside of of of but it you know
exactly what Senator Hickey was
Expressing I just want to know
if those are caught cover
because of the R. which it
sounds like they are I
understand that there are and
at.
My concern madam chair and
senator is that
It's a formula insurance is a
formula that I mean look at it's
just a formula we all have to
understand that in the day we
want to do the right thing but
insurances has a formula of how
the formulate premiums copays
deductibles and Services to
calculation.
Whether we like it or not.
people like myself and people
that I know I'm paying eighteen
hundred and forty dollars a
month.
With the sixty five hundred
dollar deductible and so if you
calculate that out that's a lot
of money.
and most times madam chair
Senator.
I pay for everything up for my
entire family that's sixty five
hundred dollars per person.
And a maximum of thirteen
thousand five hundred dollars
out of pocket.
possibly fourteen thousand so
really that we have major
problems with the whole system I
I completely agree
madam chair Senator.
I guess what I'm what I'm
getting you know thank you for
allowing me to kind of see those
parameters for me I mean I I I
keep hearing in our in our
community over and over how we
need to get more people access
to health care but what we've
also heard a lot of
conversations where madam chair
center that they there are a lot
of people that are are not
signing up for these services so
I believe that the campaign
should be for the state of
Mexico and and and the
department of health is to.
Get people to sign up for the
services that you you mentioned
madam chair well Senator Hickey
today
Of people that all could be
covered but are not covered.
And I've heard that a number of
forty percent of people could be
cover but that aren't so that to
me is is is is probably the
elephant in the room madam chair
Senator that are encouragement
should be for those who are in
need those who are ours are
struggling financially.
To to sign up to the services
and at that are that are there
to help those who can't afford
copings and energy existence
called Medicaid
and so that's that's I think
might might big deal with that
and so I mean there's no such
thing as something for nothing
madam chair Senator there's
always a cost that is some some
service will be reduced for the
copay will go up and you know I
know that we're all trying to to
do the right thing and and I
have more everyone's
Attention to this I just feel
that those people who are self
pay
And and those people are are
these these plans are self pay.
They're getting narrower and
narrow madam chair and and
senator for people that are that
are half that.
Are trying to for these plants
it's getting harder and harder
even even for myself on madam
chair and I'm I'm not just
speaking for just myself but I
have a lot of people that I know
Madam chair Senator that are in
in similar situations like
myself and my insurance as
costly as it is BlueCross
BlueShield plan I need to you'll
see the name on here but.
There's a lot of places that
it's there's providers that
aren't even on that for for
eighteen hundred and forty
dollars a month for the sixty
five hundred dollar deductible
so I'm you know.
Again Madam chair Senator I
admire what you're doing and for
a some of us to understand the
formula of of of insurance
there's no such thing as
something for nothing.
And that goes for for heating
and when that happens they will
find someone's gonna pay for
this and and I believe it'll be
those I don't know those fifteen
fifty percent of people that are
having to self pay will will.
Covered this.
Legislation that you're that
you're trying to employment and
again I'm going to emphasize
madam chair Senator our campaign
should be to encourage those who
are in financial despair to sign
up for Medicaid so that they do
not have to pay those copays.
So thank get the medical
treatment of to be whether it's
for mental health and
and hopefully if we push that
campaign I feel that we may be
able to get people help and and
reduce our suicide rate in our
of abuses of all Google and and
drugs and so unfortunately
madam chair Senator I won't be
able to support this
just because I I I understand
interests very well and I I also
Understand the other side of of
things and I believe that that
we should just encourage the
setting up of a chair Sir.
Honestly study a little more it
is it is concerning that
The insurance companies will
have to.
Study this to calculate these
these numbers they will have to
have the will be time to do
that.
It when they don't have their
numbers in in front of them and
properly calculated Madam chair
Senator
the.
We'll probably
But after those numbers because
bill they're not going to put
numbers in there to lose money
and I'm just being realistic
about that Madam chair Senator I
believe that they will
Does so they can at least cover
the cost and when there's too
many unknown so gonna they made
that number may be shot up and
causing premiums deductibles
copays for others in other
situations with other service
this to be affected and so thank
you for your time madam chair
and and senator.
Thank you Representative bash.
Do pass thank you
I just can't however once the
sentence I just want to make a
comment before we go to the to
the vote and that is that the
insurance plans still have the
ability to do prior Austin and
utilization management to manage
the care that's delivered so
that is it's appropriate care
they still have the ability to
set a formula airy and decide
what drugs are covered and the
process to get those covered
and.
They still will have to show
actuarially that they
need a higher premium and and
this is evidence based.
at are they could decrease costs
in in other areas so there may
be increased costs and
behavioral health that's true.
But because of the provision of
behavioral health.
The utilization of the ER's and
hospitalization and more costly.
interventions required and
chronic disease we'll see a cost
savings there and there is
evidence around that there's
evidence here in the state
there's evidence that's been
provided and and other studies.
And so I do believe it'll make a
difference and remember that
when the
insurance companies set their
rates if they are set them too
high.
And they don't spend that all of
you know at least eighty five
percent of that premium on
delivery of Care and direct
services they have to refund.
Part of that premium back to
back to the payers so it I think
it will
I think it will even out and I I
and I do believe that we will
see cost savings in the end and
this is hard we have this
argument so I've also Senator
welcome you to the to the body
because we've had this argument
a lot where we have to be able
to invest in providing a new
service in order to see the cost
savings on a and better health
outcomes and it's not always
saying in the same year that
those costs occur sometimes that
are and sometimes are not I
think this will be a little bit
of both I think there will be
some immediate.
impact but certainly long term
impact and so I appreciate you
putting it in there for five of
for five years and.
just one
comment about parity.
Up.
Behavioral health services
mental health services substance
abuse services have been
historically.
Under utilized that's why there
has to has been a force
federally and in the state to
emphasize parity as and I if we
get a little over emphasis on
behavioral health right now I
think it it has an impact on the
physical health and so
I I I appreciate what you're
doing and it is maybe for some a
little bit of a leap of faith
but I think there's plenty of
evidence to show it will be a
cost savings in the end so
thank you for bringing it force
we have a due pass in the second
and doors we go ahead and call
the roll.
Representative Phelps Anderson
yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
No.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Karen bash yes.
Representative Stephanie lord.
I'm sorry.
Representative Stephanie lower.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Representative Roger Montoya
yes.
Representative Lewis that also.
Your muted Sir Representative
Louise.
Representative Thompson.
I think this is yes.
Representatives from the lord.
Thanks
for our yes.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong.
Yes.
So that looks like three excuse
to terminal.
And six.
Okay Senator thank you have a do
pass on Senate bills US three
seventeen.
Imaginations thank you madam
chair and committee thank you.
I'm okay next we have a Senate
bill three sixteen and of
Representative browses is still
not here so I'm going to
bring over her expert Marshall
Martinez.
And this second make sure we
have Marshall in here there we
go.
And
Senate bill three sixteen is
gender and orientation data
collection and I'm actually just
gonna turn it over to to
Marshall to present the bill.
Thank you so much madam chair
members of the committee Jim
Marshall Martinez the executive
director of equality New Mexico
statewide LGBTQ organization
this bill is pretty simple what
we know is that better policies
come from better data LGBTQ
folks that make up a significant
part of families work
environments and communities and
all thirty three counties across
the state all this bill does is
ask legislative agencies and
departments when they are
already collecting demographic
data that they also ask
questions about sexual
orientation and gender identity
so the first thing that the bill
does is just make sure the folks
in our community are being
counted so we can determine
whether or not we have access to
the services that we need the
second piece of legislation is
that it actually guides those
agencies to either use the
questions that have been
developed and true back best
practices as advised by the
department of health or if the
program is federally funded or
or attach to a federal program
and that federal program has
created those questions and
answers that they differ to
those so so the second piece
here is just making sure that
folks are asking the same
questions sort of across the
board so we get comparable data
across the board so that we can
now have a good analysis and
with that I'm happy to answer
any questions and madam chair
did you see Robert stern is also
available.
from New Mexico community aids
partnership he's available to
answer questions as well if
there are any but that's pretty
much it.
Thank you have moved of Robert
to a panelist and Mr stern is
there anything you want to add
before we go to the audience.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee chair I just read
say that I just work here in New
Mexico I've been here for twenty
years and am in addition to the
director of the New Mexico it's
partnership also the coordinator
there Mexico sexual and gender
minority health collective which
represents a group of folks
across the state and our various
institutes of higher education
and research institutes that
have been doing research on this
population for years and we all
strongly support this bill as we
need additional data in order to
understand what additional steps
might be taken in the future to
increase equity for this
population it's just a way to
continue processes that have
already begun at the state of
New Mexico we have been
collecting data about LGBTQ
folks on both the professors are
adult health survey and the
youth risk and resiliency survey
which collects data about our
high school students and we know
that this population hat is
experiencing some significant
health disparities what we need
is more specific data from
across the state and and
different programs in order to
understand where the problems
are arising and what we can
better do so thank you I will
yield and available to answer
questions thank you Mr stern so
we will go to the audience and
first we'll do our whole if
anyone in the audience who is
and either support or
opposition.
Of Senate bill three sixteen.
I think we've got it we've got
six in support zero in
opposition so we'll go two
on the attendees anyone that
wishes to make a public
statement if you would raise
your hand.
Okay Erin showers go ahead.
can you hear me madam chair yes
okay madam chair members of the
committee SP three sixteen it is
is simply about improving health
policy my name is Erin showers
on the policy director from the
department of health we all know
that soon public policy health
policy is really as good as what
we know about the populations we
serve without that knowledge
we're really in no position to
understand the problems
persisting in in our state or
how to solve them this bill is
really just trying to do
something very basic very
uncontroversial and it really
something truly foundational to
what we all do at state agencies
and the legislature as well it's
focused on sexual minorities and
gender minorities and what we
know is that about four point
seven percent of all adults are
sexual minorities that's
approximately seventy six
thousand adults in New Mexico
we also have about two point
eight percent gender minorities
and that's transgender and
gender non conforming that's
approximately thirteen thousand
adults in New Mexico so as these
three sixteen will really help
the department of health provide
more complete data on these
demographics to better identify
health disparities in the
specific subpopulations of
sexual and gender minorities
this will help us and DO each
year programs to the needs of
sexual and gender minorities and
will assist us and other
agencies and the legislature and
development policies as we move
into the future this is this is
really over doing critically
important to us thank you.
Thank you.
Next we have Schardin Berman.
Thanks again and good morning
madam chair and committee
members I was civic engagement
and policy manager in New Mexico
First.
Thanks very much in our for this
opportunity to speak input and
support of Senate bill three
sixteen and we think Senator
Hamblen for introducing this
important legislation.
At the health town hall we help
last year over five hundred New
Mexicans from around the state
from varying backgrounds and
with the range of lived
experience and expertise called
for systems that would allow all
New Mexicans to have access to
what they need so they can
thrive.
If we don't know the needs but
how can we ensure everyone will
be healthy when we don't bother
to ask we put providers in a
position of not developing tools
to appropriately deliver care or
accurate treatment plans.
If we know what our communities
need then we can work together
so that everyone is healthy and
we want this to be true for all
communities including the LGBTQ
plus community we urge you to
support this this important bill
thank you very much.
Thank you.
Okay I think that's all we have
in public comment so we can go
to of the committee.
I don't see any hands raise for
questions so what's the pleasure
the committee I'm of the to pass
madam chair second please okay I
have a motion and a second
Representative Anderson I was
too quick for you did you have a
question.
madam chairman
I did have a question on the
bill and if if we could pause
for a minute I don't think it is
take me very long but I did want
to ask of experts of of I fail
to understand.
Why this is not a duplicate to
effort on what is already and on
going data collecting
requirement question.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Anderson
At and I'm just trying to
understand your question but it
sounds like your your question
is really getting at whether or
not this is necessary to put in
statute because it may already
be happening is that your
question.
I think that's a great rephrase
in other words I'm looking at
some material in my package that
suggests that.
This data collection is on going
on the part of
Part of the federal government
in a couple of different of.
Areas or or an issue
requirements I guess federal
requirements I just I'm really
perplexed why The New Mexico
livestock bureaus god be
burdened with whatever this is
going to require them to collect
and I'm I'm picking on one
agency there are many many
agencies that will be affected
by whatever this outcome is so
I'm really sort of saying why
why why is the data collection
that we have under way in
sufficient question.
Thank you madam chair
representative Anderson and I
and I appreciate that
clarification so so one thing I
would note to start with is that
this is this only applies when
other demographic data is being
collected for example if the
livestock bureau is currently
asking folks that they interact
with about their race their age
their gender than they would
also ask about their sexual
orientation and gender identity
if they're not currently asking
those questions and they would
not be compelled to ask these
questions Madam chair
representative of Anderson so
that's the first thing I would
note and then the second thing I
would just say is that the
federal government is in some
places collecting this data and
the state government in some
places is collecting this data
but there are quite a few
programs that are managed by the
Human Services Department aging
and long term Services
Department
and the department of health
etcetera here in New Mexico that
are currently asking these
questions and if they are asking
those questions about race
gender age etcetera again we
want them to ask these questions
in New Mexico so that we can get
a clear picture about whether or
not LGBTQ folks have access to
the state services and programs
that we need and also whether or
not we need to address any
specific concerns in those
programs that that might have an
impact on LGBTQ folks I hope
hopefully brought chair and
representative Anderson that
answers your question thank you
for that
Thank you for that answer then
of my next question would be
The data collection is is
certainly of.
Very popular flavor in state
government right now we hear
many many requests for for data
data acquisition data of.
And and I'm always curious what
your answer is on who is going
to own the data.
when this data is collected by
state agencies who is the owner
of this data question.
Madam chair representative of
Anderson that's a great question
and the and the answer is that
state agency and I certainly
would defer to the chairwoman if
she wants to chime in as
somebody who is very familiar
with the way data and and state
government works but if the
department of health for example
is collecting information on who
gets a flu shot they own that
information and use that
information to analyze whether
or not they're marketing flu
shots to the right communities
whether or not they're making
accessible in the right places
this data would be the same as
the data they collect around the
age of people who get the flu
shot for example right I I
hopefully that answers your
question Representative and
madam chair please correct me if
I'm wrong about the ownership of
the data.
I think
I think you're correct in that
the agency collecting the data
owns the data and
such data is
protected of and is only used in
the aggregate not individually
identifiable information.
Thank you for that answer then
might my question is
it's reassuring to hear the data
is protected however I have read
articles in of publications are
Albuquerque journal B. one of
reporting that somehow if the
data is collected by a third
party vendor that third party
vendor has somewhere in their
contract some language that says
now we can do whatever we want
with that data which includes
selling at up on a public market
which was not was not the
protection that the person
providing the data thought they
were going to have that's an
open ended question and it may
not be a fair one to this bill
but I I'm very concerned as we
hear more and more state
agencies come and ask for data
acquisition collection of
interpretation and expense
of that it's very unclear to me
whether we are under some false
sense of security that the data
is in fact protected.
Question.
Madam chair representative of
Anderson I I think I understand
your question and in this case
of what we're what we're asking
is that the state collects that
data when they're already
collecting other data so again I
think I think and I'm I maybe I
may be wrong but I believe.
Madam chair representative of
Anderson that in those cases
that that the journal for
example talked about we're
talking about sort of mass data
collection of the eight in the
public it is something similar
to maybe what Facebook would do
our or otherwise with this bill
Madam chair representative of
Anderson with this bill does is
it says when you sign up with
the divide keep going back to
the flu shot simple when you
sign up with the department of
health you go to your local
public health clinic can you get
a flu shot at the top of that
former on a separate form
separate from your identifying
information it asks you how old
you are asked you your race all
we're asking is that these
questions be asked in that
format so we're not asking for
mass collection of data on LGBTQ
folks across the state we're
just asking when we engage in
state services and demographic
data is being collected that
these questions we asked so I
believe the protection of that
data is as secure as any other
data that the that the state is
currently collecting thank you
thank you then in in this
morning I heard of sort of a new
term.
And little a little bit of a lab
iterations would be helpful to
me because I I played real
ignorance in in general on the
bill and that is what is the
definition of a sexual minority
and what is the definition of a
gender minority question.
Madam chair representative I'm
Anderson thank you so much for
that question I always enjoy the
opportunity to educate folks a
little bit on the the the vast
agency of our community so those
terms are are basically umbrella
terms that have been used to
describe all of us who fit
somewhere in the lesbian gay
bisexual trans gender clear
community acknowledging that
the the majority of people
identify with the gender they
were assigned at birth and
identify as heterosexual and and
we acknowledge that there is a
vast spectrum of gender some
folks fall in any place on on
that spectrum sometimes given
the day
there's a vast spectrum and
fluidity to our sexual
orientation and so we use the
terms sexual minority and gender
minority to sort of as an
umbrella say we're talking about
all of the folks who gender may
be different than what was
assigned to them at birth or
whose sexual orientation may be
different than strictly
heterosexual so Representative
Anderson madam chair and
representative of Anderson I
know that's a somewhat fluid
response but that's because
we're somewhat fluid community
and we're trying to make sure
that we make space for all
people with their entire
authentic identity.
Thank you thank you for that
answer
and
Yes it leaves me wondering if.
this bill is ready for the big
show
and that's because I'm a little
nervous about.
using umbrella terms.
For broad questions on of fluid
demographic of the second is and
I haven't touched on it but
there are in the data that I
have some indication of agency
costs which strikes me as quite
puzzling in incomplete
and so I I I suggested maybe
that maybe the agencies don't
have a full grasp what.
Incremental for additional
burdens it will be to add this
data acquisition to their
existing data acquisition
efforts expert I thank very much
for your answers this morning
and up wish you the best thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Thomson
thank you madam chair and this
is just gonna be really quick
so essentially this bill can be
summed up as if there are boxes
to check please that what more.
Madam chairman and
representative Thompson that's
pretty much the some of it okay
thank you madam chair thank you
we have a due pass a motion and
on the table of course would you
call the roll.
Senator.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative.
Representative.
H. S..
Representative.
Representative.
Thank you.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Going back to Representative
Phelps Anderson.
Representative bread.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Excuse Representative Lewis.
Chair joy and for our yes.
Yes I'm I'm a yes let's just and
stuff Representative Lord one
more time she's.
Representative Stephanie lower.
Okay
I think there's a folks are
having some technical
difficulties this morning as
well as of bills to put on so
those who are not at present are
excused and
what was the final vote.
Borak excuse six yes and one no.
Okay
thank you Marshall and will let
of Representative Ferrary is no
we have a due pass on three
sixteen.
Thank you so much madam chair
thank you and Committee members
I believe this is our last
meeting.
So very and so I want to really
thank you all for the incredible
work done the session and and
then this committee we've we've
heard some really incredible
bills and had some really
thoughtful conversation I don't
see any a Senate bills on the
Senate calendar that look like
if they were to pass would come
to us so I'm less something pops
up that is
the kind of an emergency need to
get it to get it through because
it's there have pushed out on
the Senate
then I and I will let you know
if something like that happens
but I don't see anything right
now that's coming our way so I
think this is this is it.
Representative Montoya.
Madam chair members of this
committee have said it many
times as the freshman I'm so
glad that I landed in this
wonderful group I've learned so
much from each of you I have to
say I sit and take notes and
listen with deep respect and I
think we have a tremendous
leader.
And I hope that I stay with this
committee perhaps throughout my
tenure it's been a good fit and
I'm deeply humbled by your back
thank you Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you and thank you and thank you
for running the best run
committee in the house I can I
can guarantee you I just love
the way you've done it you've
been respectful and it it's just
been a pleasure to have you as
the chairwoman and we're glad
that you're back and I just
appreciate everything you've
done and and the way you run
your committee it's it's very
very I just love it thank you
madam chair thank you thank you
I I appreciate that
Representative and
I I appreciate everyone in the
group we have some good
discussion we don't always agree
at and of that's okay we come
out with
you know better legislation that
way and I just appreciate the
the I respect that everyone has
on the committee and the
attention and and showing up
I I do appreciate and I really
really want to thank our staff
Delores and Karen and we had
Christy for a while and and Kurt
and amber and I hope I didn't
miss anyone our analysts and
this is hard to do virtually
Torrez and Karen are in the
building I I don't think
maybe no one else's it's
so for us to stay in
communication and get the get
the work done without seeing
each other has been a difficult
but it's
we've got great great to staff
and analysts and I appreciate
all that you do.
There I just like Representative
Ferrary I was just going to add
to thank the staff to bit and
Gabby for you know.
tool and we went so smoothly and
got that public comments in the
survey and and our
Our experts coming onboard too
so well so to work out all of
our technical issues got our
interpreters got her all that
going and and even though poll
Gabrielle I'll tell you you
managed to get on the pole the
bill number and when I've seen
all used in other committees it
doesn't say what bill they're
voting on so thank you you're
you're betting right on top of
that I did want to let the
committee now madam chair and
members of the committee I know
that we had some snafus when we
were doing that definite of
hearing bill in terms of
technical issues but our
experience in the health and
Human Services Committee along
with conversations with
disability rights New Mexico and
advocates that were present for
those hearings have optionally
helped provide guidelines and
assistance to less Council
services so hopefully we can
create a more standard media
accessibility for it for those
kinds of hearings even our back
to a more normal in person
sessions so just a fun little
thing that happened that I don't
think I I told any of you think
about good thank you and the
doors open I'm sorry I just
wanted to thank you chair you
are awesome to work for and the
committee thank you all so much
and I was going to do a shot up
for Gabrielle because I would
have gone down the tubes with
better and she was real patient
with me and I just wanted to
huge shout out but it was nice
meeting you and I hope to see
you next year and god bless
thank you.
Thomson.
Thank you madam chair I'm just
going to add on that we have the
best staff when people say you
know what what was the most
surprising thing when you got to
the legislature was was how very
nice all of our staff is I mean
they do their jobs beautifully
but they're also beautiful
people and not and we have some
great ones on this committee
Gabby Gabby and Gabby has grown
a long ways in the short time I
remember she was going to be my
first committee secretary I
believe a few years back and
things changed and and so I
didn't get to have but but the
staff is wonderful madam chair
you have done a wonderful job
and I really want to thank you
and graduate you in person for
getting the aid in dying bill
through and I think that's so
important to so many New
Mexicans and I I can't imagine a
personal anguish that you go
through with that but I
appreciate it thank you thank
you.
Thank you very much
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman of not
to be redundant but none the
less.
Great deal of think she is is
given particularly under these
COVID circumstances to the staff
of this committee who have gone
way beyond of.
Way beyond their efforts to make
our our effort to as smoothly as
as we can and I just appreciate
very much the entire effort
because it goes unnoticed in
this is the moment we'll get
some notice and I say thank you
thank you madam chair.
Thank you thank you at at and to
the staff at am I I continually
tell people this works so much
better than the Senate
committee's.
So on much better so much easier
and so much more inclusive that
the Senate committee so I hope
there taking note as well
Representative Lord.
You madam chair I don't know how
you guys can do to meet at the
same time send.
I'm trying to listen to this one
in the background in a run over
there look at the screen and
then I come back up in the
computer that they gave me that
we use will no longer hold the
charge.
And in a meeting so anyway so
thank you everybody I learned a
lot for one especially we have
opposing views I think it's
great would be civil and learn
from each other and realize that
we have different views but and
that's okay you know the in the
day we for me to other for
heating staff at our analyst and
everybody thank you for
everything and now I'm done with
my first session ever so got
that reconciliation another two
and a half days ago or three
days to go you're you're almost
there.
Some long night so anyways thank
you it's all that thank you
Representative bash.
Yes I just wanted to say I love
this committee and everybody on
it and
and it's been said before but
thank you for your leadership
and and thank you to the staff.
Thank you
And
Kurt.
Well I don't know if you all can
hear me but we can okay good
I've had so many computer
problems that it's been crazy
obviously there's no video but I
want to thank you all for
everything have a great time
this is been us some time.
I know you all and if you some
you'd recognized me because I've
been in your committees before
you know said as an attendant in
an otherwise but I got to be an
analyst in Delores was great
this time thank you for taking
care of me.
You all have a great time god
bless thank you.
All right well as I said I I
don't I don't think we have any
more work to do of the session
but if something pops up a
Senator I mean Senator I just
give your promotion
representatives are USCIS thank
you madam chair I'm sorry my hot
spot might my phone just I
didn't realize it got my loan is
kill that I think and I try to
get back into one even again it
in one let me so I just want to
tell you madam chair thank you
very much thank you for
Allow me to grow in the
committee and and I know that I
just asked a lot of questions
but from the beginning I was I
this is a big undertaking to
understand everything going on
and coming in mid stream of with
something like this and and soon
and and what not it but I
appreciate everybody on here for
allowing me to to ask my
questions and and and get my
perspective out and listen to
yours and and I hope to see you
guys on the floor so rather than
later on in and maybe one of
these infirmities but I
appreciate all the staff
everyone they were wonderful and
madam chair thank you for
running a good committee and I
appreciate it and up again thank
you so much for all your support
in in understanding by learning
curve yes I thank you
Representative and
and thank you for your patience
in letting me continue to
interrupt and and a try and help
with your education on not on
health care it is it's a big
left I realize that and there's
not a lot of this with
a great deal of experience on
the ground in health care so I
appreciate you letting me
a chime in to to help educate
you and I and realize it's also
really hard on all the freshmen.
regardless of your background to
know what has of that the
history of some of the stuff
that's going on and what what
bills are legislation have
passed in in the past and how
current law may relate to what's
in front of us so
I've been this is only my
seventh this is my seventh year
as a state legislator.
But it's and for working full
time in the legislature in one
way or another it's about my
twentieth year so I've been
around in the legislative
process and
are participating in this state
in one way or another for a long
time and so I appreciate you
letting me share some of my
historical knowledge on this as
well as my health care and in
medical knowledge so thank you.
All right I think that's it
again if something pops up I
will let you all know but I
don't see anything on the
horizon
so there's nothing that I'm
aware of so really good session
thank you all so much and I look
forward to seeing you in the
interim.
Thank you of those.
You're saying hash tag you're
muted hashtag you muted or
