Here.
I chairwoman here
here.
So good morning thank you for
joining us I'm going to give you
a little bit of a run of show
today the two bills in here we
have rolled house bill fifty one
because it expert witness has
had an accident
and so I'm presenting fifty
three and one thirty two but I'm
also presenting another billing
tax so what I'm going to decide
as the chairs I will start fifty
three I have an expert expert
witness are to and then when I
have to run to tax they will
take questions and then I'll get
back as soon as they can and the
very capable vice chair will
take over so it's gonna look a
little normal for the
legislature by I just want to
give people a heads up so I
guess I did a lot for her.
What I find my file.
The fact that different.
Okay.
Three I forgot my file but I'm
gonna come out there and not
Schardin.
Are you both going to join me
okay perfect.
And was brought to me by no not
a constituent of mine but to her
Representative who said I don't
know how to do this stuff I'm
not a help person so so Sean
mathas used to be a drafter and
used to staff the interim health
and Human Services Committee a
few years ago so she's the one
who actually talked me into
taking over so it essentially
madam chair and members it's a
bill that right now there's not
a lot of protection for diabetes
supplies so you can go into the
pharmacy and get your insulin.
And then you say I need needles
they say well that are syringes
well that's not covered so what
good is is in full and without
said registry to so I will let
Schardin take over from here and
just kind of flush it out of the
L. and madam chair we do have a
substitute.
And it is the number is two two
four two eight four.
Dot three.
And it was it's been in for long
enough for the analyst to get
through stuff and so I will move
this the substitute for
discussion.
Eight do we need a second madam.
And it's second by
Representative Ferrary.
So we're moving beyond the
discussion of substitute.
The microphone house bill fifty
three for those of you who are
watching from this is.
Okay thank you madam chair
members of the committee where
we're going to start off with
Laurie Hart who is the person
who came to me for assistance
and
resolving problems that she was
having getting her diabetes
supplies so I'll let a lorry
tell her story first and then
after that we have doctor
Michael Romano who is a peri
natal US specialists to is going
to be our expert witness for
today who will be testifying the
is you know and then I'll bring
up the rear wheel of with a more
focused presentation on what the
bill actually does.
It
meant madam.
Madam chair is a member of the
members of the committee house
health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill fifty three will help
thousands of New Mexican
diabetics like me whose lives
depend on medical supplies
equipment that are often denied
or delayed I'm Laurie hard I'm a
type one diabetic for over forty
years for the last couple years
I've had reoccurring problems
getting my diabetic supplies and
equipment even though I had
health insurance.
Delays in getting my supplies
and equipment can result in me
ending up in the hospital and
possibly die.
Although type of.
Although type one diabetes is
more life threatening than type
two diabetes both type one and
type two diabetics must keep
their blood sugars and a healthy
range to fill well to a to
prevent severe complications and
to avoid unnecessary
hospitalizations to accomplish
this they need specialized
equipment and supplies to
effectively self manage their
their diabetes when I was first
diagnosed with diabetes at
eleven years old the equipment
supplies were so an adequate
that ended up in the hospital
multiple times per year and
almost died once
at that time severe
complications and death were a
constant threat for diabetics
likely advances in medical in
medicine in tech have helped us
manage or diabetes with fewer
complications and help us live
longer and healthier lives
there are these this is one
month of my supplies on your
left hand side are the supplies
for my insulin pump which gives
me insulin throughout the day
and my continuous glucose
monitor which monitors my blood
sugar every five minutes every
one of these components is
necessary for the equipment to
work as a I will further explain
a couple minutes I ended up
needing to pay out of pocket for
one of these components because
of insurance delays the remote
the remainder of the supplies
are also essential for me to
actively manage my diet be this
all of these work in concert to
help me avoid life threatening
blood glucose levels especially
for type one diabetics any delay
and the delivery of these
supplies increases their chances
of hospitalization and death
before moving back to New Mexico
I got my supplies shipped every
three months
with little interaction for me
but even though we signed up for
the most comprehensive and
expensive insurance plan offered
by the New Mexico health
insurance exchange in each of
the last two years I had to make
multiple phone calls over
several to.
As and argue each time to get my
supplies two years ago when I
signed up for my health
insurance it took over a month
to draft and finalize their
initial contract with our only
supplier of my diabetic supplies
and it was only after me
numerous calls filed a complaint
with the office of
superintendent of insurance and
call the TV station last year
they had resolved their problems
over a four month period I made
over sixty five calls and spent
many hours over many days on the
phone with multiple people and
some of my supply still had not
shipped
the committee if the committee
handout shows a log of the
supplies and the time I spent
was given excuse after excuse of
why my supplies had not shipped
I was told more than once by my
health insurance company that
the supplier and the health
insurance company we're having a
contracting issue between them
stress also negatively impacts a
diabetic sugar levels when I was
forced to buy some supplies
using my own money my insurance
company initially refused to
fully reimburse me a letter from
my health insurance company said
the medical director was denying
the full reimbursement because I
had to buy the supplies from an
in network supplier but there
were none for the supply so I've
provided a copy of this letter
in the committees handout after
I contacted my to attorney with
I was I was I asked my health
insurer whether red edge park
was the only in network supplier
this diabetic supplies my church
response was edged park in
tandem for the only DME
suppliers that they were aware
of that offer or carry the
tandem in some pop at that time
neither company had a contract
for the insulin pump and only
one had a contract for some of
the supplies plus my insurer
knew of at least one other
supplier because I had connected
the Representative with this
other suppliers tenant has
twenty nine suppliers and they
are listed.
On tendons website during this
time my pump went out of
warranty and started to fail if
I had not had the help of my
attorney I am sure it would've
taken months to get a new pop
but not everyone is so lucky no
one has the time to make some
sixty five calls and spent four
hundred ninety two minutes on
the phone to get diabetics and
supplies and equipment that they
are supposed to be receiving
most diabetics can't afford to
buy supplies when they don't
arrive in time so the suffer
setbacks jeopardize our health
and risk hospitalization or
death I was fortunate appointed
attorney who volunteer to help
me get my supplies during this
process she also founded the New
Mexico law requiring health
insurers to cover diabetes is
over quarter of a century old in
her opinion the law needs
updating to require health
insurers who required to use a
specific set of suppliers to
have an adequate network to make
sure those suppliers deliver
supplies and equipment when
needed this bill does this and
promotes effective self
management of diabetes please
support this legislation because
it will save lives thank you.
Thank you very much are we going
to hear from miss Dr room last
night yes madam chair is Dr
rumah on the line.
I am on the line I can see and
hear I just want to make sure
you guys can hear me and if you
wanted to see me my cameras not
on.
Dr rumah we can hear you and
that's most important.
Okay perfect wonderful thank you
very much madam chair and
representatives Dr Michael rural
thank you for the opportunity to
speak to you briefly this
morning in support of HHS
Committee substitute for House
Bill fifty three I am the
current president and the
maternal fetal medicine
specialist of a practice called
perinatal associates in New
Mexico we work in a variety of
cities throughout the state we
touch and manage approximately
eight thousand pregnant women
every year which is about forty
percent of the entire pregnant
population in New Mexico we have
offices from Farmington Espanola
Los Alamos Sikora Albuquerque
Rio Rancho Roswell Ruidoso in
Los crucis as we definitely have
a good snapshot and that can be
your representatives eyes and
ears on the and in the field of
medicine.
What you've heard from what I
would say is a patient and human
individual in front of you today
in the form of Lori Hart is a
common and not a rare story this
as a medical professional is
something that we interact with
on a daily basis we have
innumerable impediments to Care
of individuals particularly
diabetes is a disease which is
essential to provide appropriate
medical care to in a timely
fashion while I'm representing
pregnant women pregnant people
to the state legislature I
definitely as a physician I can
speak to the necessity of these
tools that Lori is mentioning
today and their importance H. B.
fifty three in the substitute of
that bill really scratches the
surface and I would ask for you
to pass this to at through the
legislature in order to help
patients on the individual level
and to help medical providers
all throughout the state that
are facing issues with this when
we attempt to prescribed whether
it is something that is maybe
simple like glucose testing test
strips lancets which in required
to actually poke your finger and
test your blood sugar or to even
more complicated things as Lori
was mentioning about insulin
pumps and continuous glucose
monitors really the whole gamut
of that medical equipment and
those prescriptions the health
care provider myself faces
initial impediments with
multiple requirements for prior
off on upon initial prescription
upon changing prescription upon
any adjustment to a prescription
on a change in medication
important and the H. B. fifty
three the substitute would help
to fix and remedy this scenario
these prior authorizations are
not uncommon our office alone
does.
Approximately ten per week you
may be aware that the
Albuquerque journal recently
published an article about
physician shortages and I'd ever
decreasing a health care
provider pool in the state of
New Mexico you as legislators I
ask would you please make it
easier for the health care
provider to actually provide
care for the patient one of
which is sitting in front of you
today additionally as Lori
mention suppliers and their
access to those com becomes a
critical issue as well
especially when it comes to more
complicated diabetes care we
employ for perinatal nurse
practitioners and manage
thousands of a pregnant
diabetics throughout each year
and I can guarantee that those
individuals co chair innumerable
stories with you about the
difficulty of achieving and
supplies just as Lori
demonstrated to you today I will
not take up any further a time
I'm happy to answer any
questions but I would please ask
your support on behalf of all
New Mexicans patients pregnant
and not pregnant the agency do
support house bill fifty three
it substitute for thank you.
Thank you Dr rumah.
madam chair
my and members of the committee
my name is Sean Mathis I'm an
attorney in private practice
with a specialization in health
law for over a decade I've been
a health law professor for
Loyola law school's online
deadline policy program.
Not so long ago I spent five
years here has a staff attorney
for the Legislative Council
Service with responsibility for
staffing the Legislative Health
and Human Services Committee and
it's behavioral health and
disabilities concerns sub
capacity sub committees in that
capacity I drafted health care
legislation.
Worry hard and other persons
with diabetes who struggle with
health insurance to obtain
supplies and equipment to manage
their disease are the
inspiration for this bill when
miss Hart approached me for help
last year I thought that
diabetes was only about insulin
I've since learned that diabetes
is a device and supply intensive
disease.
From working on agency hearts K.
I found that when a health
insurer limits where patients
can go for these items there is
no law requiring an adequate
network of suppliers nor is
there a law holding health
insurers accountable for the
performance of these designated
suppliers.
In addition New Mexico's law
requiring that health insurers
cover diabetes was enacted in
nineteen ninety seven well
before many innovations in care.
After we were able to get miss
Harker supplies and equipment I
took it upon myself to draft
house bill fifty three to hold
health insurers accountable for
their suppliers I also took that
opportunity to work with
clinical experts to include
certain provisions in house bill
fifty three to reflect medical
and technological advances in
the years since the passage of
New Mexicos diabetes coverage
mandate.
However concern was raised by
the office of superintendent of
insurance that certain
provisions of house bill fifty
three with updated list of
specific diabetes supplies
equipment devices technology
drugs and appliances would
constitute new mandates
requiring the state to defray
the costs under the affordable
Care Act.
So we pivoted and I drafted a
substitute that drops provisions
that OSI has indicated may risk
triggering cost to frail by the
state.
Our house health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill fifty three
retains H. B. fifty threes
provisions dealing with network
supplier adequacy and
accountability and limits on
prior authorizations and it
makes other changes that should
not trigger to frail page two of
the summary that has been handed
out out to you briefly describes
the key provisions of the bill
and I'll just go through this
very quickly for you section one
requires insurance under the
health care purchasing Act to
cover diabetes has required by
our laws for other health care
insurance for other health care
insurers section to see.
I guess subsection C. ND amends
our current
chapter fifty nine a article
twenty two forty one which
applies to individual and group
managed care diabetes coverage
mandate to remove discriminatory
language and reflect the
expanded use of physician
extenders in diagnosing and
treating diabetes and obviously
now we see a far greater use of
physician extenders and our
nineteen ninety seven diabetes
mandate only referred to
physicians.
the next section of paragraphs
one and two requires health
insurance to require the use of
networks or contracted providers
to have an adequate network of
providers and suppliers it
prohibits allowing contracts to
lapse with has was the case with
messed up hard situation and
requires contracts to be in
place to ensure continuity of
care it also clarifies this
single case agreements which is
where an insurance company just
enters into a contract for a
single patient do not satisfy
the requirement to maintain an
adequate network.
Of the next paragraph in the in
that subsection requires the
health insurer to monitor
performance of network providers
and suppliers to ensure timely
delivery of covered items and
when needed.
On the next two paragraphs of
that of that subsection
guarantee reimbursement for out
of pocket expenses if covered
persons have to buy their own
covered items when they're not
timely delivered by a contracted
supplier and it also includes an
interest at a rate of eighteen
percent per year if not repaid
within thirty days of the demand
for payment for repayment by the
by the patient.
Of the next couple of paragraphs
require each health insurer to
report quarterly to the
superintendent of insurance on
the previous quarters compliance
with the reimbursement
requirements and on the
performance of network suppliers
and they need to report any
disruption of supplier contracts
to OSI.
the next of subsection requires
OSI to annually audit all health
insurers for compliance with
this section based on my
discussions with OSI they only
have one or two people to check
into any problems with health
insurers they've told me that in
any given time there monitoring
between seven and nine health
insurers in the state.
the next subsection allows no
more than one prior
authorization per policy period
for any single drug device or
category of covered items there
are
no additional prior
authorization requirements are
allowed for changes in a
prescribed dose of a drug or
quantities of supplies to
administer a prescribed drug for
quantities of blood glucose self
testing equipment and supplies
or quantities of supplies needed
to use for operate previously
authorized devices such as the
supplies that you see on the
table in front of you here if
this is purpose has already been
prescribed has medically
necessary and there is no and if
there's no change in the
patient's condition.
Sections three four and five of
the of the bill basically
duplicate all these provisions
that I've just discussed with
you and because has you know New
Mexico's insurance code is
broken up into sections
depending upon what kind of
health insurance it is so it
would apply it's been duped to
apply to group a blanket health
insurance to H. M. O.'s and also
to nonprofit of plants.
Section six is a temporary
provision it directs OSI to
convene a diabetes insurance
coverage workgroup to report its
findings and recommendations for
expanding and updating New
Mexico's essential health
benefit benchmark plan to better
address the needs of New
Mexicans for services equipment
supplies appliances and drugs to
treat and manage diabetes and
its complications and recall
that you are our original
diabetes coverage mandate was
enacted in nineteen ninety seven
so this is just for the OSI
which is the the entity that's
authorized to actually make
changes to the state's you
central health benefits it's
just this the purpose of this is
to inform them of the
recommendations of of a group of
informed and diverse
stakeholders the report is to be
made to the interim Legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee by August one twenty
twenty four so that would be
made before the end of the next
interim and before the next time
that the state will be looking
at it's essential health
benefits plans as far as
updating.
Finally section seven makes an
appropriation to the office of
superintendent of insurance to
staff this annual a compliance
audit program and to enforce the
provisions of this act.
finally problems with suppliers
and repetitive prior
authorizations create
unnecessary and potentially life
threatening delay reducing
unnecessary hospitalizations and
cost and complications it's cost
effective in the face of the
statewide diabetes epidemic it's
good public health policy to
promote rather than impede a
diabetic's ability to self
manage this disease house health
and Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill fifty
three does just that and now
we're we stand open for
questions.
Madam chair could we have a
motion to adopt the of the
substitute
yes we we had the most and we
didn't vote on it actually we we
had a motion to discuss to
discuss now we need a motion to
adopt thank you very much.
A if there's.
Got it.
HB fifty three I second that
emotion.
Okay you can ask if there's
opposition all right is there
any opposition to this to the
House substitute.
If so would you raise your hands
okay just up there disappear.
Okay.
Any opposition no opposition so
the house of the to the doctor.
Committee steps the committee
said to do that.
All right now we are on the
committee substitute for
discussion.
At questions and audience in the
audience okay yes madam chair
thank you very much better
presenter.
Any opposition to that
substitute.
Is that and I'm gonna go to the
to the zoom if you are opposed
to the house I'm sorry to the
committee substitute please
raise your hand.
Okay I see no opposition I'm
gonna go to the audience in the.
Are there any people who want to
speak in favor of the
substitute.
All right I see three Garcia for
hands and I'm going to ask you
to come up and speak through the
Mike so that we make sure that
we you can be heard.
I represent New Mexico
pharmacists Association and as
I am a guy that a COVID type two
diabetic and I take six
different then today in order to
keep me that wonderful looking
person you see in front of you.
So it's a struggle it's a
constant struggle for those of
us that deal with this every day
I have to take my blood glucose
money is simple compared to the
ones that you've been discussing
I have a glucose meter I am
struggling with my insurance
company to get a new one because
the one I have I think is
defective
some still working on that in
that's a concern
it's it's not helpful if you
don't know really know where
your blood sugars are and and
able to manage
your care so I do want to stand
in support of this I have not
read the committee seven I'll
look forward to seeing that but
it sounds like a good long term
plans thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you madam chairman of the
committee leader and registered
lobbyists for Presbyterian
health plan we appreciate the
opportunity to review the
committee set up it's and it's
it will be much easier to comply
within the original piece of
legislation press return health
plan does not have any objection
to the network adequacy
requirements or any of the
requirements to provide provide
coverage but I want to point you
to a couple places where we're
going to continue to work on the
legislation and a good
conversation with Sean Mathis I
used to deal with her when she
was in Council services used to
tell me all my ideas were bad if
you could draft in the way we
wanted so we just get back into
the fray and so it's good to
have a back in the building but
I'll point you just a couple
areas these are all in section
two of the bill a section to
page six line fourteen where it
talks about maintaining an
adequate network of that durable
medical equipment suppliers and
then you go to the top of page
seven we're OSI is tasked to
monitor network providers Indian
DME equipment suppliers those
are areas that we are requests
would be we we amend the
legislation and not necessary in
this committee were happy to
continue to work on it but to
have OSI adopt rulemaking as it
relates to those provisions so
then we can have the the health
plans can be part of the
conversation to make sure we put
in place a system that we can
comply with and we understand
what those benchmarks are
because things like having an
adequate network we look at that
we don't know what that means so
we want to make sure that we
don't pass legislation that it's
difficult to comply with I've
already had a discussion and
commitment we show on we'll
continue to work on that and
tighten up that language and
then I think that this piece of
legislation will be really good
for the patients I also like to
talk say hello to my good friend
Dr rumah I've been against him
on prior authorization before I
will tell you my my record is
and one against him so he's a
very good provider in a good
advocate for his patients and
so.
thank you for and letting me
address a couple of issues for
precision health plan.
Thank you very much.
Madam chair committee Steve
settle this for the New Mexico
Academy of Family positions the
positions or this organization
represents nine hundred
physicians in the state and the
messages that they stand in full
support thank you.
You.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Patsy
Romero I'm representing the
National Alliance on mental
illness this morning and this is
a great day it's disability day
at the legislature and we really
appreciate every single member
on this committee who has been
in full support of disability
issues of diabetes is a health
issue and the National Alliance
on mental illness absolutely
supports any opportunity that we
can do in the state in the
country to improve the health
care for all New Mexicans
regardless of their illness I
think it's a sad day today but
we stand before you asking you
to support this legislation
which is could desperately
needed in our country today when
we should have access to all
care all supplies that are going
to improve the well being of
individuals in our country and
in New Mexico so I ask you today
support this legislation thank
you to representative Thompson
to Sean and to her expert
witnesses that are here today to
try to improve that access and
ability for individuals to get
health care I appreciate your
time and thank you so much for
your for allowing me to speak on
behalf of this legislation.
Thank you.
Thank you so much a few.
Is there anyone else in the
audience who wished us to speak
in favor of the substitute.
State no other hands we're going
to go to the zoom is there
anyone who wishes to speak in
favor of the substitute if so
please raise your hand.
The first C. is Joan Dickerson.
Madam chair members of the
committee hello my name is John
Dickerson with veterans and
military families caucus of the
Democratic Party.
over two hundred thousand New
Mexicans have diabetes and
that's from two thousand
seventeen data.
Diabetes was in two thousand
seventeen the six leading cause
of death in New Mexico and care
cost about two billion dollars a
year that's billion with a B..
Why is the veterans and military
families caucus involved in
this.
Twenty five percent of veterans
nationwide who use VA for Health
Care have diabetes that rises to
almost thirty percent of
veterans in New Mexico.
And these figures don't account
for veterans family members or
veterans who do not use the VA
for Health Care.
As a military family member and
as a person with type two
diabetes like into the test of
the difficulty of obtaining
certain diabetes supplies and
drugs I urge your support for
this bill thank you very much.
Thank you very much now we will
go to a camera pack.
Hi can you hear me yes we can we
can hear you.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm in contact
speaking for the league of women
voters of New Mexico we haven't
had the opportunity to read the
committee substitute but we
support the goals of HB fifty
one based on our position that
every New Mexico residents
should have a comprehensive
local of health care.
As you've heard over and over
people with diabetes have been
called in recent years with cost
increases for life saving
medicines and treatments these
are a luxury there and assess
today we hope you'll pass this
bill thank you.
Thank you very much without
going to Laura Keller.
Madam chair and committee my
name is R. Keller I work for the
American diabetes association on
behalf of the people with
diabetes in New Mexico we
strongly support this bill one
of the major provisions that
that really affects care and
that two billion dollar figure
you heard is that continuity of
being able to know when your
plan starts in January that your
supplies and the way you're
going to receive them is the
same all year there's really no
other area where you have
insurance plan of any time where
they can change your access made
here to require you to to switch
to something else so having that
provision there will just be a
very important for continuity
care and help reduce
complications and make it easier
for people to adhere to their
diabetes management and that we
know that when people can have
easy access that we can reduce
barriers to supplies medication
education for people with
diabetes there outcomes increase
and complications go down thank
you so much for your support on
this important bill.
Thank you very much.
And I last speaker is Janet
Simon.
Madam chair and committee
Just directors for the New
Mexico put it medical
association.
We have been in consultation
with miss Mathis
this bill which we appreciate
because of the fact that.
Often times the supplies
required to treat.
Some of the complications of
diabetes such as wounds in the
feet that as we unfortunately
know so often lead to limb
amputations are part of the
supply issues.
Interestingly a lot of the wound
care supplies.
Fall out of the definitions of
for coverage under the
pharmaceutical benefits that
patients may have.
And may not always be carried by
the DME suppliers that may be
available so it's this sort of
gray area and we are
appreciative of opening up the
ability to at least have you
know so that's a starting point
for this.
Area of supplies that are not
traditionally thought of
under the usual definitions of
diabetic supplies so
R. but I tree Association is in
support of this legislation for
reduced feel that it is a good
starting point for helping our
patients with diabetes who do
have these complications of
moves in their feet and lower
extremities thank you.
Thank you very much that will go
to the committee.
First we have Representative
Jones.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Thompson and I'm
sorry I don't remember your name
the patient Laurie hard Laurie
Hart yeah and I I so appreciate
your
Explanation of what you've been
through and how we have come a
long way in forty years haven't
we it is just so much that we
can do with managing diabetes
which is as wonderful
and and some people do still
manage the old fashioned way and
so there's there's such a big
difference between.
Well there's a difference
between
the patients that live in rural
areas who really don't have
practitioners sometimes to deal
with a lot of diabetics and
maybe they're not specialists in
diabetes management I have a big
concerns about the different the
varying approach to.
To managing diabetes and how
there's there's a lot of times
lack of education and so forth
and I can tell that you're on
top of everything that's
available to you and that
because of that you're able to
lead a healthier life that
hopefully would never never.
You would never have a problem
is that just discussed by the I
addressed you know that I'm
hoping that for for all our
diabetics you know that's our
goal is to lead the healthiest
life possible but I I have a lot
of questions about this like
that nineteen and and maybe not
for you specifically I just
wanted to college here yeah what
you've told us about your art
history but madam chair
representative.
Does this bill make that
nineteen ninety seven diabetes
coverage mandate void.
Madam chair of Representative
Jones no actually what this
substitute does is it we it
incorporates it basically leaves
the nineteen ninety seven
mandate intact because it has
I explained well as I indicated
that any change what I was told
is that under this affordable
Care Act provision that even
speak making more specific or
clarifying a few general
coverage mandate would be viewed
by the federal government has a
new mandate so I A. house bill
fifty three originally I had a
lot of bells and whistles in
that you know added to diabetes
coverage or to clarify diabetes
coverage but that was now now
we've stripped it back out again
and we're keeping the state's
original mandate died coverage
mandate except for a couple of
of minor changes for example we
are odd the original coverage
mandate kept talking about
physicians a diagnosis by a
physician well we know that
there are nurse practitioners
physician assistants and other
licensed healthcare
practitioners now who are
providing care so if you to
correct that that was changed
another change to the existing
mandate was to add up there were
a couple of places in the
existing mandate the referred to
people with up vision with a
restricted vision or limited
vision and I added persons
individuals with disabilities
including the excuse me
including the legally blind our
mandate originally said that
certain adaptive
I guess tools or devices would
be made available to people who
are legally blind and I added
individuals with disabilities
because you can't discriminate
on the basis of disability for.
Our various health benefits so
that's really the only change.
Thank you
So madam chair Representative
can you explain the scope and
you you sort of touched on it
just now but the scope of the do
it DM me requirements.
For this bill
you know there are so many
because diabetes affects every
every system everything you know
podiatry is going to be an issue
like you said vision they're
just everything is affected by
and control blood sugars
diabetes.
So how far do we go with the DME
is and.
Doesn't make sense that they are
so madam chair representative.
All right the original mandate
which is general presumably
would cover any.
Care.
That is needed by a person with
diabetes and of course sometimes
some people with diabetes
for example may develop diabetic
retinopathy.
Some people with diabetes may
develop these lower limb
conditions are all servers so
The I I I guess the general
mandate stays in place the
general mandate if you were a
physician treating a person with
diabetes you would treat
whatever that person is
presenting with if it's related
to diabetes so I don't know does
that answer your question.
It is Madam chair representative
it's sort of does but I I guess
I get wrapped up in in doing
that.
There so many diagnoses that
diabetics can have that they
overlap and I just wonder that
this could be huge you know what
I was working the medical floor
it was not uncommon for four out
of five of my patients to be
diabetic and and be you know
insulin dependent diabetics and
and but they weren't even there
for diabetes related Gallegos so
just the the interaction and the
the complications that that
patients can have with different
diagnoses kind of makes me
wonder where we draw the line
with those with DME for diabetes
you know Madam chair
representative okay to the
extent and actually this was
something that surprised me from
working on miss parts K. some of
her supplies that were coming
under the medical benefit of a
policy other of her supplies
were coming under the pharmacy
benefit of her policy so I would
say that this law this
requirement to have adequate
networks applies to both do in
the state it doesn't matter what
supplier you're you're telling
insured patients they have to go
to that there has to be adequacy
there so it would apply I would
I would
in my opinion it applies to.
I pharmacies if they're
supplying some of these diabetes
supplies it would apply to DME
suppliers that's durable medical
equipment and those suppliers
often times we think of them
more has suppliers of wheel
chairs or their walkers that
kind of thing and then other
suppliers who were these I
guess.
Sort of like I don't know like
distributors warehouses they
they stock a lot of different
medical supplies so I think that
this bill would apply to all of
those for people who have
insurance coverage
private insurance coverage in
the state.
Okay thank you so madam chair
and representative
Was let's talk about the supply
chain issues and this.
You know I'm all too familiar
with that living in a rural area
and having worked with diabetes
diabetics in a rural area.
We have supply chain issues
especially during the COVID and
so
That there can be so many
failures along the way who pays
who would be responsible
responsible for not receiving
your your supplies.
And how would and what with the
penalties be.
Madam chair representative
the the way the bill is drafted
it kind it it it requires the
health insurance companies to be
responsible for having an
adequate number of suppliers it
also requires the health
insurance companies to be
responsible for the performance
of those suppliers so it's a
given that in rural parts of the
state there may be
you know there may be greater
challenges but also you know we
live in an in an age of fat acts
and Amazon or or whatever so
that's going to be a challenge
but if those people are being
insured then then there has to
be some accountability on the
part of the health insurance
company that people are getting
their supplies as needed.
Thank you madam chair
representative that's really a
concern of mine because I know
even just moving from damning to
Santa Fe boy I I order something
in Santa Fe it's right there you
know like I I've placed orders
at different stores and asked
representative.
Will they let you order
additional supplies so you stay
a month ahead.
madam chair of the
representative Vincent of the
they give me three months of
supplies and I'm allowed to
order them twenty days in
advance in and they ship
typically a week before but they
don't give you extra they give
you the three months and that
set.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
When you get that three month
supply in you get down to the
twenty day mark.
You have ran out of supplies.
Madam chair representative
Vincent I've never run out of
chair run out of supplies twenty
days ahead of when I'm supposed
to get my supplies
is so with the issue is just
it's it's when they go beyond
that twenty days so when I was
struggling to get of edge park
to send me the supplies is
because the lack of a contract
and they weren't sending me the
supplies the setting they were
not meeting that twenty day
deadline the research passing
that so was out of supplies when
that happened did I make that
clear thank you.
Madam chair representative I
guess the reason I'm asking you
these questions is because super
sensitive when it comes to
diabetic emergencies and I took
care of those for twenty five
years and in a rural place where
I'm at and the chances of you
running on somebody that you
know out of ten thousand people
is is pretty common and I know
that is something that super
skerry.
I as well have a member of my
family that fights with her
blood sugar Daly tries to keep
it up.
And.
Coming into this meeting I was
gonna vote no for this bill not
gonna lie to you and of I've
gone over it extensively I've
got a few more questions and I'm
just trying to wrap this up to
where I can I can hopefully vote
yes on this but
I get this idea so irritated the
last time I talked about
insurance companies are three
people meet me at the door and
they end provided.
This representative Thompson
talk with Hey and I got some
questions asked but I get very
frustrated with big pharma.
You know and I mean you these
are life altering drugs you have
to have.
And they cost so much money.
It's just irritating for me and
I wish they can explain to me
why they charge people that have
no option no choice all that
money.
Just to live just to survive.
Madam chair and representative
Vincent I'm another thing I mean
you can we could all imagine at
spending four hundred ninety two
minutes on the phone and being
told given the run around and so
stress increases blood sugar so
the fact that they're putting
the patients through these
hamster wheels for lack of a
better word actually is bad for
their health.
Thank you in Madam chair
representative.
Who is gonna absorb the cost the
level of Representative been so
we have to pause the meeting
we've lost the connection.
The.
Okay you want to just to close
to her that you want to just
this this include the request.
All I see okay.
I have a question for you all
your folks in the back back
there can you hear me well.
Okay good I had the work on my
microphone because last Friday
they couldn't they couldn't hear
me so I think they can turn up
the individual microphones they
can turn up the volume somehow
so I I guess they did thank you.
We have madam chair we have had
some serious tech issues this
whole session so.
We just need more stress in our
lives.
The.
Yeah.
Is thank you for your patience
we are having a few technical
difficulties and we are working
through this.
Mr chair.
The thing is there is yes we
worked very closely together on.
This.
Recent.
Right.
Maybe yes.
To send
a message that you had in.
The bill.
Actually.
To the checks.
So much because I mean this is
this issues etcetera etcetera.
The.
We're good.
Okay madam chair representative.
Those kind of honor roll there
for a minute now down.
So.
What I'd like to ask is.
If I vote for this who who
absorbs the costs.
Madam chair representative
Vincent
I I think the insurance
companies will have to absorb
the cost in the first instance
what what this does this is an
administrative issue and health
insurance companies are already
receiving a set percentage of of
payment to pay for their
administrative costs under
federal law and probably also
Representative the former
superintendent total is it is
here in the audience so they're
already getting paid they're
making money for administrative
work and this is getting more
administrative house in order so
I think they should eat it and I
think they're already being paid
for it
the cost of this bill has I see
it is would be to the state to
the general fund it's that
appropriation to the office of
superintendent of insurance at
the end to give them the proper
staffing so that they can audit
these health insurers to make
sure they're doing what they're
supposed to do under the law and
you know to pursue enforcement
action if that's warranted.
Thank you and madam chair
representative the OSI indicates
in there if in the in their FIR
that this legislation could
trigger some cost to the state
is that right or wrong I I think
that okay under the F. I. R.
that I saw it yesterday which
was issued for the substitute
my impression is that there's no
impact to the state budget
except for the fact that there
is this appropriation to OSI and
they also indicated that they
would need an additional
appropriation of something like
a hundred and fifty thousand
dollars to pay for an actuarial
study in connection with the
workgroup that this bill asks
them to convene before the end
of the next in our a workgroup
of differs and knowledgeable
stakeholders to review what if
anything the state can do to to
increase of to to better meet
the needs of diabetics in the in
the state through the updating
of the essential health
benefits.
And will this affect my local
pharmacies at all.
Well what it should do is if
your local pharmacy is under
contract with the health plan to
supply supplies to diabetics
hopefully that pharmacy will
have a contract that's in place
on day one of one the next
policy years starts so I would
think it would be helpful to
your local pharmacy also the
fact this provision that limits
the number of prior
authorizations I'm I'm not
absolutely sure I don't know if
Mr Tinker is still here but
provided you know physicians
have to call in and deal with
insurance companies on these
prior authorizations and I know
when I go to the pharmacist for
for my medication sometimes they
have to call up an insurance
company so that might reduce the
the burden on your local
pharmacists thank you.
But the reason for the
substitution was because of the
sensually what the FIR showed
that it was going to cost too
much so that that was what was
taken out with the big budget
it's you'll hear it it's called
the frail and it's about the
affordable Care Act and it's
just now kind of becoming the in
thing so we change the bill
because of that.
Thank you madam chair
representative you know to my
constituents that are listening
in.
My job here is.
I want to see miss Hart lived to
be ninety years old.
And I want to get your meds.
And.
I want to be fiscally
responsible and do the right
thing with money and I don't
want to put the burden off
anybody else.
And I'm as a freshman I'm slowly
learning that I'm gonna sniff
out who's making the money.
On diabetic and and I'm not
going to place blame on nobody
until I find it and once I do
I'm and I'm gonna be like a
hunting dog and I'm gonna sniff
it out I'm a fund where it's all
going and I want to see how they
stand when it comes to holding
medications or not delivering
medications to somebody that is
depending on that to to survive
and madam chair
I've said this before we as the
Legislature don't have a way to
look forward but let's think
about it you know you find a
thousand dollars worth of
supplies and avoid an amputation
that's going to cost multiple
thousands and in physical
therapy and then a prosthesis
and the person can't work
anymore so they get on snap and
they it's it's very short
sighted emits like thing with
your car well I don't want to
spend the forty dollars for an
oil change I'd rather put in a
new engine at you know five
thousand dollars a little bit
down the road.
That's all I've got madam chair.
If we adopt this substitute yes
we did no memory.
Yes.
So yes ma'am I'd like to make it
an for us to I'm not do you pass
on the not pass a do not pass.
Three H. P. fifty three thank
you mentor and more passed on
committee sensitive for H. B.
fifty and the do pass on the
committee substitute.
That's my first motion.
Mexico okay.
Thank you for that so we have
this was stated by.
Thank you.
Access.
There we go I figured it out all
Is an old timer it's been around
for I've carried it I don't know
how many times too many and
essentially the
The intent of the Act is to
allow a local pharmacy to well
let me start over so right now I
don't know if any of you have
have insurers that say you must
get your medication through mail
order you can't go to your local
pharmacy and when I first was
running this that wasn't me and
at one meeting somebody said
that doesn't happen I showed
them my letter from two days
before that they say so what
this bill tries to do is say
that if your local pharmacy can
meet the price of the mail order
pharmacy the patient has the
right to go to their local
pharmacy and as Representative
Vincent has talked about
repeatedly
his his the pharmacist in his
town is basically the primary
care provider so we did have a
member who was our oldest member
a few years ago who I believe he
was coming up on ninety and he
had been getting drugs from mail
order and from his local
pharmacy and so it was kind of
things were lost he went into
his local pharmacy and the
pharmacist said whoa we need to
change that because of the he
was having bad interactions with
the drugs if they all been from
mail order no one would have
notice so what we're trying to
do is keep our local pharmacies
open and available to serve
their community
and did not have folks do that
be forced into mail order and
you also think about things like
insulin am I grew up on the
Navajo reservation the fed ex
truck delivers dear insulin and
it sits out in the sun for three
days because you've got to town
or if you're homeless and you
have hepatitis C. or HIV where
did they mail your drugs there's
a whole issue of problems that
we're trying to trying to solve
with this and I will let my
expert witness take over from
there.
This you give that to you expert
witness we're back on the
webcast okay.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
thank you for giving me the
opportunity to speak to you this
morning my name is Breanna hair
Herrin I've been a pharmacist
for fourteen years I don't let
them the baby face fool you I'm
not old
but I've been a pharmacist and a
community for fourteen years I'm
currently the director of
pharmacy for a nonprofit health
center we have pharmacies in
Albuquerque and Santa Fe and we
actually serve patients
across the whole state our house
bill one thirty two to really
promote access by removing the
mandatory mail order
requirements that some PBMs are
have in there treatments with
the health plans and it allows
patients to choose where and how
they access their pharmacy
services I want to be super
clear and transparent with you
many patient populations have
zero issues with mail order
pharmacy they continue to use an
out of state mail order pharmacy
they continue to use out of
state specialty pharmacies it's
their primary way they receive
their medications and they don't
have any problems with that this
bill will not prevent these
patients from using these
pharmacies are it will not cause
a mass exit is of these patients
to not use the mail order
pharmacies
Basically there are very very
vulnerable populations in our
communities be it if they live
in a rural area or
there's they're struggling with
other things like not having
consistent communication
services stable housing stuff
like that they're vulnerable
populations in New Mexico
that receiving their medications
from an out of state mail order
pharmacy is absolutely a barrier
to care they have limited
cell phone plans sometimes you
know where all with our
smartphones and we can go online
and create create accounts and
have online portals and we can
manage
the delivery of not just our
medications but other things
that we need delivered very very
easily but there are patients in
New Mexico who cannot and
they're not able to do this
right now
we have a lot of patients that
only can receive stuff at a PO
box and a lot of these
medications cannot be shipped to
a PO box they need an actual
physical address in order for
fed ex or UPS to be able to
deliver the medications and so I
can tell you as a pharmacist
practicing in New Mexico for a
long time delivering things to
New Mexico is extremely
challenging and delivering
whether it supplies or
medications to our patients in
rural areas is extremely
difficult
there's also patients that need
assistance with language reading
writing and and hearing and
the mail order pharmacies are
unable to assist with that as
well so.
Mail order pharmacies not going
anywhere this bill is just
simply to say if there's a
community pharmacy that can meet
the same terms and conditions as
the mail order pharmacy that
they be allowed to fill method
the medications for those for
those patient populations that
are in need of it.
And that's all I have for you
this morning.
All right thank you very much
I'll go to the audience to the
audience in the room is there
anyone in opposition to this
bill.
A if you would please come
forward if you wish to speak.
And utilize the microphone and
you have two minutes.
It's on okay madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Brent more I am a registered
lobbyist for America's health
insurance plans the national
trade association of health
insurers and I would I preface
my comments today by setting the
landscape and noting some things
that I think everyone knows
drugs are expensive and they are
super expensive and they don't
seem to be going down anytime
soon farming continues to do
annual increases and it's a
struggle for everyone in the
healthcare area to keep up with
that one of the ways that health
plans try to provide care for
their members and their policy
holders is to use mail order
pharmacy to get drugs to those
those policy holders mail order
is something that's very
convenient for a lot of policy
holders and it is very useful
what you have in front of you
with this bill is essentially
what we would call and any
willing pharmacy bill it takes
away the ability of health plans
to try to design ways to control
costs and get drugs to the
people who need them and that is
difficult for us to implement I
would note that in doing in
passing a bill like this you are
adding costs into the system not
only for the folks who are
receiving coverage through
commercial care but you know
when you look to the FIR you see
all of the government run
programs you have the retiree
health care authority of GST the
PS each one of them notes the
millions of dollars in expense
that is added into the system
with this bill and to the extent
that can't calculated you would
note that the state
indeterminate but substantial so
we are definitely adding costs
back into the system for
commercial plants what that
means is we internalize.
It we bake it back into premium
and that is going to be a cost
thank you very.
Your time is I had so many more
things to say.
You always.
You are amazing.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Allison
Riley I'm here on behalf of Joe
Thompson registered lobbyists
for the pharmaceutical care
management association PCMA
represents the pharmacy benefits
specialists that manage the
pharmacy benefits of over two
hundred seventy five million
people throughout the United
States unfortunately we rise in
opposition to house bill one
thirty two because it limits the
very options we used to make
drugs more affordable what we do
understand the intent to provide
parity between mail order
pharmacies and retail pharmacies
the current language of the bill
will drive up costs for
essential medications and those
costs will be passed on to
patients through higher premiums
and out of pocket expenses as
noted in the fiscal impact
report the cost of implementing
this for many of the government
plans would be indeterminate but
substantial insurance is based
on the idea of leveraging the
buying power for a group for the
best deal and then spring that
costs the entire group through
premiums and copays in most
cases plan sponsors pay a large
portion of the premiums but
removing their ability to
leverage buying power for
specialty medications or
maintenance medications will
result in higher costs and your
constituents will pay a higher
price we would welcome further
dialogue with the proponents of
this bill and pursuit of our
shared goal for healthier New
Mexico but we cannot support the
current version of this bill
thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I'm Pat
block with Otero consulting
registered lobbyist for prime
therapeutics and we rising
respectful opposition to house
bill one thirty two.
This committee in the
legislature as a whole often
deal with issues like the ones
in this bill and attempt to
balance the needs of a wide
array of interests this bill
addresses an issue that affects
the balance between consumers
pharmacies health plans plan
sponsors manufacturers and
others mail order saves money
and the savings keep costs down
including those for copays at
the pharmacy counter we contend
that this bill would hurt those
savings move things too far out
of balance and you can see that
reflected in the first paragraph
of the significant issues
portion of the FIR I won't take
time to read it to you but if
you review that you'll see that
raises valid insignificant
questions personally I use both
mail order and my local pharmacy
they're both vital components of
the healthcare delivery system
recently I had knee replacement
surgery and I purchased my post
op medications from my local
pharmacy I didn't have any need
nor did I want a ninety day
supply or refills of the heavy
duty in our contacts they
prescribed some mail order made
no sense also when I remember my
family is sick with something
like a flu or a sinus infection
we go to the local pharmacy
because we want to start
treatment that day not one a
mail order delivery arrives on
the other hand I take a long
term maintenance medication and
I prefer to use mail order for
for convenience and for the cost
savings to me and to my plan
sponsor the retiree health care
authority.
Speaking of the R. eight CA
allow me to call your attention
to the fiscal impact portion of
the FIR if we shift this balance
in the way this bill seeks to do
it would be extremely expensive
to them the PSI HGST and other
public and private plans please
take a look at the F. I. R. I
believe you'll agree that the
costs are stunning so much so
that the R. H. CA expressed
concerns about this bill
exacerbating the long term
financial state stability issues
are currently facing so for
these reasons and the other
stated by the other folks in
opposition I would ask that you
not support this bill thank you
for your time thank you very
much.
shows registered lobbyist for
Members of the committee Marla
Blue Cross blue shield of New
believe that house bill one
Use mail order pharmacy we do
thirty two will increase costs
for prescription drugs and for
health insurance premiums this
legislation undermines cost
savings insurers currently share
with their members and limits
our ability to continue to
incentivize lower cost options
when appropriate mail order
pharmacies are volume driven
business just like Costco
meaning that they purchased
large quantities of medicines
and pass those savings back to
ensure New Mexicans it's my
understanding that currently it
existing that this legislation
parts of this legislation may
not be necessary in existing
statute fifty nine eight dash
sixty one dash four dash be
requires PBMs to reimburse
pharmacies an amount no less
than the amount reimbursed to
PVN affiliate pharmacies in the
same network for providing the
same or equivalent services the
this legislation undermines
protections in place for
patients receiving medicines
from specialty pharmacies that
are used for to treat complex
chronic medical conditions such
as cancer additionally some pair
such as several of the I back
agencies also benefit by signing
exclusive contracts with
specialty pharmacies and reap
large savings for these reasons
and many of the reasons
previously stated we stand in
opposition to this bill thank
you thank you.
Madam chair members committee my
name's keep gardener additional
this for cigna healthcare and
our affiliate express scripts no
repeat the things that have been
said about this bill we also
stand opposed we're concerned
about the ball purchasing
portion that we are able to do
as part of the PBMs of hold down
price we know that prices and
extremely important thing but
the other part is not just price
on the mail order that you can
save up from but it's also
certain secondary programs that
are part of these mail order
programs where we actually work
with the patient to help them
through their issues and to see
if there's other all alternative
care that can also save the
money by having this bold
purchasing just live same reason
many of us go to Costco or or
those other bulk purchasers for
other home goods the savings is
what we all enjoy and it's the
same thing our plans enjoy it
obviously is of those of set
this fiscal impact report if you
can imagine what the small
number of people in the totality
of the state are impacted by
this bill as as state employees
as you see on the FIR imagine
every other citizen and the
impact that it will be to them
and their health your health
insurance premiums that are
outside of that system because
this the cost is going to be
passed on to them just like it
would be members of the
executive and other branches of
government to pay a portion of
their own health care premiums
with that we stand and and
respectful opposition thank you
mentor.
Thank you.
Is there anyone else in
opposition there's one more
person behind.
Just one more madam chair
appreciate the opportunity my
name is Damond Bauer I represent
the national association of
health underwriters chapter here
in New Mexico as well as my many
clients as a broker here in
Santa Fe New Mexico what I'd
like to bring up as a point is
not necessarily the rural areas
that we're talking about but
more the.
Citizens that have to choose
private plans employer plans
cover a lot of the costs that
employees may have to incur with
a with a bill like this but
mainly I work with people that
are buying market place plans or
direct from carriers because
they don't qualify for tax
credits they are in that
minority of working hard making
more money finding themselves
not able to qualify for a tax
credit that makes that health
premium at a lower cost that's
where these increases in rates
are really hurting people you
can be a diabetic making ninety
five thousand dollars a year and
all of your money is gone
because you have to deal with
the nine thousand dollar out of
pocket Max.
Thank you for your time.
I will go to the zone if there's
anyone to speak in opposition to
this bill please raise your
hand.
Okay seeing no hands I'm going
to go to the audience here
anyone here to speak in support
of this bill.
Please step forward.
And you have two minutes.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you my name is
Dale Tinker I represent New
Mexico pharmacists Association
as the bill sponsor mention
she's carried this bill many
times and as I have told other
people I've been around here for
about thirty seven years as a
lobbyist and I've run similar
bills either called
pharmacists.
Access our pharmacy access her
patient choice those kinds of
things I did want to comment the
FIR talks about a huge amount of
expenditure that would happen if
you pass this bill I would like
to point out I tried to find
information for the F. I. R.
that the only accepted from
agencies and I'm not an agency
so
I did have information on a
number of states where the
Attorney General sued PBMs
because of over charging
the amount of money their
information is not always
accurate I don't know that
that's happening here in New
Mexico but I would like to see
the AG's office take a look at
that
because I don't believe that FIR
is accurate
pharmacies.
What made also belong to buying
groups they participate in joint
groups nationwide we have
the pharmacy group buying group
called independent pharmacy
cooperative that is national in
scope so I don't know that a
mail order company buying power
is any better than an
independent pharmacy buying
group is as well the chains have
cooperatives where they buy in
bulk.
The independence by involved
through their cooperatives I
think they have good buying
power but this bill would say.
you can participate if you're
willing to accept the terms and
conditions I think the state
employee plans that Madam in the
FIR are fed the information by
their PBMs which they then pass
on.
So
Okay I think my time probably at
that thank you.
I'll definitely be quick my name
is honey from a pharmacist and I
practice in majority of rural
areas I just want to point out
from what you heard from the
opposition they're one of the
few industries that can tell you
if you increased competition if
people meet our standards if you
give increase access you want to
pay more and and and that just
sounds like a mafia type
mentality where you could say if
you don't take them are
conditions that and you're going
to pay the consequences of it
and because we control of
everything and we have the
knowledge so I I just wanted to
bring that up to the committee
it's in their thought process of
what they're hearing from the
opposition thank you.
Thank you.
That will go to the zoom I'm
sorry where you going to speak.
And
chairman members of the
committee my name is Elizabeth
Liz other I am a fourth year
pharmacy student at the college
of pharmacy I graduate in may
and I'll be working as a
pharmacist currently right now I
am employed in several
pharmacies smoke one pharmacy.
You different pharmacies I've
worked in before but I can tell
you that it's really frustrating
when a patient but you've been
seeing for many years.
Get a notification our rejection
that we can't bill for them
anymore.
They can get their medications
through mail order we've
established relationships with
them and we know them by first
name we know what's going on
with them we know their
situation and it's really
upsetting for them when it's
more convenient for them to come
into the local pharmacy.
Granted a lot of people do like
mail order.
That's fine this bill is just
giving up choice for people to
be able to make the choice I can
order usually because I live in
a city my parents who live in
rural communities and often
times but I just can't figure
out which county road they live
on.
Can't find them they will get
their medications it's really
about giving a choice so I
support this bill thank you.
Thank you.
Is there anyone else if to speak
in support of this bill.
All right we will go to the zoom
if there's anyone who wishes to
speak in favor of the bill
please raise your hand.
Okay I see no hands of the so
we're going to the committee
madam chair could I respond just
very quickly yes so what we this
is been argument every time I
carry this bill is that oh my
god this guy is going to fall
and and now these are huge mail
order pharmacies are going to go
out of business so let's think
about it you know Joe's pharmacy
in hatch New Mexico if they
can't they have to meet the same
price so if if the companies are
negotiating such low prices then
there is no way that the local
pharmacy can meet that and
another thing is that many
insurers now somebody talked
about CVS and Caremark mark many
insurance companies have their
own mail order pharmacies so
there they are on their monopoly
and there they are keeping the
business to themselves as
opposed to letting the and madam
chair I just want to say one
more thing I just got a text
that a very dear friend son died
last night so I'm a little a
little shaky.
There are no hands of this the
are there any questions from the
committee.
We have a motion for that just
for the motion and the second is
there any opposition.
Please call the roll please.
Yes.
No.
No.
Yes.
Yes.
By a vote of six in the
affirmative and three in the
negative you have a do pass.
We are in recess until Friday at
eight thirty AM.
Thank you.
