Representative Senna Cortez,
here.
Representative Vice Chair
Herndon, present.
Char Thompson. Here.
So we do have a quorum, so we
will start with HB 15 Healthcare
strategic recruitment program,
and that is our own
representative Anaya. And, oh,
she's not on the paper.
Representative Jones.
All right. Good morning, Madam
Chair.
Fellow members of the committee,
um, thank you so much for
hearing House Bill 15 this
morning. Um, I, of course, have
my lovely co-sponsor, uh,
representative Jones here with
me. And I also have my expert
witness, our secretary of
Department of Workforce
Solutions, Secretary Nayer as
well, who will be an expert on
the bill.
So, um, it is no surprise to
anyone on this committee, um,
that we all know we need to
recruit and retain our
healthcare workers. Um, but one
of the questions that we keep
running up against is how is it
that we're going to compete,
especially because we know that
we are um in the middle of a
health care crisis shortage
across the nation. And so one of
the things that we have to do is
stand out.
Um, another one of the things
that we have to do is attract a
new generation of workers. Um,
the only way to really compete
is for us to be able to stand
out in the crowd.
Um, so what this bill does is
instead of waiting for our own
New Mexico graduates to come
back home.
We're actually reaching out to
bring them back. Hence the
strategic healthcare recruitment
program.
Um, there were 2 instances that
I came across, um, as I was
traveling unofficially, um with
the interim committee, interim
health committee. Um, and one
was that even in our, in our
institutions of higher
education, those who are, um, in
charge of recruiting folks to
work in the clinical setting,
um, we're not aware that we had
loan forgiveness programs that
we had already passed in our
state.
Um, a second piece of
information that I found along
the way was that um,
As I was talking to other
healthcare institutions, um, the
three things that they named as
a hindrance, um, to bringing
folks here where education crime
and actually partner jobs, which
was interesting to me.
And so, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, I see this bill
as, um, connecting the dots for
a lot of things that have
already happened, um, and things
that we look forward to as well.
Um,
so, Madam Chair, what this bill
will do is, uh, this is a bill
that encompasses all healthcare
workers and allied professions.
Both licensed clinical workers
and unlicensed clinical workers.
Um, so that would be folks like
Tex, but it could also include
folks like community healthcare
workers, peer navigators, of
course, folks in the behavioral
health system as well. Um, so I
wanted to just start narrowing
us down, um, because this will
be a pilot project. So we needed
to figure out who it was that we
were going to target in this
project. Um,
We are, um, uh, recruiting folks
who have graduated from our own
New Mexico institutions and who
currently work elsewhere in
other states.
Essentially what this is, it's a
bit of a hybrid between a
headhunter program and a
concierge program.
So the first thing we do is we
um call them up using shared
data with the Department of
Workforce Solutions and our uh
institutions of higher
education. We call them up, we
say, we know you're finishing
with your fellowship or we know
your phys finishing with your
residency. We want you back
home, um, or we say, you know, I
know you're working in.
South Carolina somewhere we want
you back home. Then we describe
the different types of
recruitment incentives that
we've passed throughout the
years. So we say we want you
back home and guess what? We
have loan forgiveness. We have,
you know, whatever down payment
assistance, whatever it was that
we've passed by that time. Um,
we let them know what we've
passed. And then we present them
with jobs. So I say, you know, I
know you're a nurse.
For all the positions that are
open in New Mexico.
One of the things we do not do
is we do not give preference to
the jobs. We just make them
available for folks.
Um, so we say here are all the
jobs throughout the state that
you are qualified for. If
they're like, oh man, you know,
I grew up with girls but I grew
up in wherever and I really want
to go back home. I was thinking
about it, um, then we would help
them through the licensing and
credentialing process. We
essentially open a case file for
them.
Walk them through the licensing
and credentialing process. Um,
if, in fact, they need to be
licensed or credentialed here.
Um, but then we also um think
about their quality of life.
What kind of life are they going
to have when they come here, um,
because we all know that a part
of retaining folks in our state
is actually making sure that
they have a community that they
have support, that they have
other healthcare workers that
are that are like them or that
are in their same specialty. And
so we know that those are all
factors of what our healthcare
providers
Allied health fields are
thinking of when they're
thinking of, um,
Of a job here as well.
Um
Madam Chair representatives, um,
that is, um, that is the general
overview of this. Um, I wanna
give some space for my
co-sponsor if she wants to say
anything, and then I want to
pass it to Secretary Naer as
well, um, so she can explain how
this fits into current goals for
the Department of Workforce
Solutions.
Thank you, Representative Anaya.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
I um want to uh tell you about
how uh Representative and I
approached me during the interim
with this, with this concept of
a new way of recruiting
healthcare workforce, and I have
to say I was much appreciative
of her her energy and enthusiasm
and her creative thinking that
uh approach this crisis that we
have in a in a new and different
way. Um, I think it's so
important that um we listen to
all of the voices and and we.
We look at new initiatives and
so I was on board when she asked
me, uh, as a, as a nurse who had
left the state, would you have
come back if someone had reached
out to you, and I honestly have
to say I've always wanted to
come home when I was gone um in
Kansas. I worked for quite a few
years. I always was homesick the
entire time, and if someone had
reached out with assistance to
me, I'm, I'm actually might have
come back. It might have made
the difference. We get busy with
our lives.
and I know there are their
health is healthcare workforce
out there who just needs uh
needs to be recruited and I know
that uh also, Madam Chair, the
uh the agencies, nursing
agencies reach out all the time.
I don't know why this isn't
happening in the private sector
from hospitals and and other um
Uh, facilities here in New
Mexico, but I don't think that
they're really recruiting, like
we could be recruiting, so and
although I, I, in general, I'm
not in favor of growing
government. I think that
sometimes we need to invest in
new initiatives, so I was on
board with looking at this
process and I am supportive of
the concept. So thank you so
much, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Anaya.
Uh, thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um,
as, uh, the sponsors uh
mentioned, they've asked me to
speak about how this would work
with the rest of the Department
of Workforce Solutions agenda
and also why we think this would
work. So in 2023, we
crisscrossed the state and put
together the 24 through 2027
workforce innovation Opportunity
Act strategic plan, and that's
for the entire state and one of
the stats that stuck out as we
did our stakeholder meetings was
that between 2010.
in 2022, uh, the state had a net
negative migration to the tune
of 30,0085 individuals, um,
since 2010, nearly 20,000 more
workers have left New Mexico
then arrived. And so it started
to develop this goal that
eventually became goal 4 of the
plan, which is to attract out of
state workers to New Mexico and
improve retention of New
Mexicans within the state,
particularly in rural
communities. So attracting out
of state talent is already baked
into our plan, as
healthcare and behavioral
health, which are one of our,
which is one of our priority
sectors. So alignment with the
Weowa State plan means that all
of the partners are already
supposed to be rowing in this
direction that includes adult
education, the division of
vocational rehabilitation, uh,
the senior employment programs,
the TANF and Snapor pro programs
we've all together identified
these goals. And so this program
is really designed to um
leverage all of those assets and
help us as a community of
workforce.
providers reach out to these
folks in other states.
Um, we know this is, is gonna
We, we hope this is gonna work
because we know that personal
contact works. We've seen an
increase in desire for personal
contact across our programs are
in-person programs have seen
year over year increases ranging
from 14% in our Wagner-Paiser
programs to 30% in our
re-employment services and
eligibility assessment RIA
programs.
We also think this allows the
state to leverage its existing
investments and recruitment
programs. A lot of industry
program recruitment industry
programs are out there, but very
few of them have formal outreach
or uh advertising. Many of them
are not even funded to do that.
We know that that we have in New
Mexico the social work loan
repayment program. We have the
Healthcare Work loan repayment
program. We have the rural
healthcare tax credit, and then
of course we have other benefits
for all New Mexicans like the
Opportunity scholarship,
childcare.
resistance. Um, we would like to
work closely with all of those
programs to market them to this
specific demographic of people
who have left New Mexico after
getting their healthcare
education here, and we work
closely with tourism, with
outdoor recreation, with the
creative industries division to
highlight all those
opportunities which may apply to
the person we're recruiting or
to their trailing spouse.
Finally, a lot of local
governments have looked at
recruitment incentives. I know
we did when I was at the city of
Albuquerque, um, but they
usually don't have the, the
capacity to push them out
nationally. So if Clovis or
Demming or Rio Rancho wanted to
develop a healthcare recruitment
program, they could leverage
this program to make their
investment go further. Um, I
know I was in Hobbs a few weeks
ago and got to visit New Mexico
Junior College. They have an
amazing nursing program if you
haven't seen it, you should
visit and uh the people who went
there and ended up moving to
Texas to practice, those would
be the prime candidates for this
type of program. So happy to
answer any questions. Thank you.
With that, Madam Chair, we stand
for questions. OK, thank you. So
we are going to go to
opposition, so if you are on
Zoom in opposition, please raise
your hand. We'll come back to
you in the room. Is there anyone
in opposition?
OK, seeing none and see no
hands, we will go to support,
uh, so if you're on Zoom in
support, raise your hand, we
will take the 1st 5 if.
If it's that popular in the
room, anyone in support.
If you'd like to speak, please
come to the center. You'll have
2 minutes and we'll take a
maximum of 10.
Up
Thank you.
Oh sorry, Madam Chair, members
of committee. My name is Julian
Kub and I work with the trial
Law Association. We've been
hearing a lot about the health
care crisis and what is and
isn't real about um healthcare
providers in our state. This is
a solution that will work and
will help us um continue to
increase the number of doctors
and other providers in our
state, so we stand in support.
Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Patsy
Romero. I'm president CEO of
Santa Maria El Mirador. It's an
intermediate care facility for
adults with intellectual
disabilities. It has taken me 3
years to find a clinical
director to work in our agency.
It is taken me 5 years to try to
find another bachelor's level
clinician to work in our
organization. The crisis for us
to recruit and retain.
are New Mexicans are are.
Our individuals who are
graduating from college is in a
crisis right now. This is an
opportunity for us to salute to
provide a solution for those of
us who are trying to recruit and
retain. And this, this issue
comes up time and again when
we're trying to recruit. I don't
have a loan forgiveness program
that I can use if I come to work
for you, and my salaries and my
agency are competitive across
the state of New Mexico, I pay
some of the.
Highest salaries for these
professionals, and I still
cannot recruit them, so anything
you can do, Madam Chair, members
of the committee to help us in
New Mexico and us as providers
would be very much appreciated.
So thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, please
vote yes on this legislation.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Gloria
Doherty. I'm a nurse and a nurse
practitioner, and I'm here on
behalf of the New Mexico nurse
practitioner Council. I wish to
thank the sponsors for bringing
this important bill. There are
close to 700 nurse practitioner
openings and more than 6400
nursing openings, according to
Workforce Solutions report from
December. This legislature has
been forward thinking and trying
to attract healthcare providers,
including increase in faculty
salaries, capacity, student loan
repayments.
tax credits, waiving first time
RN license fees, Medicaid
payment parity opportunity
scholarship. Imagine a process
where we can list all the great
things created along with those
in the making, this legislative
session.
And be able to inform healthcare
workers from outside of our
state to bring them home. We
need a broader reach, we need
advertisement, and you're all
doing such great things. We need
to get this information out
beyond our state lines and bring
them back home. So I hope that
you support this bill. Thank
you.
Either Madam Chair, members of
the committee, carry Robin
Bruder, registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico Medical Society.
we very much support this
legislation. We think that
starting with our individuals
who graduated from New Mexico
universities and institutions of
higher ed is a great first step.
Hopefully this pilot will work
out swimmingly well and we'll be
able to expand it maybe to
people who are graduating
throughout the region, um, but
we're excited about the
legislation and thank the
sponsor for bringing it.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Emily Pepin. I work for
Juliana Coop, who represents the
behavioral healthcare providers
association.
As a licensed clinical social
worker and endorsed mental
health specialists, I urge you
to pass House Bill 15.
Across the board, New Mexico
desperately needs people who
want to provide good care for
our communities, but face
financial hardship in doing so.
I myself love my home state and
returned after graduate school.
When I did, the price of my
housing increase while my pay
was cut by $15 an hour. Please
help New Mexican providers like
myself serve the state that we
love by making it more
financially viable. I urge you
to support House Bill 15. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Linda
Seal representing the New Mexico
Nurses Association, Greater
Albuquerque Medical Association,
occupational therapists,
psychologist. We all uh support
this bill as another way of
trying to recruit and bring
people back who have graduated
from our various uh higher
education institutes, so we
support this bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Nick. We will go to
Zoom and the first one is Zoom
user.
If you could please introduce
yourself.
And you have 2 minutes. Thank
you, Madam Chair and members of
the committee. My name is Doctor
Laurie and Kostrian check.
Sorry, I don't know why you're
looking at the mountains instead
of me. Um, I'm a psychiatrist
retired from a 25 year practice
in Albuquerque, having also
served incarcerated women at the
Grant's Prison and the Navajo
people at the Canyon Tito Health
Center in Tarajale, New Mexico.
I speak in opposition to HB 5.
While in its surface, it would
seem well-intentioned. I believe
it is a purposeful distraction
from legislation that would
actually address the healthcare
provider shortage that is
uniquely severe in New Mexico.
Medical professionals who
trained here are well aware of
the practice landscape, and they
are making a strong statement by
choosing not to practice here,
nationally, 57% of medical
residents stay in practice in
the geographic location where
they trained, while New Mexico
only manages to retain 21% of
our residents who train here.
Our young and promising trainees
instead choose jobs with better.
in areas with better schools,
less crime, and in states that
value medical care over lining
the pockets of trial lawyers,
allocating $2 million to try to
convince recent graduates to
come back and practice here is
naive and an irresponsible use
of state funds. I urge you to
vote against HB 15 and instead
pass legislation that would
better serve this purpose.
by making New Mexico, uh, a
place where healthcare providers
want to practice increase
student loan repayment and
Medicaid reimbursement.
Permanently repeal the gross
receipts tax on medical services
and reform medical malpractice
laws, so that New Mexico can
shift from a place where trial
lawyers want to practice to a
place where healthcare
professionals want to practice.
Thank.
Thank you.
Next we have um Kathleen Mosley.
A chair and members of the
committee, I may retired public
health nurse and wanted to ask
um for uh some attention on loan
repayment in this process. I
was um uh as a graduate nurse, I
looked for a state, uh, uh, that
was rural, and I worked in
Appalachia and virtually all the
positions and specialists that I
worked with.
there because of loan repayment,
and I see that um if we're to
compete, if I understand
correctly, we offer $25,000 a
year. Texas offers 45,000 a year
for the 1st 4 years in Colorado
offers 40,000 a year for 120,000
for the over that 3 years. So I
wanted to ask um if we can
compete in
that area.
Thank you very much.
And just a reminder, I'm, we are
talking about this bill, but we
could go on forever about what
might be, um, so please, if
you're going to make a comment,
make it about this bill, not
about what, what else there is.
So we will go to uh Dick Mason.
Yes, uh, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Dick
Mason. I'm a board member in a
registered lobbyist for the
League of Women Voters in New
Mexico. The League of Women
voters in Mexico supports a
healthcare system that provides
a comprehensive level.
of healthcare, but Mexico
residents, and we cannot provide
those services, and we're not
deliver those services without
providers. So, so this is an
important step to retain um uh
legi um you know, providers in,
um, who are trained in New
Mexico. Um, our personal level,
I was heartened to see my new
primary care physician moved
back from San Francisco to um to
New Mexico. She was a native New
Mexican, but unfortunately, my
previous
Just, um,
primary care physician moved to
San Francisco, so it was a net
zero.
so, um,
We, I urge you to give strong
support to um HB 15 and give and
give it a due pass. Thank you.
Thank you. We will now go to the
committee. I see your hand
raised, but we got to keep
moving. So if you want to speak,
you have to be Johnny on the
spot. I'm sorry, but we, we have
way too many bills, so I, so far
I have Representative Martinez
and then Senna Cortez, um,
Chavis, the Chavis and Chavis
team.
We should separate you two.
So, um, Representative Martinez,
thank you, Madam Chair. I
appreciate the time. I, I, I
love this concept. I think that
every way we can
Um
Recruiter retained healthcare
providers in the state.
Um
is good. I do have some.
Um, do we currently track?
Graduates
And
Um
licenses for nurses, doctors.
Do we track those things now.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, I actually believe we do.
Uh, I know you and I in
particular, maybe because it's
in my district, but I know you
and I in particular, but I also
know um Secretary Nayer has a
wealth of information as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
maybe this is directed to the
secretary, though, what is the
wealth of information that you
track?
You asked for it.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Martinez, so each, um, each
institution of higher education
or training provider tracks its
own um participants in part of
this bill would be gathering
that information. Anything
that's funded by We OA
Trainings, uh, we owe a dollars,
so if you're getting training
dollars or on the job dollars,
um, and a lot of those go
through the higher educational
institutions, we would, we would
also have that information in
terms of
the, the person's identity,
their demographics, and then we
would also have all their sort
of longitudinal data, including
where they're, you know, what
their wages are as they progress
through their career if they're
in New Mexico. So another piece
of this program would be, say we
attract this person back to New
Mexico, we could, um, because
they would then be a participant
in one of our programs, we could
tell you 5 years from now or
whoever's sitting in this chair
could tell you 5 years from now
whether that person is still in
New Mexico, whether they're
earning wages.
whether they're doing better
than they were when they got
here.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, secretary.
I, I am
I am encouraged that that we're,
we have all these tracking
mechanisms.
Um
Madam Chair Representative
night, how much is, how much is
appropriated in this bill?
Yes, um, we, uh, have $2 million
appropriated in this bill, and
we are working with the chair,
um, to try to get this into the
growth funds in particular, um,
because we know that this is a
pilot project, um, and we're
going to need more money when,
knock on wood, this is
successful.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, we're already
doing this. Why are we creating
another division and adding $2
million more to the budget.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
we're not currently doing this.
There are bits and pieces of
data, but what this program does
specifically is one, it really
compiles a lot of the
information that is spread out
throughout a bunch of agencies.
I know we, um, a few folks
talked about the incentive
programs. It's a good example,
right? They're currently housed
in a lot of different
departments. And when folks are
wanting to reach out to uh uh
potential providers, there's not
one place that actually houses.
Um, so there's not a way you can
say, hey, here's all this great
stuff.
Um, we also don't currently have
a program that reaches out to
anyone. Um, um, anyone who's who
we would like to attract um as a
healthcare worker.
Um, that's pretty much left on
the backs of
Um, employers themselves and
from my understanding, Madam
Chair Representative, um, people
are overwhelmed.
And specifically the folks that
I have spoken to in um the HR
programs that are in charge
specifically of recruitment
efforts.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, yeah, that.
That would be a massive
undertaking for for some of
these small
Agencies.
But we, a couple of years ago,
we created.
A massive
State bureaucracy called.
The healthcare authority.
Why is this not being handled by
the healthcare authority. It's a
healthcare matter. That's why we
created that.
Monstrosity of an agency.
Why not give them something to
do like.
This
Why send it to workforce
Solutions.
Madam Chair representative, I
actually really appreciate that
question. Um, it is my hope
because healthcare is not the
only place where we have
workforce shortages. It is
actually my hope that it stays
within this department as it
hopefully grows because we have
A shortage across the board when
it comes to workers. So the
first folks I think are actually
teachers, um, and so it is my
hope, Madam Chair
Representative, that this
actually becomes something a lot
larger than just a healthcare
recruitment program, um, but
that.
In years going forward.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Another
incredible idea that we would
have an agency.
That would
Help attract and put people to
work.
We do have that.
Cold workforce solutions.
Um, how much is this gonna cost?
past the initial funding.
Um, madam chair representative,
I will leave that to my.
Madam Chair Representative
Martinez, I think that that's
really one of the goals of the
pilot is to understand what the
the um staffing requirements
would be with the initial money
our idea would be to fund a lot
of the there's a there's a
research and information data
gathering component that would
only need to be done once and
then that system could just sort
of perpetuate, so that's some of
the first upfront money, and
then I would like to see people
embedded in community just like
they are for the rest of the
workforce system.
Um, at the American Job centers
in in local communities so that
they can really connect with the
local healthcare industry and
understand their needs and
recruit um work very closely
with their local educational
institutions. So, um, if you're
looking at, I estimate a
full-time equivalent employee
all in usually runs between 8000
and $100,000 just once you get
the benefits and all that stuff,
um, the equipment and mileage
and so, um, you know, if we
ended up with, say, one in each
of our 4 local
Workforce board regions, there's
400,000 or so and then the
ongoing operational costs of
advertising outreach.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
basically, the 2 million would
4 positions with
New cars, new computers, new
phones, new office space, new
desk, new.
Paintings on the wall.
Everything that comes with it.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Martinez. Now I think that the
idea of putting the 2 million
and grow is that there would be
some 11 time costs that could be
established with that money and
they would not need to be
recurring, and those would
include some of the connections
to gather information directly
from some of the research that
is mandated by the bill to
identify the full set of.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So,
You can build a whole division
with $2 million.
And hopefully not have.
Recurring costs.
Yeah, go ahead. Um, Madam Chair
Representative, um, it's not a
this uh bill is actually not a
division, so I just wanted to
make that quick clarification
and then I'm gonna request that
folks be brief. We, we have a
lot of bills.
Madam Chair Representative
Martinez, I think the idea would
be that the recurring cost would
be significantly less than the
initial investment. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you. um.
I love the concept. I think this
is a kind of out of the box
thinking that we need to do, and
just not.
Sold on the idea that this
doesn't belong more in the
healthcare authority for
30 years that I was in the state
government, 26 years, always
pushed the idea of.
Interagency cooperation.
Instead of building kingdoms and
Each division, um, so I, I would
hope that as the bill goes
along.
That discussion might happen,
um, cause I, I think I'd be a
little bit more comfortable.
I mean the health.
Recruitment, but
Uh, thank you for the time,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative, I think, like I
said, great idea. And, and, and
I meant to remind everyone,
please silence your phones.
Or you'll get a dirty look from
the entire committee. Um, so,
uh,
Representative Senator
I was gonna say senator Cortez.
So a quartet. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative. I am the
representative with all of the
last names, so appreciate that.
Um,
Representative, um,
Martinez asked a lot of that,
uh, tough questions that I
already had, so he made my job a
little bit easier this morning,
um, Madam Chair Representative,
I, I love the heart. I love the
creativity. I love the thinking
outside of the box. I echo the
sentiments of those that have
spoken so beautifully and
eloquently this morning, and
you're gonna hear this, uh, from
me a lot during this committee,
Madam Chair Representative is I
have to separate my heart
sometimes from the um
From
being the voice of District 62
and what's important to my
district, and my district is
very fiscally conservative and,
well, I think it's a beautiful
idea. It's a creative idea. The
2 million, the economic and the
fiscal impact is going to always
be a concern for my district,
and it's well intended, um,
I do believe it's gonna be hard
to achieve the results, and I
believe a more effective way to
approach New Mexico's health
care questions please. I'll,
I'll get there. Um, Madam Chair
Representative, the best way to
provide um and attack the, the
healthcare shortage would be a
significantly overhaul our
medical malpractice law. I will
get there,
madam chair that you get there
now. This is, we do not have
time for for statements and
pontificating, so please, Madam
Chair Representative, my
constituents have elected me in
this position not to rush
through bills, but to produce
thoughtful legislation, I will
ask you one more time to get to
your questions, please. I will
ask a question and then I will
throw in my comments.
To please you, Madam Chair
Representative. Madam Chair
Representative, who in this
department would be managing
this within workforce solutions
because I know that you guys
have a lot that you're already
managing, Madam Chair
Representative. Madam Chair
Representative Senna Cortez, we
have uh an employment services
division and that has an
operations component that it
oversees, um, we have a Title
III, which is the Wagner Peiser.
It oversees, um, jobs for
veterans services.
grants, it oversees our field
staff, and that's where we would
place this program. Thank you so
much for answering my question
and Madam Chair Representative,
I have my committee handbook and
on page 2 it says that uh no
debate should be limited, so I'm
gonna finish with my comments
now
that handbook that you are
referencing has not been updated
since 2013.
And so it's outdated and we are
not using it. And so you are
not, am I making my, am I, am I
clear this morning you're not
allowing me to finish my one
sentence with in the question
that I've asked Madam Chair
representative sentence, but as
I've said, we do not have time
for everybody to do an editorial
on the representative, I will
finish my sentence. I believe a
better use of our time would be
to overhaul our medical
malpractice and create.
This has nothing to
do with malpractice.
I am fully aware that if I am
giving my position and asking
questions, I will finish my
statements. I believe Madam
Chair Representative, that I
have the floor.
I believe it's well intended
this will be hard for me to
to do with. I am fully aware,
but I believe that that would be
a better approach and thinking
outside of the blocks that would
please my district in district.
62. Thank you so much for
allowing me to finish, Madam
Chair,
Representative Ann Chavis.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative for bringing
this. It's, it's very creative
idea and we all know, um.
That we need help with accessing
healthcare providers. Um, I do
have a question though, just
because it shows that this
appropriates the $2 million and
the appropriation is for both
recurring and non-recurring
costs. So my question is, is
there any way or is, did you
think about um creating a guard
rail or if we could include
goals and successes for if this
is not working, maybe pull back
dollars going forward.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, that is part of the Grow
program as well, and I know this
is also um a concern that
Representative Jones brought to
me and so um that will be part
of um
Uh, defining success and
measuring success is also will
be tied to the money.
And is there somewhere where we
can look at that just cause I'm
not familiar with the grow
programs
represented here. It has been
amazed for me as well, um, and
as I continue to navigate the
grow program, um, I will share
what I have. Thank you so much.
That's the only question.
Representative E. Chavis. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Love this pill.
Um, I have, I do have a couple
of questions, Madam Chair
Representative, and one of them
is, uh, I have two healthcare
professionals in my family. I
have 4 kids, 2 of them are
healthcare professionals.
One of them, uh, attended
Highlands University and went
away to school at the University
of Washington. So would you be
able to track that kind of data
in terms of um
The kids who go away to, you
know, they complete their their
um undergraduate and they go to
another university. Is there a
way to track that so we can get
them to come home.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
I can turn it to my expert, um,
but from what I understand, some
of our higher education
institutions, they do track that
data, and they do have it
readily available.
OK.
Perfect. Um, one of the ways
that I was able to get her to
come home, she'd call me and
say, Mom, it's raining. I'm like
the sun is shining here, so she
finally came back home after
several years. The other
question that I have, Madam
Chair Representative, is, um, in
terms of uh student loan
repayment.
Does that cover any kind of
student loans, my kids have
both, um, the government, the
federal loans, and then also
like Sally Mae and those kinds
of loans. So does it cover all
of those kinds of loans. Madam
Chair Representative, it would
cover the incentives that our
state has passed over in years
previous, and of course, what we
passed this year as well. OK.
Um, and then my last question,
Madam Chair Representative, are
we, um,
Doing any outreach to current
healthcare providers who might,
and we don't know who's all
thinking about it, but we do
know that some think about going
to other states, right? We're
doing with this include doing
outreach to them to basically
remind them about the incentives
and why it's a good idea to stay
here.
Madam Chair Representative, are
you talking about um current
students right now. I'm talking
about students who have
graduated and maybe they're
working, for example, in New
Mexico hospitals, you know, how
do we, um, you know, get them to
not think about going someplace
else. Got it, um, Madam Chair
Representative, um, this
actually excludes um folks who
are currently working in New
Mexico, um, and so if they are
working here, it would exclude
them, um, as we were thinking
of, you know, it is a pilot
program, we do.
you have to uh narrow it down,
so we had to choose, all right,
who is
Um, you know, the top of our
priority list. So folks who are
currently working here are, are
not going to be targeted. OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, seeing no more
questions, I will entertain
emotion.
like to make motion for to pass.
Do we have a second?
OK, so a motion by
Representative Kate and a second
by Representative E. Chavez. Is
there any opposition?
OK, we will take the role.
Representative Anaya. Yes.
Representative Cates, yes.
Representative E Chavis.
Representative En Chavez. No one
I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones, yes.
Representative Martinez.
Uh, yes, ma'am, I'm sure I'd
also like to explain my book.
Representative Santa Cortez. No,
and I think I explained my vote.
Uh, vice chair Herndon Madam
Chair.
Point of order, I meant to say
no. Can I explain my rules? And
then I heard all the giggling
over here.
So sure, so you're a no, OK, but
you want to explain your vote.
Yeah, correct. OK, got it. OK.
We don't need more confusion in
here. Vice Chair Herndon.
Yes.
And Char Thompson. Yes.
By a boat of 7 to 3, you have a
due pass.
On House Bill 15.
And uh representative N Chavis.
who explained her vote.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and thank you, Representative. I
will be sitting with you so we
could go over the grow program
and then just, um, I, I really
want to make sure that we have
some guard rails if this program
doesn't work, and really would
like to see New Mexicans
included in this plan because
there are so many that are
unemployed, so that would be my
concern, but thank you so much.
minority whip Martinez, who is
confused this morning. It's been
a long morning already, Madam
Chair. Um, I appreciate the
time. I, I love this concept.
Like I said, anything that we
can do to think out of the box
to recruit medical providers to
New Mexico is a great idea.
There's a couple of issues that
I have. If we're gonna use
growth funding.
You might want to look at the
language because the language
says the appropriation coming
directly out of the general
fund, so.
We might want to work on, on
some language there, um, and I.
I know it seems like I have
something against workforce
solutions. I really don't, Madam
Secretary, I think you're doing
a great job. I just think it
belongs in the healthcare
authority. Um, and I, I think
I'd be a little bit more
comfortable.
But I'm gonna listen to the
debate as it goes through
committees and down to the
floor.
Never know. I might change my
mind. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. So we are going to
jump out of order again and I'm
going to representative um
Ferrari for a motion. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, I would
like to make a motion to
reconsider House Bill 106.
Do I have a second?
Is there any opposition?
See none
And the reason just to explain
to folks why go ahead and come
up was, um, it was brought to my
attention that there were so
many law enforcement officers
that probably have better things
to do than sit here and listen
to us argue, so we, we move them
ahead and this is just to
address the amendment, there
will be questions only on the
amendment and then we will take
a vote. So hopefully it will be
very quick. Thank you. Go ahead,
Representative Reed. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you for
allowing just 1 2nd, we don't
have the amendment yet.
Oh.
I'm sorry.
I, I.
I know it's, I, I, I threw, I
threw a wrench in the, in the
work actually representative
Martinezrew a wrench in the
works.
Thank you.
So once everyone gets a copy of
the amendment, you can go ahead,
Representative Reed, sorry for
that confusion, but
were a little off of uh
Our norm. No, no problem. Thank
you, ma'am.
So I think you can go ahead. OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
again, thank you for
reconsidering um hearing this
again, um, and giving myself the
opportunity to reach out to some
members and try to address the
concerns that I believe the
committee had mainly with the
cannabis issue.
OK, well, we do have
poltergeists in this room that
mess with our mess with our AB
so my voice changed
and you weren't even speaking,
it was your ventriloquist,
and thank you, Madam Chair. And
so what, what I did is went
through the bill and took out
cannabis, the reference to
cannabis in this bill, um,
leaving the ability for search
warrants, um, obviously after a
valid arrest, um, for your other
substances.
in the Controlled Substances
Act, like, uh, methamphetamine,
cocaine, opioids, um, fentanyl,
all the, the harder, harder
drugs that we have good testing
on because I know there was
concern about the cannabis
testing and when somebody used
animus or not and, and so I did
take that out, um, I hope that
would satisfy the concerns of
the committee and you know, when
we get better cannabis testing
down the road. It could be
something we could add in and
so, um, those are the
amendments, um.
And I hope this bill satisfies
the committee and with that I
would stand for any questions on
the amendments.
OK, since we did public comment
the first time around, we're
going to skip public comment.
Are there questions from the
committee?
Oh we didn't move the amendment
for discussion. So thank you,
Representative. Is there a
second in the opposite.
Opposition.
OK, seeing then.
So, um,
Are there questions on the
amendment? Representative
Ferrari.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, can
you explain, uh, removing
section one in total, what
difference that makes.
Sorry, Madam Chair
Representative, what we did is,
um, the, we, when we took out
section one,
just go back through this. It,
it basically
Um
I don't believe it is anything
that we needed in the bill to um
accomplish, accomplish pages 1
through 11, section 1, OK.
OK.
I believe um it was because it
had um under the intoxicating
liquor or drug penalties and um
We basically um
Wanted to make sure we've
removed anything that had to do
with um the possibility of the
cannabis issue, but um I don't
think it affects anything else.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
also, um, would you mind, um,
Telling us if.
You take cannabis out when it's
just the chemical blood test.
What happens?
If the result of the cannabis
comes through, can the officers
still or the prosecutor still
use that.
Um, Madam chair and, uh,
Representative Ferrari, um, they
will test the lab in all
fairness for whatever they test
for, we just can't get the
search warrant for it. If it
shows up in the um blood test
and let's say there is multiple
substances in there, um, we're
going to be able to have a
toxicologist explain um the,
the, the two substances and
maybe how they interact
together, but again, um, the
toxicologist.
told me they would have to say
they can't say when the, the
cannabis, you know, was used or,
you know, I mean because the
search warrant will be based on
impairment or controlled
substances, not impairment for
marijuana. So, um, whether a
judge will let that come in or
not is gonna be something
that'll have to play out in
court, Madam Chair,
representative, but it would
probably show up if it was in
there.
OK, but, but like you said, most
likely can't be used to uh
Enforce the impairment. I, I
don't believe it. I can, I can't
say for sure what each judge
would rule, um, representative
Madam Chair, but I feel that um
the search warrants can be based
on a controlled substance and
not based on an arrest for
cannabis. And so, well, maybe in
there, um, and there may be
discussion on it in court
motions and lemonade, things of
that nature. I think that's
gonna have to kind of play out a
little as we go through court
cases and things of that nature,
but you will not be um
asked to get a search warrant or
the officers will not get a
search warrant based on just
their belief that there's
cannabis in there, they will
have to articulate that they
believe there is some other
controlled substance in the
person's system or the warrant.
And then if the judge would have
to approve it.
OK, thank you, and Madam Chair,
just um the misdemeanor part,
um, if there's a refusal, is
that right? Yes, ma'am.
Um
So.
The impairment doesn't include
cannabis anymore, but um,
If the low breath alcohol test.
Um, would indicate that there's
something else on board, then
they would ask for a um chemical
test now.
And I think what you're asking,
Madam Chair, is that um if they
do refuse that chemical test,
um, and there is probable cause
for the officer to get a search
warrant and it is approved by
the judge for a different
substance then, yes, they can
still uh be, it could still be a
refusal and they'll be subject
to just like somebody who
refused an alcohol test. The
exact same thing. OK. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam. Representative
Cates.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you representatives for
bringing this back and thank you
for the amendment. I just wanted
to clarify that I believe that
Um, driving under the influence,
1,000% of the time is wrong and
that cannabis can be under the
influence. It's just that our
state will not pay for the more
expensive accurate test, and I
understand why on our technology
is still behind to be able to
prove that you're exactly under
the influence at this time, just
that you have ingested in the
last 30 days plus 59 year old
weight and size. So I appreciate
that you took that out.
Um, and, and I just wanted to
clarify, I think that
Representative Ferrari started
on this. The other aspects of
the, the, the, um, the, the
upcharge of aggravated if
refused and needed a warrant.
This is the same process if uh
if you had refused the
breathalyzer, correct? There is
not a an additional hold or an
additional, um, uh, a charge.
Um, to that in this bill,
correct? Um, and, and yes, I'll
I'll comment and then I'll defer
to my expert really quickly, uh,
Madam Chair. Um, so this is, if
you get arrested for DWI,
you're, you're gonna go to jail
because that's our new, our new
rules on no bond, you know,
everyone goes to jail if they're
arrested until the next day when
they'll bond out, but there is a
time limit on uh receiving um
and getting the blood and so
I'll defer to the expert as to
This person will not be being
held for a long period of time
to get that blood if a search
warrants obtained, so I defer to
uh a lieutenant Ward.
Good Morning, Madam Chair,
Representative.
What she said is correct. The
process doesn't change the time,
there's no additional hold,
nothing. We have a 3-hour window
and we, in which we have to get
a chemical test.
That doesn't change whether it's
alcohol or blood.
So this concept of this idea
that there's an additional hold
because we're trying to get a
warrant to get blood. We still
have that 3-hour window we're
working within, so there's no
additional hole. It's the same
process.
Thank you so much and thank you
for that clarification. So when
you uh currently if you are
charging at an aggravated rate.
Is it true that you remove on
the table for the judge to pick
for the um
The person under arrest to be
able to pick divergent or uh a
rehab. Uh, the only thing that
the judge can pick or fine or
jail time, correct, when it's an
aggravated um charge. Um, Madam
Chair and Representative in some
sense that's true, but unless
you come in and you are arrested
for DWI and you just plead
guilty, um, then the judge is
gonna have no choice but to give
you the 48 hours, but generally,
you would do have a prosecutor
involved in this type of
situation and
Um, diversion, I I'm assuming
you're meaning like um sending
them to some type of treatment
and um you can never get a DWI
off your DMV record. It just
won't happen, but you can get it
off your criminal records, so
you can defer it if you don't
have an aggravated, it happens
all the time in prosecution. It
was just up to the DA to look at
well what did they, did they,
uh, you know, how were they with
the officer? Was this, you know,
when it's aggravated, is it a
.23 or is it just a 0.16?
or, you know, they look at all
those circumstances and least
happen 50% of the time dropping
those aggravated, so there is an
ability for diversion. Um, it's
just we can't put it in the
statute, we have to leave that
discretion to the DA's. Thank
you so much. So this bill does
not change what already exists,
correct? No, Madam Chair and
Riverson, not at all. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Herndon, Vice Chair Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
thank you very much, um,
Representative Reed and the, and
your um.
Experts were bringing the bill.
And
Even with your amendments, I
want to make sure that some
items are cleared to not only me
but to this committee. But with
respect to the way in which a
A stop would occur, for example.
And uh why don't you tell us
that is this bill going to make
a difference in what happens
with the next step.
After your stopped.
And maybe we should have the uh
your expert answer that
question.
Madam Chair and vice chair.
This changes nothing regarding
this stop itself.
We have to have reasonable
suspicion to stop a vehicle. If
that doesn't exist,
We can't stop the vehicle.
So this in no way, shape or form
changes that reality.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Mr.
Expert. So then after the
vehicle is stopped, this bill
does not change whether or not
um you will ask them to do a
sobriety test if you have
suspicion that they're driving
under the influence. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair, Vice Chair.
Absolutely, that is clear.
If I first step is I have to
have a legal reason to stop the
vehicle. Then when I made
contact with the person driving
that vehicle, I have to be able
to put into words, why am I
taking this a step further? Why
am I expanding the scope of my
investigation. So without that,
without being able to put into
words why.
In other words, do I see
something, hear something, smell
something, leads me to believe
the driver of this vehicle may
be impaired.
If I don't, if I can't fill in
that blank, then I can't ask the
driver to get out of the vehicle
and do filter sobriety tests at
all. I have to be able to
articulate why I'm going to the
next step in this, why am I
expanding the scope of my
investigation. So this bill in
no way, shape or form changes.
The fact that that's the way it
is now, and that's not going to
change with or without this
bill.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you, madam, um,
Mr. Presenter, and then the next
step with respect to this bill,
and if, if you ask someone to
give a breathalyzer test. This
bill doesn't change whether or
not they um
And refuse to give that
breathalyzer test. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair, vice chair, that is
correct.
So, but the next step with
respect to this bill, you want,
you are thinking that, well,
maybe there's some drugs here,
but you don't know for sure.
So what this bill will do is
allow you to say, well, I think
there may be something else, and
I want a blood test. Is that
correct, whether you know or
not, if there is something else,
Madam Chair, Vice Chair, no,
that is not correct.
I have to be able to put into
words why I think there's
something else on board that
wasn't reflected in the breath
test, which only tests for
alcohol, I can't just
Um, cross my fingers and hope
there's something else there. I
have to be able to put into
words why I think something else
is there, and that comes from my
training and experience in
watching the person drive, be
watching how they perform the
field sobriety tests and how
they just interact.
Um, are there indicators of
impairment in any part of that
process, and is what I'm seeing
matching what I saw on a breath
test, I'll give an example of a
0.02, very low level of alcohol,
but the things that I'm seeing
don't match.
0.02.
There's got to be something else
on board, leading me to believe
that that person is impaired by
something other than just
alcohol, or another scenario may
be where as it stands right now,
if I don't have a felony, I
can't get a warrant.
So, what about that situation
where I've arrived at a, a crash
scene. There's not great bodily
harm involved. There's not a
death involved, but there's a
crash involving what I believe
to be an impaired driver.
I don't have the opportunity to
take that impaired driver who's
now been taken to the hospital
to make sure they're OK.
I can't get him to a breath
machine because it's at my
office. So my only avenue now to
get.
Uh, chemical tests would be via,
I mean, sorry, a blood test.
Which in this case, what I'm
talking about is a crash
involving not great bodily harm,
no death, but somebody's been
hurt, and somebody's car has
been destroyed by someone who I
believe is impaired.
I want to be able to get a
warrant for that person's blood,
so that I can walk into court
and show these bad things
happen, and I have reason to
believe that it's because this
person was impaired. Now I have
this chemical test supporting my
belief, and I have an expert
waiting in the wings to explain
why they think the expert thinks
that, yes, it is likely the
person was impaired. Here's the
piece of paper that shows what
we found in our testing process,
but I have a better chance of
getting a conviction.
In this case, my, my job is to
fight on behalf of the person
who's been hurt.
Whose car has been destroyed,
Madam Charon, vice chair.
Just a reminder to try and be
brief. I know it's hard, but
thank you, madam, and I'll try
to make my questions brief,
Madam Chair, and, uh, Madam
Chair and Mr. Presenter, right
now the way this bill is
written, even if there's no
crash, and nobody has been hurt,
you can still request to have
the blood test to be drawn. Is
that correct?
of chair vice chair, that is
correct, but that request
involves a warrant, so that
means I have to put on paper in
clear language with all the
necessary verbiage to present it
to a judge.
The judge has to review that and
say, yes, we have enough
evidence here to justify me
signing this warrant, which is
not an easy task. So if that is
those elements aren't there, the
judge is not going to sign the
warrant.
So it's not just a um hope this
works out situation. It's a, I
have to be very clear and
concise and detailed in my
verbiage.
To get a judge to agree that
there's enough there to sign a
warrant to get someone's blood.
And Madam Chair and Mr.
Presenter.
But the, the way without this
bill, if an individual refused a
breathalyzer test. They won,
lose their license immediately.
2, they're going to be charged
with the DWI and number 3, they
are gonna go to jail without
this bill and without the blood
test. Is that correct?
They're still going to get
charged with DDBI we we call it
DWI impaired.
The problem comes in when we get
into the courtroom.
And I have nothing to back up
my, my belief, my suspicion that
The person wasn't actually
impaired. All I have is my
testimony to what I saw, what I
heard, what I smelled.
Um, how they performed in the
field sobriety tests.
That doesn't get me, like in the
courtroom that doesn't get me
anywhere, if I can't have the
prosecutor present a case which
shows
Evidence, i.e., a chemical test,
that yes, in fact, this person
was impaired by something.
That's what, that's the missing
link that I'm trying to get.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Presenter, the, the big problem
that I see with the way this
bill is written, there is no
limitation on with.
For which you can ask not to
have that blood drawn. There is
a limitation on a person
refusing to have their blood
drawn. Right now, they could
say, I don't want to have a
breathalyzer test, and they're
going to immediately lose their
license. They're not gonna be
able to drive all of these
other.
And all of these other penalties
are going to be imposed, but if
you're now gonna say that I can,
you meaning a law enforcement
officer and I highly support law
enforcement officers and the
work that they do, and I respect
it highly, but I worry about
being able to say, OK, I think
that there may be something
else. You can write it down, you
can come up with a lot of good
reasons, but you really don't
know if there's something there.
And so you, it really does
become a fishing expedition.
What
happens if you do find cannabis.
What happens if you do find
fentanyl, and you didn't really
know, so it does become a
fishing expedition. Right now,
the way the law is written,
you're going to lose your
license if you refuse the simple
breathalyzer test. So that's a
great concern, Madam Chair, uh,
Mr. uh, presenter, and that,
that is something that I think
that we need to still protect
for our people, they need to be
given the opportunity to say no,
but they are still a huge
penalty when they do say no.
Madam Chair, um,
That's all I can say. I, I, I
think it's not this bill, I
think it still has opportunity
to be changed and maybe to
accomplish what you want, but I
don't think it, uh, it's a good
bill the way it's written in
terms of the effect upon the
people that would be
representative Es.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative, the question
that I have is, um,
In terms of, I think that at
some point there was some
conversation about how long it
takes to get a warrant. Can you
remind me what, what that time
frame is?
Representative, it doesn't take
too long because
In this day and age, we can do a
lot of this electronically. So
we actually have uh the ability
to draft an affidavit, submit it
electronically to a judge,
whoever our on-call judge is, it
changes, but we figure out who
the on-call judge is, we send
it, they review it. If they have
questions or want us to change
the verbiage or concerns, they
can send it back and this back
and forth is all done
electronically. Um, so this
doesn't actually take very long.
And like I said, we have a 3
hour window we have to deal with
here, so.
Streamlined for that very
purpose.
And Madam Chair, my other
question is, between the time
that you are
You, you put someone under
arrest.
Your, um, asking for a warrant.
Does that individual have the
right to call um his or her
attorney or find some legal
representation.
Absolutely, several things we
have to do, Madam Chair,
Representative.
We have to give them access to
the restroom water, things like
that will oftentimes give them
snacks, um, and we let them use
their telephone and have access
to communication while we're
doing our booking paperwork and
everything. That changes
regardless of how this process
looks or that doesn't change
regardless of how this process
looks. We have to give them
access to communicate with the
outside world, which usually
amounts to 1.5 to 2 hours
because the paperwork involved
with the DWBI arrest is
extensive, and during that time,
They have access to communicate
with whoever they're gonna
communicate with.
Madam Chair Representative,
would they in the case where
they don't have an attorney.
Many people don't.
Would they have access to a
public defender immediately.
Madam Cherry representative, I,
I don't know how immediate, I
don't, they immediately is
what's concerning me because
usually this happens at 2 or 3
in the morning, so.
Generally speaking, no.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. So first we need a
motion to adopt the amendment.
No, we discussed, not adopt,
Madam Chair, I move adoption of
the amendment. OK, so we have a
motion by Martinez and a second
by rep Senna Cortez. Is there
any opposition?
Seeing that you have an amended
bill.
And now I need a motion for a
For a due pass on House Bill 106
as amended, Madam Chair.
I would move a due pass on House
Bill 106 as amended.
OK, so it was Representative
Martinez and Representative
Senate Cortez. Jennifer, can you
take the role?
Representative Anaya.
Pass.
OK.
Representative case.
Yes.
Representative E. Chabas.
Uh
Representative N Chavez, yes.
Representative Ferrari. Yes, and
I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez. Yes.
Representative Senna Cortez,
yes.
Steer Herndon.
No.
Chair Thompson, yes.
And
Representative Anaya.
Yes, and representative E.
Chavez.
No, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
with a vote of 8 to 2, you have
ad on 106 as amended, and we
will go to for representative
Ferrari and then represented
each of us to explain their
votes. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and um thank you for um changing
this to
Um
Meet the concerns of, you know,
cannabis. I think the most
important part of this bill to
me is that you're going to be
expanding the people that can
potentially um do the blood
draws, the phlebotomists and
others, which has been a
problem. I'm concerned about
how, um, well, you have your own
uh testing lab for that, so SLD
won't be um overburdened, but um
I know working with enforcement
on DWI for many years that
This is something that um I
think will make it so that
victims will be able to also
have better course of um uh
judgment when
Offenders will go to court. So
thank you.
Representative each of us.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I, I
want to say that this was a
difficult vote for me to take.
Um, I have concerns, um, and
some of those concerns were
expressed by Representative
Herdon yesterday in terms of the
impact on certain communities.
We know that, um, certain
communities bear the brunt of
some of these laws. I don't
support uh drinking and driving.
I do not.
But I have had experiences in my
own family.
Where my sons have been
targeted.
And have been stopped for no
reason.
And while they were not
drinking, this wouldn't
necessarily apply to them, but
it still concerns me.
Um, that it could.
Thank you, Ma.
Thank you. And just to, just a
reminder for the committee when,
if you want to explain your
vote, that is the time when you
can opine for one minute, as
opposed to during questioning.
So, uh, you have a due pass.
Thank you. And Representative
Lujan, um, sorry for the uh
Switch switcheroo, but you know
how it goes. And while they're
coming up, I'm gonna take a
point of personal privilege and
introduce our um former Senate
sack chair and um and former
interim legislative Health and
Human Services chair Senator
Jerry Ortizi Pino, so.
Mhm
We miss you already, Senator.
Yes.
So whenever you're ready,
represented, oh, he's an expert
witness. Oh
So whenever you're ready,
representative.
Good morning, uh, Madam Chair
and committee, uh, today we're
presenting House bills uh 70 to
you and
it's in.
And after relating to healthcare
enacting the behavioral health,
Medicaid Waiver Act, making an
appropriation and declaring an
emergency.
Um, madam chair, um, before I
get started on.
The, the aspects of the bill I'd
like to introduce um my extra
have my expert witness introduce
himself.
And everybody knows are, as you
just introduced our our our
senator, um, so my expert
witness, please introduce
yourself.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, uh, Wayne
Lindstrom, I'm the deputy county
manager for behavioral health
for Bernaleo County and in a
previous life, I was director of
the New Mexico Behavioral Health
Services Division and CEO of the
Behavioral collaborative.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator, did you want
Just very briefly, thank you.
This is a bill, of course, that
we, we looked at during the
interim. This is also a bill
that uh I had an opportunity to
make a presentation to an
organization called the Social
Work Consortium that meets
monthly, bringing together
social workers from around the
state, and they thoroughly
endorse this bill, and that's
what I'm here to help with.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um.
Madam Chair, I just like to go
just briefly section by section.
It's not a very long bill, but
just to give the highlights of
what the bill is uh has inside
it.
So if we start with section one,
this explains the act and maybe
be cited as the behavioral
health Medicaid waiver Act in
Section 2, we have the
definitions of uh behavioral
health and disability, the
eligibility to receive
disability benefits from New
Mexico or the federal
government. In Section 3, you'll
see we, we talk about it um
addresses uh HCA, the Healthcare
Authority duties.
All subject to the availability
of appropriations. Section 4,
our temporary provision uh add
added here for the HCA to set up
the process for the application,
including a start date, which is
December 31st, 2025, and that
would uh
Have them submit an application
to the Federal Centers for
Medicaid, Medicare and Medicaid
services for
Authorization to operate a
Medicaid waiver program for
persons with behavioral health
disabilities.
Um, excuse me, I'm a little
parched, um, comparable to New
Mexico's waiver program for
persons with developmental
disabilities. In Section 5, that
is where we have the
appropriation for $1.1 million
in section 6, that is the
emergency clause.
And with that, Madam Chair,
we'll stand for questions.
Thank you. So we will go to the
public for comment if you aren't
on Zoom in opposition, please
raise your hand, and we will
come back to you. Anyone in the
room in opposition.
seeing none and seeing none on
Zoom, we will go to support. So
if you are on Zoom in support,
please raise your hand and in
the room, please raise your hand
if you are in support.
If you would like to speak
please come up, we will take the
1st 10.
You don't have to speak.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. My name is Doctor
Cynthia Sanchez. I grew up in
Anthony, New Mexico, which is in
the southernmost portion of our
state through the efforts of the
BAMD program, I'm a new board
certified family medicine
physician working with Casa de
Salud serving the South Valley
of Albuquerque.
I'm excited for the opportunity
to provide public comment on
House Bill 70 as a frontline
worker.
In my experience working in the
hospital in emergency
department. I've seen people
brought in by family, EMS or
police officers for behavioral
health and substance use crisis.
I often found that frequent
hospitalizations exacerbated the
stress of patients and staff in
the efforts to obtain
necessities like housing and
rehabilitation programs. I
strongly believe that
preventative health
interventions that can be
performed in outpatient
community settings such as House
Bill 70 can prevent the
emotional distress of these
critical events, increased
quality of care, and
ultimately improve quality of
life.
I came back to New Mexico
because I love this state and
I'm committed to serving the
historically, economically and
socially marginalized people in
our community. House Bill 70
would provide the resources
needed for proactive healthcare
for many, for many vulnerable
New Mexicans. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Patsy
Romero. I'm president CEO of
Santa Maria El Mirador, an
intermediate care facility for
adults with intellectual
disabilities. House Bill 70 will
provide the same level of
service and support for the
severely mentally ill that we
have currently in the disability
community, but the way you are
able to do that is through a
Medicaid waiver.
program that is presented to you
today. We can throw money and
this legislature has been
extremely generous. I have been
at it for over 37 years in New
Mexico. I've managed contracts
in New Mexico, in the southern
part of the state and in the
northeastern quadrant of the
state. I've been in the weeds of
behavioral health, and I can
tell you that there is one
common denominator. We don't
have
the appropriate housing. We
don't have the appropriate step
down models that we need for the
severely mentally ill. They have
no place to go.
They have, we have no place to
put them.
And we can throw money and this
let your legislature has been
extremely generous, we can give
money to all these different
little per service providers,
but unless you have a system.
That has a uh a waiver program
for a way to pay for them.
They're not gonna be successful,
and we need to start here. We
need to begin in New Mexico to
give the mentally ill a Medicaid
entitlement waiver program so we
can serve the most severe who
take up 80% of our money. Thank
you, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, please vote yes
on House Bill 70.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Betty Cisnero Shover.
I'm the executive director of
Nami Santa Fe, but I'm here
advocating and in support of
this bill um for nomi New Mexico
and also as a parent of um a
young adult son who has mental
illness. He was recently
discharged from um an inpatient
um facility here in New Mexico.
And there was no place else for
him to go, so actually he, well,
I was placed, I placed him in
Texas.
At a residential treatment
center because there's nothing
like this in New Mexico. We
desperately need this. I also
feel calls from um uh Arnami
line from people who are always
asking, you know, where can my
family member go, uh, they're
discharged from the hospital.
There's just no place else, and
they can't go home, and many
times the only uh place is a
shelter.
Which is pretty bad. Uh, so
please, I ask you to vote yes on
this bill. Thank you.
Good morning, Chair and
committee. I'm Diane McCash. Um,
as a former special education
teacher who taught children on
the Didi waiver I saw firsthand
how vile the DD waiver is to
persons affected with severe
conditions that strip them of
their ability to live safely in
this world without significant
support systems. All those
supports are expensive, but
absolutely necessary in a
society that values human life.
I see behavioral health,
Medicaid waiver Act as
functioning in a similar way for
people who have been up to now
not only under
but mostly ignored, pretty much
in the same way we avert our
gaze to see that, not see that
person sleeping on the sidewalk
in the cold.
There are people in our
community who sorely need this,
and I don't see how in good
conscience we can continue to
avoid providing the necessary
life-affirming and life saving
services, they need to function
safely and with a modicum of
grace in our shared world. I
just want to add that I do
understand that this will be an
expensive program, but the cost
to us for not providing this
kind of support to people who
sorely need it are staggering
and will only get worse without
robust intervention. We can't
afford not to do this. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Gary Alsepi. I'm
executive director of Disability
Rights New Mexico. I stand in
support of this bill as it is
seeks to address a lot of the
inequities and gaps that are out
there for individuals, you will
continue to hear bills
throughout this session, whether
it's dealing with individuals
and the criminal justice system
or other matters in which
The question remains, well,
where are they gonna live? Where
are they gonna live for
restoration of competency, where
are they gonna live when they
come out of the criminal justice
system
because housing is a critical
component of this is that it's a
social determinant of health. So
without these, this type of
programs and individuals are
gonna have few choices out there
and the choices out there with
unlicensed boarding homes or
being unhoused just are not
meeting the needs of
individuals, so.
This is a great effort to fill
that gap and try to address it,
particularly individuals with
brain injury, mental illness,
where we see that they are just
not getting and receiving those
type of supports that are
critical, and again you will
hear numerous bills throughout
our medical respite that's being
expanded Medicaid, well, what
happens after medical respite.
What happens for these other
things, people need a place to
go with the support of services.
Thank you very much and I
appreciate.
the sponsors and those bringing
forth this bill.
Morning, madam chair, members of
the committee, uh, Jim Jackson,
uh, and I'm here because I'm
just gonna note as background
that my first involvement, uh,
over 40 years ago with the
legislature was almost exactly
like this, that is, it was a
bill to convince the legislature
to say we need to submit that
proposal for a DD waiver. That
was more than 40 years ago.
Well, now it's time to do that
for people with mental illness.
And I just want to give you a
little bit, uh some of you may
not be familiar with some of the
ins and outs of a Medicaid
waiver. So just let me note that
the state can cap enrollment. We
don't like waiting lists or
whatever, but the state can in
fact say, OK, we're only gonna
support 100 people or 1000
people or whatever. So you can
set some uh limitations if
necessary. You can set the menu
of services, so it doesn't have
to look exactly like the DD
waiver, the state can say, OK,
these are the services we'll
provide other services we just.
can't afford to provide her,
maybe not be appropriate for
this, uh, population. We're
certainly hoping that it will
include, for instance, housing,
which has been so, uh, uh,
critical to, uh, a lack of
housing has been such a major
issue for people with mental
illness, and of course, as a
Medicaid program, the feds are
gonna pay for about 3/4 of the
services that we provide. So
those are some of the
Some of the benefits and some of
the aspects of a waiver program,
and I just want to say that
fundamentally, this bill is all
about develop a proposal. It
gives the state a lot of
flexibility in terms of what
goes into that, how many people
they want to serve, how quickly
they want to do it, all of those
sorts of things are under the
state's control.
And as many other people have
already said, and more people
will say, this is just critical
and a great way to provide
services for people with mental
illness and brain injury and uh
the other folks who would
qualify under this program.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Emily Pepin, and I work
for Juliana Coup, who represents
the New Mexico Behavioral Health
Providers Association.
As a clinical social worker and
endorse infant mental health
specialists, I urge you to
support House Bill 70. You are
all aware that New Mexico faces
a vast and deplorable behavioral
health crisis. I have been
working in northern New Mexico
communities for over a decade,
and have witnessed firsthand how
behavioral health challenges
impact small children and their
caregivers. Trauma endured
during the 1st 5 years of life
can easily manifest as severe
behavioral health diagnoses.
Across the life course, and many
of my clients would be well
served by the BH waiver program,
outlined in House Bill 70. It is
imperative that you pass this
bill so that our most vulnerable
citizens can be more
comprehensively supported. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Jim Copeland, executive director
of the Association of
Developmental Disabilities,
Community Providers, and we
stand in support of House Bill
70 we think that there are
currently people being served on
the developmental disabilities
waiver that are duly diagnosed
and this bill would go a long
way to supporting those folks
and and we just don't think that
eligibility for Medicaid
services should be determined by
IQ score, so we would ask for a
due pass and thank you for your
time.
Quick talking.
You want quick talking. I could
we do better than that, Madam
Chair. Um, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Ellen
Pines representing the
Disability Coalition we
represent um an advocate for the
interests of people with
disabilities of all kinds,
including behavioral health, and
we stand in strong support of
this measure, as Mr. Jackson
pointed out 40 years ago, um,
New Mexico recognized that the
needs of people with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities were not being
properly met and couldn't be
properly met within the regular
Medicaid program and created
this Medicaid waiver, this type
of Medicaid waiver program for
them. I think that we now have
to recognize that the same
applies to people with mental
illness, substance use
disorders, and brain injury,
although brain injury is not a
behavioral health condition. I
think it's appropriate to bring
them within this waiver are
regular Medicaid program offers
lots of wonderful services, but
because of the uh
uh, the eligibility criteria and
the array of services offered
through the community benefit,
which is what we call the
long-term services and supports
component of Medicaid.
Many people with these
conditions can't qualify for
that, those um services, and if
they do, they don't necessarily
have access to the services they
need. So I think it's time to
recognize as we did 40 years ago
for people with intellectual and
developmental disabilities that
we need a waiver program to
serve this population, and I
urge the committee's support.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members, my name is
Paul Chavez, I'm the executive
director and founder of State of
the Heart Recovery. We are in
Albuquerque, New Mexico and the
International District. We have
over 400 people that walk in the
doors, um, on a daily basis that
are struggling with substance
use and mental health, and since
we opened the doors, we have not
been able to provide services
for really the ones needing the
most care, that they're they're
most likely to.
Uh, be in a position of harming
themselves and harming others in
the community, and it's um it's
not for lack of, of capacity to
support them. It's just that
they need a different level of
support than the other 400
people that are struggling with
substance use and mental health
that is not as severe. So we
really do need to look at this
demographic and and figure out
how to better support them, and
I believe that house bill 70
will be uh a huge.
Impact on that, so I, I beg that
you all would vote yes for this.
Thank you.
OK, now we will go to Zoom and
thank you to the sergeant for
counting.
It's hard to see from up here,
so much appreciated. So we will
go to Dorothy Seaton, and you
have 2 minutes.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Dorothy Seaton and I represent
more than 560 members of the
veterans and Military Families
Caucus. I'm a retired Army
officer, and I'm a former
clinical supervisor and licensed
chemical dependency counselor.
So I know this demographic a
little.
Uh, the veterans and military
families caucus supports HB 70
because access to behavioral
health programs in New Mexico is
critical issue for veterans and
military families.
Uh, the, the 2024 veteran's
profile.
Um, it was reported that there
are 122,492 veterans living in
New Mexico.
That along with their family
members is a significant
population.
Uh, I'd like to point out that
not all veterans get their
health care at the VA. They get
it in their communities and they
need access to programs and
support.
And because of the physical and
emotional trauma experienced
during their service, the
incidence of behavioral health
issues among veterans is
somewhat higher than the general
population.
Taking the health authority with
acquiring providing and
coordinating support and
services for people with
behavioral health disabilities
will significantly increase
access to services, because
those afflicted with these
disabilities often cannot
navigate the system on their
own.
This will save lives. I thank
the sponsors.
For the bill, and I thank you
for allowing me to testify. We
ask for your yes vote.
Next, we have Ilsie Beale.
Good morning. Um, my main
passion is the direct street
outreach, mainly in the
international district.
All lives outside are
precarious, but there are those
exceptionally vulnerable folks
who seriously have no business
being outside and I've been
neglected for far too long.
These neighbors struggle with
mental health challenges,
frequently along with other
complicating issues.
There are no dedicated spaces
available to them.
They tend to be rather
difficult, but they desperately
need stability.
The state, they become banned
from shelters, they become
counter amongst the so-called
frequent flyers of ER services
and first responder calls. They
are serially criminalized.
They wandering to the traffic,
the list goes on, a complete
spiral of horror.
They become outside it to such
an extent that it becomes more
difficult and expensive to ever
bring them in, if ever.
They are just, they just
basically lost.
HB 70 will provide a pathway of
hope for them and for other
folks currently too tricky to
deal with humanely.
Please pass
HB 70. Thank you. We have Dick
Mason.
Yes, uh, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, my name is Dick
Mason. I'm a board member and
registered lobbyist for the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico. The legal women voters
of New Mexico support the health
care system that provides a
comprehensive level of health
care for all New Mexican New
Mexico residents and
behaviorallo is a key part of
that. In 2013, our behavioral
health system was dismantled by
executive action. We need to
rebuild that system and HP 70
will is an important
tool in rebuilding and expanding
behavioral health services in
New Mexico. I want to thank the
sponsors for bringing it
forward, and we urge the
committee to give HB 708 do
pass. Thank you.
Thank you. And finally we have
Peter Kubra.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you committee for allowing
me to speak. Um, in my 40+ years
as a disability advocate in New
Mexico, I've met hundreds of
people in the DD waiver and
hundreds of unhoused people.
And I just wanna uh speak in
this way. First, the fiscal
impact report I just read this
morning, in my opinion,
exaggerates the cost of this
program in a shocking way by
50,000%.
It does it in two ways. It says
171,000 people would be in the
program.
When in fact it would start at
hundreds of people and maybe
someday get as big as the DD
waiver with 8000, not 171,000.
It also inflates the cost per
person by roughly 50%.
Because people with intellectual
disabilities are getting all
kinds of therapies for their
physical handicaps that few
people with behavioral health
diagnoses would be needing. And
lastly,
I want to say this, there's an
injustice here. There's a
discrimination here among the
hundreds of people I know who
are unhoused and who rotate
through the jails and the
emergency rooms. Many, many of
them are far more disabled and
incapacitated and incapable of
self-control and
self-management.
Then most of the people in the
DD waiver program, and there's
no justification for saying you
diagnosis will enable you to
either get wraparound services
and safety or freezing to death
on the streets. So please pass
House Bill 70.
Thank you, Peter, and I will go
to the committee for questions.
Represented Representative
Senator Cortez. Thank you so
much, Madam Chair
Representative, um, my first
question is, would you clarify
the number of citizens who will
be added for coverage under the
waiver proposal.
Um,
Madam Chair, um, Representative
Senator Cortez.
That would be uh decided uh
based upon the the the funding
that would be available at the
time as I mentioned in section.
Section 3, subject to the
availability of appropriations
and bringing this, you know, we,
we first need to get through the
process of the um the approval
to get to get this started and
then just as mentioned by
testimony, as you heard, then,
uh, those, um.
Those limits or those those
definitions of who would be um
accepted in the parameters would
then be adjusted to to serve
that and I I expand that to my
expert witness to answer.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, I have to concur
with what Peter Kubra had to
say, um, earlier, I think that
the uh projections in the FIRs
that I read, um,
had a erroneous, um.
Conceptualization of this
population, we throw the term
severely mentally illness around
two cavalier.
I can't even say it correctly,
um, but I think you get my
point, um, in, in Burlio County
by way of example, we keep a
database of what we call
familiar faces. These are
individuals, um, much like those
who have been described, um, who
Show up, uh, repeatedly in the
emergency department and up
jailed at our metropolitan
detention center end up in our
resource reentry center, uh, get
treatment services at our care
campus, and when I checked a
week or so ago, that's a
familiar faces count was 482 for
the entire county of Berlio.
Um, so if this measure were to
pass, and depending on the
application procedure and the
definitions around um this
waiver, assuming it's approved
by CMS, uh, we would start with
those 482, um, or less if that's
what uh was mandated by the
parameters of the waiver. Um,
so, uh, this is a, uh, a group
of people, much as as has been
described by Peter and others.
Um, that simply can't function
in the community. And one of the
things I'd like to add, if I
might, Madam Chair, is that I've
been around in this business for
53 years now, and the community
mental Health Center Act was
passed in 1963.
And if you think of a continuum
of care as runs on a ladder, the
Health Act created two rungs,
one at this end, which was
impatient treatment, and the
other rung at the other end was
outpatient treatment. The
reality is, is that we had folks
that had been institutionalized
for decades who couldn't
function in the community, uh,
some.
Could have been had we had the
right kinds of supports, etc.
and didn't just mandate people
be in institutionalized and what
we've been doing over the last
uh couple of decades is putting
other rings or rungs on that
ladder, including things like
intensive outpatient program,
assertive community treatment
teams, etc. um, this would
Provide us with something that
was promised in the community
mental Health Act has never been
delivered on, uh, to provide the
intensive community-based level
of services and supports so that
these folks don't have to be
institutionalized, don't have to
be part of this revolving door,
uh, between emergency
departments, incarceration and
homelessness.
Thank you. And I'm gonna ask if
we can keep our answers brief.
I know there's a lot of history
and a lot of data, but if we can
just try and keep things brief,
we still have belts to get
through. I'm sorry, go ahead.
Madam Chair Representative, how
will the program be managed and
there will there be another need
for an, a different HCA division
to manage it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
there.
It would be managed, um, by the
HCA and the Medicaid program
that we have available, we're
asking that um either
excuse me, I'm losing my voice,
man. I'm gonna have my expert
actually answer that, uh, a
little clearly.
I'm sorry.
Madam chair, members of the
committee, I don't have a
particular investment in how
this would get structured, um, I
don't necessarily think it
requires a separate division
within the healthcare authority.
Um, I think the behavioral
health services division, which
now is house when the healthcare
authority, uh, could potentially
oversee this waiver program.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair
Representative. Um, I know we've
discussed the funding a little
bit. Does it include funding to
support the required monitoring
and evaluation of the waiver.
Madam Chair, we wouldn't be in
that process quite yet. This is
the $1.1 million would just um
to be to get uh the application
process through the HCA. OK.
Thank you for clarifying, Madam
Chair Representative, um, and
you might have answered this
already, but I just want to
clarify for my, for my own
thought process, are there Madam
Chair Representative, are there
reoccurring funds allocated to
cover the state match of
services implemented through
this waiver?
It wouldn't be in the
reoccurring budget at this time.
OK. I thought so, um.
And then also then my last
question was, which you probably
already answered, but just to
clarify, Madam Chair
Representative, so, um, we also
don't know how it would be
completely funded after
implementation. All of that is
unknown besides the 1.1 million.
Is that correct, Madam Chair
Representative? Madam Chair
would be very similar to the way
that we set up the, the, the
previous, the DD Webber, uh DD
waiver we have in place now. OK,
thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative.
would like to add to that. OK,
Madam Chair and Representative,
uh, Cortez, um, one of the
points that was brought up um
when we had public comment is
that Medicaid, this would be a
Medicaid waiver application to
the centers for Medicaid and
Medicare at the federal level,
and if they approved it, uh,
over 70% of the costs would be
covered by Medicaid for, uh,
For newly eligibles it could be
as high as 90%. So what we're
talking about here in terms of
state, it would be the state
match portion, Madam Chair
Representative, is there a
chance that we wouldn't get that
approval?
And chair, yes, there is. OK.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. Thank you,
minority Whip Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh
appreciated running back and
forth between committees. Um,
just for my clarification,
I know, I know one of your
experts fairly well, but I'm not
sure if the other gentleman,
could you?
Reintroduce your expert, please.
Yes, ma'am. Sure.
Of Madam Chair, represent
Martinez. Uh, my name's Doctor
Wayne Lindstrom. I'm currently
the deputy county manager in
Burlio County, uh, for
behavioral health and um I have
served in the past as the
director of the New Mexico
Behavioral Health Services
Division and CEO of the
Behavioral Health Collaborative.
Thank you. I, I appreciate the
indulgence, Madam Chair. Um, a
couple of questions.
Um, so the just so it's clear in
my head, the $1.1 million is
just to pay for a consultant.
Madam Chairman and, and
Representative Martinez, good to
see you again. Uh, no, it
actually would cover some
additional staff that would be
used within HCA to do the, a lot
of the leg work, but it also
would pay for national
consultants who've done this in
other states and who know how to
get this through the Center for
Medicaid and Medicare.
So those two things would be
covered by the 1.1 million.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, and
thank you, um.
Still Senator Ortizino to me.
Um
So, do, do we know how, how many
FTEs is gonna be, are gonna be
required for this program?
Madam Chairman and
representative, I think the, the
proposal here as I remember were
4 staff.
This is just for the planning,
not for the actual monitoring
and carrying out of it later,
the letting of contracts and so
on, that would be separate, but
this is just for this year until
we get CMS approval, it would
take 4 staff, plus the
consultants, and these would be
high level staff, they're,
they're not going to be, you
know, clerks, these are people
that would be very familiar with
Medicaid regulations and how to
get this done.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Representative Senator
For some of the stuff that we've
seen go through here, that's,
that's kind of a bargain.
Um,
in referring to the FIR.
So in the out years, I'm sorry,
but we've covered the FIR in
some detail and I'm sorry that
you missed it, but um I'm trying
to keep the committee moving
forward. Absolutely fine, thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, 11 last
question.
Um
answers here. Never mind, Madam
Chair, I appreciate the
indulgence. um, and, and I'm
sorry, I just, we just, there's
gonna be people in and out all
the time and we unfortunately
can't catch everybody up, so you
can go back and watch the uh the
the tape, and you can slow mow
and all kinds of stuff. So, um,
seeing no other hands, I will
entertain emotion. I'm a second.
So we have a motion by
Representative E. Chavis in the
2nd by representative.
Ferrari, is there any
opposition? OK, we'll take the
role.
Representative Anaya.
Love this bill. I'm a yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavis. Yes.
Representative N Chaves.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones. Yes.
Representative Martinez.
No, and if I could have 30
seconds.
Representative Senna Cortez. No,
and I'd also like to explain my
vote, AKA opine.
Vice Chair Herndon.
Yes.
And Chair Thompson.
Yes.
By a boat of 7 in the
affirmative and 2 in the
negative, you have a due pass.
I lost my voice. Thank you.
It was working.
You.
Duty
Oh, no, on house bill, um.
70, sorry.
Oh, and representative, um,
representative.
Minority whip Martinez.
Representative Martinez is fine.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, it's
a no for now. I, I'm sorry I
missed the discussion earlier on
some of the
The fiscal impact in the out
years. I'll go back and review
the testimony and.
Um, keep an open mind.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives and
senators. It's good to see you
again.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. Um, I do believe
that this bill is in response to
what's happening in our society,
you guys presented beautifully
and eloquently, and I know
there's many people that would
benefit greatly. Um, my concern
is the fiscal and economic
impact of it right now, and
doesn't mean I'm, I'm not open
for change later, but that's why
it's a no for right now, so
thank you again for presenting
so wonderfully, um, Madam Chair
Representative.
Thank you. So thank you very
much and I'm gonna hand the
gavel over to vice chair.
And we are going to
my agenda.
Um, House Bill 78.
Like this
Our next bill up is House Bill
78 prohibit discrimination
against 340B entities.
That
Your time is up.
So we got to do, right.
We have chair Thompson
presenting the bill with her
experts.
And Terry Thompson, you may
begin when you're ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So this
bill, um, House Bill 78 was
brought to me by the primary
care association.
And I, the first thing I will
tell you is the 340B drug
pricing is incredibly
complicated and impossible to
understand and
Um,
I'll leave it at that. So, Madam
Chair,
What this, what this bill does
is to enact a new section of the
insurance code to prohibit
discrimination against entities
participating in the federal
340B drug pricing program, and
in a nutshell, what that is is
that certain entities can get
prescriptions at a lower rate
and then they are expected to
use their savings to provide
more care to more patients. Um,
as I said, it's not nearly that
simple or straightforward.
Madam chair, I do have an
amendment.
If that could be passed out.
For the clerk please pass out
the amendment.
Madam chair may make motion that
we discuss.
Let's wait for the amendment to
be passed out.
OK.
I've been
The amendment has been passed
out. Is there a motion to accept
the amendment for discussion.
So moved.
The 2nd.
I'll
Thank you, it's been moved in
2nd, the amendment, uh, has been
approved for discussion.
Thank you, madam chair. So, um,
I'm not gonna read you the
changes you can um fit them in
as as needed. There's only 3 in
there, just addition of a few
words and and to make things
more clear and to
To
Assuage some of the concerns by
some of the folks. So Madam
Chair, with that, I will allow
my experts to introduce
themselves and if they have
opening statements. Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you so much for allowing us to
be before you today.
Um, Representative, thank you so
much for carrying this bill. It
is a difficult bill in some
ways. Um, you may have had a
flurry of information about this
bill, um, some of it may be
accurate, some of it we feel is
misinformation. Um, so I'm
Yvette Ramirez Ammerman, I am
CEO of the New Mexico Primary
Care Association, we are, um, an
association that has 200 sites
across New Mexico.
Um,
we provide school-based
healthcare, primary care,
behavioral health care and
dental to the people that need
it the most. Um,
The large proportion, about 80%
of our people are living below
the federal poverty line. We
are, uh, one of the few
providers that provides, um,
sliding fee scales for people
who are underinsured and
uninsured.
Um
The 340B program allows us to
have discounted.
Pharmaceuticals that our folks
would not be able to get
otherwise. And we are very
concerned that since about 2020,
a number of the drug
manufacturers began to put
serious limitations on the
program.
To refusing to re replenish
pharmacies or by requiring
burdensome reporting, um, on our
340B medications. We are trying
to put a stop to that.
Um, there's many other things I
could say in the interest of
time I'm, I'm happy to.
To hold their we're nonprofit
community-based, um, any savings
from the 340B program goes right
back into our clinics to provide
services. Thank you.
I am Melissa Manlove. I work
with a vet at the New Mexico
Primary Care Association, and
I'm here really in the event
that my prior experience in
administering the 340B program
in a community health center
with that, madam chair, we stand
for questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Is there
a motion to amend the
To move the amendment to
Accept the amendment that.
Has it been seconded.
OK. Is there any objection to
the motion?
Now you have an amended bill.
Thank you.
We will now go to the uh zoom.
Is there anyone on Zoom who
stands in opposition to this
bill as amended.
I, I see two hands and we'll go
first to Kyle.
Car you'll have 2 minutes on on
mute, please.
OK. Good morning. My name is
Kyle Piccola, and I am a
director of state policy for
pharmaceutical research and
manufacturers of America. I'm
here in opposition to House Bill
78. Pharma agrees that it is
important to ensure the 340B
program truly benefits the
safety net that helps
underserved communities in New
Mexico and is committed to this
crucial federal program, but
respectfully disagrees that this
legislation in particular will
serve that purpose. The Federal
3
B program was established by
Congress in 1992 to help safety
net entities access affordable
drugs to treat their low income
and underserved patients. Due to
weak oversight, the program has
expanded in a way that has
allowed covered entities to
divert this money.
As a result, the 340B program
has grown dramatically since its
establishment.
The 340B program is a
comprehensive federal program
that is governed exclusively by
federal law. States do not have
the authority to create new
requirements that are not in the
federal statute or that conflict
with the statue. Significant
reform is needed at the federal
level to systemically address
the problems that have permitted
the program to stray from its
original intent.
House Bill 78 would exacerbate
existing problems in the program
by forcing manufacturers to ship
340B drugs and extend 340B
pricing to contract pharmacies,
which are not even mentioned in
the federal statute and have
become significant revenue
generators for profit motivated
hospitals, chain pharmacies,
PBMs, and other middlemen. The
recent New York Times article is
a tragic example of a New
Mexican patient, a New Mexico
patient with cancer paying the
price of 340B abuse.
The bill's provisions directly
conflict with the federal 3402
program rules and enforcement
regime and restrict
manufacturers' ability to impose
reasonable conditions. I
appreciate your time and
respectfully ask for your no
vote on House Bill 78.
Uh, thank you. We'll now go to
Greg.
The burns.
Go ahead, please.
But
Thank you.
I represent the New Mexico
Biotechnology and biomedical
Association. Our membership
includes more than 70 life
science firms, and it also
includes heexico's research
universities, CNN.
And UNM's Health Science Center.
We're opposed to this for
several reasons. Probably, um,
I'll, I'll basically start with
the limit on the positive
benefits of 340B, a program
designed to help increase care
for underserved residents. It
also enables state legislation
to undermine a federal program,
and it fails to target pharmacy
benefit managers, one of the
primary reasons for drug prices.
been increasing significantly in
recent years. In addition, um,
to our local members were also
part of the bio-innovation
organization. And we have
collaborative arrangements with
Advaed, the med tech industry
and the State Council of
Bioscience Associations, all 49
states in that organization are
opposing this, as are the
bioorganization in
A theme.
Um, basically, we see it, uh,
House Bill 78 as an attempt to
prohibit drug manufacturers from
restricting 340B drug access to
entities in their contract
pharmacies in New Mexico.
This legislation would prevent
the manufacturers from
reviewing, purchasing
arrangements.
Associated with 340B. So those
are the, the quick bullet points
on why we opposed this
initiative.
Thank you very much. And if you
would please state your name in
full for the record, I think
that was missing when you began
your, your statement.
it's
All right, that was Greg Burns.
Thank you very much. All right,
is there anyone in support
Uh
In support of the uh amended
legislation on Zoom.
Right, I see 3 hands, you will
have 2 minutes each, please, uh,
introduce yourself, and you may
proceed with your
Um, statement when your name is
called. Rachel, you are first.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Rachel Biggs with
Albuquerque Healthcare for the
Homeless, a community health
center serving 5000 people
without homes in Bernalillo
County, and we are here in
strong support of HB 78. It is
crucial for the health of our
most vulnerable, for those in
rural areas of our state and for
financial health of our state
agencies and health systems that
we protect 340B revenue for the
intended purposes. Loss of 340B
revenue will negatively impact
the ability of our community
health centers, our safety net
health system.
to support healthcare services
to roll and underserved families
throughout New Mexico. We thank
the sponsor for bringing this
forward and urge your support of
HB 78. Thank you.
Thank you. And next we have Dan.
Good morning, um, Madam Chair
and committee members. Can you
hear me OK?
We can hear you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Doctor Daniel Otero, I am the
CEO of Hidalgo Medical Services
serving Grant in Hidalgo County
and expanded on out into the
regional Southwest corner of the
state of New Mexico. I'm also
the president and chairman of
the New Mexico Primary Care
Association Board of directors.
Um, we are urging the committee
members to support health, uh,
House Bill 78, uh, and I'm
saying this from a place of
Um, working with the frontline
community members that we serve
who depend on these medications
at a discounted price to be able
to have a holistic healthcare
experience and be able to get
the medications that they need.
Additionally, the savings that
is generated from the uh federal
340B program goes directly back
into the health care system to
serve the uninsured or
underinsured. I think this is a
pivotal moment for the state of
New Mexico to take um a strong
stance and predict.
Protecting all New Mexicans,
especially those that are most
vulnerable in need of these
savings and the discounted
prices to obtain their
medications. Um, please, please
consider the economics that we
face in our, in our citizens of
New Mexico phase and the
healthcare challenges that we
face when um um considering this
bill and I too also want to
thank the sponsor and the expert
witnesses in the room, and thank
you for the opportunity and
request, respectfully request to
do pass. Thank you, madam.
Thank you. And next we have
Beverly.
The Beverly, can you unmute?
I apologize. I
We can hear you.
Thank you. I apologize. I didn't
realize I was uh
So to speak, um, I would
As a veteran and part of the
veterans Military caucus,
Veterans and Military Family
Caucus, we strongly urge your
support of this bill. Um.
Thank you.
Thank you. Now we'll go to the
audience. Is there anyone in the
audience who opposes this
legislation as amended. Would
you please step forward?
You will have 2 minutes. Please
introduce yourself, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Art Hall on behalf of
GSK Pharmaceuticals with great
deference to the chair, we
respectfully oppose this
legislation. As you've heard,
the goals and intentions of 340B
are laudable, very important,
but it was to serve a small
number of safety net providers
taking care of the needy with
the advent of all the middle men
that have gotten into the
business and our.
Health care system over the last
several years, including big box
pharmacies and especially large
nonprofit hospital systems, the
benefits of these lower priced
drugs are not making it to the
patient.
Those lower prices are being
siphoned away into the profits
of these institutions, and this
stuff is fairly clearly
evidenced by the aforementioned
January 15th, New York Times
article happening right here in
our backyard in Santa Fe, New
Mexico.
So for those reasons, we
respectfully oppose this bill as
amended and drafted. Thank you.
Thank you.
Morning, Madam Chair. My name is
uh TJ Trujillo, and I'm a
registered lobbyist for uh the
biotechnology innovation
organization, otherwise known as
bio.
Um, Bay was the world's largest.
Trade Association representing
biotechnology companies,
academic institutions, state
biotechnology centers and
related organizations across the
United States and a more than 30
other nations.
Madam chair, we, uh, to save
time, actually submitted a
letter to the to the committee,
uh, when the bill was first
scheduled, so I won't repeat
anything and hopefully you've
had the committee's had a chance
to look at at our concerns with
respect to this legislation.
In summary, though, I will say
that uh this bill would prohibit
biopharmaceutical manufacturers
manufacturers participating in
the federal.
340B drug discount program from
establishing requirements or
standards intended to ensure
compliance with federal laws.
Madam chair members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to speak.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Charlie
Marcus, uh, registered lobbyist
for Eli Lilly, with all due
respect to the sponsor, um, this
program, it's, it is a pricing
program. It was intended, as Mr.
Hall stated for safety net
providers, and the intent was to
help grow those entities so that
they could serve more people.
Instead, what's happened is you
have a business that's been
established that helps others.
Identify how to work around the
requirements of 340B to the tune
that they are making hundreds of
millions of dollars each year.
And so we are really concerned
about this because if it grows
too large, I think it can
jeopardize the program. And we'd
like to keep it in place so that
we can help those that do not
have the means to seek care.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
the audience who stands in
support of the amended bill.
Please come forward.
Please state your name and you
have 2 minutes. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair. My name is Dan
Weeks and I represent the uh
Health Sciences Center and UNM
Hospital. Uh, those of you that
have been around a couple years,
remember the last time we faced
this, uh, the, the bill was, uh,
A dummy build that was sponsored
by your chair.
I was house Bill 540.
It passed. It uh has resulted in
about $40 million a year coming
to uh the University of New
Mexico Hospital, which is helped
address
The services to the indigent and
also reduced the cost of their
drugs.
So it works. It's not been
litigated, and I would encourage
you strongly to support this
bill because there are
647 clinical sites.
And 1456 uh facilities that
will, uh, benefit from this, but
more importantly, this does get
passed through, uh, to the
patients and to the patients low
income patients, and it also
helps those entities to have a
more robust financial situation,
so that they can afford to
provide more services to the
indigenous. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, Troy
Clark from the New Mexico
Hospital Association. We
appreciate the uh chair bringing
this bill, uh, we'd like to
represent that the program
actually works well for those
who don't understand there is
not federal funding or state
funding, all of the funding for
this bill, uh, or for this
program comes from a discount,
uh, from the pharmaceutical
manufacturers that only goes to
nonprofit organizations.
So any revenues that are
received by those hospitals or
federally qualified health
centers who are providing care
to the indigent and the less
fortunate in our state. That's
what these monies are going to
help provide, uh, damn shared
some numbers from UNM but across
our state in our rural
hospitals, uh, for those that
are not for profit entities,
they're the only ones eligible
for this. We strongly encourage
you to pass this bill to
continue that so that those
programs don't get cut at our
facilities.
Thank you. I see no other uh
individuals wishing to speak, so
we'll now go to the committee.
So at first we'll have
we
respond just very briefly. Yes,
madam. So, um, one of the the.
persons in opposition, Madam
Chair, um, says that PBM's
pharmacy benefit managers are a
problem.
You have 1,000% agreement from
me, that that's, but this is not
the bill. There is another bill
around um pharmacy benefits
managers and we're trying to
keep this simple, and also that
there are issues with fraud and
those kind of things, but it's a
federal program. We can't fix
those issues here in New Mexico.
So what we are trying to do with
this bill is to protect our
providers and our patients who
need.
Help with their prescription
medications. So thank you, ma'am
and my, my expert also has a
statement.
I, I think you, you did it, um,
that I think we're the 13th
state who has um passed
legislation that has survived
litigation from the
pharmaceutical pharmaceutical
companies that um are able to
protect the 340B program. I
would like to amend something
that I said.
We are concerned about misuse as
well, and we are continuing to
have conversations with
pharmaceutical companies to see
if there's any way that we can
correct that. Thank you. All
right, now we'll go to the
committee for any questions,
we'll go first to Representative
Martinez and then to
Representative Cates.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Madam Chair, for bringing
this forward.
The
Seldom ever wish that we had the
same rules as Congress does, but
I really like to
Get more information on this New
York Times article.
You know, one of the people
testifying was
Referencing it and I, I, I wish
I could get a copy of it.
And look at that magic. I have
one.
Um
I think it's important that we
Kind of
I mean
Never say I'm a big fan of the
New York Times, but this is a
good article.
I think it would be important to
To get that in the record. Uh,
let me get to my questions
before I get buzzed, of course,
Madam chairs and having the
phones.
Yeah
Uh, my questions, um,
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, who,
who really?
benefits
From the way the bill is
written.
Me and Representative Martinez,
the
The people who need the
medications, who can't afford
their medications and the
clinics and hospitals that
That nonprofit, um, those are
the people who benefit and to go
back to the New York Times, yet,
as I said, it is a problem, but
it's a federal problem. It's not
something we can fix in terms of
of um
PBMs getting involved and, and
all of the, there is abuse of
the system, but it's a federal
program, so we cannot
Do anything about that, uh, as I
said, I'm 100% in favor of the
federal government.
Taking a look at this and making
sure that it's working the way
it is, but this bill right now
will, will protect New Mexico
providers and New Mexicans who
need assistance with their
medical.
With their prescriptions.
Madam Chair, madam chair.
So the, the, the patients that
are really benefiting.
From this federal program.
Or are you saying by introducing
this bill that they're
Somehow
Not benefiting fully.
From this federal program.
There are several way, uh, I'm
sorry, Madam Chair, Madam Chair
of the committee
and minority whip Martinez.
There are a number of ways that
individual patients continue to
benefit.
This particular bill is designed
to prevent restrictions on the
number of contract pharmacies.
That with whom covered entities
can work to make medications
available to their patients of
record.
And so in rural New Mexico, it's
often necessary or helpful to
have partners to be able to make
prescription uh medications
prescribed by providers
available to those patients, and
there is a spectrum of ways that
um
Patients might benefit from this
program as it stands right now,
because covered entity providers
use the program in slightly
different ways.
Thank you, Madam chair, so that,
that clarifies it a little bit
more. The benefit is not
necessarily for the patient.
Benefit is for the contract
pharmacies and some of these
other
Entities in the rural parts of
the state that are, we're gonna
take off the restrictions from.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair,
minority whip Martinez. If
patients can't get their
prescriptions because it's they
live in a community that is.
Far from where.
Uh, a pharmacy might be.
Or from their health center
where they might be able to get
some of those medications.
They need to have partners to be
able to receive those
medications.
And at this 0.1 of the
challenges is unilateral
imposition of restrictions by
various pharmaceutical
companies, various different
pharmaceutical companies that
Um, either limit the number of
contract pharmacies. Not all of
our members, for example, have
full scale pharmacies, um,
mostly they have small drug
rooms.
And so they may utilize 340B.
Dis discounts to purchase
medications that are used in the
course of a visit.
Um, they may also stock some
limited quantity of some
medications within their own
health centers.
But
Full scale prescriptions may
actually be better dispensed by
a pharmacy that is subject to
border of pharmacy rules and
regulations and law, and is
bigger, right? So that those
prescriptions can be given to
those patients. So it's really a
a network of relationships and
The, um
Patients are the ones who are
really the ones that are the
focus of this so that they can
continue to receive this
benefit.
Me,
Madam Chair.
It was clearer now it's
confusing to me again with, with
your second answer.
So
I mean, my, my head could wrap
around that this was gonna
benefit the contract pharmacies
that serve the rural parts.
But it was
Now you're saying it's
I'm, I'm the second, the second
answer, I'm sorry, really
confused me.
Um
Let, let me try to move on.
Can you show me, Madam Chair,
Madam Chair.
Where in this bill, it's
Kind of patient centered and not
Contract pharmacy or or one of
these other providers. Can you,
is there some language in the
bill that shows that it's
patient-centered.
Represented Madam Chair and
minority whip Martinez. So it,
as I started out, this is
incredibly confusing, but, but
what, what the second part of
the answer was that in
Some there are necessary evils
and, and I don't mean that
necessarily, um, but
If, if you're only pharmacy
within 100 miles is a CVS.
And the drug manufacturers are
saying, you know, we don't want
to provide these services to
them because they're CVS. What
we are saying is,
We, you know, we wish there was
a small local pharmacy that
could do this, but there isn't.
And so in order for the patients
to be able to access their
drugs. We have to allow those
pharmacies into the program, and
that's what this bill attempts
to do is to say to the to to
pharma essentially, that you
can't say no to this, this
pharmacy because they're a big
conglomerate or whatever we, we
are trying to get the
medications to
New Mexicans as close to where
they live as possible. Thank
you, madam chair, Madam Chair,
um, so.
I'm trying to figure out a way
to ask this question without.
Sounding like I grew up.
On the streets of some inner
city.
But how, how many times is this
drug gonna get
clutched.
Before it gets to the patient, I
mean,
Doctor prescribes it.
Goes to now or after this, a
contract pharmacy, but it's been
touched by
PBM it's been touched, how many
times?
Is it gonna be touched by
somebody.
Before the patient gets it, who
now has to pay an increased
amount.
Madam Chair and Representative,
they will not have to pay an
increased amount, but there are
many, many, many, many people
entities that touch it,
including the pharmacy benefits
managers, including the
manufacturer, including a
distributor, including,
including, including, and that's
all part of the issue with the
federal government.
That we, that we can't affect.
So thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, Madam Chair. So what
we're doing is we're opening the
door even wider.
With this pill, Madam Chair and
Representative, I, I don't agree
with that. I, as I said before,
we are trying to make sure that
New Mexicans have a pharmacy
that they can access that can
participate in the 340B program.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair. So the way I'm seeing it,
the problem we're trying to
solve with this.
I
Focused on the rural parts of
the state who don't necessarily
have a Walgreens on every corner
or CVS down the street.
Am I correct in that? In large
part, yes, madam chair.
So Madam Chair, madam chair, why
was this not
What they're not language
included in the bill that
specifically dealt with a rural
parts of the state, or is it
That we have to let
Everybody on every corner.
We'll take that.
Madam Chairman, I'm chair
minority whip Martinez and
members of the committee.
We have sought to uh look for
language that would
be very clear about safety net
providers throughout New Mexico,
keeping in mind that this
program was established in 1992,
specifically to try to address
the availability of medications
for
Patients of safety net providers
and the definition of covered
entities does include a variety
of nonprofit organizations.
Um
We
were thwarted a little bit in
trying to limit this.
And
Uh
Really want to represent since
the bill that was passed 2 years
ago.
Uh, regarding anti-pickpocketing
by pharmacy benefits managers
use the broadest definition of
covered entities who are
eligible to participate in the
program and we emulated that.
Bill
And out of the chair, Madam
Chair, what, what happens if
this bill gets held up.
What problem will continue that
we weren't able to solve.
Madam Chair and um minority whip
Martinez.
The fact that some folks are
having difficulty and, and I
want to remind folks that there
are also pharmacy deserts in
Albuquerque.
Um, particularly in the
international district, there's
a a food desert, there's a
pharmacy desert, so it's not
just rural, um, and I will let
one of the experts, um, talk
about your question.
And I'm sure
Madam Chair, majority whip, um,
Martinez.
One of the other things that
this bill does, which is
incredibly important is to put a
stop to very burdensome required
reporting. We do a ton of
reporting to make sure it's very
clear that those 340 discount
drugs go to people who need
them, who are underinsured,
uninsured.
Um, but we are, um,
We are concerned that because we
deal with so many different
pharmaceutical manufacturers,
they're all putting different
reporting requirements on us and
what we see coming down the
pike, is that at some point
they're gonna ask for a refund
program, and they're gonna say.
We're gonna give you your
pharmaceuticals, um, but we're
gonna, you're gonna have to pay
for them upfront and then we're
gonna refund them.
Our clinics absolutely cannot
front enough money to cover
pharmaceuticals on a refund
program, and that I think is our
biggest concern and our biggest
caution with not having this go
forward.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair.
So I'm not sure how this bill
would
fix that.
I think, I think a more targeted
bill.
Um
towards fixing that exact
problem would be easier for me
to support.
This seems to open up the door.
To, to where we'll see this kind
of stuff.
Widespread all over the place
and, and.
I, I understand the food deserts
and the, the pharmacy deserts in
the.
In the International district.
But it's a heck of a lot more
pronounced in
Logan, New Mexico.
So I, I would love
If we could, if, if there was
some language in here that
focused on that issue. I would
be.
fully supportive of that. This
just seems I'm just not really.
Quite comfortable with it, the
way it is, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair, Madam Chair and
representative, if you look at
page 2 starting on line 20.
Um
Let's see, um.
A manufacturer manufacture's
agent. This is actually line 9
or an affiliate of a
manufacturer shall not directly
or indirectly and then go down
to 3 line 20 require a covered
entity to submit any claims or
utilization data as a condition
for allowing the acquisition of
a 340B drug by or by or delivery
of a 340B drug 2, a covered
entity unless the sharing
claims or utilization data is
required by federal law.
So that doesn't quite get to
your, to your, uh, rural, but as
you know, any laws that we pass
in the state.
across the state, so
If one of my experts has more to
add.
Feel free.
I just want to add one other
correction in the first opposite
opposition on Zoom, there was a
declaration that the state has
no jurisdiction over this
federal program, and we
acknowledge that it's a federal
program, but in fact, 7 states
have passed this kind of
language that bans contract
pharmacy restrictions and
several have also added the
language that prevents.
Um,
Submission of data prior to
receiving the medications and
the contract pharmacy
restrictions have withstood
appeals through the legal system
up to and including a refusal by
the Supreme Court of the United
States to take up their lawsuit.
There are 5 manufacturers right
now that are suing US Health and
human services and health
resources and service
administration trying because
her sa health resources.
and services administration
pushed back on the unilateral,
um,
Establishment of a rebate
program for 340B meds.
You know, the program is under
threat and it is important to
patients served by safety net
providers in New Mexico, and we
would like New Mexico to follow
the example of other states with
language that has held up
through the legal system.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Madam Chair, um, I, I'm not
gonna belabor the point. I, I'm
not.
I'm not quite comfortable with
this, but I do have one last
question.
I was trying to digest what you,
Madam Chair, uh, directed my
attention to, which is page 2,
line 9, and then
Skipping down the line 20.
Please, please correct me and
tell me. It seems like this
language is telling.
Us
And manufacturer has no right to
find out.
Who is using the drug.
Or
Who was beings who the
prescriber is, who's pres what
they're prescribing and who
they're prescribing it to. Is
that, am I reading that
correctly?
minority Whip Martinez. So if
you look at the last two lines.
It says unless the sharing of
claims or utilization data is
required by federal law, so the
that data that is required by
federal law, obviously we can't
touch, so they can get the data
that the federal law says that
they are entitled to what we are
saying is they cannot require
more data than is required in
the federal law.
You met him chair, so.
Um
We're quick to sue
manufacturers.
So, I get, I get.
Prescribed the medication.
I don't sue the PBMs and
everybody up the chain. I saw
the manufacturer, but they're
not allowed to have this.
Information just doesn't.
It, it, it something's not
clicking there for me.
Um, Representative Martinez as I
have said, it's a federal law
and the federal law has in place
what data that those
manufacturers are allowed to
collect.
We are saying we don't want New
Mexico to be required to do more
than that. We are following the
federal law and so the
manufacturers are getting the
data that the federal law
mandates.
We just don't want more onerous
um requirements on our state.
Entities.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair, um, seems like if we're
following the federal law then
I'm, I'm not quite sure.
I'm still not quite sure what
we're trying to accomplish, but
I'll listen to the rest of the
debate and, and
Madam Chair and we are just
trying to not have um.
Entities confusing things and
making them more difficult for
New Mexico providers. That's
what this is all about. We, we
fully intend to and we fully do
follow federal law, but we don't
want any added burdens specific
to New Mexico,
uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
expert witnesses. Thank you, uh,
thank you, Representative
Martinez. We next go to uh
Representative An Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, Madam Chair, for
bringing this, and I apologize I
was working on a memorial, so I
missed some of the feedback, so
if they've already covered this,
please forgive me, but I just
have a few questions. Um, if we
do not pass this bill, the 340B
program will still continue to
help the FQHCs across the state,
correct? Correct, Madam Chair.
OK. Um,
If
We passed this bill.
We won't even say if we pass
this bill. Currently, if a
hospital purchases a drug, or
say $2000.
Is there instances where now
they are billing the insurance
company or the individual, maybe
they don't have insurance for
$20,000.
For the medication on a claim.
Madam chair and and
representative, we can't discuss
what hospitals do or don't do. I
mean, we just don't have that
data.
And, and
Up to your point, I'm sure that
there are, there are many hands
that go into that pot for money,
um, no doubt, but this bill is
specifically for the 340B drugs
and the 340B uh qualified
providers. Madam Chair, thank
you, and I understand that
completely because I know that
this was developed for our low
income and uninsured patients
across the state, um, but I also
know that when they
Receive these medications at a
much lower cost that they then
can bill, whether it's Medicaid,
whether it's Blue Cross
commercial Plan Presbyterian.
5 times the amount because that
is the allowed amount for the
medication and that does happen.
Across the state. And so my
question to you is, um, I did
see a statement from OSI saying
that they could not monitor.
There's no way of them to
monitor this program. Is that
correct?
Representative and Madam Chair,
it's the board of pharmacy that
monitors it and, and I believe
we took out any reference to um
OSI, which is the Office of
Superintendent of Insurance. I'm
as guilty of the
acronym,
but um, I believe that was
removed um in a prior it
Version
And excuse me, Madam Chair,
Madam chair. I wanted to address
the Medicaid portion of this of
your question and be very clear
that the medical assistance
division has issued rules and
regs that are very specific
regarding filling any Medicaid
claim for prescription
medications with a 340B
discounted drug where that the
only cost is the acquisition
cost, the 340B cost of that.
and it defined dispensing fee
for the pharmacy that dispenses
it, so this is not a program
that is used or leveraged within
the Medicaid program for the
state of New Mexico.
Thank you for answering that
question. That helps, but is
there the same language built in
that they cannot then bill a
health insurance company that's
non-medicaid for the difference.
Why would it be one and not the
other.
Madam Chair, madam chair,
Representative Chavez, um.
I can't speak to why the in
1992, this program was created,
but it was very specifically
created to not only provide
benefits to patients, but also
to respect and reflect
prevailing rates of claims
payments and reimbursement.
Medications. So if there is a
margin between acquisition cost
and the claims payment, the
decision was to allow that
margin to inure to the 340B
covered entity who must meet
those eligibility requirements
and for community health
centers, those dollars go back
into fulfilling our mission of
service.
And Madam Chair, just to add to
that, so Medicaid is a state
program, so we do have controls
over over how much we pay for
things, etc. Private insurance
that restraint of trade and all
of that stuff we cannot um say
what what private insurers.
Or
Private entities are
are allowed to do with the, and
we all know that drug prices are
start out high in our inflated
and as representative Martinez
asked many, many hands are going
into the till to get more money,
and unfortunately we don't have
a way to control that for
private insurance. OK. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representatives. Um.
I, I guess that's my concern.
There, there is no way to
control a margin where sometimes
could be $100 to $20,000
difference that they're billing
an insurance company for other
than protecting our Medicaid
program, so, uh, you answered my
questions. Thank you so much.
All right, thank you. Um,
Next, we'll go to Representative
Senator Cortez. Thank you so
much, Madam Vice Chair, Madam
Chair, um, I have several
clarifying questions that I'd
like to ask, Madam Vice Chair,
Madam Chair, does the office of
the Superintendent of Insurance
have enforcement authority over
the drug manufacturers or
pharmacies if this is enacted in
the insurance code as proposed.
Representative, um, and Madam
Chair, I believe that letter
that you're looking at is in
reference to a former.
um
version of the bill. So there is
nothing in here about Office of
Superintendent of Insurance
doing anything with this. We
removed that when we realized
that a technical error was made.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Vice Chair. Madam Chair, um,
have you considered including
this in the pharmacy act
instead?
Madam Chair and Representative,
I trust our drafters. I take an
idea to them and they know the
law much better than I do, so I
can't answer that, um, I, I can
refer you to the drafter, but,
but I try and stay out of that
stuff cause we got plenty of our
own stuff to worry about. Yes,
ma'am, I understand, Madam
Weisher, Madam Chair, I was
just, I was just curious, um,
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair,
how does the state monitor and
regulate the manufacturer's
conduct when it's a federal
program.
Representative and Madam Chair,
we really don't, um, I mean, we,
we are trying to protect New
Mexico providers and patients
with this law, but we, we have
no say in in how the federal
government um implements this
program.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair,
and what was your reasoning and
not just allowing the federal.
Component to fix this issue.
Representative and Madam Chair.
They've had a long time to do so
and they haven't. And so, you
know, all we can take care of is
New Mexico, so we are trying to
take care of New Mexico. I
understand that. Thank you,
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair,
and while I understand the heart
of this proposal and in this
bill, um, I don't agree with the
implementation as you've stated,
it's incredibly complex and
confusing. Um, I just can't in
good conscience vote for it.
Thank you so much, Madam Vice
Chair, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Are there any other?
OK. Uh, we'll go to
representative uh Kates for the
motion.
A representative case you have
questions.
Please move forward with your
questions. I had one question.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair,
thank you, um, Madam Chair, and
presenters, um, I'm most
certainly, um.
support this bill, and thank you
for bringing it forward. I do
have one question. I am kind of
persnickety about uh follow
through.
So why and you did explain,
you've explained very well the
complexity of where the data is.
But I want, why is there not an
audit component in this to
explain
Who is using um the 4, the 340B
program.
In the state of New Mexico, just
in the state of music, when is
it going to the federally
qualified health clinics, when
is it going to the big box
stores. You did very adequately
explain that, hey, sometimes big
box stores is all that they have
access to, but there's no audit.
Component in this bill and I
just wanted to know, Madam
Chair, Madam Chair, and
Representative Cates, thank you
for the question. I would refer
you to the section of
Um, the public Health Service
Act relating to 340B, which
As it was passed, and I'm not
sure that it's been touched
since does provide for oversight
and monitoring of this program
at a national level does allow
for auditing full scale audits.
My health resources and services
administration and in fact also
allows manufacturers to demand
audits themselves. So there are
many oversight mechanisms, 340B
organizations covered entities
must recertify on an annual
basis, and they are subject to
audit and monitoring by the
federal government.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Vice
Chair and thank you for your
answer. I, I think it's very
good. I will just respectfully
say that it would be of an
interest to this legislature to
know as we as as our chair so
eloquently put it, we're trying
to take care of New Mexico. We
can't control the federal. If we
had where this program is being
used, the utilization numbers
within the state of New Mexico,
that would be of an interest.
but you have my support, thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Kate, so, and
some of you who have been on
this committee know that we
Have as this committee and as
the legislative Health and Human
Services Committee, we have
difficulty getting data on
everything, but we are
requesting an appropriation for
the interim committee to put out
for study so so that we can get
the data that we are unable to
get at the moment, so that could
be part of what we're, what
we're looking. Thank you.
Representative of Tapas, a nick,
uh, I'm sorry, Eleanor Chavez
for the motion. Thank you, Madam
Chair, I move that you pass on
House Bill 78.
As amended.
Thank you. We have a motion for
a due pass on House Bill 78 as
amended.
And it has been seconded by
Representative.
Anaya, all right, is there, uh,
maybe we go to a roll call,
please.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Cates, yes.
Representative each of us, yes.
Representative N Chavez? No.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones.
Representative Martinez. No.
Representative Senna Cortez. No.
Steer Herndon, yes.
And vi um chair Thompson, yes.
By a vote of 6 in the
affirmative and 3 in the
negative, you have a due pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members and.
Our next bill is House Bill 80,
Personal Insurance Credit
Information Act changes
representative chairwoman
Thompson will be presenting, and
do you have expert witnesses? I
do from the office of the
Superintendent of Insurance. So
me him chair while they're
getting situated. I, I will
briefly introduce uh this this
bill. So what this bill does is
to disallow um auto insurance
companies from
credit scores in determining in
determining um the
The cost, the insurance rates,
and it came to me from a friend
who who was concerned about
people who are low income, being
able to
To
A Ford automobile insurance, and
we all know what a problem the
state has with uninsured
drivers, and his question to me
is, when you get in an accident,
do they ask you what's your
credit score? You know, are you
late on any payments? So,
We feel some I feel and others
feel that it's discriminatory,
and I will say that I sat down
with a couple of insurers, the
lobbyists for insurers and ask
them how do they use the
algorithms of, they don't call
them credit scores, they call
them credit insurance scores,
and
I'll leave that alone, but I
asked them, OK, so how, how are
we assured that you are not
using gender or race or economic
status as a
Basically to discriminate and
what they told me is that
information is proprietary, and
what that says to me is we don't
get to know if it's
discriminatory or not, so since
they will not share how they use
that data, and I think we should
not allow that data, and I will
allow my um
My expert witnesses to make
statements and introduce
themselves.
Yes, Madam Chair, um, members of
the committee, I'm Alice Kane,
I'm the superintendent of
insurance, and with me is my
chief actuary.
I'm Christian Myers. I'm chief
actuary at the Office of
Superintendent Insurance. My
primary role is uh reviewing
rate filings from companies uh
in auto, motorcycle and
recreational vehicles, which
we're talking about today, as
well as monitoring the overall
premium um and claims trends
from companies throughout the
industry. We obviously support
this bill very strongly, uh, we
do think that it's uh uh it does
uh impact low income, uh,
Members, citizens more than uh
it should, uh, it doesn't
directly uh and it, it's not an
indication of what your driving
record is. It's just your credit
score. Uh, so we feel that it's
more relevant to look at driving
records to impact rates and
credit scores and do feel it's
probably inadvertently
discriminates.
But we do not have the the
actual data to prove that.
Madam Chairman, I'll just add,
um, so this is very similar to
the credit score that you would
get when you're going to apply
for a mortgage, uh, insurance
companies have essentially
narrowed this down to 30
variables that are very
predictive of driving
experience, but they do not have
anything to do with your driving
experience. It's you're, you
know, what type of credit are
you carrying? What's your
payment history, how long have
those credit uh accounts been
open. Um, it is predictive of
Future driving accidents, um,
and while you're, uh,
Representative Thompson is
correct. Uh, companies treat
this as proprietary. We don't
necessarily know all the
variables underlying the model.
Uh, there was a study done by
the federal, uh, the FTC in
2007, uh, that does demonstrate
these scores are highly
correlated with race and low
income. So whether or not
they're actually using race or
income is a different situation,
but it is very clear that
Folks with very good credit
scores generally have higher
income, um, from our
perspective, you know, New
Mexico has the 2nd highest rate
of uninsured motorists in the
country. DC is number one, for
those of you that are curious,
um, so our support of this bill
is really trying to improve the
affordability of auto insurance,
um, by removing this variable
from pricing and to hopefully
increase the percent of New
Mexicans on the road that
have state-mandated insurance
and in addition, um, unlike
buying a house or.
You will have debt when you buy
the house with auto insurance.
If you don't pay, you don't have
insurance, so there is no
opportunity, there's no
opportunity for loss for the
insurer. If, if you end up not
paying your bills, you just
aren't insured anymore.
So I think with that we stand
for questions, manager.
Thank you very much. We'll go to
the uh Zoom. Is there anyone on
Zoom who stands in opposition to
this legislation.
Right, I see two hands, and you
will have 2 minutes. Please
state your name for the record,
Tony, you are first.
Great. Can you hear me?
We can hear you. Wonderful.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee
for the opportunity to join you
this morning. My name is Tony
Cotto here on behalf of NAMI in
opposition to HB 80, as a policy
matter, the objective of
insurance underwriting and
rating is to match rate to risk,
because not all risks are the
same. It is this foundational
principle that protects
consumers from being overcharged
to subsidize risks posed by
other people. This is a critical
concept because ignoring it
means intentionally
accepting that people less
likely to experience a loss will
overpay for reasons having
nothing to do with risk. Efforts
to match rate to risk work best
when insurers are permitted to
consider objective
scientifically proven, actuarly
sound rating factors that most
accurately predict the
likelihood of a loss. In
insurance, accuracy is what
fuels competition in healthy
markets, which increase the
availability of and access to
insurance, improved consumer
choices, and reduce costs for
policyholders. The converse is
also
Less accurate measurements,
reduced predictability and
increased costs to the overall
system and individuals. The bill
before you today proposes
eliminating 3 traditional
scientifically proven actuarly
sound underwriting and rating
factors from insured toolboxes,
which means a reduction in
accuracy and ultimately
increases in costs across the
board for your constituents.
Credit-based insurance scores
are a metric based on
objectively confirmable data
that tell an insurer whether an
applicant or policyholder is
more
less likely than another to
experience a loss. That's it.
Scores are not used to deny
coverage. They're not used to
penalize thin files. They have
been studied time and again over
the last 3 decades, including
that FTC study that was
mentioned, which I would contend
actually had a different
finding, but they are
consistently found to be highly
predictive, and they are to the
benefit of most consumers.
Occupation and education, which
are also in the bill, possess
beneficial predictive value for
consumers. Pretending that
Every segment of the workforce
or every level of education
behaves the same way behind the
wheel is unscientific and it's
an intentional divergence from
reality that harms consumers by
not giving them opportunities.
Thank you. We, we believe in
objective and fair treatment for
every applicant and
policyholder, and I'm happy to
answer questions.
Thank you, Tony. Uh, we will now
go to Chris.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
honorable honorable members of
the committee want to confirm
that you can uh hear me before I
move forward. We can hear you.
Great. Thank you. My name is
Chris Quigley on behalf of the
Consumer data Industry
Association, and I appreciate
the opportunity to submit
testimony and respectful
opposition to House Bill 80.
CDIA represents the consumer
reporting industry, including
nationwide credit bureaus,
regional and specialized credit
bureaus, background check
companies, and more. We promote
the responsible use of consumer
data to empower financial
opportunities reduce fraud and
manage risk as it relates to HB
80 credit-based insurance scores
have been widely recognized as
reliable indicators of risk and
are used to ensure that
insurance price remains fair.
and accurately reflects the
likelihood of claims.
Also, numerous studies have
confirmed that credit
information is strongly
correlated with risk and loss
predictability by restricting
the use of such data, HB 80
would disrupt well established
risk-based pricing models that
benefit most policyholders.
Further eliminating eliminating
the use of credit information in
underwriting and reading would
result in unintended
consequences for policyholders,
including higher premiums for
many.
Restricting the use of valid
underwriting criteria will only
serve to limit options and raise
costs rather than achieve the
intended goal of fairness and
affordability. With that, we
respectfully oppose HB8D. Thank
you.
Thank you. We'll now go to Zoom.
Is there anyone on Zoom who
stands in support of the
legislation.
OK, I see no hands will go to
the audience. Is there anyone in
the audience who sends in
opposition to the legislation.
Please stand and come forward.
Say your name and you have 2
minutes.
OK. You're holding. All right.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the American Property
Casualty Insurance Association
and for Allstate Insurance
Company. Both
the trade association and the
company stand in opposition to
House Bill 80 or what this bill
would do would it it would
prevent insurance companies from
using credit information as they
evaluate risk in the auto
insurance market. And what
that's going to do is it's going
to prevent insurance companies
giving people the benefit of
having good credit, and when you
do that, because insurance is a
zero-sum game, you're going to
be having people with good
credit subsidizing folks with
bad credit, uh credits
information or credit insurance
scores are very predictive of
risk, and so you'll have people
with good credit, uh,
subsidizing those with bad
credit. I've shared with the
committee, uh, some information
that was collected from one of
APCIA members and
It relates to real-time
information related to who will
bear the burden of these
increases that will come from
insurance companies not being
able to give and give uh a
discount to folks with good
credit. Those include seniors
who will have a $261 increase,
firefighters who will have a
$313 increase, nurses who will
experience a $335 increase, law
enforcement, teachers will
experience a 300.
dollar increase in military
officers. I will tell you that
at least 46 states allow for the
use of credit information and in
the state of Washington recently
in the last two years, the
insurance commissioner there
banned the use of this credit
information and what happened,
I'm telling you, will happen
with this bill. People with good
credit subsidized folks with bad
credit, and there was a lot of
consumer pushback, seniors and
others who had good credit, uh,
were very upset over the radio.
increases that they uh
experience because the use of
credit information was banned in
the state of Washington. We
respectfully stand in opposition
to this bill because if this
passes, you, your phones will
light up and you will hear from
folks with good credit. Thank
you.
Please come forward.
Uh, thank you, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Ann Conway, and I'm the
registered lobbyist for the
State Farm insurance companies.
I'm also losing my voice. Um,
we concur with what Brent Moore
has just said, and I don't want
to repeat that. I did want to
say a couple of things. I, um,
If you look at House Bill 80, it
amends the personal insurance
credit Information Act, and I'm
sad to say that in 2005 and 2007
when this act was enacted, um, I
was involved in working on that
with the then superintendent of
insurance and the legislature
and many, many, many
stakeholders in this issue. If
you look at this act, it already
prohibits some of the
Concerns that the sponsor has
indicated that she wants to
address in this bill. Um, if you
look on page 2 of House Bill 80
at line 3. It all our law for 20
years already prohibits the use
of an insurance score that is
using income.
Gender, address, race, color,
national origin, religious or
marital status of a consumer as
a factor. So those are already
prohibited. If you go through,
and I won't go through it today,
but you will see that existing
law has very comprehensive
safeguards for insurance
consumers when it comes to the
use of personal credit
information, and that has been
our law for 20 years.
Um,
in addition, although it doesn't
show on House Bill 80 this act
goes on to provide for specific
remedies that a consumer has to
petition the Department of the
Office of the Superintendent of
Insurance. In the event that
they feel that credit
information has been used
improperly. So that is in the
existing law, and if any of the
committee has questions, I can
give specific citations to that.
Um,
the superintendent your time is
up. OK, thank you.
Thank you.
Is there, I see no other hands
or people in the audience uh in
opposition. Is there anyone in
support of the legislation in
the audience.
Send no one in support of the
opera uh.
Of the legislation we will now
go to the committee.
We'll go to representative
Senator Cortez.
Thank you so much, Madam Vice
Chair, Madam Chair, um, have a
couple of questions. The first
one is what potential impacts on
the insurance markets have been
considered.
We don't see any direct impact
on the insurance market. They
can still offer policies.
And thank you so much for
answering, Madam Vice Chair,
Madam Chair,
Madam Chair. Yes. You're good. I
know it's a lot to remember,
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair,
uh, thank you for responding so
you don't see insurance premiums
rising, madam chair, madam
chair.
I, I, well, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, uh representative,
uh, insert as as they pointed
out, there may be a shift in
where the premiums hit certain
groups, but the other thing
that's not been raised is that a
lot of uh people are are dealing
with the fact that they've been
hit by uninsured motorists, and,
and we hope this will solve that
problem. Uh, there's also the
and we're finding unfortunately,
uh, in our policies, people are
offered uh.
Uh, benefit to cover uninsured
motor motorists, but that
doesn't always been taken, so we
feel insured motorists are
exposed to another risk that
isn't being discussed here.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair,
um, what steps have been taken
to consider any unintended
consequences and referring back
to the uninsured rates or
increased premiums for the
public.
Um, well, this is our Ott, thank
you very much, Madam Chairman,
uh, and representative, uh, I
agree actually I thought uh.
Brent said it well, so when we
do uh if this legislation does
passes, there will be changes in
prices for folks certainly, uh,
policyholders with poor credit
scores we'll see rate decreases.
Policyholders with strong credit
scores would see rate increases,
um, our objective is to lower
the rate of uninsured motorists.
And uh there, as Alice
mentioned, there is a coverage
that all of us that pie
insurance um cover in case
there's like a hit and run or
someone strikes us that doesn't
have insurance that we end up
paying for. So our goal of this,
in addition to helping people
getting on the road with
insurance is to help lower the
cost for all of us that are
currently buying insurance, um,
To, uh, to, to, to pay less
because that UM coverage is is
less. Um, as far as, uh, what
guard rails are in place. Uh, we
have a rape filing system where
all the uh, if this were to
pass, each company would submit
a rate filing that I would
review where I would essentially
um, ensure that the company has
removed uh insurance scoring
from the rating algorithm, they
would also submit kind of a
histogram of policyholder
impacts so I could see how many
customers are going up.
by how much and how many are
going down by how much, um, and
if there was something that
didn't make sense, I would ask
questions about that to ensure
that uh they were following
through with the appropriate
actions based on whatever is
past,
um, that really reiterates my
concern, and I believe this is
government overreach restricting
business autonomy and pricing,
and I stand with my constituents
from District 62 in opposition
to this bill.
Thank you.
Representative Martinez.
Madam Chair, um.
And I'm.
I have a couple of questions.
Or are there studies that back
up the need for something like
this, or we
We've seen widespread.
People applying for insurance
and being denied insurance
because
Of a credit score.
Um
Is there, is there some, some
type of data that you went and
said,
Here's a problem, I'm gonna go
solve.
Well it's really on the pricings
of Madam Chairman, it's really
on the pricing side, um, where
if you have two identical risks,
both of them live in uh uh uh I
don't know, Albuquerque, and
they've never had an accident
and they're 20 years old and one
of them has really good credit
and one of them has really poor
credit. The person with poor
credit, uh, in New Mexico on
average will pay 80% more than
the person with good credit,
regardless of the number of
tickets or accidents, and that's
really.
this,
uh, proposal is to try to level
the playing field, um, and
really put more weight on the
rating algorithm on actual
driving behavior. Thank you,
madam.
Um
Madam Cha.
So you're telling me that me and
my twin brother.
We were raised in the same
community.
At the same job, everything's
the same, except
I was responsible my entire
life, and I made sure.
That I paid my bills, my credit
score was good. Everything was
taken care of. My twin brother.
Wasn't so responsible.
I'm gonna end up paying more for
my insurance, so my twin brother
who wasn't responsible.
can get a better rate on his
insurance. Is that
Kind of basically what we're
trying to do here.
Madam Chair and Representative
Martinez. One thing is people
living in poverty, it's not that
they choose to have bad credit.
It's not that they've ignored
paying their bills. It's that
they simply cannot afford it.
Um, so I will let the experts.
I would just like to add a Madam
Chair, uh representative. I'd
just like to add another piece,
uh, what we're talking about, we
have so many what I forget that
Christian has the number, but a
large number of uninsured
motorists on the road. What
we're trying to do is to get
them more insured because they
can afford it, which we think
ultimately will protect the
insured motorists if they get
into an accident with an
uninsured motorist, and that's
really one of the drivers for
us, and it isn't and it and
it
there's not a direct issue about
race or or income, but the
ultimate result is that it does
impact if you do the uh the
numbers pro which we could
probably, uh, we don't have the
numbers to give you exactly, but
uh we're certainly gonna have uh
some unintended consequence
insofar as people that can't
afford insurance.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair, or.
How many states or or
Not allowing an insurance
company to use a credit score.
Representative 2 states do not
allow it.
So
Currently 48 states.
Do we have 50, you're right,
correct.
I'm sorry, I'm I'm so old. I
remember when they were 48.
Apologies, Madam Chair
expert.
I have not had enough coffee.
I'm easily confused today.
I had to go back and count and I
don't have that many fingers,
um.
So, so two states are doing what
we're proposing here, 48 states
or not.
Or is there data from those two
states that say,
The I'm not gonna be impacted
more than my twin brother.
So I did, uh, Madam Chairman, I
just wanted to directly answer
your previous question about the
twin brothers. So today,
Your twin brother would pay 80%
more than you pay, because your
twin brother has a higher uh a
poorer credit score.
Even though your driving record
is the same, your background is
the same, you live in the same
house. I'm sorry about that. Uh,
so what we're proposing to do is
say insurance companies cannot
use the the insurance scoring,
so you and your twin brother
would pay the same amount. Now,
what is going to happen in the
short term, is that your twin
brother is gonna get a rate
decrease and you're gonna get a
bit of a rate increase, so
you're paying the same amount,
but today, your twin brother is
paying a lot more, simply
because of his
credit. So going, going back to
my question, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair.
Those two states do we have data
that say that my uh
irresponsible brother who, in,
you know, in, in my story is
much uglier.
Um, not as intelligent.
Is there
Data from those two states that
say that my twin brother is
actually gonna go out. Uh, uh,
Madam Chairman, I don't have any
data on the, uh, the looks or
intelligence of the twin
brother, but I will say, I think
it is regardless of what state
you are in.
Creditscore is predictive of
future loss experience. So I
think California, you can't use
it. But I suspect that if you
looked at drivers in California,
drivers with poor credit score.
Generally get into more
accidents than drivers with good
credit scores, and that's why
the industry likes it so much.
That being said, we think it's a
public policy reasons, we want
to make it affordable for all,
and uh impact, you know, racism
and and income levels the Madam
Chair, but the question is, is
there data from those two states
that showed that those with a
poor credit score will now go
out and get insurance. Oh, I'm
sorry. Uh, I misunderstood the
question. I apologize, Madam
Chairman. Um,
Um
I do not have that data at my
fingertips. I know this, uh,
well, actually, just because New
Mexico happens to be the very
2nd worst. I know that those two
states do have lower rates of
uninsured motorists than we do,
um, but I do not have specific
data at my fingertips to suggest
that that has happened. No. And,
and Madam Chair and
Representative Martinez, just to
remind you.
We don't know what the insurance
companies are doing with your
credit scores because as I
stated, that information is
proprietary, so there could be a
bias against women drivers or, I
mean, it's in the it's in the
law that that's not supposed to
happen, but without us knowing
what what they're using in their
algorithms. We have no way to
ensure that there is not
discrimination built into
algorithms, and if you've been
paying any attention, um,
particularly in health care, but
that, that discrimination is
built into many of the
algorithms, so I mean I would
love to be able to see from the
insurance companies, how exactly
they are using it, they call it
proprietary, and so we, we are
expected to go on their word,
um, and, um, insurance companies
are not, um, the most trusted,
shall I say.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair.
Um
Despite our opinions of certain
industries.
I, I would like to go on.
Yeah, um.
You know, we can say the same
thing about banks or mortgage
companies or
I, if I'm gonna go buy a car and
my wife is gonna go buy a car.
You know, who knows?
All I know is that the
unintended consequences of this.
To me
Or far too risky until I can see
the data that says.
Boom, you fix the problem, the
uninsured motorists in New
Mexico.
are now going out in droves and
getting insurance.
I don't know that this is going
to solve that problem.
Um
So I appreciate the time. I
appreciate the answers. I just
don't know that we're going to
solve that problem. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Madam Chair, just,
just as a reminder, no bill is
guaranteed to solve any problem.
We, we do the best that we can
and we hope that it works, and
we go with what we know.
Go ahead, miss,
the one thing I want to point
out is, uh, a lot of the
algorithms we haven't been
testing them to see the outcome,
but the, the data that's put
into many of these algorithms is
is past data, which often
Continues problems that were,
were uh statistically there, uh,
I know some of the AI bills that
are coming through, we're going
to start testing the algorithms
to see if there's a
discriminatory outcome, which
People are very concerned might
be there and I would say that's
something we should be doing
with this, with this algorithm.
Alright. Thank you. Uh, uh, Mr.
Nay, I'm sorry, Representative
Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Couple
of quick questions. Um, my
understanding, Madam Chair and
Representative, is that
insurance rates have risen
steadily over the years without
the enactment of this bill. Is
that correct, Madam Chair? Madam
Chair and Representative, yes,
and I always say.
Like, um, gas prices, they go up
because someone has a fart
somewhere and they go, they
never go down, and I would say
it's the same thing in
insurance. They, you know, we,
I, I haven't seen a decrease in
my insurance rates ever.
Uh
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. You're also
beginning to sound like
Representative Trio, and I will
let her know that
I that
It would be Madam Chair
representative, is there any
indication of insurance
decreasing even for people with
good credit, or is the pattern
generally trending upward.
We generally, uh, Madam
Chairman, we have generally seen
in insurance rates increase
every year, there was a big
spike, uh, with the pandemic,
um, obviously as people got back
in the road, there was an
increased emphasis on distracted
driving, supply chain pressure,
drove up the cost of auto
repair. We've seen double-digit
rate increases in our department
in 21, 22, 23, uh 24 was the
first year that we've seen, uh,
rate increases really moderate.
Um, and actually in 2025, I know
it's early, um, but we have had
a couple companies small file
for small, very small rate
decreases. Um, so I'm hoping
that the worst of the worst is
behind us. Uh, I don't
anticipate rate decreases in the
future, but I think the, the
days of like the 20% per year
rate increases are, are in the
past. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I ask these
questions because, of course,
I'm a freshman, but I'm also not
new, and I'm tending to see a
pattern, um.
With narratives about the
insurance industry, um, as we go
through session and as we've
seen in the past, that if we
pass certain bills, rates will
go up, but it seems to me, Madam
Chair Representative, that rates
will go up anyway. Um, in fact,
the insurance industry has had
its heightest profit in recent
years, and that's the tune of
billions of dollars. Um, and so
Madam Chair Representative, I
want to thank you, um, for
bringing this bill forward, um,
and resisting some of the scare
tactics about if we do this,
then rates will go up. Rates are
gonna go up.
anyway, whether or not we pass
these bills, um, and so I just
wanted to point that out, Madam
Chair, Representatives.
Hey, I see no other hands, um,
Madam Chair, I mean, madam
presenters, especially
Christian. I just wanted to, uh,
3 points of clarification for,
for you, if I may. We had one of
our witnesses to stand to tell
us about doctors, uh, insurance,
teacher's insurance, firemen's
insurance that would go up. Is
there a correlation between
somebody's profession and their
credit score. Uh,
Madam Chairman, I'm sure there
is, though I admit I have not
specifically.
looked at that, um, well, every
carrier that I have reviewed a
filing for uses, credit
information and insurance
scoring and rating, uh, not
every company uses occupation
and education, I think.
Lots of companies just kind of
want to steer clear of that. Um,
so I, I had not, uh, seen the
numbers that, that were shared
earlier. Um, but I am sure that
there is a correlation between,
you know, I'm sure that lawyers
have a better credit scores than
uh actuaries, I guess, just to
pick on myself. Um, I, I don't
know specifically, but I'm sure
there's some correlation there.
And just for clarification on,
uh, if I may, Madam Chair, um,
That with respect to
representative uh Martinez's
twin brother who has a bad
credit score, but, uh, he is an
excellent driver, but he's
paying a high insurance, so the
insurance companies are making
quite a bit of money out of him.
He's not having accidents and he
is having to pay a higher, uh,
premium, and he is driving well,
and he's, and is that a problem
to you, Chris, uh, Madam
Chairman, that is
That that is the issue that
we're trying to address. There
are people out there that are
excellent drivers that have poor
credit scores, um, and insurance
is, is unaffordable for those
folks.
Um
So yeah, we're, we're
The the way the system is set up
today, I mean, I understand that
in aggregate credit score can be
predictive of of future risks,
um, but there are individuals
that are identical, and the only
thing that is different is their
credit score and people with
poor credit score are paying 80%
more in uh in New Mexico and
Madam Chair, just to, just, just
to add on that, I believe it's a
scare tactic. Oh, let's, you
know, let's say this is gonna
Shoot up the rates of
firefighters and nurses and
teachers. I, I haven't seen the
data as was stated, there may be
some price increases and it's
not gonna be only for physicians
or only for, it may be across
the board, but the, the intent
is to make sure that everyone
who drives as much as possible
can have auto insurance and as
the uninsured motorist costs go
down, then rates may
also go down, but it, it's a
scare tactic as far as I'm
concerned.
Thank you. We're going to
Representative Eleanor Chavez
for the motion. Um.
Madam Chair, I, uh, make a
motion for it to pass.
There's a motion for
representative Eleanor Toba
Chavez said this legislation get
a do pass, is there a second?
It is seconded by Representative
Anaya,
please, let's go to a roll call.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative case, yes.
Representative each of us. Yes.
Representative N Chavez.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones.
Representative Martinez. No.
Representative Senna Cortez, no.
But, uh, vice chair Herndon.
Yes.
Thompson. Yes.
By a vote of 6 in the
affirmative and 2 in the
negative, you have a due pass on
House Bill 80.
As we continue to move forward,
well.
We are going to hear House Bill
116, boarding of certain health
discharges represented to
Ferrari will be presenting.
Quick.
OK. Uh, madam, uh,
Representative Ferrari, we're
gonna have to roll your bill
until Friday. Uh, we have to be
out of the room in 2 minutes.
OK.
So, uh, Mr. uh,
Representative Ferrari
could just, can we do it and
we'll do it if you can do this
in 2 minutes, let's do it. OK.
Thank you. Um, this is, um,
House Bill 116 and um uh senator
or TC Pino, um.
had this idea and our bill needs
to um give incentive for um
boarding homes to become
licensed because right now
there's only 3 and
Um, Mr. um,
Linari from uh healthcare, uh,
um.
HCA, um, let me know about
there's only 3, and this is to
increase that by giving special
um compensation to the boarding
homes of $200 per person, um,
for the per month, yes. And I'll
let Senator CCPo say a few words
since he was gracious enough to
wait.
Thank you, Madam Chairman, and,
and, and members of the
committee appoint of the bill is
to add a carrot, because we have
no stick.
There's no way that we can say
to some, to an adult released
from a mental hospital, that you
can't live there. They can make
a free choice of where they
live, and that's what they're
doing, so that our efforts at
improving the standards of these
boarding homes by requiring them
to be licensed.
Means nothing. The ones that are
licensed get nothing from the
state for that, and the ones
that aren't licensed are able to
enlist people to come live with
them, because they can make a
free choice to rent a room from
whoever they want. This would
give an incentive and a reason
for some boarding home operators
to actually get licensed,
because then they would be
qualified to get these bonus
payments from the, from the
state health department for the
For each person that they're
taking care of each month.
And um, Madam Chair, we, um, in
finding out information and
meeting yesterday, um, I need to
make changes to the bill that
will be not from the Department
of Health, but to HCA and also
they requested that we increase
it to 5 million instead of
250,000, so we can promise to do
that in the next meeting uh
before committee of HEFC.
Thank you. Um, so quickly, we
will go to the um if you're on
Zoom in opposition, please raise
your hand, and we will come back
in the room in opposition.
Sing none, sing none on Zoom in
support.
On Zoom, raise your hand,
please. Um, in the room, it just
a show of hands who's in
support?
If you want to speak
OK, thank you. Um, so we will go
to admin on Zoom and please
00, that's Nat Dean. I'm sorry.
So go ahead now.
Excuse me, thank you, Madam
Chair. I stand in support of
this bill. Thank you for your
time. Thank you, Nat. We have
Lorraine.
Mendiola.
Yes, my name is Madam Chair,
Vice Chair and committee
members. My name is Lorraine
Mendiola. I'm a member of the
New Mexico Family Guardianship
Conservatorship Coalition.
However, these are my personal
comments.
Uh, this issue of boarding home
licensure has been ongoing since
2010.
Um
And like uh represented Ferrari
stated,
The only boarding homes that are
licensed in the entire state are
3 boarding homes in Albuquerque,
with the same owner.
And um
You know, this bill as it is
now.
Does not address any unlicensed
boarding homes. Now that $5
million sounds really nice that
I, you know, just found out
about two seconds ago.
Because my question is this.
The mentally ill have been
ignored, neglected.
Since 2010.
And I'm hoping that this new
Amount of money can go towards
Renovating these boarding homes
because most of them are
substandard. I know because my
son, adult son, has lived in
some of them, and I visited
them.
They're most of them are just
terrible.
So I'm hoping that this 5
million coming from the
healthcare authority will
Um,
Help these owners to renovate.
Their homes and comply, I guess
with the rules and regs policy
that DOH created in 2020. I
don't know. That's something
else you need to look into are,
are the rules and regs policy
going to be honored that the
Department of Health created?
Or, or they're gonna be relaxed,
uh, regulations or, or whatever,
but I'm glad to see that the
state of New Mexico is finally
Um, recognizing these mentally
ill people as
Humans in our life, and uh they
need an uh they need
accountability and oversight.
Thank you, thank you, Lorraine.
Um, so with that, we will go to
the committee.
Representative Martinez, and
let's really try to be brief
before we get the actual crook.
Here's a quick one, Madam Chair.
I'm overdue pass. Seconds. Oh,
good. Yeah, 2nd.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. It pays to be last.
With the promise of um changing
things before the next
committee. Yes, madam Chair,
thank you.
We are a journey.
