representative Kate here.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative N Chavez, here.
Representative Ferrari.
President
Representative Jones.
Here.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez.
Madam Vice Chair. Madam Chair,
here.
OK, we do have a quorum, so, um,
Representative Martinez,
whenever you're ready, you can
get started.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, today I
bring you House Bill 225.
We all know that there is a
crisis when it comes to
recruiting and retaining foster
parents.
Um, this is one.
tool that I'd like to put in the
toolbox. It is a
An income tax credit.
Afforded to the to foster
parents, um, and the amount of
$100 per week per child.
Um,
If, if there is a married couple
that files separately, they can
only file for half each.
Which will still total the 100
$100 per week.
Um, and with that, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I
stand for questions.
OK, thank you. So if you are on
Zoom and opposition, please
raise your hand.
And I'll come back to you,
anyone in the room in
opposition.
OK, no, um, and I see
Mitya
Go ahead.
Good morning, members of the
committee. This is Micah Bettini
with Bold Futures. Um, I'm not
really in opposition or support.
Um, I just want, there are a lot
of tax bills regarding um foster
parents and organizations, and I
just want you all to consider um
how they might
Support reunification efforts,
um, in terms of what, what that
would look like I
Perhaps, um, adding, uh, I don't
know, a bonus of some sort for
reunifying a family or also
thinking about um extending this
to families that do reunify, um,
but again, there are several tax
bills coming forward, um, with
different provisions. Thank you.
OK, thank you. Anyone on Zoom
and support. If you are, please
raise your hand and I'll come
back to you. Anyone in the room
in support.
If you'd like to speak, you can
come to the middle.
Thank you.
Marilyn Beck, um, founder and
executive director of New Mexico
Child First Network, and we are
also, I'm a former foster
parent, um, through the
Kevinness settlement, we know
that foster parents are critical
aspect of.
Fixing our, our broken system,
so anything we can do to recruit
or retain foster parents is is
really important in our in our
matters and so we appreciate um
all of the tax bills coming
forward, um, though we just
can't say enough that an
independent outside ombudsman
would also help these because um
foster parents don't do this for
the money. So, thank you.
Um, seeing no hands on Zoom.
Um
Representative, did you have
any, have any closing remarks?
No matter material stand for
questions. OK, thank you. So
first we have Kate. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you,
Representative. Um, I do really
appreciate um these innovative
approaches on trying to
increase, uh, foster families in
our state. Um, did you consult a
a a tax expert while you were
developing the spell.
Madam Chair Representative Kate
Sno did not.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. So here's
just as a parent.
Um, the IRS allows you to take
3, the your bill proposes up to
a $5200 tax credit if you have
your one foster child every week
of the year.
So the IRS gives anywhere from
3000 to 3500.
And the state of New Mexico
gives 600 up to uh maybe $2000.
Her child, it it it's, I wish it
was as simple the taxes, Madam
Chair and Representative that we
could say, one child, you get
this deduction, but it's never
that simple. You get a deeper
deduction if you make under
$25,000. And so there is a range
there, but all are substantially
lower than $5200. Are you aware
of that, Madam Chair
Representative?
Madam Chair represent Kates, I
am.
So manager chair representative,
is that your intent is to make
sure that that that this tax
benefit is robust and uh might
encourage families who would
require up to a $5200 deduction.
Madam Chair Representative
Kates, I wanted it to be
meaningful.
Um, like I said in my opening,
this is one tool in the toolbox.
But I want it to be a meaningful
tool.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I do
appreciate um that you broke
down your deduction by week
because we all know that uh
foster kids, I think that that
was very thoughtful, very
mindful. Um, I do.
Think you're gonna have a hard
time in tax, um, on what this
is, what this looks like
compared to all the other tax
benefits for children, um,
living in families, um, do you
know how much money you would
after all your deductions,
sorry, Madam Chair
Representative, I'll do a little
short basic tax thing, so once
you do all your deductions and
pay your feds, then you
have
Your income for the state. Do
you know what kind of income you
would have that you're paying
taxes on for the state that
would
Benefit of $5200 tax deduction.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Kates, this bill
does not reference that at all.
It's a straight. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I understand you
wouldn't, you don't lay out a
tax table on a bill. I, I do get
that representative, Madam
Chair. I just want you to
understand that for a $5200 tax
deduction. There's a certain
income threshold that that would
be meaningful for and that means
that this deduction is
Or, or I guess it's for
everyone, but to the maximize
when you were saying you wanted
to make it meaningful. It is
only for a certain income, a
family that would make it
meaningful for a 5 $200 that's,
oh, sorry.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. That's my
only concerns with the bill. I
do appreciate the effort, but I
do think you need to, um, I
think you're gonna have a
problem in tax unless you talk
to a tax consultant. Thanks.
Senator Vinay
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
I guess a handful of years ago,
um, I started going through the
CYFD process, um, because I had
a little cousin that I um was
hoping to take care of and
I just want to say, Madam Chair
and Representative, one of the
things that um.
Maybe it was shocking to me, um,
as I was going through the
classes was, um, you know, I was
there with a bunch of folks. I
was the only person who would
have been a kinship guardian,
um, and everybody else was there
and they had.
Multiple, multiple children.
And that was really hard for me
to watch, um, because they asked
who in here is, you know,
related, and I was the only
person who raised my hand and I
looked around and I was like,
this is.
Really bizarre. I would imagine
that, you know, more families
would be um taking in uh some of
the kids, and so I do want to
say, Madam Chair and
Representative, um,
That moment has really stayed
with me, um, especially as we
talk about CYFD generally, um,
because I really want to see
families and kinship guardian.
Incentivize more than I'd like
to see adoption.
Incentivized. And so I do want
to say, Madam Chair and
Representative, um,
I
I would much rather see that as
an incentive, um, not to say
that foster parents shouldn't
have incentives. Um, I just
really strongly believe that
There are a lot of families out
there and it may not be, you
know, the grandmother, even
though we know we have a ton of
grandmothers taking care of her
grandchildren, but, you know, I
was a second cousin and I think
I'd be a pretty good parent,
but I, I just wanted to throw
that out there, Madam Chairs
representative, as we're
thinking about who we're
incentivizing, um, and a lot of
those families may not have the
money, right? May not make
enough money to get a big enough
tax deduction deduction for it
to matter.
So for me, I want us to be
thinking about a system that is
prioritizing families and not
necessarily saying, you know,
here's the deduction if you make
a certain amount of money, the
deduction matters, but how are
we getting families the money
directly that they need.
Um, in order to take care of
their family members, even if
they're not in the best
financial situation, um, and so
I just wanted to bring that up,
Madam Chair and Representative.
This is hard for me because I
don't want to say, uh, no, you
don't deserve that tax credit,
but I also really want to come
into this body and think about a
way in which we're changing a
system that actually
incentivizes families and helps
families take care of loved
ones. Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Next, we have Representative um
Herton.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, um, oh, I'm sorry. I
didn't.
No, you go.
They, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Martinez. It's something that I
wanted to share with you, you
know, there's been a big
discussion about uh foster
parents and about the money that
they're getting. So this
conversation was the exact
conversation that we had in, in
uh appropriations and one of the
things that it really came out
of this and I wanted to make
sure that you had that
conversation was our secretary
of CYFD Teresa Casados, who
happens to be in the audience
today, had talked.
about how we need to increase
the amount of money, which I
think is better than a $100 tax
credit. So I would just ask that
if you would work with her, and
we talked about how that amount
needs to be increased
considerably for the work that
these parents do to take care of
these kids. I think that we will
come up with the same, uh, come
to the same place that you are
looking uh to come to, to
provide these, these families
with a greater, um, ability to
have access to resources. And so
I just say that.
didn't ask you, have you spoken
to Secretary Casados about what
she's looking forward to doing
and increasing these funds.
Madam Chair Representative
Herndon, um, I did have a
meeting with Secretary Casado.
She was
Gracious enough to cut out some
time for me. Uh, we talked about
several things, but we, we did
not talk about this specific uh
benefit.
So thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Representative ranking
member, I just think that's a
very valuable conversation to
come up with and I'm really
happy that, to tell you that I
do think it's gonna come out to
the good and just to accomplish
exactly what you're looking for.
Thank you, Representative N
Chavez. I'm sorry I didn't see
you before. That's OK. I think
she said me and then you asked
Eleanor if she had a question,
but she meant me, it was fine.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Our wonderful whip, um, so I
actually think that New Mexico
has the highest kinship,
guardianship in the country, um,
which is great, so I guess um
on.
And um Representative Anaya's
question, would this apply to
the kinship guardianship Act as
well.
Madam Chair, Representative, uh,
Chavez
This does not.
Specify um that they're not
allowed to take this. I wanted
to open it up.
Because many people and like you
said, New Mexico.
Uh, the amount of kids going to
a family member is the highest
in the country, so I wanted to
make sure that those families
that do take in a family member.
Um, have this tool in the
toolbox.
So it would apply even to
kinship, guardianship in that
case.
Thank you so much and also do
foster parents get paid right
now, even for um respite care or
emergency care.
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, uh, not that I'm aware
of.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you. That's what I
thought, but I wasn't sure. Um,
I think this is a great
opportunity for us to
At least be able to reimburse
foster parents. Um, it is such
an important part of our
community and community members.
I have a very good friend that
is Fostered dozens and dozens of
children, and her and her
husband are just amazing, um,
and I'm very thankful for, for
foster parents across our state,
so I think this is great,
another tool in the toolbox like
you said that we could help
foster parents and, and it is
another tool because I know that
a lot of.
members of this committee and
the legislature are really
trying to help foster parents as
well. So thank you for bringing
this forward.
Thank you. I just did a a quick
Google search and it
And I can't figure out who this
is from, but um
According to this, New Mexico
foster parents earn between
27,10092,00061 annually,
depending on their experience
and the level of care they
provide, so there there is um
And where that's from.
It's an AI overview, so, so just
as a point of clarification, so
seeing no further
Hands, uh, I'm open for emotion.
Motion per do pass, OK, so
motion by and Chavez in the 2nd
bite, um,
Representative Jones.
You can
well, Madam Chair, I'd like to
move to table this and give
Representative Martinez, an
opportunity to talk with
Secretary Casados more about
what um her plan is in terms of
increasing funding to these
families and to see if we come
to some resolution with respect
to that before this.
So we have a motion that
supersedes the other motion of a
table by Representative Herndon
with the 2nd by E. Chavis.
Karen, can you take the role?
Representative Anaya.
Yes.
Representative Kate.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative Echavez know the
table.
Representative Ferrari, yes, to
table.
Representative Jones, no to
table.
Representative Martinez.
not the table.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Madam Vice Chair? Yes.
Madam Chair
Yes.
We have a 5 Reno. So by a vote
of 5 to 3 this bill has been
tabled, but with that, as, as
Representative Herndon said, um,
it may give you a chance to
To talk with the secretary and
see if it, you know, make sure
that everyone's on the same page
and then if and when you're
ready, um, let, let me know and
we'll put it back on the agenda.
Madam, I, I failed to ask, um,
to explain my vote. Can I do
that? Oh yes, you can. Thank
you. Um, this is actually really
hard for me. I don't wanna take
away from folks who are doing
good work, um, but I, I would
love to work with you, um,
representative, I'm very
Serious about this, I would love
to work with you on this. I
think one of the pieces that I
would like to understand, um,
especially with what
Representative Kate said, um.
I would like to understand how
much money you would actually
need to make in order for this
tax incentive to be, to be
meaningful. Um, and I would like
to also maybe take a
A look at all of the other tax
incentives that are coming our
way, cause I feel like we keep
passing things in little bits
and chunks, and it's kind of
like, how do we look at this
system as a whole and say, OK,
like, here is what we will
prioritize. Are we prioritizing
direct money to the families who
need it right here right now,
um, or is it in a delayed tax
incentive or somebody who makes
a lot more money than families
who may not make as much money.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Thank you, Representative.
So, um, that bill has been
tabled, so we will just for
those of you who may be tuned in
or got here early, late, later,
um we are rolling HB 303.
So
Excuse me, so next we have HB
269 representative Armstrong.
I make comment?
Yes, please. Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um,
I'm always open to working with
anybody for the betterment of
New Mexico. I'm just sorry that
this committee couldn't see past
that.
Um, and move this bill on, um,
but we will continue to work
hard for families of New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Whenever you're ready.
And
So, um, minority leader, we
have, we do have a your
amendments, so um if you could
briefly explain the bill. I will
entertain a motion to discuss
the amendment.
Some movement OK.
Thank you, Representative
Ferrari with a motion to discuss
the amendment, so go ahead,
however you see fit.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um,
you all know I'm no nonsense, so
all the amendment does is more
of the, remove the emergency
clause. That's the main thing.
So just it's a very, very
simple. But what this bill does,
um, Madam Chair and members of
the committee is uh the 21st
century Cures Act was signed
into federal law December of
2016, The Cures Act includes
provisions that impact home
health and professional care
services, particularly through
its mandate for electronic visit
verification or EVV. The law
provides that agency systems
must be able to electronically
verify, visit services, dates.
times and locations conducted as
part of the personal care
services.
For home health uh and for home
health services. The intention
of the federal law was to ensure
accountability and improve
service delivery to Medicaid
patients. However, the reality
is that New Mexico adopted a
very ineffective and clunky
clod.
Electronic visit verification
system.
Um, which has created
substantial inefficiencies
without corresponding
improvements in care, um, in, in
quality of care or patient
outcomes. Currently in New
Mexico is only.
Or operating, um, in what is
known as the closed model.
Our closed model system forces
agencies to only use the
state-provided solution
currently, um,
Deserve or authentic care, um,
and we are blacks, uh, lack of
inappropriately creates of
inoperability creates
significant administrative work,
meaning agency agencies have to
hire additional staff.
To manage the system while
slowing down the time it takes
for prior, um,
To process for pays to process
the pay claims. This creates an
unwieldy cost uh for agencies
while adding no value to
patients. Hospital 269 would
require the New Mexico
Healthcare Authority to utilize
a data aggregator. The data
aggregator would allow home
health and personal care
services, uh, service providers,
the flexibility to use EVV
systems of their choice.
Providers would then be able to
use systems that would offer um
inoperability and
And or integration.
Which could help streamline
workflows and reduce, reduce,
uh, redundancies by promoting a
system that can run, that can
communicate across platforms via
an aggregator, providers would
be able to reduce manual data
entry, enhance accuracy, and
improve overall efficiency,
which would benefit providers
and more importantly, the people
they serve. Also this
flexibility can encourage
innovation all while in ensuing
compliance with federal
regulations.
And with that, Madam Chair, I'd
like to introduce my expert,
Megan Lorino, if you have
additional questions, and the
amendments, um, the amendment
removes the emergency clause on
the legislation which makes it
the effective date of the
legislation January 1 of 2026 to
ensure the healthcare authority
has time to implement an open
aggregator electronic visit
verification systems.
And with that we stand for
questions. All right, thank you.
So I will accept a motion to
adopt the amendment.
So moved.
The second by.
Everybody, I think it was Nicole
Chavez I heard first. So, is
there any opposition, seeing
none, you have an amended bill.
And we will go to Zoom if you
are here in opposition, raise
your hand.
And I'll come back to you in the
room. Is there anyone in
opposition? OK, and I don't see
any hands on Zoom, so in favor
of on Zoom if you want to raise
your hand and in the room in
favor of.
Um, if you would like to speak,
please come to the center. Oh, I
guess no speaking. OK, so I see
one on Zoom Mitch Ferguson. Go
ahead, Mitch.
Yes, thank you. uh uh I'm
pleased to
support this bill. Uh, it is
representative said EBV has 5
elements that are part of it,
right, the uh the date and time
of service, uh, the, the date
and time that the service starts
and the day time the service
ends, um,
The location, which is a
key element of the person
providing the provider is
providing the service and the
person that is receiving the
service, uh, Authenticare, uh,
done by Pfierve, uh, fails us on
pretty much all of those
elements, but especially on
location and those kinds of
things. The additional burden, I
should say that there is a state
compliance survey.
It's required to be comp
complete, completed in one of
the elements of that is that the
state the state cannot impede,
um, the services, right? That
their solution for EVV cannot,
uh, you know, preclude or impede
services we're providing to
patients.
So our experience with this
software has been that we have
manual interventions that are
required for scheduling for the
clinicians visits, for initial
authorizations for incorrect
addresses, for additional
authorizations for billing
exceptions per visit our claims
processing uh
individual. Your time is up, but
you could, can you please
introduce yourself and tell us
who you're with. Sure. My name
is Mitch Ferguson. I'm with uh
uh.
And with the Matrix Home Health
Services of New Mexico and Las
Cruces.
OK, thank you so much for your
comment.
OK, I will.
Go to the committee questions.
Representative Anaya Herndon.
OK. Go ahead, Representative
Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, all
right, I wanna get my head in
the right space. Is this, um,
visit verification system only
for home health care providers.
Madam Chair Representative
Anaya, it is for home health and
for personal care service
providers. OK, so this, um,
wouldn't be across HCA.
Very specific.
Thank you. OK. Um,
Another question was, um, I
noticed that we're trying to
align some of this with some
federal law. Um, would this
system communicate, um, with
systems federally as well. Is
that the intent is to align
them.
Madam Chair Representative
Anaya, the the purpose of this
system is to make it so that.
All of, all of the programs that
serve these industries right now
are all what's called EVV cures
compliant because this has been
a law that was passed 9 years
ago, um, it just for home health
providers became effective
January 1 of 2024. This would
allow our providers choice, um,
of what system they would use
and and the idea is it would
allow them to have
interoperability. Right now
they're in a closed system, so
the best way I can.
Show a quick inefficiency is
that you have a caregiver or a
clinician clocking in at a at a
house. It doesn't speak to their
payroll, and that's just one of
hundreds of inefficiencies that
this system has because it's a
closed system, it doesn't speak
to anything else, so we want an
aggregator so that the federally
required data can be captured,
uh, I think what Mitch was
trying to say is it's very basic
data that's being captured the
technology is is there. Your
phone could do this today.
But we're really on last century
technology to try to stay
compliant with the state's
requirement.
Thank you, Ma and
representative, and I have one
last question. The reason I
bring this up is, um,
You know, I was asking about
the.
The open system in regards to
the federal system because I am
of course thinking about our
immigrant populations. I just
want to make sure that we are
not essentially creating a list
of people and it communicates
somewhere else, but it seems to
me, Madam Chair Representative,
this is just within
Uh, the inoperable not working
systems we have right now, and
it is in our state, correct?
Thank you. Thank you, Madam.
That's all the questions I have.
Representative E Chavis.
Mike, please. Sorry. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um,
Can I ask for your, uh, Madam
Chair Representative, can I ask
where your um expert witnesses
from
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez. My name is Megan Lorino.
I'm the executive director of
the New Mexico Association for
Home and hospice Care, we
represent Medicare certified
home health agencies, Medicare
certified hospice Agencies and
then Medicaid funded personal
care service agencies. OK. And
my next question, Madam Chair
Representative, has to do with
um in the in our analysis, I
noticed that um the health
authority says that they're
working on such a system. Have
you had
a conversation with them to see
how this might overlap how you
bill might overlap with what
they're already doing, Madam
Chair Representative Chavez,
we've been, we've been in
conversation with the healthcare
authority for 5 years now about
the uh.
capabilities of our sys the lack
of capabilities of our current
system and the need for an
aggregator. They've always been
supportive, but so far we have
not had any success with getting
anything to move forward. This
bill is about accountability and
to make sure that we have a
timeline when our providers know
that they can use a more
efficient and effective system
that supports better delivery of
care to our Medicaid home health
and personal care service
clients.
Madam Chair Representative, how
would it do that? How would it
ensure better delivery of care.
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, um, the principal issue
with our current system right
now is our providers are having
to spend an inordinate amount of
time in order to process claims
to get those claims paid. So a
very quick example is that the
way that home help pays it pays
in 30 day units and so a typical
home health payment is about
$1800 for them to go out and
provide that care, the the wound
therapy, the, the physical
therapy, the assessment.
the aid services. It's about
$1800. 1 of our agencies that
serves a very rural population.
They reported that it cost them
just in their biller time, not
in their clinicians time, $1700
to get two claims paid, so that
is a really inefficient way to
provide patient care. Um,
another example I would like to
just bring to your attention as
we have another agency, they
serve, provide, they serve
clients statewide across the
state, there.
Patient, their Medicaid
population is about 7% of their
patient mix, but their billing
is their their billing staff
it's 38% of their billing time
just to get those claims paid.
So the way that we believe that
it could support better patient
outcomes is that they could
spend more time providing care
to patients in less time trying
to wrangle the 67, the 6 data
elements to get them correct so
they can get them paid. The
system is just inefficient.
So Madam Chair Representative,
then in terms of what you just
said, would they, are they
saying that then then they would
increase the numbers of staff.
Uh, that they have to provide
patient services.
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, the examples that I just
provided, I think show a true
disincentive to provide care to
Medicaid patients, especially
Medicaid rural patients who take
even longer drive times and
windshield times to get to, so I
do believe that if we were able
to reduce our administrative
time, there would be much
greater access to care. I would
be really interested if anybody
wanted to do a study on how many
Medicaid patients were served in
2020.
3 before this bill went into or
before this law went into effect
for home health, um, in 2024
when it did, I think we would
see a huge gap in care because
it's uh it's, it's just in
almost near impossible for small
home health agencies to invest
that much time when their
margins are already so small.
Madam Chair Representative, but
I don't know if you really
answered my question. What does
it mean that then they would be
able to increase the numbers of
staff, uh, to be able to provide
additional care. Madam Chair
Representative Chavez, I think I
don't know what their staff
would look like, but I do think
that they could have more
clinicians providing care unless
uh administrators processing
bills, yes,
madam just really quick if you
don't mind, uh, anytime we can
reduce administrative costs
that.
cost can go out to providers
actually providing services. If
the administrative part is
easier, then we can hire more.
But I, we don't know that that's
what they will do. If we can
reduce the administrative cost,
I would assume that people would
want to service the people more.
Um, um, Madam Chair
Representative and, and my last
question is, with the system
that you're talking about
creating sit inside, uh, the
health authority or outside of
the health authority.
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, I don't believe that we
were that we specified currently
the way that it works, I the way
I understand that it works is
that our managed care
organizations all have a
contract with Pfizer for the
authentic care system, so it's
very possible that they would
have a similar situation where
the MCOs would contract with an
aggregator as opposed to
contracting with um the actual
EBV system.
So, um, Madam Chair,
representative, then that raises
just one more question for me.
We've had a hard time getting
sometimes information from the
MCO, so I'm assuming if, if it
sits outside of the healthcare
authority and with the MCOs, and
maybe it's not a question, maybe
it's just a comment, then we may
have some trouble, um, you know,
um, getting information, the
kind of information that we need
to determine whether or not um
the system is running the way
that it it should be. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Rison and Chavis.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I think,
and I, and I'm familiar with
what you're talking about and
the authentic care system, so I
think for the committee, maybe
to make it a little simpler, um,
for everybody to understand. Can
you just walk us through and
talk about how many manual
overrides, the workers are
having to do for one claim in
order to process the claim, and
I think then that would make all
of us understand a little bit
easier how this is gonna.
Help administrative costs.
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez.
So one thing is that I want to
just make sure it's clear is
that the purpose of the federal
law, the Cures Act was just to
get 6 data elements. Again,
these are really simple basic
data elements. Who is the person
providing care, who are they
who's the patient or the client
they're providing care to. Where
is that care being provided,
geolocated that so that we know
that they went to the home. What
service, what time were those
service was that care provided?
What services were provided and
clearly I've listed 5 and
there's 1 more, but it is very
basic data elements that
we are collecting.
Um, with our Medicare home
health, um, in order to process
the claim dozens to hunt to hunt
to 100 plus um claims it, they,
there are 4 to 5 touches on that
claim that can be batched up to
our pair and then those are
audited, reviewed, and then
eventually paid.
For our Medicaid, uh, clients
for Medicaid home health
patients. It is 40 to 50 touches
of the exact same type of data
and for like a dozen of them,
not for dozens to 100+ of them.
So the manual time that is spent
fixing and correcting and
editing these claims is.
Truly quite cumbersome and again
it results in no improvement in
patient outcomes and quality of
care. It is really about getting
paper pushed across all the
lines until you finally get
reimbursed for the care that you
provided. It hurts providers and
it hurts patients. Thank you so
much. And so what I'm
understanding is because this is
such an old system when we're
using this system for healthcare
providers for Medicare.
They only have to touch
something and do maybe a manual
process 4 to 5 times, but when
these same providers are doing
the same exact claim for
Medicaid providers, it's 40 to
50 manual overrides to file one
claim, correct? That's correct.
OK. Thank you so much for
explaining that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you Vice Chair Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Madam presenters. I,
I have a question for you, uh,
Miss.
You know, and, and
representative. So just
recently, it's been about 4
months now. The healthcare
authority issued an RFP and it
was granted, and the purpose for
that RFP was to unify and to be
more effective in terms of the
way in which they're providing
their healthcare and the
healthcare uh system. Have you
spoken to them since that RFP
has been implemented, it has
actually been lit, I should say.
Madam Chair, Representative
Herndon, that that RFP is not
related to the electronic visit
verification that we're speaking
to about today.
And Madam Chair, Madam Marino,
how do you know that?
Madam Chair, Representative
Herndon, I, I speak with
healthcare authority. I have at
least one standing meeting or I
have a standing meeting with two
different individuals at the
healthcare authority, um, one
who's over the personal care
service program and the other
that's over the home health
program, and we've been, they
are aware that we're bringing
this legislation that this is a
is a primary concern for our
providers that, as I indicated,
they are supportive. There's
nobody has not been, nobody has
been, um, questioning of.
of what we're speaking about, I
think if you look at the bill
analysis, the healthcare
authority echoes the same
concerns that were describing,
but they have not up to this
point made been moved forward
with solving the problem, so
this bill is about
accountability and it all it
really does is set a deadline,
so if that RFP was to, if they
uh if they changed it in any way
and made it so that it did
respond to this, all this bill
would do would create um that
timeline for that. January 1 of
2026. So we're not even asking
for July 1 of this year, um, we
are really just trying to create
an accountability so that we can
be assured that our providers
have a solution and relief in in
in the future.
And, and thank you, Madam Chair,
Madam, uh, expert, just one
other clarification. So
Representative Chavez asked if
this process is going to be
operating outside of the
healthcare authority. How is
that going to increase
efficiency. I think it's really
important for us to understand
how that would apply.
Madam Chair Representative
Herndon, the way that this will
increase efficiency is that we
and what an aggregator is is it
creates interoperability so that
their system can only report the
6 data elements that are
required to the state so that
they can report those to the
fat, the the feds. It also means
that their system can speak to
their other systems that the the
other electronic medical record
systems that they've already
invested.
money into so that whether it's
streamlining their payroll,
streamlining the payment
process, having a system that
has interop right now they, the
system is you have to download a
spreadsheet.
Find the errors, then go fix,
fix the errors in the system,
refresh the system. It is very,
very manual. This would allow it
to be more inter would allow to
have interoperability, more like
what we all have like on our
cell phones now, we really are
truly dealing with technology
from 9 years ago, um, and it was
not even advanced technology
from 9 years ago, so it would
really just bring a system to be
within the 21st century to be as
capable as.
as technology can be today.
Madam Chair, members of the uh
Madam Secretary, presenter.
When you had your conversation
with the healthcare authority.
Did you ask him if the system
that you're talking about now
would integrate with the one
that they just issued and uh
integrated into their RFP which
was just left.
With that conversation occur?
Madam Chair Representative
Herndon, I did not have that
specific question for them, but
I met with healthcare authority
last week talking about this
bill. We have a very positive
and productive relationship. I
don't know why they would not
bring that to to my attention if
they were looking to, if they
had a solution, I that would be,
that would be confusing to me.
OK. Thank you, Madam, madam
presenter. I'm just worried
because right now we have two
systems that are in place, one
that's
5 major counties have a, a
healthcare system that's in
place that isn't talking to the
one that the healthcare
authority has, and then to bring
another one on if it doesn't
integrate, I think causes more
problems. So we could just get
some verification that all these
systems will be talking to each
other. I think all everyone
would be a lot better off, and
that's just my, that's my only
concern, and I know that you had
the conversation with him
recently, but it, it doesn't
sound like that answer has been
secured, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair Representative Herndon, I
just want to emphasize that the
system we're currently on is a
closed system that won't talk to
any other system. What we're
asking for is an aggregator that
would enable.
An open API would allow uh
interoperability. It would allow
our, our systems to talk to
other systems, including the
states.
Looks like Madam Char to talk to
the system that they just
integrated. You said it will now
talk to it if this system is
accepted, is that correct? Chair
Representative Herndon, it would
have interoperability
capabilities that it could. I, I
can't speak to what, what it
would do. That would be up to
the state. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, madam
presenter.
Representative each of us,
Representative Jones.
Sorry. It's OK. It's Monday
morning. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and uh thank you Representative
and expert. So as someone who's
done some home health care, I,
it sounds to me like what you're
saying is this um aggregator
would allow for a lot more time
with the patient rather than
having to deal with um working
through the computer, computer
systems. Is that correct?
Madam Chair Representative
Jones, absolutely.
That's, that's very good. I
mean, I can see that on the
ground that is a real benefit to
patients and also reimbursement.
So I appreciate you bringing
forward this bill. Am I the last
on the list?
OK. All right. Thank you to the
motion, you can't be the one to
make the motion if you're the
last one to speak. So I will
come back to you. Thank you very
much, ma'am. So thank you, and I
just received a text from a um
A CEO, I think that's her title
of a DD agency, and she said EVV
is ridiculous and inefficient
for HC for health um HCBS.
Community-based services, um,
home and community based, um,
and then she says, I'm in
support of this bill and we have
been asking for an open system
since it was enacted, but I do
have a few questions of my own.
So will DD waiver providers be
included.
Madam Chair Representative
Thompson, um, the way that the
bill is written. It is specific
to our industries because that's
who I represent. However, I do
believe that the I don't believe
that the state would have to
disparate systems.
OK, thank you. Um, and then just
reading in in the um I book in
the FIR it says that the
department is planning to do
this, um, by July 2025. So do
you see conflict? Do you see
seamlessness, how will, how will
what this bill does interact
with what HCA says they're going
to do, um, later this year.
Madam Chair,
This is, I think, the 3rd or 4th
time I've been in front of the
Health and Human Services
Committee with this problem. Um,
last fall, you all are uh
senator or TZ Pino, and it was
actually to legislative Health
and Human Service Committee to
the interim committee that I
brought this issue to multiple
times every year and um Senator
Ortizipino wrote a letter to the
healthcare authority urging them
to please listen to our
concerns. We
have been in as I've said, we've
been in conversation with the
healthcare authority. They have
been positive about, um.
About finding a solution, but no
solution has yet occurred. This
bill is about accountability.
Thank you for that, and I don't
see anybody from HCA in here.
Um, and they, if they were, they
might not be authorized to
speak, so they're gonna hide.
Um, so, let's see.
And just this is kind of to do
with this bill, but not really,
but that.
The very rural areas there, they
have a hard time doing an EBV
because there's no cell service,
there's no um internet service.
So is that still an issue and I
don't believe this addresses
that. I don't know how we could
address it, but just a question.
Uh, Madam Chair.
In the frontier communities
there.
It is an imperfect system, but a
lot of kinks have been worked
out. I think it's the best way I
can answer that. There is a
store and forward technology so
that work that they do when
they're offline is captured and
and reported when they are
online and I don't see that
changing because of an
aggregator. So, so, um,
representative and expert, um,
so, I mean, I was under the
understanding that the EVV kind
of
track where you, where you were
reporting from and if it wasn't
That where there's no service,
then it may be um refused to be
paid because you were not where
you were supposed to be cause
there's no service where you're
supposed to be. Madam Chair,
there are.
There are definitely have been
issues like that with EBV, and I
believe that they continue to
exist, but they are less
frequent.
OK, thank you. Thank you. That's
all I have and I'll go back to
Representative Jones for a
motion. I'd like to make a
motion for Du pass to House Bill
269.
I was gonna say, did we adopt
the amendment? OK.
Ha.
Karen says, yes, so.
Um, I'm glad I'm not the only
one with no memory. So is there
any opposition to the motion to
uh for a due pass on House Bill
269 as amended.
I don't necessarily oppose it,
but I also don't necessarily, I,
I still have a lot of questions.
So is it possible to abstain?
Only if you leave the room. OK,
I will leave the room.
OK, Madam Chair, I just have,
can I explain that I don't
oppose.
Well, that's what we'll do the
vote and then if you want to
explain you can explain.
you.
OK, so is there any opposition?
OK, seeing then you have a due
pass as amended on house built
to.
69 and Representative Herndon to
explain her vote.
Madam Chair presenters, one of
the things I would like you to
do before we, if this bill
proceeds to the floor, that you
actually have a conversation
with the ACA to determine if
it's gone, the two systems will
talk, and if the system that
they just let is actually one
that encompasses the things that
you're looking for and be able
to explain that to us if, if
this bill moves onto the floor.
And thank you, madam chair.
And thank you, and it will go to
judiciary, so, um, hopefully.
Yeah, that's its next committee,
so hopefully if, if there are
any issues raised that you can
um
Find the answers or whatever,
you never know what judiciary is
gonna ask, do you? OK, thank you
for that next, as I said, we are
rolling 303 to Wednesday at the
request of the sponsor.
Um, we will go to our
Don't see our presenter. I'm a
Let me, let me see, I've texted
her, let me check.
Let me make sure she didn't say
she's on her way.
Oh
I am.
Your timing was good. You almost
got bumped, but you came in the
door just in time.
So whenever you're ready, you
can go ahead.
Morning, Madam Chair Committee.
Running over here, um.
So today we have
I catch my breath real quick is
house build a 329. Uh, the
purpose of the bill is to
elevate the role of a statewide
planning for behavioral health
services and provide additional
resources that support planning
activities as well as expand the
focus.
Of planning to include housing
support and support for people
involved in the criminal justice
system and treatment for
substance use disorder.
Um, excuse me, I'm trying to
catch my breath here. So one of
the things that we know, uh,
through this past year or
through the last year, man, the
reason why I brought this
forward
and probably talking and working
with with some of you up there
on this issue, and you, of
course, Madam Chair, is that we
have a behavioral health
collaborative. It is really
dysfunctional.
In fact, it hasn't met in over a
year?
So
Part of the premise of the
collaborative was initially back
in
it was in
2014, 2013, prior to that, um,
excuse me for not knowing that,
um.
Off the top of my head, but it
was formed so that there could
be some oversight, and there
could be um communication
between those agencies between
those support systems that all
had a vested interest in the
behavioral health of our state.
What has happened is what I just
mentioned is that it's
dysfunctional. They haven't met
in over a year, they don't have
a director currently, and it
needs a revamping. It needs some
reimagination. It needs it needs
us to push it forward so that
there can be that type of
collaborative, um.
Effort that we need as we're
building back our behavioral
health system.
Um, I was going to have some
some folks from LFC here.
Uh, to who helped me, um, work
on this because we also need the
aspect of of the oversight of
the financials of what's going
on.
Last year, um, fiscal year, we
put over a billion dollars into
our budget for behavioral health
purposes, Madam Chair, of which
many of that has been uh.
has moved around and really the
oversight really isn't there.
And that was the initial
function of the collaborative.
So I'd like to propose this
initiative through this, uh,
this piece of legislation before
you and um redevelop that
collaborative, Madam Chair,
thank you. With that I'd stand
for questions. OK, thank you. We
will go to the, to Zoom if you
are in opposition, please raise
your hand, and I will come back
to you in the room, anyone in
opposition.
They sing none and sing none on
Zoom in support on Zoom if
you're in support, raise your
hand in the room, anyone in
support.
Hey, not seeing anything. Oh,
OK, Jeremy Martinez.
Go ahead, Jeremy.
Hi, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Um, I just
wanted to take time to support
this bill. Um, I work among many
individuals who have behavioral
health issues and it's a
critical critical piece to
helping them succeed. So I'm in
support. Thank you. Could you
please state your full name for
the record.
It's Jeremy Martinez.
Thank you so much.
OK.
Seeing no more hands, uh,
questions from the committee.
Representative Chavez Jones.
Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, we um
had
Much discussion during the
interim, uh, with regard to the
behavioral health collaborative.
And
So one of the, one of the issues
was that there a director hadn't
been hired for, I don't, I don't
remember how long it had been,
maybe more than a year, um, and
so under this legislation, can
you talk a little bit about um
the director sort of what their
role would be and why that's so
important.
Thank you Madam Chair. So the
director would ultimately be
appointed uh by the, the
governor. Um,
And this would be much of a
Much of a set up like we've seen
with the
Um
The children's cabinets or the
um I think there was the cabinet
for um.
Early childhood initially that
was with Diane Danish. I don't
know if anybody remembers that
when that was formed and that
led into ECECD as we know it
today. So, um, so the governor
would um appoint a director, but
there would be, uh, there would
be a small committee put
together to give um.
To be the individual and to give
name uh names to the governor.
Madam Chair Representative and
would there be certain criteria
required of the director who is
being hired for the
collaborative Madam Chair, yes,
so the, the group would come
together to look at the criteria
of, of what would um.
What would make the best
director in regards to their
experience in behavioral health.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Next, we have um
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Lujan.
So this would be
Madam Chair, would this mean
that we're we're further
centralizing this.
Process of uh dealing with uh
behavioral health dollars if we
If we
Put this behavioral health
purchasing collaborative under
the Governor.
Madam Chair, right now the the
director and the um.
collaborative work under the the
cabinet direction of the
governor, so this would solve
the oversight from the
executive, if that's what you're
asking. Yes. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Luhan. Then how does that
actually change if it's already
under the governor?
The, the constructs and creating
um.
A referring process and creating
those uh criteria for the
director to give the reference
to the governor to have the
choice then made much too like
what we've done with the PRC and
um.
That went to the voters and the
voters overwhelmingly voted for
that type of process, so I, I
would think I would, I measured
it after that, Madam chair.
And Madam Chair, represent a Lou
Han you you mentioned a billion
dollars that we
We placed last year and and said
that it was not used, I don't
remember the word you used, but
we don't know what happened to
the billion dollars, madam
chair, it has been um
distributed across our budgets,
you can see it in different
areas, um, some of that, that
funding would be uh reverted if
you will, some of it, there was
a $20 million appropriation that
went to one of our agencies and
then was
Distributed in in a different
way without the oversight of.
Of what the what this would
create. So as we
Legislators come together and
really focused on our budget
issues and where those dollars
go. This would provide for their
overseas.
OK.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, Madam
Chair, for bringing this
forward. Um, I know that they
passed um the Senate bills uh
out of the Senate, and of
course, I took the weekend to
take a peek at them because I'm
excited because at least one of
them is coming here. Um, but I
was wondering, Madam Chairs
representative, how does this
interact or intersect with
something like Senate Bill 3.
it just so happened that I read
that this weekend and then I
read this and I was like, wait a
minute, um, who is going to be
in charge of the?
plan for behavioral health, and
clearly none of these have
passed and so it's hard, um, uh,
but I was just wondering, Madam
Chair Representative, how do
they interact with one another
or do they?
Thank you. That is an excellent,
excellent question. Um, one of
the issues, um,
That I was concerned with as
well, many, uh, many of us is
creating, um.
The type of legislation or pass
through the Senate bill that
would have
Um, what they wanted a billion
dollars into the behavioral
health fund, essentially, I
think we're going to, I think
right now is looking at
I haven't read the, the bill,
but I think it's like 200,000 to
start with.
With this, uh, what that would
do with, yes, we need some
oversight. We need some, we need
the, the experts in the room
saying, where the funding, where
is more most um most needed and
where it should really be um
flowing to along with us, we
would be decision makers, we'd
never be taken out of that
process, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. One of the
questions that comes to mind is
what happens if both of these
pass. And so, um, that is
something that is in the back of
my mind, clearly what ifs can be
forever. Um, so I wouldn't want
to legislate based off of that,
but it is something that I think
about, um, 3, as I understand,
has a regional plan directs, you
know, uh, I believe it's AOC um
to
Uh, set up and implement these
plans. This is a behavioral
health purchasing collaborative
that has existed for a while,
um, but I guess my question,
Madam Chair, representative, is
what if both of these pass? Is
there a way to integrate them or
what does that look like? Madam
Chair, absolutely, I think that
that was the concern for me as
well. What does it look like for
us to regionalize a behavioral
health system. Um, and if you
really take a, a deeper dive or
deeper look. We already have
regionalization in our.
states and so
Can you hear me? Oh, OK.
So I was just agreeing, madam
chair. I saw the regional part
in in this bill as well. So
that, that is very much a
function of what we need, um,
and both bills are directing
towards that, but this would,
this would help with that
oversight and bringing the
collaborative and bringing
those, uh, together to have
those bigger discussions, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and I'll just
add one of the biggest concerns
that I've heard about Senate
bill 3 thus far from folks, um,
in AOC is
They're not healthcare
professionals like they may not
have the actual expertise to be
able to, uh, think of
holistically and try to
implement these regional plans.
Um, and so I just wanted to
bring that up as a point as that
bill is also coming this way.
Um, no further questions, Madam
Chair and Representative.
Thank you, Representative
Ferrari.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, um, Representative
Luhan, um, some of the concerns
to the um.
I was wondering why um certain
agencies are removed from the
collaborative, um, such as uh.
The New Mexico Health provider
Association.
And
Oh no, you're adding that, but
you're excluding um other groups
such as New Mexico, tribal
behavioral health provider
Association, the Latino
Behavioral Health Association in
Southwest Behavioral Provider
Associations and so this is
supposed to be a collaborative
wire um certain groups and also
aging and long term services,
um, that has um several
divisions and programs that are
focused on.
Supportive behavioral health
services.
Thank you. Thank you for the
question. They would be
administratively attached, uh,
regardless through the through
the collaborative and um a
couple of those I did mention.
So if there would be a friendly
amendment that you would, um,
That you'd like to offer um
representative, I would, I would
gladly accept if the.
I did notice a couple of those
things, uh, I don't know why a
couple of them were not
mentioned, but to my
understanding that for the for
the collaborative and the
functionality of it to have the
oversight that they would be
included regardless, manager.
Um, Madam Chair and
representative. So, um,
I'm wondering why instead of
just creating a whole new group
that we just don't.
Um
Since they haven't met for a
year, why just trying to um get
that. How is this going to be
different.
Thank you, ma'am. Sure. Just as
we're having the discussion and
talking and.
Um, and thank you,
Representative Anaya for
bringing up the regionalization,
the planning that we need to
really engage in for behavioral
health processes that we have
not in the past.
And I don't know if anybody here
has attended or attended any of
the, the past meetings of the
collaborative, uh, the current
collaborative went to. It was
much more like a hearing and not
really a functionality of
getting into um those regional,
those regional type of um
Interactions, if you will, and
really getting into um.
The concepts of where we need to
be moving towards through our
behavioral health systems and
creating those new guidelines,
that would be the functionality
here.
is to create that, create those
guidelines, create the planning
and the structure, which I
believe is lacking.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, um, I would love
to make an amendment, but I
think we would have to go into
recess to, you know, make those
amendments, have them drawn up,
so, um, I think if you.
Plan to have those in the next
um
Madam Chair, yes, I love to work
with you into the next committee
to get those, those done and,
and I would accept him as a
friendly, um, amendment.
Thank you.
um, was your Hendon. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and, um, Madam
presenter, I see that you have
someone from the LFC here with
you right now. Would you like to
introduce him and he can explain
his involvement with this. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Eric, would
you?
Yeah, yeah, not for or against
any of any uh
Legislation that's before you,
but I'm, I'm here as a
Expert witness with this
legislation. Thank you, Madam
Chair. um, and
Madam presenter, according to
the bill, it said it would
designate the Secretary of
Healthcare Authority is the
chair of the collaborative.
My only question is, uh, why
didn't we designate this the
director of behavioral health
within the healthcare authority
is the chair, the person who
really is bringing forth the all
of the expertise that involves
behavioral health. Would that be
considered a friendly amendment?
Um, Madam Chair and
representative, so I think part
of the point of this bill is to
kind of raise the um.
You know, the, the behavior
health collaborative hasn't met
in over in in over a year and a
half. I don't know if you
already covered that, but, um,
You know, it's to kind of raise
the profile of the
collaboratives so that
Uh, there's more of an
opportunity for
Um, the cabinet to be more
involved in what's happening in
behavioral health.
And go ahead to your point, um,
we feel, I feel like it should
go to, it should be the, the,
the, the behavioral health
director would already be
involved, but under already
works under the direction of of.
Of
The secretary, thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I, I would
just, the way that I'm reading
that the bill reads it says that
the secretary of Healthcare
Authority, it's should also read
are their designee so that they
don't personally have to sit
there, Madam Chair, um.
Um, madam presenter.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We can,
that could be added as we move
into the next committee as well,
and I would accept that as
friendly. That is, that is a
that is a great motion. And
thank you, Madam Chair and Madam
Presenter, the information that
we have also says that the bill
conflicts with Senate Bill 3 and
that the Senate Bill 3 would
create standards and priorities
for behavioral health spending
and would repeal the behavioral
health purchasing collaborative.
So what I think that would work,
Madam Chair.
remember, um, Madam Presenter,
is that this collaborative was
the focal point of looking at
all of the behavioral health
programs that are throughout the
state and presenting them and
bringing them together and then
and then talking about how
spending should be made making a
recommendation pursuant to
Senate Bill 3. I think that
might be a good, uh, amendment
if you would think about that,
Madam Chair, um, madam
presenter, Mr. LFC.
Person with that work.
I'm sure
She
To your point, and I believe
that this is what we're trying
to do within within this uh this
legislation. I'd have to work
with you and gladly do so if
that is not reflected as you're
reading it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
if we made that clear in terms
of that's what it would happen,
uh, in addition to the other
chains, I think we have a
perfect bill that aligns very
well with Senate Bill 3.
Madam Chair,
Madam.
Thank you, um, Representative,
and thank you for all your, your
diligence and working towards
So I, it sounds like there might
be some significant amendments,
I would suggest we roll it if
you can get them in by when, you
know, 24 hours before our
Wednesday meeting, we'll hear it
on Wednesday, if not Friday.
Um, I'd be amenable to, uh, but
I, I thought we were working
towards.
Getting those done for the next
committee, but if that's the the
will of the chair.
Mm
Madam, Madam Chair, uh, if it's
OK, I, I'd like that
recommendation that we may be
passive with no recommendation,
let them work on the amendments
so that at the next committee
all of these amendments we were
talking about could be
implemented.
You were here 22, OK.
So, um,
So now I need a uh that is a
motion for a do pass, no
recommendation.
Second by each of us.
So, is there any opposition?
See then,
you are moving along.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
7 to 0. OK, next we will go to
um house and those of you who
may not have heard the House
Bill 303 has been rolled at the
request of the sponsor, so HB
341, I see Representative Ree is
here, so whenever you're ready,
representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, also
introduced Marilyn Beck, my
expert witness, who's present
with me.
Um,
uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, HB 341 is a one-page
bill.
That
simply mandate CYFD to issue
identification cards to license
foster parents. Um, in the
recent years, we passed a few
pieces of legislation enabling
foster parents and families free
access to things like state
parks, museums, free fishing
licenses or passes, camping
passes, and more, but what we
have learned is that they're
actually is an easy way for
foster parents to identify
themselves to receive these
benefits, but over the years, it
appears
when I've talked to different
foster families that CYFD is
intermittently issuing ID paper
cards, um, but nothing has been
consistent, um, in fact, I, I
talked to, I believe it was
Madam Chair, 2 to 3 foster
parents that don't have ID
cards, which have identified
special identification numbers
on them that help them with many
different things. For foster
parents to escalate issues like
reimbursement problems or
grievances, they're.
Expected to know their state fax
ID number, but most have no way
of knowing it and standardizing
these on an ID card would help
foster parents better navigate
the complex systems in the face
of high work turnover and help
the department communicate with
foster parents to better support
them. Uh, the hope of this bill
is that ensuring that each
foster parent is issued a simple
identification card with the
information that CYFD deems
relevant, we can support foster.
parents and help them ease a
little of their burden. Um, I
would also remind the committee
that um in the Kevinness case
and the arbitration, um, under
the settlement agreement and
arbitration CYFD has been
directed to take all necessary
steps to improve foster parent
recruitment and retention,
including asking um including
asking um them to legitimately
legitimately fund these.
efforts, um, and so I think that
is something I would love the
the committee to be made aware
of, um, I would also say that
you have situations where
mountain chair and members of
the committee that you might
have a child to go into foster
care and a parent, a foster
parent wants to go to the school
the next day and explain, hey,
I'm the foster parent, and, you
know, there's kind of taking
their word for it that they're
the foster parent. What some
foster parents do get.
Of course, it's not consistent
and you have to know about it,
um, currently, CYFD issues
licenses that are standard paper
size. They're 8 by 5 x 11. They
also, if we ask them multiple
times, this is for my foster
parents will issue a little card
that is more portable, but you
have to know about them to ask
for them. They also only give
you one per household. They are
about 2 by 2 made out of paper,
not laminated, and often not
even signed.
Um, checking with other foster
parents from other agencies, uh,
this is consistent. Most do not
even know that you can get a
travel size, um, ID card or or
license, and so what we're
hoping this bill will do is
support another, another key,
uh, just part to supporting our
foster parents and making this
just easier for them to have
have a paper or have a a
laminated ID that they can take
with them to parks and.
Schools and things of that
nature to prove that they are
foster parents, um, because
while
Children, youth and families may
say, Madam Chair, this is
happening, it is not happening
consistently because I've talked
to many foster parents, and I
think this is a very simple,
easy fix. I did notice in the
FIRs there was some questions,
I'll just uh and.
Deal with those right at the
beginning of uh how much it
would cost. I believe it was
$15,000 I would remind this
committee that CYFD reverts
millions of dollars every single
year, and to say that $15,000 is
going to make this big huge
impact to get ID cards on them
is something that it's hard for
myself to actually get behind
that argument. Um, we also,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, one of the analysis
from CYFD.
said that it lacks clarity, the,
the spill lacks clarity in what
information the foster parent
identification cards must
include, such as photos,
expiration dates, or unique
identifiers, but I'm sure we
intentionally left this up to
the department so that they
could have the necessary
autonomy in creating a process
and rule and regulations that
best meets their needs. I would,
I would close by saying, um.
It it's concerning that we even
have to come here to try to get
this put into a statute, when
this is something that should
just be happening. I mean with
that, Madam Chair, I'll stand
for questions.
Thank you. We will go to Zoom if
you are in opposition, please
raise your hand, and I'll come
back to you in the room in
opposition.
Seeing no hands either place in
support if you are on Zoom in
support, raise your hand.
If you are in the room in
support, please raise your hand.
OK, so I will go to Anne
McKinney and Jeremy Martinez in
that order, and please introduce
yourselves, you have one minute.
Hi, my name is Anne McKinney.
I'm a child welfare advocate,
and I stand in support of this
bill, and anything that we can
do to support our foster
families who are taking care of
our children in foster care.
Thank you.
Thank you. And next we have
Jeremy Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representatives. I just want to
say I'm in support of this bill.
I am a kinship guardian and the
only thing I would extend is it
be towards safety monitors and
also kinship guardian because we
like they explained about not
being able to have
identification for school and
stuff. I think it's extremely
important for foster kids, all
foster kids that entered the
system. Thank you.
Thank you. The committee
questions.
Representative E Chavez.
Um, vice chair Herndon.
Go ahead.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative,
I, I don't know if it's
necessarily a question, but it's
a common in terms of leaving it
up to CYFD to determine what
goes on the card. I have some
concerns in terms of if there
isn't an expiration date on it,
then, then I would assume the
expiration date would, would
follow, um, you know, when the
license of that foster parent
expires and then they have to
renew it. Um, I just have a
concern in terms of if we just
free flow I
cards out there, um, you know,
what might happen to them, um,
and then obviously we need her
photo. I'm assuming that CYFD
would provide a photo, um, I
think those are my two, my two
concerns. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Herndon.
I think
he, I was just gonna defer to my
expert on this questions.
Uh, and also the secretary of
CYFD is in the back, so she can
explain uh for voluntary foster
families, also I just want to
clarify because we keep talking
about kinship guardianship,
relative and non-relative foster
parents are both reimbursed.
We're not paid, so the
expiration date would be the
likely the license, the first
year of your license is for 24
months and then it expands
beyond there. It also depends on
the type of license you have, so
that would be a CYFD directive
based on whose licensing and
them and where another
reason why some of the cards are
so hard to access is because
placement workers turn over so
quickly, so putting this in
statute, um, a photo would be
great, but that's up to CYFD if
they have the capability. Madam
Chair Representative, I think
they have to.
And Madam Chair and um
representative, I think they
should.
I mean, I hope they, they have
to, but I don't know if it's
happening.
It's not happening. I
representative.
And um I'm just gonna jump in
here. I think you should amend
your bill that says that. I
mean, I can just see some
non-custodial parent or
something somehow being, you
know, doing a visit with the
child or whatever and and
picking up the card and
I don't know, I just, I just
don't want people who shouldn't
have access to a child or their
records, um, somehow get those,
I think a photo would be a good
idea, so just a suggestion, uh,
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Si, and Madam
Chair and presenters, I just
wanna make sure to clarify based
upon one of the public comments
that was made. This is a ID for
the parents and not for the
children. Is that correct?
Madam Chair representative, yes,
for the foster parents. And so
also the purpose of this
identification card will allow
them to uh would allow foster
parents to obtain.
Um, access to resources, for
example, in the FIR it talks
about to museums and state
parks. Is that a, is that a
policy that's in place now, if
you can identify yourself as a
foster parent. You have free
access to these resources. I'll
defer to my expert. Uh, New
Mexico proudly passed the bill
in 2019 and then in 2023
allowing foster parents, foster
families, bio families, families
working kinship guardianship and
youth aging out of care, free
access to state.
Parks, camping, fishing license
and um all cultural museums
owned by the state. So New
Mexico is the first state to
pass that, um, and Oregon has
come closely behind us. So yes,
this would help us get access to
all of those things. We're very
proud of that. And thank you
Madam Chair and Madam Presenter,
how do they get access to it now
without the card.
Uh, it's a bureaucratic
experience. Just to remind you
to go through the chair.
Thank you. And Madam Chair, and,
and Madam presenter with respect
to the schools right now, you
also mentioned some access and
needing these cards for access
to schools, but why would that
be necessary if they are foster
parent, Madam chair, uh, madam
presenters.
Madam Chair, Vice Chair Herndon,
um, I was a former foster
parent. I had
In my 2 years of being licensed,
I had 39 placements, many of
whom were emergency placements
and so that means a child can be
placed in your home at about 11
o'clock at night or 2 in the
morning. Um, you will usually
get a placement agreement. You
have to get a placement
agreement. You're supposed to
get a placement agreement, um,
oftentimes it's not filled.
Again, it has the child's name,
etc. It's a piece of paper and
so when I was a foster parent, I
would try to make it a point to
go and walk the child to school
and the next morning and say hi.
You as the principal should be
concerned or just aware why mom
is not dropping the child off or
if you have questions, and so
I'd bring the placement
agreement which more times and
less was not fully filled out
and a foster parent
identification card issued by
the state of New Mexico could
help add credibility to that
experience.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, madam, uh, presenter and um
I think that with respect to
this, I want to make sure I
understand that you've had this
conversation with CYFD and the
secretary and that they are
supportive of this process that
you're bringing forth.
Madam Chair, CYFD is sitting in
the audience and you're welcome
to ask them questions.
She's coming up.
Um, good morning, Madam Chair.
Representative Herndon, so I
can't remember who asked the
question by the time I got up
here, um, Teresa Casados from
CYFD, um, yes, the department is
supportive of this. Anything
that we can do to ensure that
foster parents, it's easier for
them to identify. We have, um,
just recent, you know,
currently, they can go to a
museum or a park, and I've
worked with the cabinet
secretaries of both of those to
make sure that if they come in
and identify themselves that
there is hopefully not any
bureaucratic red tape for them
to get in and they've been
really good about doing that.
and we've tested it in a couple
of situations and so.
I don't think that there are
barriers right now to them
getting into some of those
events or um parks or other
museums, but if this makes it
easier, we would, I would just
like to clarify that we did ask
for an appropriation so that we
could do the plastic cards and
purchase those. Um, I know that
as a department we revert
funding but not through
protective services we're
actually in a deficit there, so
I just wanted to clarify that.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
And thank you too, and Madam
Secretary, before you leave,
just, just for clarification,
you are asking for an
appropriation to do exactly
what's described in this bill.
So whether the bill passes or
not, that's something that
you're looking forward to doing.
Is that correct, Madam
Secretary?
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Herndon, yes, currently they do
a little paper card. I don't
think it's issued in all
counties, as they said, some do,
some don't. It doesn't have a
photo, which I think, um, to
Representative Chavez's point
would be important, um, and the
expiration date right now, it's
just a little piece of paper
that they get that says that
they're a foster parent. We'd
like to do something, you know,
similar to the badges that are
issued that are the plastic that
have a photo on them, um, that
would have their expiration date
that they could then use.
Um, for access. Thank you and
then one more question, Madam
Chair, Madam presenters, uh,
with respect to uh
Uh, with respect to the, the
card itself. I want to make sure
from the, the bill sponsor that
you left it as vague as possible
so that any additional
requirements could be
implemented through rule. Is
that correct? Madam Chair and
Representative, we left it vague
because we wanted CYFD's input
of what they felt would be
important, and they have a
special number. I think a photo,
um, and I don't know what else
they would want, but we would,
we would be happy to get that
into the bill.
Uh, our preferences to move this
bill on and then work with CYFD
and we can put exactly what they
would like in in that ID format,
and that's very friendly to us.
Uh we were trying to give them
uh the ability to, to put in
there what they think would be
easiest and, and most effective,
uh, Madam Chair, and I don't
know if you have any comment on
what you think would be easiest
or the best information in that
ID card. Thank you. Um, Madam
Chair, what we were looking to
do when
We talked about this, is it
currently the way it says it
just certifies that you're a
foster parent. We'd like you to
have a little bit more
information, you know, the dates
for that your license expires,
um, we don't want is, you know,
when people stop being a foster
parent, we just have all these
cards floating out there, um.
The museums and parks do rely on
revenue from people visiting
those parks, you know, to feed
the state coffers and so we want
to make sure that foster
families that are currently
serving as a foster parent with
kids, have the ability to go to
all of those, but we also want
to make sure that there's not um
opportunity for abuse on that,
so it would have a expiration
date when their license expires,
which then would require us to
issue a new card, you know,
every time we do a license and
that would just be part of that
process when somebody's license
renews.
automatic um card would be
submitted to them at that time.
Thank you and Madam Chair, Madam
presenter, I think that it is a
great idea to put that into the
bill because you might not
always have someone as wonderful
as your secretary now may not be
following that process, so thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh,
minority whip Martinez.
Madam Chair, I'm overdue pass.
Second
took it from
oh, a motion from Representative
Martinez II from N Chavez.
Um, is there any opposition on
this bill.
OK, see you have a due pass.
9 to 0.
Thank you. Thank you committee.
Thank you very much.
Next, we will be going to House
Bill 343.
CYFD plans of safe care for
certain children.
Um,
Oh, she's here. She moved too
fast for me.
So whenever you're ready, you
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
representatives, um,
This is
One of the most important bills.
In the session that we could be
hearing.
Um, I've been an advocate for
trying to change this. I believe
I'm going on your
6 or 8.
Um, and ultimately I'm tired of
babies dying.
This is kind of a big hairy
audacious bill.
Um, Madam Chair, and, uh,
But we have to be
We got to put our big girl and
big boy pants on.
And make a change.
For the babies.
And the families of the state of
New Mexico.
House Bill 243.
Or a critical carafix bill.
is a bipartisan led bill to
address urgent and critical
system gaps.
To the current New Mexico Cara
law.
Kara is New Mexico's plan of
safe care law for
substance-exposed infants and
their caregivers.
Since 20
20 since 2003.
Uh, CATA, which is the federal
Child Abuse Prevention and
Treatment Act has required state
governors provide assurance that
the state has policies and
procedures to address the needs
of substance-exposed infants.
Including requirements that make
appropriate referrals.
Child prevention services, CPS,
and other appropriate services
and a requirement to develop a
plan of safe care for affected
infants.
In 2016, Kara, or the
Comprehensive Addiction and
Recovery Act.
Federal legislation was passed
to address different aspects of
the opioid epidemic.
Including expanding requirements
for reporting substance-exposed
newborns and addressing needs of
families with substance exposed
newborns and increasing
requirements of state plans of
safe care.
policies too.
Address the health of substance
use disorder treatment needs of
family and caregivers as well as
the infants.
To develop and implement state
monitoring systems around plans
of safe care to determine
whether and in what manner local
entities are providing.
In accordance with the state
requirements, referrals.
to and delivery of appropriate
services for the infant and the
affected family or caregiver.
New Mexico is one of 10 states
to pass statute, regulated the
care of federal legislation, and
we have learned a lot in the
past 6 years. We are
Excuse me, we are here before
you today to pass necessary
urgent fixes to identify system
gaps that have made or state
made our state's implementation
of this law complicated,
confusing, and problematic in
many ways.
In the fall of 2023, the LFC
published a program evaluated
evaluation on Kara and found
alarming system gaps, including
The vast majority of care
families are not receiving
support services or substance
use treatment.
And care related
case management screening and
identification of substance
exposed newborns should be
improved.
This bill before you, House Bill
343 is a direct stopgap to save
lives and address critical
issues that plague the success
of this bill and the plagued the
success of this bill and prevent
harm to the very children and
the families we meant to
support.
At a high level, this bill
changes existing statutory
language from plan of care to
plan of safe care.
To align with the federal
captive statute and the spirit
of the law, safe care.
This and adds a new section to
clarify procedures.
For when a health care provider
or other mandated reporter
reported care has immediate
concerns about the safety of the
newborn prior.
To or after a newborn's
discharge to their from the
hospital or birthing facility.
Clarifies roles and
responsibilities for healthcare
provider and CYFD statewide
central reporting hotline.
says that substance exposed
alone at birth shall not be
caused for a mandate mandated
report.
shall shall not be cause for a
mandated to report to CAFD like
the Carabel says.
Uh, the, uh, but creates an
expectation for the most lethal,
elucit substance, including
meth, heroin, fentanyl, and
cocaine.
Today our bipartisan critical
fix bill is trying to be exactly
What we are calling it.
A critical fix to ensure the
immediate safety of our most
vulnerable infants in this
state.
We know that we're that.
Excuse me, we know that there
has been a consistent confusion
back and forth between um when
frontline nurses and healthcare
providers at hospitals call CYFD
statewide, central intake
hotline to report immediate
safety concerns for these
babies. We know that we know
from the program evaluation that
the statute continues to cause
confusion and complexity, and we
know children have died because
of it.
We must fix Kara.
Systems gaps, this session.
Lives depend on it.
Our bill works quickly and
clearly to address the concerns,
stop the confusion and ensure
the safety and support.
Or our substance exposed
newborns and their caregivers.
And with that, Madam Chair, I
would introduce Marilyn Beck,
the founder and CEO of Child
First Network, and, um, I don't
know if you have anything to
add?
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. Um, I've been
before you many times in the
past 6 years over this bill. I
think what's important to say
and what this bill um
appropriately addresses is that
since our law was implemented in
2019, our Kerala, um, other
states call this the plan of
safe care law, and originally in
2019, we didn't include the word
safe in our law, so that's
critical that we change that. HB
205 is the LFC endorsed bill,
um, and, and at some point these
bills.
likely marry together because
they do work and they kind of
work together. There's a,
there's quite a few carabels
we're all trying to save the
same thing. This is a process
map of how technically plans of
safe care what our state calls
Kara should work, um, the
confusion, there's also, um,
since our bill was implemented
in 2019, there's been additional
legislation and model
recommendation at the federal
level to even change the words
plan of safe care because if you
have to say the word is the baby
safe when they're leaving the
hospital, we've done it wrong.
So
You'll see more bills, but, but
ultimately this bill tries to
address imminent safety
concerns. This bill guides what
health care providers when they
call Sky, this bill tells Sky,
statewide Central, and take what
to do when that call comes from
a hospital, which has been very
um concerning and questioning.
The other thing that changed in
2019 is um.
And CYD again isn't, I mean,
they're not in support. I don't
know if they're not in support,
they're in the back. Is that in
2019 when we passed our Carra
bill, we actually passed a
program information guide 2020
that said substance exposure
shall not be substantiated,
which means every time a
hospital nurse has been calling
in from the hospitals, there's
confusion because if they say
the subs, the baby has been born
substance exposed to fentanyl,
Sky, and this is confusion, this
is what LFC identified.
is that they have been screening
out the calls because we created
a rule that said substance
exposure shall not be
substantiated. The other thing
is that this is another issue is
that when nurses call the
hospital and say there's
concerns about the baby sky in
policy say is the baby in the
hospital. Yes, screen out
because the baby's currently
safe in the hospital. And so
what this bill is trying to do
is to address some concerns. We
know that when Kara was passed
in 20
19, we didn't actually even
create rules and regulations on
how the hospitals should
facilitate Kara until 2022.
So for 2.5 years, they, we had
no plans, right? And so one of
the um one word in this bill
actually calls requirements that
healthcare providers shall
create requirements for the
hospitals on how to implement
this. That is something that has
been identified in the past 6
years as missing. So this is
again an urgent and critical
fix, simple solutions, and it
identifies the foremost fatal,
um, and lethal substances as
shall not, um, and I just want
to call attention on page. I
don't know what it is, but it's
the mandate.
reporter section 32A-4-3-A. When
our bill was written, it says
pregnant women. Nowhere in
federal capital law does it
mention pregnant women. The
entire CAA plan of safe care
laws about the protection and
safety of the newborn. So when
we're trying to not make sure
we're penalizing substance using
parents or caregivers in Mexico
is actually the only state that
singles out the pregnant women,
and we don't want to do that. We
want to make sure that our focus
is on protecting the newborn,
and that's how we've rewritten
that statute. This should not be
penalizing pregnant.
Women, we should be focusing on
the safety, um, and security of
the newborn. And, and with, with
that, Madam Chair, I would, I
would just add that um this is
not about taking babies away.
This is about supporting the
family as a whole.
And um they um as my expert
said, there are a lot of bills
out there right now.
Um, but this is some, this is a
critical fix that needs to be
addressed as soon as possible,
New Mexico should not lose one
more baby because of this. Thank
you, Madam Chair. We stand for
questions.
Thank you. We will go to Zoom if
you are in opposition, please
raise your hand. I will come
back to you in the room in
opposition.
If you would like to speak,
please come to the center.
Good morning, chair, members of
the committee. My name is Mike
Izzini, policy manager with both
Futures, and we respectfully
oppose HB 343. We are seeing a
number of plans of care, plans
of safe care this year, and we
believe supporting legislation
that moves oversight to a
healthcare-based system, which
would reduce unnecessary state
intervention, increase access to
treatment and allow families to
seek support without fear of
child separation. Bous has a
long history of working
alongside individuals with lived
experience in the area of
substance use in pregnancy. We
work to center their voices.
and expertise in shaping policy
and advocacy efforts through
these stories, we are committed
to analyzing legislation related
to care, plans of safe care, 3
health care focus lens, ensuring
that responses to substance use
during pregnancy prioritize
care, support, and
evidence-based practices over
punishment, we seek to, we seek
to shift away from carceral
approaches that criminalize
pregnant people who use
substances, instead advocating
for policies that empower them
to access family um
comprehensive treatment, harm
reduction services, and family
centered care. We recognize the
national Epidemic.
Substance use, and we believe in
resourcing and expanding
community-based programs like
UNM's Mularo program, which
provides integrated prenatal
care, substance use treatment
and behavior health support, we
respectfully oppose HB 343.
Thank you. I don't see any hands
on Zoom in support on Zoom if
you'd like to speak, raise your
hand.
In the room in support.
If you'd like to speak, you can
come.
Oh, we'll go back to Zoom.
No, no, just come up here to, to
where the mic is.
But the sergeant is with the
mic.
Good morning. I'm sorry, I
thought you said we were going
back to Zoom, so I paused, um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Teresa Quezados from
Children, Youth and Families
Department, um, as
Representative Armstrong said
this is the time and it's
critical for us to act on
ensuring that we have a strong
bill that represents Kara. We do
want to support families. We do
not want to be punitive. We
believe that this bill does
that, um, we also have dropped a
bill on the Senate side, um,
similar to this, and I'm hopeful
that we can work together with
the sponsor of this bill.
To look at those and really um
have a comprehensive bill that
can address these issues and can
pass this session so that we can
ensure the safety of babies born
in New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you, and I see one in
support on Zoom, Jeremy.
Hello, Madam Chair Jeremy
Martinez here. Um, I'm in
support of this bill. I
definitely think that this needs
to be more considered throughout
the state. These are our most
vulnerable children of our state
and the families, and I have
been a kinship guardian for over
6 years and I've seen, and also
spot for uh
Child who is in custody recently
and I saw no follow up, no
education on this within the
placement workers. I see that
this is something that no one
even has no education and follow
up on, and it definitely needs
to be considered because we're
failing the most vulnerable
children of our state. So I just
definitely want to make sure you
guys know I support this bill
and this bill definitely needs
to be looked at. Thank you.
Thank you. OK, seeing no more
further comments, questions from
the committee.
Representative Anaya.
OK.
Um, and Chavez.
Jones in each of us. OK.
And Ferrari.
So go ahead, Representative
Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, my
first comment on this is maybe
something I'm not sure if you're
going to judiciary, but maybe
something judiciary might catch.
Um.
I noticed on page, let's see
here.
3, I believe that's the first
place, the department is
referenced.
Uh, page 3, line 19, I believe
that's the first place the
department is referenced, if you
would just clarify that it is
CYFD as I read this bill the
first time around, I actually
thought it was the healthcare
authority, um, because it just
kept referencing the department,
the department, um, and there
are references to HCA, uh,
perhaps I missed it, Madam Chair
Representative, but that might
be just a technical fix on that.
Um,
But, uh, let's see here. So I
have a few questions about the
substance of the bill itself.
Um.
You know, clearly we have care
plans as is, um, under this
bill, who makes the contact with
the family to
To deliver the plan. Madam Chair
Representative Thompson, uh,
Madam Chair, Representative
Anaya, this is my first
committee this year. I'm so
sorry. Um, that is a great
question, and congratulations.
So is the department. It's a
great question. This is a
critical fix bill, so we are
fixing the bill in the statue as
it exists today, which means the
department is clarified in code
as CYFD. Thank you. So ask me
your next question because
that's the second part of that
question. Yeah, so who makes the
actual contact with the family
to deliver the plan.
I, I see that they're in
coordination with a few
different departments, but who
actually is the deliverer of
information. That is a great
question, um, because that's
where the complication has been,
So under this bill, the
healthcare, so nothing is
changing in this bill. There are
other bills that have changed a
little bit of the
responsibility. This bill is the
only bill that passes is
plugging some necessary and
critical gaps. So under this
bill, under current statute.
The healthcare provider creates
the plan of safe care.
Under this bill, under existing
statute, the NCO care
coordinator is technically
responsible. There are other
bills that are working this
session to clarify and
uncomplicate that because it has
been a point of issue for the
past 6 years. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So does that mean that in
this bill.
So, OK, let me clarify. So in
this bill, who will make that
contact with the family.
Madam Chair and Representative
and it remains the same.
OK, um, in this film. Thank you.
Um, and then after the
plan is developed, um, is there
any kind of follow-up or who
does the follow up for this
plan?
Madam, secretary.
Um, Madam chair, representative
Anaya, again, you are asking the
right questions, which is why
this is so complicated, um, it
would be the if this bill passes
and no other bill passes, and
this is the stopgap right now
it's the care coordinators at
the MCOs who are responsible
when the infant walks out the
door and the caregiver, um, as
of December, see why as of
November, CYFD has fully staffed
up their carra navigators for
the first time in 6 years as of
December, those have moved.
moved to DOH LFC is concerned
that conflicts with statute.
There are two bills. I think
we're all meeting maybe you're
welcome to join to kind of
figure out where this system and
program belongs, because that is
an absolute system gap. So this
bill is trying to prevent
imminent harm from walking out
the door of the hospitals. It is
an absolute system gap that we
have identified. The questions
you're asking over who oversees
who manages and who supports is
a complicated question.
Thank you, Madam Chan
representative, and I asked this
because um I actually
I'm glad to start putting these
puzzle pieces together because
this summer I actually um I was
door knocking with one of the um
contracted uh entities that the
MC has contracted with, um, it
was CBC Solutions, um.
And I was door knocking with
them and um of course, I was
asking about, you know,
generally like where does this
lie? Why are you doing this?
Isn't this the responsibility of
the NTOs, um,
CBC solutions itself has an
incredible outcome. They've done
it in uh different states across
the nation. Um, but the reason I
ask this is because a lot of the
information that we were getting
from the families when we were
door knocking and making sure
they had what they needed to
follow their plans. Um, a lot of
the information we were getting,
um, was actually in terms of
care and logistics and not
necessarily um
Because they were being
bad parents, if you will. Um,
and so my concern is that I
would really like for this to
live somewhere that is not CYFD.
It was very clear that when we
were knocking at their door, and
we were saying we were part of
their healthcare plan. They were
very, very open to, to, um,
talking to us, letting us know,
giving us an update. Um, we know
that CYFD is not exactly the
most trusted source when it
comes to actually contacting
families, um, and so I, I think
that is why I'm concerned about
this bill.
And whatever bills come forward,
because I want this to exist
where healthcare providers have,
um,
The closest contact and the most
tools to provide for, uh,
individuals under the CAA plan.
So, Madam Chair, I know it was a
complicated answer, but I, I
would really like clarification
like who does that contacting?
And if this bill doesn't solve
it, then what does? Uh, Madam
Chair, uh, representative, and
I, uh, we know there is a bigger
issue.
All this is doing is fixing the
plan that's in place, filling
those gaps of the plan that's in
place right now.
We have other legislation and
several other people do too.
Coming down to fix that. But if
those don't pass.
We need these gaps fixed.
Um, and Marilyn would, uh, my
expert would like to add.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Madam Chair and Representative
Anaya, um, the secretary is here
and so this has been a not the
governor has a bill, it's SB 42.
Senator Padilla and
Representative Armstrong are
sponsoring it, so there are
multiple functions and that's
why I've literally brought this
with me. So there's management
and then there's 911. And so
this bill is talking about the
9/11. Everyone.
I think, agrees the management,
the support should not be in
CYFD. I don't think a single
person in this office disagrees
with that. The, the carroha to
bill says public health. This is
we took a public health
approach. This bill specifically
says what happens. I actually
printed it and there was a stop
sign on here and I was told that
was too much information. So
what happens 911, we have nurses
calling 911 saying they will
lose their job before they let a
child out because of the way our
process map comes.
getting screened out. So you're
correct, we don't want in it
every single bill baby that's
been substance exposed is
de-identified to DOH. DOH should
pro I mean there's DOH HCA,
ECECD has home visiting, uh,
CYFD now has family services, so
there's management and support.
This bill is saying if you are a
nurse who is willing to risk
your job and not leave the
hospital and call 911 strapping
yourself to general counsel's
office, and I have received
those calls. What do we do in
that case?
So, so this is the CYFD
investigation. It has nothing to
do with the management, and so
we do agree, so clarifying
roles, who is the department,
what are their roles ongoing,
uh, SB 42 actually clarifies the
difference between care
coordinators at MCOs, Kara
Navigators, HB 205 does the same
thing that's the LFC bill. So
those are clarifying and both HB
205 and SB 42 move the oversight
Kara navigators out of CYFD.
to this day right now in this
moment that Karen navigators,
which are support.
entity are not at CYFD. So right
now in this moment they're not
at CYFD. The carrot navigators,
there's 16 of them, they are
physically housed in DOH right
now.
Thank you. Thank you for that
explanation. I know it's
complicated, but I really
appreciate that. Um, so I can
know what is actually changing
in this bill versus what is
staying the same. Um, my next
question is also, um, just about
the substance abuse exposed um
newborn. I was wondering if by
chance there is any kind of
second test, um, for the
substance abuse or uh the
substance exposed newborn, and I
ask this because there are a lot
of um.
drugs that are given in labor,
um, that could actually give a
false positive result.
And so I was wondering if there
were any kind of stop gaps to
make sure that there was at
least a 2nd test or anything
like that. And I, I have a, a, a
list of those um medications
that are prescribed during
childbirth that could give a
false positive. Happy to read
them, but um.
Just wanted to know if there was
any kind of Madam Chair
representative, not in this bill
because we are just trying to.
Fill the gaps.
In the current law in other
bills, we could, we could add
that in there to do a second
test, but not in this bill. We
are just trying to fix what's in
law right now.
Now I appreciate that, Madam
Chair and Representative, but I
say this because we are adding
substance, um, exposed newborn.
And when we do that,
There will be inevitably some
kind of path from.
Being a newborn child going into
the world of the hospital.
Immediately you may be put on a
plan when the mother.
It's not like actively abusing
substances.
Um, Madam Chair representative.
I don't know if it's uh
inconvenient if Kathy would like
to answer how that, how those
tests are done currently. Um,
I'm not a fully, if, if you have
any, anything to add, how the
testing for substance exposure
is done currently.
If you don't mind, Kathy. Thank
you so much, Madam Chair, if
that's OK with you.
Please keep it brief.
Madam Chair Representative, um.
Currently in the hospital, the
initial thing is it's a question
as to the parent, um, they also
can do blood tests if they want
to or need to feel like there's
a reason that they need to, I
definitely understand your
point, and that's something that
we're making sure that um we're
aware of.
To make sure that we don't do
exactly what you're saying.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And, and
we can really look at adding,
possibly adding that into our
other bill that is a even a
bigger fix for the whole Kara.
I don't feel comfortable putting
it in this bill just because um
we really have high hopes, Madam
Chair and representatives that
uh we will get another bill
passed.
Um, but in just this is a just
in case we're fixing.
What's in law right now.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. I, I appreciate,
um, you're talking about the
fact that right now we don't
currently have a 2nd test. I
also, you know, we heard our
last bill, um, or maybe it was a
bill before that talked about
two competing behavioral health
collaboratives. What would
happen if they both passed, um,
but I think in this, in this
instance, I'm really, really
afraid that we start putting
folks into, um, a pipeline that
they don't need to be in if
there's not that, and if that
bill doesn't pass.
and if somehow we forget to
amend that bill to make sure
that that's included. And so I'm
just, I just wanted to let you
know, Madam Chair represented,
I'm really worried about that.
Um, and I love where this is
going and that is the biggest
thing on my mind right now. So
thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
Thank you, Representative N
Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, um, I just
wanna first thank you for
bringing this forward. I think
you said this first passed in
2019. Is that correct?
Yes, madam Chair.
And how many babies have died
since 2019. Do we have that
number? Uh, thank you, chair
Thompson and Representative
Chavez, um, we know that in the
first DOH has sent some of this
information. DOH in the first
two years, at least 22 babies on
plans of safe care died. That
was in the 1st 2 years. We don't
have an actual number, um,
Brittany Costello from KOB has
been tracking every single
autopsy of a child born since
this bill passed.
And her numbers are.
Um, devastating.
So I, I can't say but 2 in the
first year, 2 years.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, that is.
Horrible, and clearly there's a
crisis and we have been past
that point, and this needs to be
fixed. I guess I have a really
hopefully simple question
because there were people that
were in opposition speaking,
talking about criminalizing
pregnant women or new moms. Does
this bill criminalize anybody in
this process at all.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Chavez. No, this
bill does not this bill simply
ensures that we do not, that a
child in eminent safety does not
walk out that door and that we
are getting the families.
In crisis, the services they
need and that healthcare
provider voices are not
mistakenly muted when they call
for help, um, in urgent crisis.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and, and that's
what I had thought. So this is
not criminalizing anybody. It's
making sure that there is a
plan, that there is an action,
and we are truly providing care
to those new moms, babies,
families, um before just letting
him leave without
any counseling, any talk, any,
anything.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Sorry, I
didn't know that was a question.
Yes, and Representative Chavez,
in the LFC in the original DOH
evaluation in 2021 and then the
LFC recommend program evaluation
in 2023. They identified that
41% of families on plans of safe
care didn't even know they had
one. And so the number one
finding of the LFC program
evaluation is that the vast
majority, 85% of families on
plans of safe care aren't
getting support. Um, and so this
bill said when healthcare
providers have imminent
concerns.
What do we do? And those are the
families that need the support
services the most. This bill is
ensuring that we are not walking
out the door without family
support services.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative and expert
witness. Thank you for
explaining that. I mean, I think
it helps clarify what we're
trying to do with this pill,
worst case scenario, we need to
fix this first. So thank you so
much. That's all the questions I
have.
Thank you, Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much for this
presentation. I know we all want
this, you, you know, you made me
tear up when you began your
presentation because I feel as
strongly as you do about this,
having been a NICU nurse, um,
and, and watched babies and
families go through this process
of trying to deal with um
substance use has been um it's
emotional.
I really appreciate the
collaborative effort, you know,
with CYFD secretary um deputy
secretary Phoenix Doyle, and the
governor all working together in
this. I still have questions
about, um, you, you did answer
my 41% question cause I knew
there were so many people who
didn't even realize they had a
plan of care. So help me
understand, there's a nurse who
sees that this baby that's that
was substance um.
Um
That that was exposed to
substances.
was not identified and is
getting ready to leave the
hospital. Then what happens?
Madam chair and Representative
Jones, um,
I have personally had more than
probably 2 dozen nurses in the
past few years call me
personally because my phone
number is accessible and say
please help us. I usually call
the secretary directly and say
there are calls into Sky, the
secretary now makes sure that
everyone knows when they call
into statewide central intake,
they get a number and so part of
what this bill says is that if a
health care provider, it lays
out on one of the pages, what
happens if a healthcare provider
calls the process that CYD shall
follow to ensure
that that healthcare, it's on
page 8 when a healthcare
provider or other individual
who's creating a substance
exposed newborn's plan of safe
care has concerns about
continued safety. It lays out an
entire process of what has to
happen, and then again, um, upon
receiving the report, the
department shall um perform an
assessment. We talk about how
immediate those assessments
should come in, um, in the case
of newborns, we're often talking
72 hours, those kinds of things.
That's why we've laid it out
that if first line providers,
nurses call.
The department has to take those
in and then assess that. OK,
thank you very much, um, so in
terms of um or just to address
what Representative Anaya
mentioned about the
Um, the testing.
It, it, the testing is a small
part of addressing these issues.
is that not correct? Uh, Madam
Chair Representative, yes, it's
a small, uh, it's a small, the
actual test is a small part of
it, but it starts with just
communication with the patient.
Thank you. And so how are the
navigators being used?
And does it apply to this
process at all or this bill at
all, navigators.
No, madam chair representative,
the navigators are not part of
this bill. It's a, it's a big
issue and, OK, we're trying to
stay focused on this bill, and I
really appreciate what you're
doing, um, to address just this,
the gap of being sent home
without a plan. So thank you so
much for bringing this. I'm
really in support. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative E of us.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I
Well, I'm a sponsor on this
bill. I do have some questions.
Um, when I originally signed, I
was, if I'm remembering
correctly told that.
These families would um be
visited by early childhood, and
somehow maybe that's changed. I
don't know, maybe I Madam Chair,
uh, representative, that is in a
different bill and my apologies
if, if, uh, you misunderstood
me, but that's a different bill.
Um, this is just really talking
about what's already in law and
the gaps to help.
Prevent the uh to fill the gaps.
OK.
So in terms of the Kara
navigators, I think you
mentioned Madam Chair
Representative, I think you
mentioned there were.
1116, um, can you tell me, um,
the
Qualifications, experience of
those care navigators, um,
And, and then the second part of
my question is,
Families
These kinds of families need a
ton of support.
So what does that support look
like? So sort of a two-part
question.
Uh, Madam Chair representative,
this bill doesn't change any of
that, um, uh, I can't answer
what the qualifications of the
Kara navigators are, but.
Uh, maybe someone in the room
can if they feel so.
Yeah, I would love to hear that.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
the qualifications of the
navigator, I don't have it right
in front of me is um a college
degree. Um, it is not, um, there
are some opportunities if you
have um experience working with
substance exposed individuals
that that will be taken into
account.
Are there, are they social
workers?
Some representative, Madam Chair
Representative, yes, some are.
Do we know how many Madam Chair
representatives?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
I do not at this moment know
exactly.
All right. So,
Is there a madam chair
representative, a plan in terms
of how many times a week.
These families will be visited
and whether they will be
visited, um, after 5 on weekends
to sort of fit in with uh the
family schedule.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
yes, the dosage will depend upon
the risk that's involved and uh
what the family's needs are and
how um how
Quickly we can get them
obviously supported with
treatment and services and to
support.
Transportation is an issue, so
some of the things would happen
before 5 because of the where
they're linking to, but non
traditional hours would be a
part of this program because um
we're working with families who
are working oftentimes or um
need support after 5 or on the
weekends.
Madam Chair Representative, do
you know how many car babies we
have identified right now at
this very moment.
Madam Chair Representative, I
don't at this very moment. I
My, I usually get it monthly,
all the data, but I can get that
for you, Madam Chair
Representative, what was
January's uh number of care
babies.
Madam Chair Representative, I
have Decembers. I don't have
Januars yet. December's is fine,
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair, Representative, we
had 66 completed plans of care
in December, and we had 26
plants of care with the service,
we had 12 uh planned 12 persons
with a plan of care that were
involved with protective
services.
So Madam Chair Representative,
can you break down the 12 kinds
of care that were involved with
CYFD as opposed to the uh the
others on your list, Madam Chair
Representative, I would, I would
have to get back with you on
that.
That's not. So, Madam Chair
Representative, does, does that
mean that the 12 who had been
who are involved with CYFD where
they um did they have
investigations of either child
abuse or neglect.
Madam Chair, representative,
that is my understanding, Madam
Chair Representative and the
others, can you tell us why they
didn't or um
Why they weren't um
there weren't any investigations
on those ones. Madam Chair
representative, I
Don't know the exact reason I
would, uh, of the 66 plans of
care 46 were marijuana.
So it could be based on the
actual risk of the family once
the assessment was done, um.
We had 13 with methamphetamine
and 5 fentanyl and 5 opioids.
OK. So, Madam Chair
Representative, then should we
assume that there's already a
process for identifying um
Cara babies who are at risk.
That aligned with some of the um
substances that are identified
in this bill.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
I believe so. I, I understand
the need to um continue to add
that across all the the
different bills is
Representative Armstrong
discussed, um, but I believe
once they're called in the sky
that is occurring.
OK
Madam Chair Representative, so
nothing at this moment in time
prevents anybody from calling
in.
Madam Chair representative
correct.
Um
Thank you, Madam Chair, I think,
no, I, I, I didn't wanna um
raise one of the issues that
representative Anaya, uh,
raised, and that is in terms of
the kinds of, you know, false
positives, um, that, that could
result in this. The other thing
that I wanted to raise also is
that um in the analysis on the
last page, it speaks to, and I,
this is always always been a
concern because we focus on, on,
on those families who, who have
Medicaid, and we don't
necessarily focus on those
families that have private
insurance.
Um
So the FIR also makes note of
that on, on the last page. Thank
you, madam. Thank you, uh,
representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um
Representative my concerns are
that.
Um,
How do they get the test
results, um, so quickly, so
every child is tested or
screened for, for drugs.
Thank you, Chair Thompson and
Representative Ferrari, again,
this would be a better question
uh for CYFD, the LFC recommends
universal testing for every
single child, um, testing and
screening to reduce bias. Um,
and so it depends. I also want
to clarify that plans of safe
care at the federal level are
directly and intentionally
simply for those affected by
substance abuse and withdrawal
systems or have been identified
as fetal alcohol.
spectrum disorder, so our state
is not doing testing and
screening consistently, which is
an identified system gap that is
an identified system gap. That
being said, when we, we asked
the question is if you call Sky,
um, for instance, I had a
loveless nurse call me. They had
called Sky 52 times, but because
the infant was safe in the
hospital currently and only had
been um exposed to fentanyl.
They were screened out 52 times.
So this is, this bill is
simply preventing it. The
questions you're asking are the
exact questions that have been
identified as system gaps in the
LFC program evaluations, which
is why you will see 3 other
bills.
Madam Chair, and um.
Representative in Maryland.
The concern is if those other
bills don't come through, then
what will this do?
Um, Madam Chair representative.
All this bill is doing is fixing
the gaps of the law that's
already in place.
If those other bills do not
pass.
We are filling those gaps that
have been identified by
legislative Finance Committee.
Um
Of, of things that need to be
done.
If the other bills pass, then
Kara will be moved around. We
there's a lot of different
moving parts for.
But really all we are addressing
in this is the existing law in
place filling the gaps.
So Madam Chair and
representative, um.
I
Newborn could be detained at the
hospital.
And the family go home. No,
madam chair, no, ma'am. Uh, what
could happen is if a baby is
found substance exposed.
Whether through screening, which
is visiting with the the
patient.
Or through a test.
Then the family will be provided
services be put on a plan and be
provided services.
To help them in whatever avenue
they need help with.
We have a lot of different
services. So whatever that is,
they, the, the baby will go
home. This is not taking babies
away from.
From their family.
Um, and Madam Chair and
Representative would this
interfere with the children's
code regarding time frames for
emergency, uh, established
custody holds.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative Ferri, I think
you're reading the FIR for 303.
Um, so, OK, 30 3 changes.
There's a little bit of
timeline, yeah, yes, you're
absolutely right. OK.
Sorry about that. Thank you.
Thank you for pointing that out.
Madam, could I do a point of
order or?
I wanted to, um.
Not generally, but since you are
a social worker, I'm gonna let
you this time. No, I, I just
wanted to um respond to
something that uh representative
Ferrari um said in the response
that the um
I think it was you, Marilyn,
that maybe, or I don't remember
who said it, but anyway, um, I,
I don't think Madam Chair
Representative that is
necessarily true that this could
not result in children being
taken away from their family,
there is no guarantee if the, if
the family is, uh, if there's a
referral made for neglect or
abuse, um, and the worker has um
concerns about uh that child
safety then definitely the child
can be taken away. And I think
You know, that's one of the
pieces of Kara, um, or the way
that care is right now is that
it was not a punitive approach,
uh, to substance abuse, but
rather a um
He
Health approach.
So I just wanted to add that in.
Thank you, thank you, um, and
I'm going to go back. Are you
finished representing Ferrari,
um, Madam Chair, uh, no, I did
have one more that, um.
Because this is already aligned
with non-punitive and to make it
so that more um people will
access services, um.
I, my concern is that if we
change this.
That it will um deter people
from getting the care that um
they need.
Um, for prenatal care.
Thank you.
And Madam Chair, we, we're not
really, we're not changing,
we're just clarifying, so.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I'm going back to
Representative Anaya for a 2nd
time for a very brief. It's
gonna be as brief as darn
possible, Madam chair. OK, um,
I was looking at page 10.
Um, line 7. So this is the
notification to the Department
of noncompliance with the plan.
And so my concern, Madam Chair
Representative, is that
Taking at least one of the cases
from the door knocking
situation, this person was on a
plan for Kara. She had a
An engine, like her engine.
Basically pooped out on her. She
could not take her child to um
A, uh, she was late or something
like that, and she wasn't able
to get her child to um one of
their doctor's appointments, and
I'm, I'm concerned with the
testing approach in particular,
Madam Chair Representative,
because this could set up a
family on a career plan, and if
they don't, let's say they miss
an appointment, they do have the
ability to be referred to CYFD
as if the child were being
abused or neglected. I know
that's another piece of
Children's code.
Neglected is a problem right now
in the children's code, Madam
Chair, I would like to ask the
um sponsor if some kind of.
Um, definition change to the
substance exposed newborn would
be friendly. I think there might
be a, an opportunity to say, um,
the substance abuse newborn
means a newborn child who, after
a second test by, you know, by
the mother after testing the
mother at least twice, or the
parent at least twice determine
is determined to be affected
by short
with Madam Chairs
representative, would
sponsor be open to a friendly
amendment. Just redefining what
exposed newborn I think we're
not gonna go with a friendly
amendment now, you, you can
either vote.
Against the bill or the sponsor
can roll it, you can work with
the sponsor, but um,
I, I, I went to you for a brief
and trying to
it's true. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So thank you,
Representative Herndon. Thank
you, Madam Chair and Madam
presenters, I just need a
clarification of what happens or
how long does a methamphetamine,
uh, fentanyl, all of those items
stay in a mother's uh system so
that you could get a false
negative that you have not been
using it.
Madam Chair Representative,
we're testing the baby, not the
mother. OK, so, um, Madam Chair,
and uh madam presenter, that's
my also my concern if there is a
concern about the mother early
on, I mean, where does that even
come in? And why are you wait,
why are we waiting?
Madam Chair, that's an excellent
question, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Uh, we're, we are encouraging
assessments be done of the
patient and, and if they admit.
To using uh substance, um,
You know, then we can help them
get them in a plan of care
action right away instead of
waiting. So we'll do it in your
in utero instead of waiting
until the baby's exposed. And
right now, Madam Chair
Representatives, this is very
important for you all to hear.
This plan that we're talking
about right now.
In law already.
Is a may. It says may take.
Take you up on the plan of care.
This is, there is no
requirements in the existing law
that a family has to accept a
plan of care.
We are just fixing the gaps in
the law that is here and now.
And so Madam Chair, madam
presenter, if they don't accept
the plan of care, then they
could lose their child. No,
Madam Chair.
That is not true that that no,
I'm, I'm asking for
clarification, madam, do you
want to expand, please? Thank
you, Madam Chair and
Representative Herndon, again,
this is a question for CYFD. I
want to clarify from my
wonderful thing and I, this is
short every single baby born
substance exposed.
Get a plan of safe care like
what Kathy was saying, the
deputy secretary only if there
is an imminent concern for the
child's safety. Only then is
that going to the mandated
report. Every single baby born
substance exposed falls under
the voluntary services of Cara
plan, every single one, and they
are prenatally exposed to
substances demonstrating
symptoms of withdrawal diagnosis
of fetal alcohol syndrome,
neonatal, etc. Absolutely only
if there's imminent concern, do
they go to the mandated report,
and then
They still have to go through
sky, CFD. CFD has an investment
uh investigation and assessment.
They still can refer them to
voluntary services, and then
absolutely the last, which the
governor said she wanted to
mandate plans of safe care. You
can only mandate plans of safe
care for a legal petition has
been filed.
So, Madam Chair,
um, presenters, I hear what
you're saying. I think that's
good about not mandating it, but
If they don't accept it, I'm
just concerned about losing a
child. And so I, let me just go
back one more time, if I can,
particularly in, in areas which
has been brought up as what if
these substances are in the
system, but they really aren't
using these systems anymore. It
might be carried forward to the
baby, they really have come
forth in our, are no longer
being uh utilizing any type of,
of um
of drug that they shouldn't be
used, but it's in their system.
I, I'm just concerned about, as
I'm looking at this FIR, madam.
Presenter is that the definition
for substance exposed newborn is
openly broad and made
unintentionally include mothers
who are taking these medications
when they are prescribed during
pregnancy and that something
might occur because these plans
are not mandated. It could cause
problems within the family, and
then I'm just gonna ask one
other quick question, and I
don't know if you know the
answer to this. So when we've
been talking touring sinners,
for example, and the fact that
they're doulas and and
individuals.
who are, they're very close to
mothers all the time. These,
they're less likely to happen
and I'm just wondering if that
is occurring in your research
also that you're finding that
those mothers that are a part of
these birthing centers, for
example, you are not seeing
these issues raised nearly as
often. Um, Madam Chair, members
of the incentives, Madam Chair
and Representative, I actually
think you'll really like this
answer. New Mexico was one of
the 1st 6 states to create this
in the statute.
44 other states didn't think we
had enough information. The
information that has come out
today says that our plans are
unnecessarily punitive and
problematic. So when we're
trying to fix Kara, 44 other
states and actually almost 49
think that we need to fix Kara.
Plans of safe care is a
two-generational model. That's
the federal guidelines now tell
us to call it pregnancy and
family Care Act, because we want
to invest upstream. Not only did
we forget the word safe. We
forgot.
you include the words prenatal.
So in HB 205 that I think half
of this group is carrying. Yo, I
see other bills. This is a
critical fixed bill to say if
there is imminent concern that
child we have to screen in the
call from first, um, from the
hospitals. If they call, that's
what this bill says if a
hospital provider says we have
concerns. I'm going to lose my
job that this baby is not safe,
and I've called CYFD 52 times
and have been screened out 52
times. I'm not
letting this baby walk out of
the hospital.
That's what this bill fixes. The
bill is about notification, the
bills about noncompliance, those
are identified concerns, but we
shouldn't plans of safe care
isn't even what the federal
capital law says anymore. It's
pregnancy, we should be um
investing upstream. That's not
what this bill does. This bill
says because we passed a bad law
6 years ago, and we know infants
have died. We have to stop the
bleeding today.
That's what this spot and the
interesting thing about this
pill is it actually works well
with every other bill that's
been introduced. Madam,
I don't have any other
questions.
Thank you. I do have a few
questions. So, and, and I
understand that page 4, line 11
is current language, um.
But
I think it, it would be pretty
common that um in a substance of
a substance.
In a child who's been exposed to
substances.
That they don't have a primary
care physician.
And so, so having that in there,
that the safe care should be
sent to the, the primary care
physi or, yeah, the primary care
physician may be shooting
ourselves in the foot. And like
I said, I know it's not part of
the bill, but that caught my
eye, and then on page 15.
No page 14 1st.
Line 4.
So
Um, I guess my question here,
although it doesn't say this,
um,
Cannabis, one of you mentioned
cannabis, and so what, what
testing, I mean, we, we have
Representative Reed took the
cannabis part out of a DUI bill
because we don't have good
testing. So, um, since you
mentioned cannabis and
I'm just wondering it, it what
kind of testing you could
possibly use that's reliable for
cannabis. Madam Chair, uh,
that's the reason it's not
listed here is we want to take
that out.
It's tested for now, I have no
idea how, um, but Representative
Jones does, but we're taking
that out.
But, but it was mentioned
that's, that's why I said it's
not in there, but it was
mentioned that
That by your expert, something
about cannabis, madam. It's a
verbal screening from what I
understand right now. And they,
they are asking now, um, but we,
we would like to take that out.
OK, so then going on to page 15,
um Jay starting on line 13, um.
That this is really scary to me.
Affected by prenatal exposure to
a controlled substance,
including a prescribed or
non-prescribed drug.
Um, so, you know, it
I think as representeder I
started to talk about, you know,
what if it's a
medication-assisted treatment
drug or what if it's uh, you
know, uh,
fentanyl patch for, you know,
back pain. Uh, this is way broad
to me, way too broad, so I'm, I,
I'm not gonna not vote for it,
but um I think this, something
has to be done with this, or
we're gonna
Um, there's gonna be, oh, you
know, my doctor said I could
take this and then there's gonna
be calling the doctor and this
and that and that's not what a a
new mom needs, and then um I am
also worried that
And I, I get this kind of that
any provider can call and and
report, you know, what if
there's a provider who has a, a
dislike of people who are
unhoused, and so a mom comes in
who's unhoused and they think,
well, you know, if you're
unhoused, you're, you're either
have behavioral health
involvement or you're a bad
mother or your or your or your,
and that really frightens me
that people's prejudices, um,
Can be
Uh, there there's no way in here
to control for that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Madam
Chair. Um, that's actually an
identified concern in the
program evaluation, um, when we
asked why people are declining
services, 8, so.
When this bill passed
originally, it was shall not
alone. So you can't be addicted.
You shall not alone be exposed
to fentanyl and unhoused. Um,
the process simply lays out on
page 8 the process for reviewing
the call, um, and so what your
concern is, is the staff at
statewide Central intake CYFD,
um, and I think Miss Phoenix
Doyle is working very hard to
make sure that their staff is
trauma informed as best as they
can. The other thing I wanna say
is that what was
identified in the first
implementation under DOH when
we're talking about failed
implementation, and what we
learned is that providers were
asking voluntary asking mothers
who had substance exposed
newborns in the ICU or NICU,
would they like a plan of safe
care? They were offering housing
assistance and what we learned
is terminology matters. They
were declining because most
families who are unhoused need
emergency rental assistance. So
when we're talking about 6 years
of information that we've
gathered in our inputting to
create a better program that is
a two generational pregnancy and
family care, we are using more
trauma informed words like.
Instead of just checking box, no
services are not available, no
services are not available. Do
you need emergency rental
advice, and that can only happen
when you have a human working
with another human in these
crisis situations.
Thank you. I, I'm not sure that
that answered my question, but
my last statement is, um,
there's an $11 million fiscal
impact and no referral to um to
HAFC, so I'm wondering.
What's your secret, if that's
really the case.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, this
is already, this is fixing
existing law and so LFC has
appropriated 1.8 million to HCA
for the implementation plans,
um, some of that comes from the
creation and moving of DOH, so
LFC really, and I don't wanna
speak for LFC, they've looked at
this. This should already be
happening and if we actually get
our families's first federal PSA
plan approved, it should be
matched from federal monies.
Again, um CYFD says the cost is
at least 11 million and
And this is from the um LFC, so
I have concerns with that. If
this continues to move on, I may
request a referral to
appropriations because looking
at $11 million is, is uh
I've been set to appropriations
for 150,000, so, so just, just,
just a heads up. So with that,
I will entertain emotion.
I'm sure I'd move do pass.
OK.
OK, we have a motion for a due
pass.
And the second of motion by
Representative Martinez and a
second by Representative N
Chavez. So we, will you take the
role, Karen?
Representative Anaya.
No.
Representative Kate.
Representative E. Chavez, no one
to explain my vote.
Representative in Chavez, yes.
Representative Ferrari.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez? Yes.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Representative Ferrari.
No, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Madam Vice Chair.
No, I'd like to explain my vote.
Madam Chair.
No.
By a boat of
325.
3 to 4, um.
The, the
Motion to pass does not.
Representative, um, we could do
a table or you could roll it and
come back. Madam Chair, I'd like
to see them table it because
what is we've discussed a lot is
how this might interact with the
other bills that are in place,
and they are talking about
interacting with the other uh
committees so that we look at
the broadest possible way in
which this could be examined.
That's what I'm, we are asking
you to do. I, I would actually
like to roll it, work with
Representative Anaya to fix uh
A lot of her concerns that were
brought up, but understanding
that this is already law.
And, um, but I, I would love to
roll it, uh, but I do think you
have, I think you've got to fix
your motion because you've
already voted.
We, we, we voted for due pass
and it didn't pass, correct. So,
so we, we, we can roll it. OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, I'd also like to be
involved, um, in that
conversation about um addressing
some of the issues that were
raised here. Most certainly.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. And finally, we have um
House Bill 279.
Actuarial review of certain
legislation by An Chavis and
Representative Armstrong.
So
Recommendation.
Whenever you're ready.
I get my bill.
Um, Madam Chair,
representatives, I believe as a
new legislator, I've quickly
come to appreciate the
complexities and issues that
come to our committee and we all
want to ensure that our
healthcare policies improve
access and affordability while
reducing disparities, um, but
the reality is there are so many
legislative proposals, I think
no matter how well intended,
come and bring a social
financial systematic
implementation.
and implications, um, that are
difficult to fully assess in the
few days of legislative Finance
Committee and even state
agencies have, um, in reviewing
them so what House Bill 279 does
is it establishes an optional
process for actuarial reviews of
proposed health care legislation
that may change health insurance
or health care coverage or
compliance requirements. And so
what it does is the Legislative
council services.
Would retain independent
actuarial experts to analyze
one, I think the potential
health benefits for individuals
or communities that would result
from legislative proposals to
how the policy would impact
insurance premiums and out of
pocket costs, 3, how it would
impact state funded healthcare
programs such as Medicaid and
the Healthcare Purchasing Act,
and then whether it aligns with
national best practices and
evidence-based healthcare
guidelines.
really, um, house Bill 279 is
about strengthening our ability
to make informed data-driven
decisions that advance health
care access and affordability in
New Mexico and um Madam Chair, I
know that you were always
talking about how important data
is, especially when we're we're
looking at legislation, so that
is um the basic.
principles of what House Bill
279 would bring.
for that, I stand for questions.
We will go to the audience if
you are um on Zoom in
opposition, please raise your
hand, and I will come back to
you in the room in opposition.
Anyone?
OK, and seeing no hands on Zoom,
on Zoom if you are in support,
please raise your hand and we'll
come back to you in the room and
support.
If you would like to speak,
please come to the center.
One minute, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce supports this bill,
constructing budgets and
legislation has become much more
evidence-based through the work
of the LFC when more data is
obtained, decision making
becomes more clear and there's
less speculation injected into
our discussion and debate. This
bill is focused on obtaining
more data about the possible
effects of adopting proposed
health care legislation, and
this goes beyond the fiscal
impact of the state budget. It
com pa s s es the impact on
patients, providers, the
affordability of care and the
effect on programs like
Medicaid. So this proposal takes
an important step forward in
getting a more complete picture
of proposed changes to our very
complicated healthcare service
system. We urge you to vote,
yes, thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza, state
director for NFIB New Mexico. We
represent thousands of small
businesses across the state who
struggle daily with rising
healthcare insurance costs. Our,
our members are not policy
analysts or actuaries, they're
small business owners trying to
offer the best possible benefits
while keeping their doors open.
That's why House Bill 279 is so
critical. It provides lawmakers
with independent data-driven
analysis to understand the real
world impacts of certain
healthcare proposals before they
become law. More independent and
valid
data means better decisions and
fewer unintended consequences.
When lawmakers have access to
clear actuarial insights. They
can ensure new policies don't
unintentionally drive a
premiums, increase out of pocket
costs or reduced coverage
options for hardworking New
Mexicans, um, but have a New
Mexican small business, we urge
you to support House Bill 279.
Thank you.
Uh, good morning. Chair members
of the committee. My name is
Alison Riley, Public Policy
director with the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce here to
support House Bill 279. At times
policymakers do not get all the
information on how proposed
bills and health care policies
will affect the overall business
climate. This legislation
provides a structured process to
evaluate these impacts, ensuring
that legislators have the
necessary facts to make
decisions that expand health
care access without driving up
the cost for businesses and
consumers. A stable and
affordable health care system is
essential is essential for
attracting new
businesses and keeping New
Mexico competitive by
implementing a data-driven
approach to health care policy,
these decisions will support
economic growth.
This is a common sense reform
that helps lawmakers balance
access to care with economic
stability, and I urge your
support for Hospital 279. Thank
you.
OK, thank you. I will go to the
committee.
For questions?
Representative Anaya.
Martinez
OK.
Go ahead, Representative Naya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, my
first question is, have you
secured the 100,000 in the
budget, Madam Chair
Representative.
I have not secured 100,000 in
the budget. That was just.
Anticipated. Thank you. I'm I'm
sure, um, and representative,
um, can you just explain really
quickly the process, um, through
which, you know, if I wanted to
bring a piece of legislation
that I requested an actuarial
review on what would that look
like?
especially like timeline wise as
well. Does it happen within
session, outside of session?
So first, I think let's look if
you look at page 1 and 2 and you
could just.
Um
Go page by page, but it would
establish an optional process,
um, for the actuary reviews of
proposed legislation that may
impact it, so it requires LSL
LCS Legislative council services
to retain a contractor for
actuary, as you know, um,
actuaries are hard to come by,
so this is one reason why we
said contractors, but by
September 1st, 2025 LCS must
hire at least one.
contractor um for actuarial
reviews and um most of the time
it would be taken from
information that we're working
on during the interim committee.
And so if you see here by
October 1st of each year, um,
the proposals would be submitted
to LSC LCS, sorry, I keep
getting that confused. Um, and
then if you look at pages 3
through 4, that's where the
actuarial review would include,
you know, estimated affected.
New Mexico residents projected
changes in healthcare service
utilization, um, they look at
cost sharing out of pocket cost,
long term financial impacts,
potential health benefits for
individuals and communities, and
then they'd look at the social
and economic impacts, including
effects on healthcare providers.
Um, we would look at the impact
on state spending under the
healthcare purchasing Act and
public Assistance Act, and then
the analysis of whether similar
um legislation are covered.
is already available without new
proposed legislation, um, and
then the review of support from
national health policy
authorities, which would include
um FDA CMS, which is the Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid US uh
preventative Services Task
Force, and then nationally
recognized clinical guidelines,
and so then if you go to page 5,
you see that then the use of the
health data reviews, um,
whenever possible, the actuarial
reviews must
Then rely on health data
collected under the Health
Information System Act, which is
the all-payer claims database,
um, and then by January 1st,
LCS must publish a report
summarizing all actuarial
reviews conducted, so a lot of
this.
Now, as it's written, would be
key information for legislation
that we plan on bringing in the
interim, so everything that
we're working on, and then we
could propose that and then
hopefully then using that
actuarial data if there are new
legislation that comes after
January 1st, we could rely on
the the data that the actuaries
have brought forward.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I, um,
I asked this for a couple of
reasons. Uh, my first question,
um, on the finance piece is also
because I also have some
legislation moving from my
understanding, even just um one
study would cost at least
$200,000 so I'm just concerned
with the price tag on this. I, I
would imagine it would be a lot
more than that, especially if
these actuaries are one hard to
come by and 2, would be doing a
number of actuarial studies, um,
the, the reason I asked for the
timeline on
how this would actually roll out
is because if I'm not mistaken,
Madam Chair Representative, we
can, we can already direct
things like this in legislation
right now throughout the interim
process, um, through things such
as memorials or if we wanted to
include it in legislation, we
already can, if I'm not
mistaken. Is that true, Madam
Chair Representative? I don't
believe we would have the
actuary data based on what
legislation we're bringing
forward.
So
I guess it depends on the
legislation and, and what it is
that we are proposing. Thank
you, Madam Chair and
Representative. I think, uh, the
place I'm trying to get at here
is, uh, I think I paid family
medical leave just at the top of
mind because we're talking about
it so often, but Madam Chair
Representative, if I'm not
mistaken, they actually came
with an actuarial report on it,
um, both from the national and I
believe the state level as well.
And so I, I just want to point
out, Madam Chair Representative,
I don't believe there's anything
that
doing this right now. Um,
But Madam Chair Representative,
I was also asking about the
timeline because, um, do you, do
we have any kind of um
estimation on how long an
actuarial report takes, Madam
Chair Representative.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
usually, and that's why here the
timeline, but I believe goes, we
would say September and all the
information, um, we would
request by October 1st.
And a report would be ready
January 1st, so that's, that's a
few months of process, 2 months
of processing for the actuary,
um, but I think going back to
your other question, um, scopes
and proposals differ and would
require more or less resources,
which is why we put that
specific number, um, but nothing
would prevent an outside group
from doing this, this just
creates a truly independent
process that we can rely on for
data that we don't currently
have.
now when we are trying to bring
say paid family medical leave or
Medicaid forward or some of the
legislation that we brought in
by some of our other committee
members.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um.
As a side note, I mean, I do
believe you may be advocating
for a full-time professional
legislature as well, um, thank
you, um, Madam Chair and
representative for my
understanding, I believe we can
already do this. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
representative Chavez. This is
just for health care legislation
or is it across the board? This
is currently for healthcare, so
using actuaries for, for any
kind of healthcare.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative, I think we
would, we would learn a lot.
I think it would
Add the transparency.
And I think this is a great idea
that maybe someday we could
expand to.
Every piece of legislation we
introduce.
Um, and if it's appropriate at
this time, I'd like to make a
motion to do that you can't.
Because you were the last person
to speak, and, and I do, I do
have um a couple of questions.
So, um, and, and then I can come
back to you for the motion. See,
I saved you. So I'm as chair of
this committee and having been
on this committee for um
10 years. The one thing we
always say is we don't have
data. We can't get data, but in
order to do an actuarial study,
you've got to have data to
study, so I, I mean, I'm not
against this, but I don't, I
think are all payers claims data
is woefully insufficient, and so
we may be putting the cart
before the horse here to ask for
actuarials before we actually
even have can get, uh, and I
will just remind the committee
and those of you who are new,
last year we
a big bill um to find what we
thought were, you know,
struggling rural hospitals, and
in order to get the data for
that, um, for that bill.
The legislative Finance
Committee had to IPRA, the
healthcare authority to get the,
so what I'm saying is the
legislature does not have the
data that would be needed for
this. So uh Representative
Chavez and um E Chavis and I
have a bill for a million
dollars to start collecting the,
the types of data that would be
used with this, so I just think
this is the cart before the
horse. Um, Madam Chair,
representatives, um, I
appreciate that feedback, but I
believe.
that if we do hire these
actuaries and they do use this
data and there were from many,
not not just the payer system,
um, but from many other
organizations and we use that in
those two months with that
report being available January,
I think it may show us how much
data we can actually rely on and
going forward, um, maybe instead
of this just being a contracting
position as um Representative
Martinez stated, maybe.
We can have those in addition to
to our analysts going forward or
LSC, so thank you for that
feedback.
Representative, I, I believe,
um, and I can't find it now. Oh,
the, the office of the
superintendent of Insurance.
Dates that the 3 month time
allotted for completion of all
actuarial analysis may be a
challenge, um, because not only
are they gonna have to look at
the data, they're gonna have to
collect the data. I mean, and,
and as I said, I'm a firm
believer in data, but we've been
working for at least a decade
trying to get
the appropriate data, and we
have not been able to do so. So
with that, I will go back to
Representative Martinez.
You, you could do it now because
I talked.
OK.
I'd like to make a motion do
pass motion.
Hey, so we have a motion from
Representative Jones for a due
pass
and a 2nd from representative uh
Martinez.
Will you call the role?
Representative Anaya.
No.
Representative Kate? No.
Representative E. Chavez? No.
Representative and Chavez.
Yes.
Represented Ferrari.
No
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez? Yes.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Representative Vice, I mean,
Madam Vice Chair.
No, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Madam Chair.
Yeah. No, and I did explain my
vote, so by a vote of 3 in the.
T3 in the affirmative and 6 in
the negative, you.
Bill does not pass. Thank you,
and Representative um Herndon to
explain her vote. Madam Chair
and Madam presenter, one of the
things that the appropriations
Committee does is they have
something called aegisstat, and
what they do is they look
consistently at the data and the
information with respect to
bills that are passed. Your bill
is uh looking at every single
thing that we should be, but it
is something that is being
carried out, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Anybody else wanted
to, I, OK, so with that we are
complete for the day.
And we would, we will be back at
