Representative.
Thank you right here yet.
Madam vice chair here.
And another source.
They're still not here.
The madam chair.
Okay I'm here and again I
apologize for the late start I
want to open up and now my
computer is that doing update.
Please be patient so we
Representative Eli are you
presenting for our or are you
are you are with Representative
Senator Gonzales or.
I am presenting madam chair so
so I'm going to quickly turn it
over to secretary Groginsky
could be in the attendee list of
private
Okay I thank you Secretary
Groginsky.
Charlie markets thank you.
Presenting.
Okay I'm sorry that's the wrong
bill yes that's.
Your call will madam chair yes
we did and I'm glad you're here
Representative thank you very
much I might have a little
choppy service
Here in about an hour but
outside of that I should be.
on most of the time okay thank
you madam chair thank you.
Emily did you find madam
secretary.
Yes I did she's now panelists
okay.
All right so I'm.
Whoever wants to go first this
is Senate bill thirty eight.
Madam chair and members of the
committee
all all start and here's I'm
gonna start it's a very
innovative program and I'm gonna
now turn it over to the
secretary described.
How is that madam secretary.
Wonderful good morning madam
chair and thank you so much
Representative Eli from being a
sponsor and then to our Senate
sponsors Senator Gonzales and
then Senator Hemphill the early
childhood the ECECD
authorization bill Senate bill
thirty eight of the main purpose
of it is to ensure that the new
department has full and clear
authority to conduct all of the
departments essential functions
and responsibilities as was
mandated by law in the early
childhood education and care act
of two thousand nineteen so it
has five primary things that it
does first is around background
check authority we work for our
first nine months as a new
department to get our own M. O.
R. I. number with the department
of justice we work for the
department of public safety
currently our staff to the
background checks but are forty
comes through an animal you with
CYFD and so this a change in the
law we worked through it and
realize there is a statutory
changes needed for us to have
that full explicit authority at
similar child care licensing
authority we do all of that as
the new department but currently
in the statute it that is CYFD
so this remove CYFD is having
that jurisdiction and fully
establishes ECECD as a
department with that authority
it makes as a voting member of
the behavioral health
collaborative something that we
think is very important
upbringing that prenatal to five
perspective but also it was a
place that our programs and
services had access to when we
were part of deal H. and CYFD
similarly it makes us a member
of the New Mexico developmental
disabilities council and finally
it transfers the authority of
for the family infant toddler
interagency coordinating council
to advise ECECD that was another
piece that while fits
transferred over to us this very
important federally mandated
advisory board is still sitting
under D. O. H. as advising D. O.
H..
So those are the five components
of the bill and I will stand for
any questions I do have some
supporters and other experts in
the audience if we if they can
raise their hands and they
promoted I would appreciate that
okay thank you so if you will
raise your hand and be promoted.
I think if you're doing that
madam chair with that we will
stand for questions okay all
right.
We have secretary of the hill I
believe and Alice McCoy okay.
And Bryce petty Jr CEO of the
behavioral health okay and madam
secretary are you promoting them
to give statements are to be
there for questions.
Just give statements of support
okay all right so are in
whatever order you want to get
ready that will will promote
folks then go ahead and.
Chair as secretary BL yeah there
we go and I it's turnover
questions were manager will go
ahead with to make statements
that would be great.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I stand in full
support of SP thirty eight and
the authorization of the early
childhood education and care
department I have worked closely
with secretary Groginsky and in
the child welfare area of for
the state of New Mexico and I've
been so impressed with her
leadership.
And focus on early childhood
matters as she has led to this
particular new department of the
state in New Mexico it is very
important that we continue to
strive to strengthen our child
welfare system and the creation
of this particular department is
important in focusing on the
needs of early childhood the
youngsters the the the children
while children youth and
families department does
Have interaction with those
children when they are in prices
or are victims of abuse and
neglect it's also important that
we develop preventive oversight
for these families and the early
childhood and education care and
education department.
Just straight.
I'm sorry I'm hearing an echo
That that this particular
department focuses on those
early issues early childhood
issues and is important in
strengthening our child welfare
system in New Mexico so with
that madam chair members of the
committee I stand in full
support of this bill It
clarifies responsibilities
obligations of this new
department and just know it's
under great leadership with
secretary Groginsky thank you
ma'am.
Chair.
However thank you yes raise up
to enter.
Morning madam chair press
Pittenger CEO of the behavioral
health collaborative I stand
here today on behalf of all the
executive departments that are
voting members in support of
ECECD becoming a full voting
member and executing all of that
right senator E. that we're lied
to us and to
probably first in the nation in
terms orienting around an early
childhood system of care
provision is unparalleled so
thank you so much time.
Thank you madam chair Alice
McQuaid.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee on Alice luma
quite executive director of the
New Mexico developmental
disabilities council the C.
stands in strong support of
Senate bill thirty eight in the
past two years EDC is made
enormous strides in our advocacy
systems changing capacity
building work to improve the
lives of New Mexicans living
with intellectual and
developmental disabilities
ECECD's programs supporting
children and families were
previously houses UFT DO HPD all
who all have voting members on
the council to ensure
coordination and collaboration
between programs affected
constituencies are Secretary
against in her leadership have
been crucial partners in the
council's work particularly in
our special education
transformation work is critical
ECECD become a voting member of
the council so that the voices
of young children families and
programs that support the Pepsi
to table thank you madam chair
and members of the committee for
the opportunity to support this
important I just.
Thank you Alice madam chair we
have the two co chairs of the
ICC who just like to make a few
remarks Carmen are meant to
who's our parents and look
around at who is at the
providers co chair had good
morning Carmen hi good morning
thank you my name is Carmen I
meant that I am the co chair and
parent representatives for the
inter agency equity council I am
in full support of Senate bill
thirty eight I do believe this
bill will ensure the essential
functionality and
responsibilities that are
mandated by the federal state
early childhood education Care
Act and in my parent perspective
the lighting the lead agency
with the authorities in Senate
bill thirty eight will
streamline and continue the
success of the ICC's ongoing
work thank you.
Thank you madam chair finally
looked around from and which
provider.
I see see.
Good morning madam chair.
Members of the committee I am
little brown and early
intervention provider for
individuals with disabilities
Education Act or IDA part C.
services from the provider
Representative and co chair of
the executive committee for the
inter agency coordinating
council.
We stand and support Senate bill
thirty eight I'm here today to
talk about and share information
about the ICC is functions and
the significant role it plays
within our state family infant
toddler program and early
childhood education and care
department.
The governor must designate a
lead agency and in New Mexico
it's ECECD to receive the
federal grant to administer the
comprehensive statewide program
of early intervention services
for infants and toddlers with
disabilities ages birth to three
and their families an important
point an interagency
coordinating council which
includes parents of young
children with delays and
disabilities this federal
program falls under part C. of
the individuals with disability
act.
Excuse me Congress established
established part C. early
intervention program in nineteen
eighty six in recognition of an
urgent and substantial need to
enhance the development of
infants and toddlers with
disabilities.
Reduce educational costs by
minimizing the need for special
education through early
intervention minimize the
likelihood of
institutionalization and
maximize independent living and
following to enhance the
capacity of families to meet
their child's needs the primary
role of the ICC is to advise and
assist the lead agency and the
implementation of a coordinated
and families early childhood
service system that meets the
federal point you requirements
responsibilities include
identification of sources of the
school and other support for
services.
Promotion of inter agency
agreements advise and assist in
the preparation of applications
and amendments advise and assist
the public education department
regarding transition of infants
and toddlers to preschool and
other programs services and to
prepare and submit that to the
governor and step the status of
the state's early intervention
program the ICC plays a very
important role for the service
delivery of early intervention
services in our state and needs
to align with ECECD which is the
lead agency thank you for your
time today.
Thank you madam chair that those
are all of our speakers and I
will stand for questions
with that we will stand for
questions.
Thank thank you for
Representative Eli so we will
first start with the poll so and
we will put a pull up and and
panelists can't vote but the
folks that please let us know if
you support this our propose
this.
Not give you a few more seconds
Care log in your.
Okay.
Nine out of nine are hundred
percent are in favor so I'm.
You have a popular bill it looks
like and with that we will go to
the audience for
Madam and I will start I'm well
what we'll start with in favor
and then if there is somebody
I'll come back in and do in
opposition so we will start with
she Gonzales.
Madam chair thank you my name is
to Gonzalez I am an attorney
with the New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty we thank the
sponsors for bringing this
legislation information
childcare priority we stand in
support of this bill because it
will allow the early childhood
education and care department to
perform its obligations to New
Mexico families this bill is a
commonsense clarification and we
urge you do pass on SB thirty
eight thank you.
Okay I'm not seeing any more
hands raise just just in case
there's someone in the audience
who is in opposition please
raise your hand.
Okay I'm not seeing any anyone
in the public so I will go to
Representative Matthews followed
by Representative Armstrong so
go ahead Representative
Matthews.
Thank you.
Yes my voice and I thanks
thank you madam chair and thank
you madam secretary up for the
presentation along with all the
other participants.
Last summer in the interim
committee meetings and CYFD was
presenting and at the time the
secretary was then
Secretary Blalock and one of the
questions I asked him was that
it was my understanding that.
Part of the reason for the
creation of the goal of ECECD
was to move the prevention
programs for children and I
don't remember was you of the
three or Senator the I.
To the new agency and act and
remove and take that
responsibility out of CYFD.
And the reason I'm asking that
question is because you said oh
no that's not right that wasn't
going to happen it sounds to me
as if what you're describing is
exactly that and that it was to
go to for these prevention
programs to be moved to E. C.
ECT for certain age group and I
just wanted to confirm that that
is acrid and that's what's
happening and whether or not
this now represents a complete
transfer of those
responsibilities to E. C. R. E.
C. K..
Madam chair and Representative
Matthews as I think secretary B.
Hall shared it is a deep
partnership between ECECD and
CYFD in terms of prevention and
support of early childhood you
know reducing child abuse and
neglect am This bill the two
things that it does a firm for
ECECD are you still reside with
CYFD is around child care
licensing and child and that
responsibility under the federal
law that the lead agency conduct
all the background checks for
people who work in childcare.
And childcare programs so this
this affirms that we are that
agency that we now have the
statutory authority to carry
that out in terms of the family
infant toddler program that was
at D. O. H. and that that piece
came over so we continue to work
very collaboratively and closely
with CYFD on improving the
connection between the child
welfare system and the early
childhood education and care
system but I would so I would
say that we all are involved in
the prevention work and that
CYFD retains that role as well
as ECECD.
That answers your question.
Thank you thank you madam
secretary
Sorry
It.
Where for example would at
responsibility life for early
childhood in the back up not
early childhood but for home
visitation to
For early check in connection
with the early childhood
programs.
Madam chair representative
Matthews that did transferred to
ECECD with the creation of the
bill in two thousand nineteen
and those those programs are
with us now.
So those are.
And madam chair at.
You madam secretary
it.
I'm just trying to understand
aligns responsibility I.
In case of neglect allegations
of neglect or abuse that CYFD
would be called in but that in
terms of the supportive services
generally without those
allegations that have we would
be looking to ECECD.
Madam chair representative
Matthews yes that is correct
that we're we're promotion and
prevention and intervention as
well as in some of our programs
but you're exactly correct.
And and madam chair then
secretary is your age group of
focus zero to five where zero
three.
Madam chair representative
Matthews is prenatal to I
primarily but our childcare and
our family nutrition programs do
serve children I'm older than I
through child care assistance to
the child and adult care food
program and summer food service
program.
Madam secretary and madam chair
at I'm glad to see that this is
move forward and I'm glad that
Secretary Blalock was incorrect.
We.
It is S. R. S. M. R. and that
this transition has been
submitted and
I wish you you both agencies at
great great success in caring
for the
in dealing with the kids in
these programs thank you.
Thank you Representative and I
saw that secretary
The hill had her hand raised did
you want to make a comment on
this.
Madam chair and and members of
the committee and and
Representative Matthews I just
wanted to affirm what secretary
Groginsky answered with respect
to your questions and there's
not a real clear deep
demarcation if you will between
our respective roles and
responsibilities with respect
early childhood prevention but
that said it's important that we
That we work together and we
have with respect to meeting the
needs of of these young children
and so with with that the
creation of this agency this
department it really enables
CYFD to look more diligently and
carefully at of course the
intervention work that is so
critical once there is abuse and
neglect reported but also to
know that with respect to
prenatal and five year old up to
five age five there's another
agencies that's really reaching
out to families and doing a
great deal of work with respect
to prevention so with that I'm
I'm very very much in support of
this this bill and with working
with secretary Rybinski on on
these matters thank you madam
chair and Representative
Matthews for the question.
Thank you madam secretary will
now go to representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you secretary Inskeep for The
presentation and
Thank you representative Ely for
your short and sweet
introduction there I love it
I just wanted to ask about
background checks
in New Mexico there's several
agencies that require background
checks and are we doing anything
to streamline not to to where
you know someone works in the
child care center and then moves
into a school are we are we
doing anything to streamline
that thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong thank you for that
question I know that there has
been talk I can't speak to that
the whole efforts around it I
think it's a nationwide problem
and this is happening in lots of
places our responsibility is the
lead agency under the child care
and development block grant when
they re authorize that block
grant of two thousand fourteen
there's a very specific section
on background check and what has
to go into it to them how
comprehensive it has to be and
so we think I mean ours is very
rigorous and I know that and as
we.
Look at other background checks
so we have to follow the federal
law and so that's where our
background check authority
responsibility comes from and
then of course I'm staying in
compliance with state state
statute I think it's a very
worthy effort it should be
looked at because it is onerous
for people working in education
and want to maybe move or work
in two different types of
settings at the same time so I
think you're you're very that's
a very good observation and and
probably some work to be done on
that.
Thank you madam chair I I just
want would like to bring it to
everyone's attention that it is
a barrier when you're trying to
be and work in a school or I
know there's different agencies
the requirement different levels
so it would be really be
appreciated if someone could
start grabbing that will by the
boards and I just have to say
madam chair and Committee that
to have a secretary Michael E.
Groginsky and US Supreme Court
justice I'm not sure what your
title to be healthy she has so
many and so very proud to call
her friends
Some strong advocates for New
Mexico and it is much
appreciated thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you secretaries and everyone who
is involved with this and
director Alice Lucroy
I think you've been doing the
work that this legislation.
is asking you to be on these
boards and a voting member and
is is that true secretary HSD.
Madam chair representative
Ferrari yes that's what this
legislation is is doing.
And it seems like you've already
been working with all the
agencies that you touch upon in
any sort of way I just
commend you for all the work
that you've done already and I
think this is really important
my question is again on the
background checks are does this
include people who have child
here in their homes.
Madam chair representative for
our test both licensed and
registered homes and and in our
law everybody who lives in the
home is over the age of eighteen
must have a comprehensive
background check.
Right and madam chair and and
and secretary Groginsky
How how do we incorporate or
include.
Everyone who's providing this is
it up to the parents to you know
say ask if they're certified or
licensed I should say
to make sure that someone isn't
just doing it on their own how
to how do we bring them in.
Madam chair representative
Ferrari thank you for that
question I'm in a variety of
ways we definitely have the
child care we have a chapter
search so people can see that
everybody on that list are part
of the ECECD licensed or
registered how disabilities
across the state we do rely on
Community members in or others
to say Hey we think there's
child care going on here that
maybe isn't that licensed or
registered as a we get people
who will call our one eight
hundred line our complete line
and let us know and then our
staff will go out and
investigate and determine if
that care is actually legal and
we always work with whoever that
is to bring them into the the
registered home or the license
system so we a variety of ways
we learn about that and the
staff of work I'm to address it
and to make sure that children
are in healthy and safe
environments.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and I think this is really
important
Especially anyone who gets you
know federal or state dollars to
support their Center because
we've had many situations where
there have been
In assaults and things like that
so thank you very much that's
all madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Terrazas.
Thank you madam chair most most
of our answer but I just wanted
to know if they could just give
me a timeline report how much
time it does take to get a
background check and how many
are they behind in other
agencies about in particular the
agency that were.
I guess children youth and
families I know this
transferring your strangulation
to the state department but I
just want to know how long it
took to get our.
Second how far behind we are.
Madam chair representative also
thank you for that question and
we are not behind we have an
incredible background check team
that processes those very
quickly it can be as quickly as
forty eight hours one part of
our background check requirement
is that if a person has lived
outside of the state of New
Mexico in the last five years we
also have to do a child abuse
and neglect a search on their
history in all of those any
states that they lived in and so
sometimes that can take a little
longer because we have to work
with other states process these
but if the person has lived in
New Mexico and has been here the
last five years the process is
very streamlined and the
department has been paying for
those background checks to
support the child care providers
in them facilitating that that
process working very closely
with the department of public
safety so there is no delays and
there's no backlog.
Thank you madam chair I the
other questions were answered
that those only thing I wasn't
aware of that thank you so much
of Madam and.
Madam secretary thank you we'll
go to Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair and I'll
be shortened to the point
the secretary I apologize to
bind down the bit harsh but I do
want to pile on on that
background checks I think
there's no question about the
need to ensure the safety of our
the individuals that that are
sort of the beneficiaries of.
Successful background checks
however.
When I hear it's a nationwide
problem I think not that's not
good enough that will not work
where I live.
When I hear to the federal
law that makes it is I think now
that it got to get be very poor
with constituent to talk to me
about the increasing very.
Trying to meet.
The demands of background checks
and other things so to make my
point madam chair and make it
short as a new member of the
behavioral health collaborative
I hope you will tell them all
show that in your hearing you
work you work
it was mentioned that these
background checks are close to
getting out of control over as
use code words for.
Almost impossible and when you
take a single mother with two
children two or three jobs
trying to climb over some
bureaucratic hurdle under the
name of background checks and
told could you send this that
and she thanks to ourselves now
I've already sent that and why
are they not saying I see that
box checked or whatever there is
a real break out of that process
I salute you we're the ones who
were under your control but I
encourage you to talk to the
other agencies that have fallen
down on this issue thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Anderson Representative Montoya.
Madam chair secretaries members
of this incredible group I I
just have a short message of
gratitude.
As the Legislature were to have
the confidence that this team is
so stellar incompetent that our
state has elevated this cabinet
in a in a clearly
into in a way that sets us apart
is just heart warming and and
thank you.
I'm glad that I finally got on
to this call I was having some
trouble earlier but I'm happy to
cast my vote in support thank
you.
Thank you Representative and I
just want to jump in here and
thank all of you this is this is
my heart my babies I've been
I've been whining for years when
people say oh pre K. pre K. has
it don't forget our babies don't
forget our babies because that's
where we're going to have the
most impact and now it set them
up for lots of good things
instead of lots of bad things so
thank you all and I will
publicly say that I probably
should have said this you might
want to look for the Sanchez
might want to look at the math
of the percentages in terms of
that D. D. council that adding
another person may throw off the
in the percentages that are
required by federal law so just
take a look at that and then if
there needs to be a change maybe
a quick on the floor I'm
amendment and with that I will
open it up for on a motion.
Madam chair I do pass for house
Senate bill thirty eight as
amended.
Okay so Representative Ferrary
and and Representative month
Oria so Emily can you take the
role.
Representative Anderson yes.
Armstrong.
Yes.
That is not correct.
Representative Brown yes.
Representative more.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Absolutely yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
And madam chair yes thank you
for your post thank you Emily
and Representative been cut is
excuse she sent me an email
yesterday so thank you for that
all of the all of the fabulous
folks working with our babies
and toddlers
next we will go to Senate bill
forty which is Senator Ortiz the
piano and I'm here for that
I'm at all you're you're just
going to stand in for the Senate
today how that's right okay and
we did like your nice short
introductions so you know but I
I need to promote some people
okay Kerry army ho secretary
Scrase.
Secretary Clark.
Secretary Lopez and Vincent
Vargas.
And I'll wait for them before is
saying you know.
We can have a cabinet meeting
with all the experience we have
today you drive crowd madam
chair.
The bills drive out.
Good bills drug good crowds.
Representative Ely at could you
repeat the second to last name
on that list yeah US secretary
Lopez out and intervention
Vargas.
I carry army has the most the
talking although if I know
secretary Scrase held most of
the talking.
I will be here for that.
I did.
I'm glad we're on film so there
will be no.
Go ahead whenever you're ready
madam chair I've if I've been
here six years I've always
wanted to say this if you like
the last bills you're going to
love this bill this is a repeal
of a sunset provision of a
program that really is working
and but I I I don't want to
start repeating stuff because I
know a bunch of people want to
talk so I will turn it over to
carry army thank you madam
chair.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee and
thank you for the opportunity to
present Senate bill forty this
morning thank you to a
representative Ely for bringing
this important bill forward in
the house as well as our bill
sponsor senator Ortiz Y. Pino
the health care quality
surcharge program is the result
of an innovative bill that was
passed and enacted in two
thousand nineteen which was
really designed to optimize
federal Medicaid funding for New
Mexico's nursing facilities and
other facilities in our state
that serve people with
disabilities.
With the investment of
additional federal dollars
really intended to improve the
quality of care and health
outcomes for New Mexico to for
New Mexicans reside in those
facilities the program requires
facilities to pay a per bed
surcharge to the taxation and
revenue department those dollars
and go to a health care facility
fund that's managed by the Human
Services department and provides
the source of state match
allowing HSD to draw down
additional federal Medicaid
dollars those funds are then
paid back to facilities in the
form of higher reimbursement
rates and pay for performance
quality bonuses the surcharge
revenue just for context is
about thirty billion per year
that's what's being paid into
the fund and the federal match
drawdown is about ninety two
million.
The current statute includes a
sunset provision of January
first twenty twenty three and
Senate bill forty simply seeks
to address that by removing the
sunset date and allowing the
program to continue without a
repeal
is Senate bill to forty does not
pass than the surcharge program
would terminate and that would
result in and that loss of about
eighty six million dollars in
federal Medicaid funds that are
currently being paid out to
facilities per year it's also
important to let you know that
the surcharge program is
designed to improve quality of
care on that program funds are
resulting in better nursing
facility performance on equality
measures we've paid out about
two hundred and twenty one
million since an accident of the
program of which a hundred and
twenty seven million was paid in
the form of performance bonuses
the data show that the program
is working as intended with
noticeable improvement in
measures so that started
resulting in better health
outcomes for The New Mexicans
who live in our facilities.
Recognize the partnership across
the Human Services Department at
our sister agencies of the
taxation and revenue department
the aging and long term Services
Department the department of
health as well as the providers
and the provider association
this is half of the surcharge
program is the result of strong
legislative innovation and
affected inter agency and
stakeholder collaboration.
On behalf of the Human Services
department and US secretaries
Great Falls take liberty there I
request your support for Senate
bill forty this morning I as you
can see there are other
supporters here in support and
so with that I'll turn it back
over to you madam chair.
Representative Ely did you have
other folks you wanted to what.
I wasn't sure madam chair if
they wanted to talk or not let
me ask is are me ho if they want
to talk to our they heard really
just answer questions
I think that looks like because
the critters Graeser have a
comment and then I think
secretary Schardin Clarke would
like to speak in support as well
as secretary who train Lopez and
Association so so madam chair we
could go just like we did with
the last bill and just take them
in order I don't think any of
them will be particularly long
but I think that's a good
program and they should be
talking about it okay thank you
I'll let you call on them to in
whatever order and you go ahead
I'll turn it over secretary
Scrase first thank you Matt.
Madam chair and representative
Ely this is a fantastic well but
I do desire I had to prove to
Representative Ely that I can
talk less than other people at
and so I I will I think it's
important to hear from
secretary Schardin Clarke and I
think it's three nine hundred
Lopez and aging secretary and
aging I just will say that you
know might specialty
at the university was nursing
homes and quality improvement
and this program really when you
all put this into law
xcelerated performance
improvements in nursing I'm
really appreciative of your
innovative approaches this and
that can't imagine a reason to
stop it now so thank you for
your support and I would like to
turn it over to my calling our
secretary Schardin Clarke madam
chair if we could do that that
would be great and I I just want
to say that one of the wonderful
things about this job is I get
to work with people like Kerry
and was secretary Scrase and I
just have fun with them so you
know we got a little bit of fun
so yeah so we could hear from
secretary Clark that would be
great.
Thank you as sponsor thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee I'll be brief maybe
even briefer than secretary
Scrase I want to share that the
taxation and revenue department
fully supports extending health
care quality surcharge the
implementation of this new
revenue stream was very
innovative in fact so innovative
that it's been presented to
national tax conferences what
was unique about this is that.
You all the data on behalf of
the taxpayers so we went ahead
and use the information we
already have to pre populate
their tax returns and make their
filing very easy as a result of
that are compliance is also
super highway know exactly how
much is owed and we can compare
it to what we received an have a
hundred percent certainty of
compliance and I want to also
just mentioned we've already
done be left to to implement
this and I. T. system so
continuing the surcharge is
absolutely no additional
resource needs turned for tax
and Rev thank you.
And now madam chair for you here
Senator Lopez with the
department H..
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee sponsor
so we we to support this bill
strongly you know long term care
facilities have had a really
rough for the expression of the
last few years we've been
working with them on nine PP and
compliance and trying to get
staffing into their building you
know that permanent repeal on
the the sunset it helps them
on with their on going
recruitment their quality
assurance or quality improvement
which improves the quality of
care for the residents living in
these long term care facilities
it reduces the number of
complaints that we received a
long term care ombudsman program
and it improves the outcomes and
lessons the effects of the abuse
neglect erect and exploitation
you start looking at the
patterns of surveys that
happened and facilities you see
that there are less
intense.
For quality care outcomes for
our residents and there's a
quality improvement sense this
additional revenue has come in
so we strongly urge that you
support this bill thank you and
then finally madam chair Mister
Vargas.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
deceptive I guess I'm the
director for the Mexico health
care association in New Mexico
Center for assisted living our
association represents sixty two
of the sixty nine nursing
facilities in the state of New
Mexico and eight of facilities
that care for individuals with
intellectual disabilities this
is that we we appreciate the
sponsor and Representative you
live for for for helping carry
additional and those those
numbers of those seventy
facilities that are in our
membership of the ICS and the
nursing facilities are the ones
that do
they do benefit from this
quality surcharges especially
more importantly the residents
and clients are the ones that
benefit from the surcharge
always stand in strong support
of this piece of legislation
it's been stated quality
improvement has been showing
with the data and for those
reasons so we we support the
bill thank you.
Madam chair that concludes our
presentation will turn it back
over the committee for questions
or comments thank you thank you
all I'm so we will go to the
polls so panelists can't vote
but other folks can
Can show their support or
opposition I'll give you a few
more seconds.
Okay I'm.
Ten out of ten support this so
I'm so we will go to the public
for for comment.
If okay it looks like people
already raising their hands so
we will allow we won't go with
with people in favor estimate
something called I. T.
information tech.
Information tech.
Can you on mute go ahead.
Is that is that me madam chair
this is Patsy Romero it looks
like it was I'm using the S. and
my can you hear me I guess you
are information technology today
at the.
Moated are demoted I don't know
what to do well madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for giving me an opportunity
to speak to you this morning
again I would also like to it's
extend my appreciation to
senator Ortiz Y. Pino and
Representative Ely for bringing
this.
This bill to you today you know
for many years the intermediate
care facilities are I am the
CEO of some some idea Alameda
the lord we provide intermediate
care for adults with
intellectual disabilities and we
were fortunate to be included in
the health care quality
surcharge tax legislation for
many years madam chair and
members of the committee the
intermediate care facilities
have struggled to meet the cost
in the delivery of services and
to maintain compliance with both
our federal and state
regulations basically because of
the lower rates that we are
awarded to provide the services
the health care quality search
chart surcharge tax has.
The excellent.
Support for us the innovation of
this particular bill has
provided increased rates so that
we can ensure that we continue
to provide quality care and to
meet the increased demands and
expenses in the delivery of our
services are we're also pleased
that the health care quality
surcharge tax has also brought
in additional federal funds
through Medicaid or New Mexico
or New Mexico state ministration
to continue to meet the service
needs of the pulp vulnerable
populations in New Mexico and on
a personal note we also
appreciate the manner in which
in which tax and Representative
have managed the health care
quality search chart surcharge
tax requirements it has gone it
has been seen last and it's been
extremely are well received and
I'll tell you what my chief
financial officer appreciates
the work that goes into that so
madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
considering your vote to remove
the sunset clause on eight on
the health care quality
surcharge tax thank you madam
chair members of the committee
thank you Patsy next we have
sure read Dotson.
Morning madam chair and all
those distinguished members of
the panel my name is sherry
Dodson and I am a volunteer
advocate for AARP and AARP New
Mexico supported the twenty
nineteen enactment of the health
care quality surcharge Act we
continue to support quality
improvement efforts and skilled
nursing facilities to protect
residents and contribute to
their quality of life we stand
and support and we urge passage
of SB forty thank you.
Thank you for reading next we
have Charlie markets.
Miss madam chair thank you for
the opportunity to speak and
thank you members of the
committee for your time as a
visited with each of you I
appreciate the Sanchez Senator
Ortiz panel and Representative
Eli well we're bringing this
measure forward
as you heard that the program is
working the successful and I
would just urge your support
thank you very much.
Thank you Charlie and then our
final comment on is committee is
the committee room.
So when please introduce
yourself.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
representative and I work for
Julie on the
I am the New Mexico supports
this bill because it fails the
state with this valuable support
a high quality of care for New
Mexicans in these facilities
these vulnerable communities
deserve quality care so we
respectfully ask for a do pass
thank you.
Thank you in that I will
In case there's anybody who's
watching who was in opposition
and you can raise your hand now
although there was no one in
the.
In the hold on I wanna give
folks a chance okay it looks
like that's it for the public so
we will go back to the committee
and I see Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you and the team that.
Is doing such a great job of.
In twenty nineteen getting this
bill and and then making sure
that it continues to because
it's so successful and madam
chair and secretary Scrase I was
wondering we always talk and
inner and how we need to
leverage funding and it seems
like this is doing a great job
of doing at can you tell us what
are you know surcharge dollars
leveraging how much federal
dollars this is leveraging I
know we had some totals that but
the ratio is.
You are muted Dr Scrase.
I'm sorry some I had to zoom
windows open but I.
The ratio right now in the
pandemic is higher so it's
almost is it runs right about
four to one three point nine
seven federal dollars for every
general fund dollar we put in
and so I it's a very generous
match that will drop down after
the pandemic is over to a
smaller amount that I believe
that we're out.
I'm well on our yeah I think the
Human Services department as
leverage over at two billion
additional federal dollars since
the beginning of this
administration.
That's annually not total
annually and the only about nine
hundred million of that is
related to COVID seven this is
an example of one of the ways of
what we've leverage federal
dollars.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chair and Dr Scrase secretaries
based this I think is really
important that we we leverage as
much as we can for those federal
dollars thank you.
Madam O. okay I thought I saw
someone else's hand raised to
maybe wanted to respond to this
but I'm not if it wasn't you go
ahead you madam chair at I just
wanted to Madam chair
representative for you just
enter up give it some context
specific to this program I just
so you know we've paid out two
hundred twenty one million in
the program the surcharge
revenue so the state share of
that is sixty million so the
federal share was a hundred and
sixty one million.
Thank you for that clarification
and I CS Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
has joined us I wonder I'm and I
will allow you to want to talk
if you would like to Senator.
Okay he gave me a thumbs up I
think he's good so
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this forward I I totally agree
with this site I would like to
think Charley markets for in
lightning me this morning and
making sure I understood the
bill I do understand it and I am
I will be in favor of it voting
in favor of it I appreciate
Secretary Katrina hope from
Lopez and Stephanie Schardin
Clarke for being here now
there's two strong women that I
fully support and I appreciate
and Dr Scrase as usual always
thank you for answering my calls
and giving me updates so I
keeping us on the straight and
narrow I just have to make this
statement just because I am who
I am yes I love to federal to
leverage federal dollars I love
that but at the same time we
have to remember where that
money is coming from to leverage
those federal dollars so I just
need to point that out I I will
be voting in favor of this
because I had a lot of phone
calls and people that support it
but I just need the the.
Well who are listening and to
remember those are tax payer
dollars that were federal that
we are leveraging to get more
taxpayer dollars so thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative I'm I
and I will say I feel like this
morning if this were a real
committee we needed a red carpet
with all the heavy hitters we
have here not necessarily
All down in spotlight but
definitely a red carpet for all
of our our and wonderful folks
here so Representative could
also.
By mark madam chair.
okay do we have a second okay
Representative so Representative
Anderson and Todd office you
have your hands rates just to
make the motion and second or do
you have questions.
This is.
I just what was your ballots
okay so I don't see any other
hands right so we have a motion
from Representative office with
the second from Representative
Anderson and Emily go ahead and
take role.
Anderson.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative for our yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative could also see
you are muted.
Yes.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Yes thank you.
Zero.
So you have a do pass thank you
all for being here and I while
I'm thinking about it I'm going
to give a shout out to
Representative Matthews we
haven't had to say once you're
on mute so here don't mess it up
here on a perfect role.
Putting more pressure on her the
next we will move on to Senate
bill one thirty eight which is
Senator Kernan I don't
Representative Eli are you doing
this one to.
I guess the state battled I'm.
We're.
Okay I'm so.
Representative Kernan to
panelist okay thank you we will
wait for her to to get on here
good morning Senator Kernan
whenever you're ready we are
ready for your bit your bills
are you thank you thank you
madam chair I believe that the
on our state.
M. thank you madam chair members
of the committee and I guess I
need to promote Charley markets
is my expert witness please.
And today we're being bringing a
piece of legislation that
addresses an amendment to
section seven dash nine dash
seventy seven point one and
deals with the New Mexico gross
receipts tax deduction for
Medicare payments received by
nursing homes and hospices for
health care and palliative care
services to Medicare
beneficiaries legislation
enacted in twenty sixteen
amended this section and created
confusion regarding the
continued applicability of the
debt deduction to nursing homes
and hospice providers New Mexico
health care association
discovered language which
created exposure and liability
for taxes for nursing homes and
hospices.
In MH C. eight drafted the
language before you and work
with the taxation and revenue
department also this language
the department of taxation
revenue just to clear this was
the initial intent of the
statute in twenty sixteen TRD
also declared this was the
intent before and after the
legislation was introduced in
the twenty sixteen legislative
session they agreed with the
recommendation to amend the same
section of law so that it
clearly stated the ability for
next nursing homes and hospice
providers to take the G. R. T.
detection.
TRD also agreed that there is no
previous liability of our
nursing homes and hospice
providers in the exemption
should be taken on a going
forward basis the language makes
it clear this is a valid G. R.
T. deduction and can be claimed
by nursing homes and hospice
providers for Medicare payments
and with that I'd like to turn
it over to Charlie markets to
see if he has some comments.
Madam chair madam chair members
of the committee hello first off
thank you for.
In this piece legislation
scheduled.
I really don't have much more to
add I think the the Senator
covered it quite well but I do
want to make the point that
Senator modesty is executive for
director for New Mexico Health
Care New Mexico Center for
assisted living is also on of
the meeting in the event are any
questions thank you.
Senator Kernan are you ready to
go to the audience yes I am
madam chair thank you so we will
we will do a poll and review the
put the pol laughs.
And so anyone in the audience
who is in favor or opposed.
Senator did looks like this
isn't the sexy Bill of today.
Okay we got one person so there
we go okay so you want to are in
favor of this and so we will go
to the audience for public
comment if anybody has any if
you'd like to speak in support
please raise your hand.
Representative Lara Cadena.
Madam chair good morning
committee I'm just listening in
today because I am proud to
support Senator Kernan these
efforts and working to learn up
quickly so that I can eventually
passed this bill on the house
floor so I'm just here in
support appreciate her
leadership as well as the
thoughtfulness
and communication from TRD to
make sure that we can fix and
clarify this language and make
sure it meets as it was intended
to be thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative and
smart move to yes join in and
not and get some some help how
to presented on the floor so it
looks like it and I will is
there anyone here in opposition.
Okay I'm sorry I've got my two
and a half year old
granddaughter in my lap so and
all right so we will go to the
committee for any questions.
Okay I'm not seeing any hands
raised so I will entertain a
motion.
I.
It okay so what I'm most bill
one thirty eight one thirty
eight our motion by
Representative Ferrary in the
second by vice chair bash family
we'd go ahead and.
Call the roll.
Representative Anderson.
Yes.
Armstrong.
Yes you were going yes
Representative could practice.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes.
Representative board.
Representative mark you're on
mute.
Representative.
Hi Representative Matthews your
unmuted but we cannot hear you I
yes.
Yes I heard you the first time
thank you okay I lost my
pictures.
Montoya.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative are you there.
Not seeing.
For the lord votes yes apologize
I was muted thank you
Representative part.
R. Madam chair.
Yes.
Eight in the four zero.
Okay you have a do pass Senator
thank you for joining us.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee thank
you my pleasure.
Okay next we will go to the
final
To house bill two thirty nine
and I have promoted my experts
and this is the this is a simple
bill and I am I I will just give
you a little background some
some point during the session I
heard from a group of medical
residents at UNM and we did them
and they talked about how how
unappreciated they felt and how
under paid they felt at UNM is
paying them less than than our
neighboring states and they are
offering last vacation and we
have we have always depended on
our residents
to to pick up the slack in
health care and we want to treat
them right because that's where
that's where we get our a lot of
our doctors and what what people
do and those of you who don't
sit on their regular and that
interim health and Human
Services Committee I'm.
Where people do their work
where people do their residency
is frequently a state so what.
And senator to the piano has has
the companion bill in the Senate
and what this bill does it gives
Extra money to I'm UNM and the
Human Services department to
provide a one time salary
increase the current graduate
medical residents and fellows
and we just a lot of this is to
is to thank them for all of the
work that they've done
particularly through COVID and
to show them how much we
appreciate them so my experts my
experts are more risk so I'm
gonna turn it over to her for a
few statements and then to the
doctor and then we'll go to the
public comment so go ahead
members that.
Thank you madam chair we really
appreciate you and for being
here I'm actually just going to
yield my time to drive anything
capsular.
Go ahead any.
Good morning madam chair and
members of health and Human
Services Committee my name is Dr
anything J. Kessler and I'm at
current pediatrics resident
physician at the university
Mexico Hospital we are the only
level one trauma hospital in New
Mexico.
I'm here speaking to you on
behalf of more than six hundred
fifty resident physicians at the
university of New Mexico as well
as members of the committee of
interns and residents.
As you probably know residents
are physicians who recently
completed medical school and are
now spending three to seventy
years training in a particular
specialty residencies and
already reeling time during
which we work over sixty to
eighty hours a week for the past
few years of COVID nineteen we
have been pushed to our physical
and psychological limits.
New Mexico is a wonderful place
to live in practice however the
combination of our experiences
over the past two years as well
as our inability to address
recruitment retention and reason
to go she Asians with U and M.
as many residents considering
other places to settle in
practice for their career
throughout the pandemic we have
been on the front lines keep the
hospital flow and care for our
communities our continued
service has been to the
detriment of our well being our
training our families and so
much more.
Well we will continue to be
there for our patients and our
communities we have sacrificed a
lot and it is difficult to cope
with what we are going through.
Are you surveyed our membership
to get inside to their
experiences and write as
residents and fellows you and.
No preliminary results from our
internal surveys show in more
than fifty percent drop in the
proportion of residents saying
they currently want to stay in
New Mexico after training
compared to how many wanted to
before training in the survey
time and time again lack of
support and fair compensation
were major themes our state is
already in a shortage of
physicians which has a direct
impact on access to medical care
for all New Mexicans and this is
only going to get worse we are
hemorrhaging position because
people feel under appreciated
and not given what they need to
the life in this beautiful
state.
We have a golden opportunity to
recruit young physicians who are
already here and many of those
positions will be closely
watching the legislature's
actions over the next few weeks.
House bill two thirty nine is
our state's opportunity to show
our early career physicians that
their value the sacrifices they
have made our values and then if
they stay to practice in New
Mexico the state will be here
for that I want to thank
representative Thompson printed
using house bill two thirty nine
and I respectfully ask for do
passcode for the committee thank
you for your time.
Thank you doctor and I'm having
my granddaughter here has turned
me off my game I should've
turned down turn that chair over
to our vice chair back so I will
do that now and let her continue
They're so go ahead
Representative.
Chair woman bash one.
Thank you.
All right.
I see one hand in attendees.
Representative I think we need
to do the poll next I'm sorry I
I agree a lot by forgetting what
I was supposed to be doing so if
we can do that that the pole and
then you can go to the public
thank you.
Yes in favor or opposed please
mark your choice.
Give it a few more seconds.
Is there a result.
Madam chair we have fifteen in
papers zero.
Thank you.
All those in favor who wish to
speak can raise their hand.
And I see some hands up and
for Stacey Stephanie.
Would you.
Yes hi hello has at health and
Human Services Committee my name
is Dr Stefanie Brianna's I am an
anesthesia resident physician
first I am a proud native New
Mexicans who has devoted.
The last twelve years of my life
to higher education with the
plan to serve my community as
mentioned before we spend on
average sixty to eighty hours a
week sometimes averaging less
than minimum wage care for the
care of of many of our loved
ones our colleagues a lot of
your constituents and over the
last few years we have seen an
extreme decline in morale and
increaseper now of our physician
workforce in order to continue
to bring the highest quality of
care to the state of New Mexico
to the people that I love and
and cherish we need to make
intentional efforts to recruit
and retain our positions at H.
B. or house bill two thirty nine
is the first step in making that
intentional effort we thank you
Representative Thomson for
introducing this bill and
respectfully ask for your vote
on this bill.
Thank you we will now go to Dr
Maxwell with.
I am doctor with I'm one of the
internal medicine residency UNM
and I've been really happy to
make New Mexico my new home and
I you know and I feel like we
really couldn't since you have a
chance to really support
residents and show them that we
were valued in that we wish want
to stay in New Mexico you know
I'm fortunate enough to really
have.
Moved here with my family and
called this my home now and I
hope that that's something
everyone else is able to do and
that their fable to feel
comfortable and supported in
their time as residents
you know not everyone I'm
planning on doing infectious
disease so this is kind of what
I signed up for but you know
everyone else this is been it's
been hard for me it's been hard
for everyone else it's
interrupted a lot of our
training and I hope will be
stronger for the future and
which we can do as best we can.
Thank you doctor with doctor
Alisha berry.
Good morning.
My name is Dr very and I am up
with all of the president at the
university of New Mexico
hospital in here today because I
am passionate about health
equity and as we all know New
Mexico struggling to keep
positions in the state
especially in rural areas and as
on the front lines I'm seeing
first hand that resident row is
at an all time low we're burnt
out struggling to survive and as
a result a lot of my residents
are leaving the state after
residency and some of them are
leading medicine altogether
so we are hoping that by showing
residents the appreciation they
deserve and improving working
conditions it will help us to
keep more of us here in New
Mexico and health bills two
thirty nine is a first step in
making that show of support so I
want to thank representative
Thompson for introducing this
bill and respectfully ask for
your yes vote on house bill two
thirty nine.
Thank you.
Matteo but that truck.
I am talking about true
pediatric resident I just want
to say that thank you so much
for your time and your support
of this bill sh when working six
days a week twelve to fourteen
hours a day our spouses our
loved ones our children ask us
why we're working so much it.
We have the town is there's no
one else to do this job we're
needed here I have never been in
a place where I needed more
that's why I came to New Mexico
on a column of this place and
when I'm trying to recruit
people to come here I need to be
able to tell them that we're not
just muted here and you'll get a
great education here but the
your wanted here I think this
house bill is a great way to say
that we are wanted we are
respected and that we have the
house and Senate behind us and
the state behind us and wanting
us here so that we stay here and
we put down roots make our lives
here New Mexico needs us I'd be
great if you wanted as well
thank you appreciate all support
for this bill.
Thanks committee for.
I can morning I'm my name is Dr
Melanie Bob's I'm actually a
fellow what trauma surgery
following.
So I am in my six year of post
and school training.
I'm I come from out of state The
New Mexico is my new home as
well
I have as I mentioned I am I in
my six year training.
And I actually took a pay cut
coming to New Mexico I'm so I am
at ten years out of college I've
been training for ten years and
I make by hourly minimum wage.
I'm and I just don't think that
that is a great way to treat the
forces really I'm supporting us
through this pandemic and I
don't think people realize how
close we are to losing
our use in medicine because they
can't support their families and
as many of mentioned before our
morale is so low.
I echo my colleagues' sentiments
and I really hope that we can
create a place where residents
and fellows and all trainees
feel valued thank you so much
for your support.
Thank you doctor Bob's for.
Bob.
Good morning everyone my name is
Dr thank you about the first
part I would like to thank you
to senator and giving us the
opportunity and presenting this
bill to the Senate.
So a little background I used
for this bill.
I'm I am in funding medical
graduates are the moved from
Florida I lived there ten yes
and this is my sixty year would
you just yep New Mexico this is
a beautiful place yes we I love
this place New Mexico university
of New Mexico I just want to say
one thing I lived in Florida for
ten years and no one asked me a
question like very you want to
move next every day like lots of
people asking a question we are
you animal which state you want
to go are you a
thank you for your care here are
we're you animals no one asked
me this question and and in
Florida I'm here for more than
six years I have four kids I
would love to stay and beautiful
states it's a great state to
work and if we have a you know
unfortunately we are not
retaining of the residents there
come like from all over the word
from all over the United States
in different states so.
Yes university is a great place
to train to retain people and a
lot of like my court is done
Michael follows they want to
stay here and because this is a
beautiful place we have a
beautiful neighboring states
like California Arizona and
Texas.
But unfortunately I will say we
are unable to retain a lot of
other people people come here to
get the opportunity and then the
movie after a couple of years
off after three four years so
we're like state representative
over on but I never been Senator
should really think what's
exactly going on and All you
know we can retain our positions
here thank you.
Thank you doctor but.
Catherine Vanderburgh Dr Kathryn
Vander burgh.
I thank you for having us on Dr
Vandenberg I'm a fifty year ENT
head and neck surgery resident
at UNM.
I come here from Florida I would
finishing my training in about
four months
I will say that I do echo a lot
of the sentiments expressed by
some of the doctors here today
like healing wanted feeling
respected having all time low
morale
we are the only twenty four hour
seven day a week Ian T. service
available to the entire state
and their surrounding states.
During the COVID pandemic there
has been a lot of there's been
an increase in their way
emergencies and airway tracheal
stenosis and there are no twenty
four hour seven day a week anti
available except for at UNM.
So we have been pretty busy and
there are definitely nights
where we do not sleep.
And so I think.
It's you know bring down our
morale when we are getting paid
less than minimum wage and
I'm working very hard to.
you know help the people of New
Mexico.
So I just want to thank you guys
for listening and thank you for
introducing this bill and I
think everybody for sharing
their thoughts and experience.
Thank you.
Dr Messina right may have wanted
to speak.
Right.
You need to unmute.
Perhaps not perhaps we should
move on to your opposition.
Right.
Is there anyone in opposition
who wishes to speak if so please
raise your hand.
I'm not seeing any hands.
Will move on to the committee.
And
Right Representative Roger
Montoya.
Madam vice chair members of the
committee and sponsors I have
been listening to the testimony.
With the warmest heart it's just
beautiful this legislation is so
on point.
Being the need to attract and
retain qualified frontline
workers in this realm is just
there are no words to express so
I have to get off right now to
testify in another committee I
will I want my book to count as
a test I don't know if someone
can be a proxy but I have to
leave this second.
Thank you I yield my time.
Representative Joanne Ferrari.
Thank you madam chair and madam
chair representative Thompson
this is great I'm so glad that
you brought this forward my
niece as I've mentioned many
times in the past two years
she
New Mexico for her residency and
unfortunately because of
you know the residents allergies
just weren't competitive with
some of the other opportunities
so I hope this will equate the
same kind of opportunities for
people to stay here and I
appreciate what we heard from
all of the residence in their
residency now and hope this
helps to paid for their
Not only to live here but also
to help pay for their education
which is a very expensive so I I
really appreciate that we're
doing just and help that we can
maybe even increase it in the
coming years so thank you
madam chair and thank you madam
chair.
No further hands from the
committee so I would entertain a
motion.
Madam chair I'll mention for you
just.
Thank.
Seconded.
Yes.
Okay.
We can call the roll.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Anderson.
Yes madam chair I vote yes but
I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Armstrong mmhm
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes probably and I would've
voted for twice the amount.
Representative Montoya is not
present Representative todos OS.
Representative.
Yes.
And this representative
Armstrong here.
Madam chair bash yes.
And in three point zero.
All right you have a do pass.
Hello yes we have someone who
wants to explain their vote.
Yes real quick madam chair
I don't want to slow this
legislation down because time is
of the essence however there is
part of me that questions the
methodology that we're employing
on this today thank you madam
chair.
Madam chair I will say this is
this is intended to be a one
time
Infusion dollars for them
essentially and and I I make I
promise that we will have this
I'm discussed during the interim
so we can look at it longer term
and it is my understanding that
the money has been placed in the
house bill two on the Senate
side so I think we're set for
that but this is not the end
this is just the beginning of
the conversation on how we can
best attract and retain
residents chair we all know how
short we are health care
providers in New Mexico I want
to thank the committee for their
their support and and thank all
the residents and members that.
To bring this to our attention
we we try to do things but we
need to know what we need to do
so we appreciate you bringing it
so thank you madam chair.
Representative Ferrary I just
need to you.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to add I did the
calculation this is only two
thousand dollars
her students our our resident
and I think we should have this
a lot more to do to compensate
and to entice people to stay
here thank you.
More business before the
committee.
Madam chair I guess I'll take
back over us since we're since
we're done I'm and and let folks
know that we have I don't
believe we have any more bills
at this point so as they come
over from the Senate we will not
be need to make this weekend
I'm stay tuned for whether we
will meet Monday and and so I
guess we are in recess until
Monday morning if we need it.
Thank you all.
Bye bye bye.
