Because we didn't the um
The analysts didn't get the
amendment until last night, so
we will have it on.
Right, OK.
So, um,
Madam
Minority leader, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
committee. First of all, I want
to say thank you for uh giving
me a second shot at this bill. I
um
We try not to get emotional. Um,
uh, so first I want to thank you
because I know you have many
bills in this committee and, and
we really appreciate you rolling
this bill.
Uh, with me today, Madam Chair,
and, um, committee members, I
have Jenny Gina De Blasi with
the uh the DOH uh designee,
secretary designee and Teresa
Casados, uh, CYFD. Um, what I'd
like to do first, Madam Chair,
is, um,
Introduce and and talk about my
amendment.
And I'll tell you which, uh,
there was a couple of different
ones sent to you.
But the one we're going to be
the committee sub that we're
going to be uh
Talking about today is 23.
122 8.1.
So, the one we have is 23137
8.1.
This one was sent yesterday
morning to the committee.
No.
Can you, can you give us the
number again just
2312.
28.1.
Oh no, wait, maybe I'm wrong.
Don't scare us so early in the
morning, I'm sorry. I, I'm
incorrect. It's 23.
137 8.1. That's what we have,
I'm so sorry. I, there was so
many I apologize for the
confusion that so I will, I will
accept a motion to discuss the
substitute, so moved. Thank you.
So I have a motion from, is
there any um objection to
talking about the substitute.
OK, go ahead.
Uh, thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
I, I, my apologies. Um, so
really what this at a high, a
very high level of this
substitute makes Department of
Health the lead on Kara agency
with more specific.
Expectations about the roles and
responsibilities of care
coordination, including
in-person and active support and
following up with families to
engage them in referral
services.
It focuses on upstream support
for families impacted by
substance use disorders and
allows for plants of safe care
to now be uh prenatally.
Focuses on support and
connection to services for
families, including that all
families issued a plan of safe
care or connected to home
visiting services and substance
use disorder prevention and
treatment providers, uh,
requires CYFB CYFD be notified
in the event of noncompliance
with a plan of safe care and
requires C YFD to conduct a
family assessment in all cases.
CYD shall then refer families to
services recommended by the.
family assessment.
Requires CYFD to proceed with an
investigation pursuant to inact
if the event in the family.
In the event, the family refuses
referred services resulting in
potential immediate risk to a
child.
Ensuring better data collection
and reporting requirements, adds
the word safe to plans of safe
care statute to align with
federal law.
And with that, Madam Chair, we
will stand for questions.
OK, um.
Let's go to the audience. If you
are in opposition on Zoom, raise
your hand.
If you are in opposition in the
room, raise your hand. See in
support on Zoom if you're in
support, raise your hand and
I'll come back to you in the
room and support.
If you want to speak, you can
come forward, please.
Good morning, chair, members of
the committee, Mike Gini with
both Futures New Mexico, and we
really appreciate the sponsor
for um amending the bill and
making some changes, um, we
appreciate the healthcare
approach and um again just uh
want to thank the sponsor.
Uh, Marilyn Beck, uh, New Mexico
Child First Network. Once again,
we thank the sponsors, um, at
the end of the day, we have to
do what's going to improve
outcomes for children and
families, and we have to fix
Kara before we leave here March
22nd. Thank you.
OK, we'll go to Barbara and then
Jeremy. So go ahead, Barbara.
Hi, yes, um, I am on the
governor's policy advisory
council for CYFD.
Oh, yes. Hi, Barbara Yale and I
am
Can you hear me? Yes. Sorry. OK,
Barbara, I'm a social worker,
and I'm the director of a
nonprofit in Chavez County for
foster and adoptive families,
and I am also on the governor's,
um, policy advisory council for
CYFD and um after having
fostered many children of my own
and adopted foster children
through New Mexico foster care,
um, I am in huge support of
fixing Kira and of this.
Bill.
And so are many of the other
members of the pack, and the
families that I represent from
Chavis County.
Thank you.
Thank you, Jeremy.
Good morning. Um, my name is
Sherry Martinez, and I am here
to represent as a family member
and a kinship guardian, um, of
children who were born substance
exposed. And I just want to say
that um I'm in support of this
bill, just because I've seen
these plans fell over and over
and failed the families and the
people who step up for these
kids, so we desperately need
reform, and I desperately think
it needs to be removed
completely from.
The YFD and be investigated and
also look into to all the
families that they failed
previously with this bill
passes. So yes, I am in support
of it, most definitely just
because it needs to be
completely reformed and they
need to follow their own
policies and procedures, and
they need to follow.
Making sure that they follow
through with reuniting these
kids with their families, if
they can't do it with the bio
pairing that step up and do not
fail them and instead of
adopting out to their CYFD
workers, so thank you. Thank
you. OK, committee questions.
OK.
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much, Representative.
I'm.
Over the moon. Thank you for
sitting down with me. Thank you
for taking all of the
Worries and concerns that we had
and putting them into this bill,
um, there are a couple of pieces
that are
I just want to highlight, Madam
Chair, um,
The ability for
Um, folks to consider, uh,
prenatal, right? Not just when
you're at the hospital, but what
happened before that. I know we
talked about the gaps when it
came to who is the care
coordinator, who takes care of
that. Thank you for fixing that
gap and saying MCOs are in
charge of this. Thank you for
moving it from CYFD. Thank you
for your consideration of which
substances the child is exposed
to and why. Um, Madam Chair,
thank you so much. Thank you,
Representative. I love this
film.
Thank you, Representative Cates.
I'm sorry, this is also a thank
you, so.
Um, thank you for um
Acknowledging
That uh you have like on page 10
lines 8 through 11, the
strengths and needs of a child's
family members, including
parents, relatives, guardians,
or caretakers who respect to
providing the health and the
safe. Thank you for
acknowledging that it is not
just the child, but the family
unit, um.
That's, that's a huge uh thing
for me on page 15. Thank you for
online 8 substance exposed
newborns, parents, relatives,
guardians, or caretakers who are
present at discharge, I'll
receive a copy of the plan and
safe care.
I mean, thank you very much for
taking your time and making sure
that all the voices are here.
Thank you, Representative.
Thank you, um, representative N
Chavit. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, for
coming back. I just think this
is time that we address this
huge crisis, so we don't
continue to have.
babies that are dying or found
in backyards a year later. This
does protect and prioritize the
future.
Of our children that are
unfortunately born, and I also
think that it's gonna help in
breaking the cycle of addiction
on this treatment plan. So thank
you so much.
Leader Armstrong for for
bringing this bill forward.
represented Martinez.
I think Madam Chair, um.
When it's appropriate, I'd like
to make a motion.
Representative E. Chavez has
questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so I
didn't.
I haven't had a chance to like
really look at it. I know you
gave it to me yesterday and I
had a committee and
Then drove back home to
Albuquerque. So um, so all of
the underlined is the new
language that you've put in
here. I don't remember in the
last pill if there were
If there was a car navigator and
a care coordinator. Can you tell
me if there was?
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, it was not specified in
the in the last, when we're
talking about the last bill,
what passed or the draft that we
had prior.
The original bill.
Uh, Madam Chair representative,
the original bill was trying to
fix what was in law now and I, I
honestly don't remember what was
in there, um, so we just kind of
got away from that because.
Everyone sort of misunderstood
what we were trying to do, I
felt, and so we just, this is a
committee sub.
And so that that's maybe, maybe
it was or maybe it wasn't. OK.
All right, so I, I, I just have
some questions just thinking
about this from a
Um
In terms of how this is all
going to work, right? And I may
be getting into the weeds, but
if you, you've got a care
navigator, you've got a care
coordinator. So who's who's the
lead person, who's the lead in,
in the, in this case.
Madam Chair Representative uh
Chavez that would be the
Department of Healthcare
navigators, uh, Department of
Health is taking a public health
approach to this, and the care
navigators will be working from
the Department of Health very
closely with the care
coordinators within the MCOs for
those um substance exposed
babies that have been, um, that
are on Medicaid.
All right, so, so then my
question is, so.
Madam Chair Representative in,
in my conversations with um
Current workers at CYFD. One of
the issues has been that the
care coordinators, but there's
been
Too many layers of folks who
deal with with these cases and
nobody's really responsible, um,
and, and it adds a whole lot of
administration, a whole lot of
meetings in terms of the kinds
of services that people that
families really need to to get
to.
Um, so it ends up weighing down
really the worker, uh, the
worker's ability to be able to
um to get their work done with
with families that need that
need these services. So when I
ask who's who's responsible
here. You're telling me that the
car navigator is the lead, that
person will make the decisions
in terms of this family's case
and follow through um to make
sure that the family gets the
services that they need. Is that
correct, Madam Chair
Representative?
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, yes.
OK, so the MCO, if the MCO care
coordinator, Madam Chair,
representative doesn't follow
through, doesn't show up for a
meeting, doesn't do whatever,
that doesn't matter. The
navigator can proceed.
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, yes. OK. So then the
other question that I have,
Madam Chair Representative, is
uh it's on page 15, um, section
2.
And that speaks to um healthcare
providers at a birthing
facility, and I'm assuming that
that's anywhere that could be,
um, Madam Chair Representative,
um,
A hospital that could also be
um,
a midwife.
That so it covers everybody,
right? Any place the child might
be born.
So, um,
So 2 questions. One, what about
kids who were born at home?
How are they incorporated into
this. I'll ask that question and
then I'll follow up with my
other question manager
representative.
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, the uh birthing
facilities are within the
definitions and it would be a
hospital, a birthing center,
there are quote unquote
facilities. The um the uh those
that are born at home, like once
we get a report.
Uh, through the Department of
Health about the birth we would
have.
And, and Madam Chair
Representative, the report would
include whether or not the child
was um exposed to substances.
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, yes, OK, um, Madam Chair
Representative, the next
question that I have has to do
with um Xiao Yu's definitions
and evidence-based screening
tools.
Can you tell me what those are,
Madam Chair Representative.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Chavis, so we have revised the
tool that we use this um plan of
safe plan of care. We now have a
plan of safe care that has been
revised. Um, it is a tool that
they have worked on that, um,
Kathy can speak to if you have
additional questions, but that
tool puts in line the questions
and what is considered to be
safe for that child to move
forward and they make that
determination through that tool.
They're also working with the
Department
of Health on a questionnaire
that will follow up on that tool
that will be used um in these
circumstances to determine
safety and risk as well.
Madam Chair Representative, is
that tool being used now in some
shape or form.
With these babies. Um, Madam
Chair Representative Chavez, the
plan of care is being used now,
um, as I said, it's been
revised. We've revised it to a
plan of safe care and the tool
itself has changed.
Can you, Madam Chair
Representative, so one of the
concerns that I have is
Um, in terms of
how social workers are going to
be involved.
Um, in, in these kinds of care
or are they
I can't remember which bill it
was, but um I had a had some
questions in terms of the
background educational skill
level of, I believe it was the
navigators and and was told that
maybe somewhere so social
workers maybe some weren't, um,
but if some of them aren't, are
they being supervised by a
social worker that can give
guidance because you don't
necessarily can't always rely on
some tool, some questionnaire,
when you're doing an assessment
of the family, um, Madam Chair
Representative, sometimes you
that worker who's gonna give um
who who relies on their
experience and their training to
make an adequate assessment. I
don't know that tools can always
um do that.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Chavez, so there are several
elements of training that are
being provided by DOH to all the
hospitals, the doulas, the, um,
anybody that will be working
with those um individual
families and infants, the care
navigators are filling out the
plan of safe care at the
hospitals in coordination with
DOH navigators, but those care
coordinators, I believe, are
mostly social workers. I don't
know exactly because they're
privatized, but I believe they
hire.
social workers as navigators, I
think it's one of the
requirements, um, there also in
the hospital working with the
nurses and um in the NICU, a lot
of those babies are and so
they're developing that plan of
care there with the expertise of
the individuals who work in that
facility.
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez is a follow up, um, I
understand your question
extensively with the master's
prepared social work, I mean, I
come from that background in my
previous role, um, and one of
the things that I want to make
sure that we do at Department of
Health is we're gonna have
weekly case reviews, some of
those social workers are masters
prepared social workers and
others might have bachelors, but
we'll make sure that everybody's
appropriately trained and then
with our weekly case reviews
that happen of every single.
case that each of the navigators
are following. We'll make sure
we have that higher level of
oversight.
So then the next question that I
have, I think that's really
important, Madam Chair
Representative, because I think.
I don't know that all of.
The hospitals are necessarily
following these plans of
actions. I got a phone call last
year, letting me know that one
hospital in particular was not
and the social worker from that
hospital was especially
concerned about it.
Um, so I'm, I'm hoping that all
of the hospitals are contacted
and the training actually does
take place, but not only just
not only the training, but the
fact that we have to do these um
plans of action.
Um, so the other question that I
have is on page 17. I mean, what
you've done here is you've been
very specific in terms of what
those workers have to do in
terms of, of dealing with these
families, right? And so one of
the questions that I have is on
page 17. It talks about a
determination that a substance
exposed newborn will have a safe
sleep environment.
So what constitutes a safe sleep
environment, madam chair
represented.
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, so the Ki navigator will
go, will make a home visit.
And we'll make a determination
of whether or not they've got a
safe sleep environment, if we
need to provide them with a
crabet, that will happen, we'll
make sure that we're educating,
uh, the, the family, um, or
who's who's caring for the
infant about uh safe sleep. Uh,
we have a big campaign about
safe sleep for for um out of
Department of Health in
collaboration with CYFD, so
we'll be providing that we'll
be.
Madam Chair Representative safe
safe sleep means not sleeping
with your child in the bed.
On your baby on the on on their
back, those kinds of things.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
OK. Um
the other question that I have
is related to the kinds of
housing supports.
Um, for these babies and their
and their families.
Um, so say there's a family who
is homeless.
What will you be able to do,
Madam Chair Representative, to
provide that family with a home.
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez will be working with our
uh partners in the community to
identify appropriate placement
for that family, um, and if, you
know, we're not able to get that
level of compliance with the
family where they don't want to,
I mean that that would then
constitute a report to uh CYFD
for additional follow-up and
investigation.
Madam Chair representative.
Um
I could probably go through this
and have more questions, but I'm
just gonna ask one more. Um, so
basically on page 17, the the
start date.
Um
It says by January 1st, 2026.
The Department of Health and
collaboration with all these
other folks.
Um
Will
Provide sort of the procedures.
Rules, all that other kind of
good stuff.
Um
Madam Chair Representative.
So by January 1st, 2026 were
expecting that this program will
be up and running.
Is that correct, Madam Chair
Representative. Madam Chair
Representative Chavez, the
program is up and running. We'll
have the rules developed no
later than January 1st, 2026.
We're already contacted the, uh,
been working with the hospital
association about establishing
what the training might look
like, and so we're already
starting.
OK, Madam Chair Representative,
so will there be public comment
for this, uh, when the rules are
established?
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, yes. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Those, I have a ton more,
but Representative Jones. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you all
for this, um.
I, this is the thing that I was
probably the most concerned
about when I came in 2 years ago
to the legislature, having
worked with the Nikki babies and
babies that were drug addicted,
weaning them off those meds and
watching families who some were
not involved at all. Some were
really wanting the opportunity
to, to get better and take care
of their children, um.
I was really happy to see that
uh deputy secretary, um,
And the, the revised plan of
care, the plan of safe care now,
is actually a plan of care. It's
not just a list of resources
like it was. It truly is a
working plan of care, and I can
see as a nurse, I can see this
picture, I can see those
navigators involved with the
MCO's involved with nursing
staff and, and moms and babies,
and that was the missing pieces
the navigator and a real working
plan of care in my mind. I'm so
happy with this. Like you said,
it's hard not to get emotional.
But I mean, it's, it's something
really.
Um, it's just a, a real, um,
It's a real necessary um
Progress that we've, that we've
made, so I'm really happy to
support it. Do you think it's
gone far enough? That's my
question, Madam Chair. You think
that that what we've done here
in this bill goes far enough.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, thank you,
Representative for the question.
We can always go.
Are there
I mean, it's never far enough to
take to keep a baby safe and to
give family services, uh, let's
It, it didn't happen overnight.
But we can fix, we can fix this,
and we can come back and, and
make more changes, Madam Chair
Representative, if that's so
needed, um, but let's give CYFD
and uh
DOHs the chance to implement
this, the hospitals the chance
to implement this and let's see
how, how we do. I too, um, Madam
Chair and Representative, want
to think, um, Cathy and the
audience, uh.
Phoenix Do for all the work that
she did on the plan of safe
care, it's, it is like you said,
it is, it is a real plan and not
just services.
Yes, thank you so much, uh
representative, and, and thank
you, Madam Chair.
I have a couple of questions
when you were talking about
trying to get training out.
Throughout the state and echo
popped into my mind. Has there
ever been any discussion around
using echo.
Um, to, to do these kinds of
trainings to and, and then the
follow up, you know, rounds that
they do.
Uh, men of chair that's actually
a very good suggestion, so thank
you for that, um, no, I didn't
think about it though.
Thank you for that. Well, think
about it, and then I um I don't
know if this is a question. So
Doctor Enrique Ngudaos, who, who
ran um
CBCS and I can't find out what
that, but he was he was
contracted with the MCOs to
track down care of family. I
mean, and they tracked them
down, they, they went.
On the streets, they went
wherever and and his contract
with the state was that if he
didn't save us as much money as
he cost us, he wouldn't get
paid.
And his, his results were
amazing. I mean, he hired social
workers and they, they, they
went out and they found the
families and they, they did,
they got the families what they
needed, but it's my
understanding that the MCOs did
not renew his contract, which is
um very disappointing to me
because the the numbers that he
was showing were impressive, and
we need more of that, so it,
it's not, I mean, I mean you can
respond, but I just wanna put it
out there that sometimes we
gotta do things that
Don't fit neatly within our
mold, but that work. Uh, Madam
Chair, can you repeat his name,
please, so we can write that
down. Maybe
Enrique and Guidanos, E N G U I
D A N O S.
And he did present to the
interim committee and I, I think
as, as a whole, we were very
impressed with his work. Thank
you for that, Madam Chair, and,
and committee, we would also
just like to to bring up that,
you know, the prenatal part,
adding the prenatal in there,
uh, is, is going to be helpful
as well. OK. So first, I need a
motion to accept the substitute.
So first we have to accept the
substitute, OK. Is there any
opposition?
OK, so we'll go back to
Representative Martinez.
I think Madam Chair, I make a
motion.
not accept how or.
Do not pass on House Bill 343
and a due pass on the committee
sub for 343. A second.
Um,
I don't know who was first.
OK,
no wrestling up here, ladies.
Um, so we have a motion for do
not pass on House Bill.
343 and then do pass on
committee substitute for House
Bill 343. Erin, can you take the
role, please?
Representative Vinaya, yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Yes, and to explain my book.
Representative Ann Chavez, yes.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Senator Cortez,
yes.
Madam Vice Chair?
Madam Chair,
Yes.
We have a due past 9. You have a
due past 9 to and thank you so
much for uh I'll come back.
Thank you so much for your
willingness to work on this and
get it to a place where, where
everyone can agree. So thank
you. You have a few past 9 to 0,
and we'll go back to
Representative E Chavis to
explain her vote. Thank you,
Madam Chair. um, so yeah, I, I
still have lots of questions
that I will be asking and I
really do want to see that tool.
Um, and I'd like to see all of
the other tools that CYFD uses,
I believe I've maybe asked for
them during our interim
committee and have never gotten
them. Um, and then I also would
like to see the training that is
offered or that is going to be
off. Actually, I'd like to see
the current training and then
the, the training that is going
to be revised and who's going to
be doing it. I think all of
those pieces are very important
to the success of this program.
And then I, the second pieces
I'd also like to see who
um
The car navigators, the care
coordinators are really, really
think that, um, you know, hiring
the right people is important,
so I would also like to see that
and again, that's something else
that I've also asked for and
I've never received. So if I
could get that information, that
would be super helpful.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. And for those of you
who may have just gotten in
here, we are rolling 408 because
our analysts didn't get the
amendment in time. So next we
will go to House Bill 344 with
um
Majority whip.
Hackman be help.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
I am by myself today, so.
Take it easy on me.
Um, Madam Char, you should have
a committee substitute.
Um, 22 number last 3 is 198.1.
And um.
If I may, Madam chair, I think
it would probably make the most
sense to just explain the
premise of the bill just
generally so we can get into the
sub.
So, uh, I need a motion to, um.
Some of
I got you. I got you. I know.
Go.
Yes
So, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, before coming
into the 2025 session, um, I had
a town hall with members of my
community and one of the
resounding conclusions that came
from that town hall is that we
are in the middle of a crisis as
it relates to healthcare access
in our communities, and so, uh,
the premise of House Bill 344
men of Chair members of the
committee is to essentially um
accept.
All healthcare services from
application of the New Mexico
gross receipts tax. Um, we
already do this, Madam Chair, as
it as it uh pertains to um
grocery receipts, tax that's
applied to co-payments and
deductibles. But what 344 would
do is um expand the exception to
all healthcare services, um, and
I can go through a big list.
It's all there in your um.
fiscal impact report analysis,
but, uh, basically everything
except for hospital services,
um, and Medicaid is treated in
kind of a tricky way, which is
one of the things that the
committee sub deals with, um, so
Madam Chair with the committee
substitute does is it makes it
very clear, um, how we are
treating the gross receipts, tax
exception as it relates to
Medicaid eligible services and
more specifically as it relates
to
Hold harmless uh provisions
because many of our communities
are gonna lose a lot of gross
receipts tax, um, if we were to
approve this exception, and so,
uh, we have to figure out a way
to, um, again, hold those
communities harmless so that
they um don't lose a huge amount
of revenue as it comes to um the
grocery receipts tax generated
through healthcare services. Um,
so that's basically the bill.
chair, um, I can go into again,
I have a great little chart that
talks about exactly what new
things would be exempted as
opposed to, um, what is exempted
now. Oh, and it's also important
to um state that the exemption
that is in um that is currently
in place, expires in 2028, so at
the very least we are looking at
um extending that sunset or
eliminating it altogether, um,
New Mexico is one of just a
handful of.
that does tax healthcare
services. So, um, this is in my
belief, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, a wonderful tool
that New Mexico can use to um
recruit and encourage healthcare
providers to move to move to our
beautiful state. So with that, I
will, uh, stand for questions.
Thank you. We will go to the
audience if you are on Zoom in
opposition, please raise your
hand. Anyone in the room in
opposition, seeing none in
support if you are on support in
support on Zoom, raise your hand
in the room in support. If you
wanna, I'll take 5 for 1 minute
each.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the,
my name is Tom Scripsma, I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Dental Association, uh,
and the dentist in Albuquerque.
um Den is one of those areas
where uh the predominantly it's
being paid for from out of
pocket dollars and insurance
that is not considered managed
care. That means that those
dollars, um, don't buy as much
healthcare in New Mexico as they
do in Texas and Colorado and
Arizona and really any of the
other states in the United
States and so.
So, um, this is important not
just to the, the practitioners
but to patients as well. Um,
there are provisions in this
bill that also um eliminate
groceryceipts on supplies and,
and, uh, equipment, um, that
also is an important piece of
this, um, you know, that we're
talking about expensive
technologies and um that costs
more to provide that care here
in New Mexico than it does in
other places.
Mexico is losing Dennis at an
alarming rate at this point. Um,
this has been an issue since I
started practice, which is 43
years ago, um, and continues to
be an issue, especially now.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Fred
Nathan. I'm executive director
and founder of Think New Mexico.
We enthusiastically support this
bill. Um, according to a recent
national study, New Mexico is
the only state in the country
that lost doctors between 2019
and 2024. There are three main
reasons why doctors retire early
or leave the state.
One is a relatively high medical
malpractice premiums that are
nearly twice our neighboring
states. Secondly, are low
Medicaid reimbursement rates,
although we've been making
progress thanks to many of you,
um, and a high percentage of
people who are on Medicaid, I
think it's 42%. And the third
reason is addressed by
Representative Hochman v. Hill's
bill, which is our gross
receipts tax. We're one of only
two states with this tax. The
other is Hawaii.
Their GRT is capped at 4.7. Our
statewide average is 7 in many
communities, it's over 8, so,
uh, this would be very helpful
if we could pass this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee, uh, Troy Clark from
the New Mexico Hospital
Association. Uh, we appreciate
the sponsor bringing this bill,
and while this is not a
reduction for the hospitals on
the GRT we are all aware of as
has been said of the uh severe
shortage we have of healthcare
workers, especiallyty providers,
and so, uh, as Fred just
mentioned, this is one of 3
causes we believe, uh, main
causes that detract physicians
from coming to this state, uh,
as we have worked, uh, with you
on the Medicaid.
Reimbursement, we appreciate the
efforts to work on this other
component, uh, to incentivize or
help uh recruit and retain uh
physicians to our state.
Madam chair members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza,
executive director with the
Greater Albuquerque Medical
Association. We stand in strong
support of the legislation that
the sponsor for bringing it. I
won't repeat the comments of
the, my colleagues before me,
uh, but we do represent over
1000 physicians in the
Albuquerque area and do believe
that this is gonna help with
recruitment and retention. Thank
you.
OK, on Zoom we have Dana Gray.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Dana Gray, Executive
director of Desert states
Physical Therapy Network,
representing 30 independent
private practices throughout the
state. Network clinics are
appreciative of all efforts made
to increase gross receipt tax
deductions to assist with rising
costs of providing quality care
to New Mexico communities. We
would like to thank the sponsors
for introducing this bill and
for the clarifying language and
the definition of co-pay, we
stand in full support of House
Bill 344 and urge a due pass.
Thank you, Nick, we have Carrie.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, I very
much appreciate. oh, I'm with
the New Mexico Medical Society.
I very much appreciate the
opportunity to testify on Zoom
as this morning, I have an
appointment with my own daughter
that we've waited several months
for, uh, the medical society has
been talking about the issues
with gross receipts, tax, and
how it makes New Mexico more
unattractive as a business
environment for medical
practices for a number of years.
If our physicians weren't in
clinic this morning seeing
patients.
you would probably see well over
100 on Zoom to testify in
support of this bill. Uh, we
think the sponsors for bringing
it. Uh, it is long overdue and
we think it's a significant
investment that New Mexico can
make in our current clinicians,
while also hopefully opening up
the field to make New Mexico
more attractive for new ones.
Thank you so much,
Madam Chair.
Carrie Robin Bruder with the New
Mexico Medical Society.
So I will go to the committee
for questions.
OK, I see.
Representative Kate.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you so much,
representative, uh, for bringing
this forward. Um
How wonderfully brave of you! I
love it. Um, and so, uh, can you
just uh clarify a couple of
things for me. Is this for only
uh medical services for Medicaid
patients.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Kate, no, it is not. It is for
all services.
And uh without because we are
not the tax department, we are
not the tax committee, but
In general, can you uh uh
Explain um how you were holding
those smaller communities whole
who have been relying on the GRT
from their medical providers.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Kates. So the
original version of this bill
included the cost of what that
hold harmless would be, so
essentially, um, if we were to
put into law a GRT exemption,
um, a, in a lot of instances,
GRT is local, right? So whatever
GRT is generated in that
particular municipality or
county, so to speak, um, that,
that GRT is generated there. It
is.
Spent there, it is revenue
there, and so if we were to um.
passed this law, it would leave
those communities without that
particular revenue that would
have been generated by grocery
receipts tax, but for this
exemption, right? So the
original bill also calculated in
the fiscal impact report, what,
how much money it would take to
hold those communities harmless,
so that there that their budgets
would not be impacted. This new
committee substitute, however,
does not do that, um, it does in
some particular instances, but
for the major.
instances, it does not and so
full disclosure we are
anticipating pushback from,
let's say the association of
counties, um, and it is
something that we definitely
would need to, uh, it's a very
complex question and it's
something that we definitely
need to take on, um, as it
relates to Medicaid, however,
it's also important to let the
committee know that there is a
federal uh fund that already
exists that would, it, it
doesn't affect.
and so any GRT that would
normally be associated with
Medicaid expenses, it's not
factored in and it shouldn't be
factored in because it's already
covered. Thank you so much,
Madam chair and thank you very
much for that explanation. Um,
I'm very excited about this
piece of legislation. It, it
sounds to me like there may be a
a follow-up piece of legislation
to be able to uh track as
smaller communities can attract
medical providers, maybe if
they.
they have a financial incentive
from the state to be able to
cover their GRT.
Um, it might also help them
implement more.
Um
Recruitment for for medical
providers, but uh thank you very
much for this film. Thank you.
Any other question?
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I'd like to
just take off on that question
of Representative Kate's a
little bit more because my
district is, um, I haven't heard
any pushback from them
personally, but I can see how I
would. I have about 80% of the
people in my district who seek
health care on Medicaid, and uh
we have a lot of poverty there,
so uh can you please address
that as to how it would affect
my district, the way it's
written.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative Jones, so
remember Medicaid is excluded
from this, so anybody that um is
at Medicaid eligible or would be
seeking services out under the
Medicaid program are not
considered, however, if you have
someone who um is on a private
insurance plan, if they were to
visit their doctor GRT would not
be applied to those services are
charged, so that GRT that
normally would have been
generated in your community.
Wouldn't be and so your
community would be out that
amount of money that normally
would have been, um, that
revenue that would have been
generated per the tax.
Thank you very much. That's
clear now. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chad like to make a motion
first we need a a motion to
adopt the sub.
Thank you. OK. So is there any
opposition to adopting the sub,
seeing none, you have a
substitute bill, and I will go
back to
I don't think thank you. I, I'd
like to make a motion, Madam
Chair, um.
For a do not pass in HB 344 and
a do pass and health and human
services Committee substitute
for HB 3, 44, and a second in a
second. And well done
representative Cates.
It gets a little wordy. So is
there any opposition?
I see then you have a due pass.
92, no, 88 to 0. Thank you,
Madam Chair, that was much
easier than I anticipated. Thank
you. We're not, we're not a mean
committee.
We're not tax. We're not taxed.
That's exactly right.
So next we will go to HB 402
Health Insurance provider info
loading um representative
Hernandez, with this snazzy
jacket.
Whenever you're ready
representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Uh
Uh, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, I'm here today to
present House Bill 402, a
crucial measure to improve
access to dental care in New
Mexico by addressing slow and
inefficient credentialing by
insurance carriers. Insurance
credentialing is the process
that involves verifying and
validating a dentist
qualifications, licensure status
and compliance with insurance
company requirements.
Through credentialing dentists
established contractual
agreements with dental insurance
companies, allowing them to be
reimbursed for services provided
to a patient.
New Mexico has a severe shortage
of dental providers, especially
in rural and underserved areas,
slow credentialing delays.
A dentist's ability to see
patients and receive payments,
making it harder to recruit and
retain providers. Many dentists
wait months for approval, which
discourages them from practicing
in New Mexico.
In 2023, the New Mexico
legislature unanimously passed
Senate Bill 232 to address the
same problem for physicians.
However, dentists were not
included in the definition of
healthcare provider in this
legislation. This bill will
merely extend the same
provisions that were in that
bill to dentists.
Um, so it, this bill will
mandate that insurance carriers
process complete credentialing
applications within 30 days, um,
if it insurer fails to process
an application on time, the
provider will be automatically
reimbursed for any services they
provide after those 30 days.
Uh, the bill includes a 15 day
extension for cases where an
applicant has licensing board
sanctions and investigation,
felony conviction, or revoked
clinic privileges, allowing for
the appropriate due diligence
without unnecessary delays.
And this bill will ensure
transparency by requiring
insurers to notify applicants of
missing documents within 10
working days and provide a point
of contact for questions. Uh,
the 30 days does start, um, once
all of the necessary documents
are submitted to the insurance,
so it's not, um, if there is
missing paperwork that the
insurance has requested that
there is not.
Um, that doesn't count against
the 30 days. Um, I would also
like my expert to um introduce
himself and then we will be
ready for question.
A man and chair members of the
committee, um, I'm Tom Scrisma,
the executive director of New
Mexico Dental Association, the
dentist in Albuquerque.
Um, I, I don't have very much to
add to Representative
Hernandez's description of it. I
think there's one other
provision that's a really
important one, and that is a
standardizes the forms that need
to be used in order to do this,
and that can be a real, uh,
difficulty when you're talking
about a couple of dozen
different agencies that need to
be credentialed. I would also
add that uh Medicaid is one of
the most difficult because there
are multiple layers that have to
be credentialed at the state, it
has to be credentialed that the
MCO and
It has to be credentialed that
the dental administrator level.
So, um, all of those are, are
more complicated and add to the,
the problem, so eliminating
delays and making it simpler is
going to make a big difference.
Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair, we also have an
amendment, um, that should have
been sent a few days ago.
Could I get a motion to um
discuss the amendment.
Uh, yeah, uh, Madam Chair,
231110.1.
Make that version, madam chair
and reminder to silence your
phones, please. Um, so we have a
motion to discuss it, so go
ahead, representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So, um, this
amendment is more about the
readability of the bill, um, as
we were reading through it with
the drafters and a few of the
stakeholders, um, we noticed
that it only says dental one
time in the entire bill, um, and
so we, um, came to this
conclusion, which was to replace
the word.
providers with the word dentists
throughout the bill to make it
very clear that we are um adding
dentists to the already existing
statute rather than trying to do
other types of providers, so
that is the extent of the
amendment, it just, if you see
it says dentist like 40 times
across the page and that's,
that's all that this amendment
does, and it's for readability.
Um, and to reduce confusion.
With that, we stand for any
questions that the committee may
have. Thank you. So we will go
to the audience, if you are in
opposition on Zoom, raise your
hand and I'll come back to you
in the room. Is there anyone in
opposition?
OK
OK, um, seeing none either place
in support if you are on Zoom
and support, raise your hand,
and I'll come back to you if you
are in support in the room,
raise your hand if you would
like to speak, come to the
center. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Roy Soto. I am a
registered lobbyist for Choice
Healthcare Services, uh, an
organization that provides
dental care for kids, uh, we
have 13.
clinics around the state. Most
of them in underserved areas
serving needy kids, uh, such as
one in Deming, Gallup, the South
Valley, Los Lunas, one of the
major obstacles that uh we've
experienced is trying to recruit
Deist, uh, you heard on with the
testimony on previous bill, I
believe 344 of the need to
recruit physicians. Listen,
getting Dennis is even harder.
So what this bill does is merely
level the playing field, putting
in the same requirements that
the physicians have for dentists
and getting credentials. We
compete with Arizona, which
already does it. We compete with
uh Colorado, which already does
it. So trying to attract the
dentist is extremely hard. We
believe that this bill will
level the playing field and
provide us with more dentists
throughout the state, providing
services to kids.
OK, on Zoom, carry.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
Carrie Robin Bruder with the New
Mexico Medical Society. Uh, we
worked on this legislation on
the physician side with
Representative Hernandez two
years ago. We just want to
extend our full uh hearted
support for our colleagues, the
dentist, to be treated the same
way in terms of credentialing
with the health, with their
dental plans. Thank you so much.
OK, thank you, and I will say
that we've been pushing for
credentialing single
prudentialing for years, um not
just for dentists, but for
everybody and uh so far not too
successful.
So, um,
I will go to the committee for
any questions. Representative
Kate.
Thank you again, uh,
Representative Hernandez, for
bringing this forward. This is
great. Just making sure that we
You know, fixing our previous or
making sure that we've cast our
net big enough. Um, I have
talked about your bill to
several constituents over the
last couple weeks because I was
so happy to see it up there, um,
the only comment I got from a
constituent is can we add dental
hygienists to the bill.
Is that something that um you
would be willing to do.
Madame Chair and Representative,
uh, I don't see why not. That
would be.
Fantastic.
Thank you very much and thank
you.
OK, I don't see any other
questions, and this is just a
suggestion, but you might think
about a substitute when
committees see these, it's like,
oh my gosh, we can't, even
though it's simple, it's got a
lot of words, we were, uh, under
the under the time crunch. So,
um, also the, so we can add
dental hygienist and the FIR
which came out later yesterday,
um, also, um, said that, so in
our bill it says New Mexico
Medical Board, we need to change
that to the
Board of Dental Healthcare, so I
will roll all of that into a sub
when we get to house government.
OK, that sounds good. Um, so
first I need a motion to adopt
the amendment.
OK. Representative E Chavis, is
there any opposition?
Seeing none, you have an amended
bill, and now I will accept the
uh motion for to for Madam
Chair, I'd like to make that
motion that uh we accept House
Bill 402 as amended. OK, so
motion to approve House bill.
Um, 402. Is there any
opposition?
Signan, you have a due pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
who's
who seconded that I did. Oh, I'm
sorry. I should have heard you.
OK, next we will go on to House
Bill 404, and again, if you're
here for 408, we had to roll it,
um, so we're going to 404
representative dela Cruz.
Whenever you're ready,
representative.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, members of the
committee.
I am happy to be here with you
to introduce HB 404. It is a
3-year pilot program.
Madam Chair
Education has long been
recognized as a powerful tool
for better employment prospects,
better jobs, career advancement,
financial stability,
self-dependency,
self-confidence, becoming a
contributing member of society,
increasing one's quality of
life.
For those reasons, this bill is
intended to support two
vulnerable at-risk populations.
Foster youth who have aged out
of the foster care system.
And to those who were formerly
incarcerated.
A monthly monetary stipend would
be provided for basic cost of
living expenses, such as
housing.
Food, transportation, childcare,
and other basic necessities,
while the individual is in a
post-secondary educational
program.
With that Madam Chair, I will
stand for questions.
You, so we will go to Zoom if
you are in opposition, raise
your hand.
In the room, is there anyone in
opposition?
OK, seeing none on Zoom if
you're in support, raise your
hand in the room if you're in
support.
If you'd like to speak, please
come forward.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Marlahos registered
lobbyist for CNM Community
College, we stand in strong
support of this legislation and
want to thank the sponsor for
bringing it forward. CNM serves
many non-traditional students,
including former foster youth
and justice involved young
adults through our programming,
including adult basic education.
Many of those students face
housing insecurity, economic
instability, and limited access
to healthcare, barriers that
make it harder.
to stay in school and succeed.
House Bill 404 offers a Lifeline
by providing up to 2000 a month
for basic living expenses while
they pursue their education or
workforce training. Similar
programs in other states have
proven effective, leading to
higher graduation rates, better
employment outcomes, and
improved health. Without the
support too many of these young
people fall into poverty or the
justice system, costing the
state far more than the long, in
the long run. CNM strongly
supports House Bill 404. Thank
you.
Just a reminder to set the clock
on Zoom, please, um, go ahead.
Morning, Madam Chairman,
committee, Jason Weeks
registered lobbyist for the
Albuquerque Spano Chamber of
Commerce. The chamber stands in
support of this piece of
legislation because it's a, it's
a very important piece of uh
workforce development. Um,
there's a lot of folks in our
community who can't afford to
get themselves into school,
support themselves while they're
in their school, in school, this
creates that lifeline that Miss
Schultz was talking about. It
allows them to appoint of
stability while they pursue
educational resources.
Thereby educating themselves,
training themselves so that they
can enter the workforce and be
beneficial members of society,
have better lives and honestly,
quite frankly, um,
Create uh an ability to meet the
gap that we currently have in
terms of some of the workforce
issues that we're currently
experiencing in the states, so
we stand in full support. Thank
you.
Thank you. Um, members of the
committee, Mike Gittini with
Bold Futures New Mexico. We
stand in strong support of this
bill, um, we love that it
promotes economic
self-sufficiency and fosters
positive contributions to
society and that requiring data
collection and evaluation of
this program ensures
accountability and provides a
strong foundation for future
policy decisions and um HB 404
is an investment in the
well-being of our vulnerable
young adults and the economic.
south of New Mexico, please
support this bill. Thank you.
Thank you, and we have Laurie
Lynn.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Laura Lynn Vianta, and
I'm the co-executive director of
New Mexicoan. We're an
organization that partners with
young people to lead positive
systems change. We stand in
favor of House Bill 404.
Research shows unconditional
cash support is a policy that
holds great promise for
transition age youth. There's a
growing body of work documenting
positive impacts of direct cash
transfer pilots across the US. I
encourage deeper consideration
about the best agency to
distribute and manage these
funds and want to emphasize a
truly accessible uh application
process to ensure that young
people who need it most have
access to it, um, and want to
also emphasize to transition age
youth.
Need a truly holistic
infrastructure of care that
supports well-being. Please vote
yes on HB 404. Thank you.
All right. Thank you. Do you
have any follow-up comments? Are
you ready? Thank you, Madam
Chair. I'm ready for questions.
OK. Any questions from the
committee.
Representative E. Chavez. Thank
you, Madam Chair Representative.
So I have a question in terms of
the numbers of kids that this
program might serve. Do you have
a sense of that? I don't have
that. I have a national uh uh.
Estimation, but not, not a local
one. Madam Chair Representative
and why?
Under the age of 26. How was
that, um, age chosen.
Madam Chair, uh, it is, it is,
uh,
an age that was recommended, uh,
by, by our drafter as we worked
on this bill. It's, it's, it's,
it's an attempt to try to make
sure that we're able to serve
those people that are aging out
of the system as well as
incarcerated and still young
enough to be able to more likely
take advantage and succeed in
the program.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Any further questions?
none
Madam Chair, I'd like to move it
to pass.
I have a second. I'll second
that. OK, so Representative
Anaya with the motion,
Representative Cates with the
2nd. Is there any opposition?
Singan, you have a due pass.
88 to 0.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members.
OK. Um, Representative
Armstrong, since you're here,
I'm gonna jump you ahead.
Oh.
No, go ahead. It should be very
quick. We've done a lot of uh
compacts and you can just say
ditto.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
appreciate that. I try to stay
prudent and, you know, I'm very
quick.
Um, Madam Chair representatives,
uh, and committee. This is a,
um,
physician's assistants licensure
interstate compact. I think
you've heard several of these in
your committee. I'd like my, um,
expert to introduce himself, and
then we will stand for
questions.
I wouldn't describe myself as an
expert, but my name is Marcus
Luhan. I work with Think New
Mexico. I'm very familiar with
each and every one of you
because we've done 7 bills on
Compaqs so far, um.
So yeah, I work with thinking in
New Mexico where the people that
sent you the report, um, on how
to solve the healthcare worker
shortage. We believe compacts
are a great way to start
addressing that. It's not a
silver bullet, but they are a
way to remove a huge obstacle in
the way of people coming into
our state, and we now stand for
questions. OK, thank you. So if
you are on Zoom in opposition,
raise your hand. Anyone in the
room in opposition.
Seeing none either place in on
Zoom in support, raise your
hand, and in the room and
support. Would you like to
speak? If you would, please come
to the center.
Uh, good morning, chair members
of the committee. My name is
Alison Riley, Public Policy
director with the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce, standing in
strong support of this
legislation. We feel it's an
innovative piece of legislation
that it only enhances quality
health care, especially in rural
and underserved areas, but also
drives economic development
across the state. And for these
reasons and all the other
compacts we've heard this
session that we support this
bill. Thank you.
Thank, thank you and online we
have Kelly, Kelly May. Good
morning, Madam Chara Thompson,
Vice Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Kelly May
Douglas, and I work for the
Department of Defense state
liaison office. On behalf of the
Department of Defense and
Military Fam based in New
Mexico. I would like to express
strong support for the policy of
death and health for 13, which
would announce the position that
their compact in this school
professional licensure has been
an enduring problem for military
staffsors, military spouses are
prospects of the American.
population,
although a greater percentage of
them are in license applications
when their civilian counterparts
and they are significantly more
mobile.
The short duration of military
assignments coupled with lengthy
licensing packages can
discourage military spouses from
seeking your life or causing
them to quit an occupation or
plot their career for the
service member to leave the
military.
policies enacting and a state
license for contacts such as the
physician, that like to their
contact facilitate greater
career sustainability for
military sponsors, improving
their family's financial
security and overall well-being.
In closing, the Department of
Defense is very appreciative of
New Mexico's ongoing commitment
and efforts to support members
of the military and their
families.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for
providing me the opportunity to
provide comments in support of
this policy proposal. Thank you
and Representative Armstrong for
bringing.
important issue for us.
Thank you. Next we have Nahali.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Nahali Kalfus. I am
legal counsel with the Council
of State governments as well as
interim legal counsel of the
physician Assistant Slicener
Compact. Uh, we stand, of
course, in strong support. We
would very much like to see New
Mexico at the table with our uh
1st 13, I think almost 14 states
to the, to the compact
commission, the compact
commission has been stood up
because it met its 10 state
threshold.
It is a mutual recognition model
like many of the other compacts
you have seen. It has a slight
nuance in that you have a
qualifying state, but it is a
mutual recognition model. Um, I
want to be respectful of the
time of this committee, but I, I
will stand available for any
questions as a subject matter
expert. Thank you.
Thank you. And finally we have
Adrian Gomez.
Good morning, committee members
and Madam Chair, Adrian Gomez
from the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce and I'm here
to testify and support.
Of the bill, um, this would make
it easier for licensed providers
in other states to treat New
Mexicans.
Be it in person or in a
telehealth setting, and it's a
real way to get more New
Mexicans of the care they need
and address the lack of
providers, while at the same
time encouraging them to
practice in, perhaps even move
to our state.
The chamber is pleased to
support this bill as it aims to
bring more care to New Mexicans,
and we ask you to vote to pass
it. Thank you so much for your
time.
Thank you. Um, do you have any
follow-up?
Uh, Madam Chair, I was very
remiss in uh letting you know
how much I appreciate you giving
up this bill so that I can run
it and others in this committee.
So anyone who would like to sign
on, please sign on, and I just
want to publicly thank you for
that and tell you how much I
appreciate it. Thank you. It
takes a village, right?
OK,
um,
Question
OK. Representative Anaya.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, as I have said
on other applicable uh compacts.
I'm also really worried that
compacts are under fire across
the nation when it comes to
reproductive and gender
affirming care. And so I know
that is um an amendment that
I've asked for in other
applicable compacts to amend it
to make sure that we're
protecting the current laws we
have in place here in New
Mexico.
Any other question?
I will entertain emotion?
Make that motion, Madam Chair,
so we have a, a due pass motion
on 413413. Is there any
opposition?
You have a due pass. Thank you,
Madam Chair and committee. 7 to
0. I, I know we, we need more
days like this
unfortunately, no, but we have
one more.
So thank you, Madam Chair, for
hearing House Bill 407. It
really is a simple bill to add
$300,000 in appropriations from
the general fund to Department
of Health.
To work on, um, well, to provide
training and education to
prevent shaken baby syndrome. I
don't have the money in the in
the um
Budget yet, but I'm hoping the
Senate will come through. It's
such a small amount, and I will
let my co-sponsor, um, say a few
words.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Our chairwoman Thompson for
allowing me to assist you with
the co-sponsorship of this bill.
My name is Representative Abeda
and I come from District 69, a
large rural district that's in
dire need of these types of
educational services. I'm here
to explain that education is
crucial, especially for our
infants. The statistics show
that in the last few years we've
had an alarming amounts of
deaths in this area, in this uh
field because of baby shaken
syndrome, and unfortunately my
nephew, my brother.
Law's son was one of those
victims of uh baby shaken
syndrome. He did survive,
however, he has tremendous
health problems, lots of um
doctor's appointments and follow
up that he has to do, and it's
devastating to the family. It
takes a toll on us, and we now
have to do 24 hour care and um
really assisted living for him,
and he's only 4 years old. I
have two other nephews and their
father went through a baby
shaking.
syndrome education panel while
he was at Navajo Technical
University College, and that
changed his perspective
tremendously. He was educating
the rest of our family members.
He was educating everyone he
could about baby shaking
syndrome, so to see two
different brothers who went
through two different scenarios,
one with the education and one
without was a tremendous impact
for these children's life, so I
can't tell you how much I
support this bill, and I
appreciate Chairwoman.
and bringing it forward, and I
look forward to advocating for
your support and for the funding
as well because it's needed,
it's preventable, and I know
that this house can move forward
in the right direction for our
children. Thank you.
And with that we stand for
questions.
Thank you very much. So we'll go
to Zoom first. Is there anyone
on Zoom who stands in opposition
to this legislation.
I see no hands will go to the
audience. Is there anyone in the
audience here who stands in
opposition?
Seeing no hands here, let's go
back to Zoom. Is there anyone on
Zoom who stands in support of
this legislation. If there is,
please raise your hand.
Thank you and I see two people.
You have
You have one minute. Desiree
Torres.
Good morning. Thank you. My name
is Desiree Torres, and I'm
standing in support of this
bill. I'm an infant injury
prevention consultant.
Additionally, I was a member of
the UNM Shaking Baby Syndrome
Prevention and Awareness Program
that nearly 10 years ago created
the educational materials that
many um hospitals around the
state used to provide chicken
and baby syndrome or abusive
head trauma prevention
education. This education
teaches new parents how to cope
with infant crying, which is a
common trigger for this type of
abuse, and teaching parents
these coping skills
continues to provide a benefit
for the family beyond the infant
stage, allowing for parents to
cope with other trying aspects
of parenting, while keeping
their children safe. Um, when
Senate Bill 21 passed in 2017
requiring UH to oversee the
educational model statewide,
there was no funding available
and without this funding, DOH
has been unable to update the
material since they were
created. Hospitals have reported
that because the materials look
out of date, parents believe the
problem with shaking baby
syndrome or abusive head trauma
is also out of date and they no
longer need to learn about it.
This couldn't be further from
the truth and this material is
still essential for all parents
to to receive.
Um, House Bill
for
uh, would you, thank you very
much for your comments.
All right, we're gonna go to
Christopher Torres.
Mr. Burr, you have one minute.
All right. Good morning,
everyone. Thank you so much. um
I appreciate the, the committee
for hearing this bill. Uh, my
name is Christopher Torres and
I'm a community pediatrician and
Alurki, New Mexico, and I've
cared for numerous children
who've um suffered from child
abuse and and this form of child
abuse as well, and I strongly
support this bill, um, as a, a
means to decrease the amount of
this form of child abuse in the
state of New Mexico, um, so I, I
encourage the community as a
whole, um, as well too, um.
to move this bill forward. I
think it can have a large impact
on the state of New Mexico.
All right, thank you, Doctor
Torres. We appreciate your
comments. Is there anyone in the
room who stands in support of
this legislation, who would like
to speak. Please come forward.
You have one minute.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Deborah Walker, a registered
nurse and executive director of
the New Mexico Nurses
Association. Research conducted
by nurses at UNMH led to the
current law. Our concern has
been that without resources,
these updates are not occurring,
and um with the turnover and
nursing staff with the number of
traveling nurses.
that we have, we think it's
imperative to not only update
but ensure that uh the reports
are being done, and that this is
being addressed. Thank you. We
hope you will support the bill.
Thank you. Thank you.
Morning, Madam Chair,
representative and sponsors. I'm
Jeremy Rutherford. I'm the
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico School for the Blind and
visually impaired. We have been
doing this kind of education and
outreach for many, many years.
Um, unfortunately, we see way
too many students come through
our early childhood campus as a
result of what we call
non-acidental trauma, which is
essentially a shaken baby
syndrome.
And so we really appreciate this
effort. It needs to be much more
wide ranging, much more
education, much more outreach.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Now we'll go to the
committee. Are, are there any
questions? Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives. I just
want to say thank you. This is
such an excellent use of
$300,000 much needed, and I'm so
sorry about your 4 year old.
It's tragic, but we can prevent
that, I think. This is a
movement toward that. I
appreciate it. Thank you,
Representative Eleanor Chavis.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I don't
have any questions, but I just
want to make a comment. I mean,
I think this education piece is
really super important. I was
commenting to Representative
Jones about a case I had back.
When I was a CPS social worker
and um later um saw the child as
an adult. And so saw the the
impact of his injury. What I
wanted to say is in terms of,
you know, where education takes
place. I think and and I'm not
not suggesting that you change
the bill or anything, but maybe
for future future thought, um, I
think that so many of these
things would really uh fit in
our high schools as well. I
educating kids in terms of, you
know, the
importance of, you know, not
shaking your little brother or
sister or, you know, um, but,
um, but yeah, that was, that was
my comment. I know that teachers
will say, hey, we can't, you
know.
Don't load us up, but maybe
figuring out a way to do it so
that we're not um burdening
teachers also.
I think schools are a great
place. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, um, that's a good
idea, I would think as part of
the health, uh, you know, health
class, but you are right,
whenever we try to add in more
um there's pushback, but, but.
Thank you for the suggestion.
Representative Cates.
I thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Madam Chair, for
bringing this forward and
representative, um, uh, I was a
part of the, I guess the first
wave of education as I ran an
early intervention program as
well, and there's a substantial
amount of individuals that we
served who had been that, and
you can see the long term
effects, the education and I've
worked with PB and J who was big
when this program was first
rolled out either through UN.
the fit program, um, uh, I love,
uh uh representative Chavez's
uh.
Suggestion in our in our high
schools, um, I am concerned that
you have to bring a bill for
$300,000 for a basic education
class that really makes a
difference. Um, I am taking up
some of this committee's time to
hope.
That the deciders that be out
there understand that this
should be a permanent part of
funding and making sure that
updated educational materials
and outreach are provided, and
it does not take a legislative
action. Thank you.
Madam Chair, I agree, um, and.
One prevention will save us 300
easily.
Representative Anaya.
Uh, Madam chair, I'd love to
move a do pass.
Thank you. We have a Du pass by
Representative Anaya, a second
by Representative Eleanor
Chavez, is there any opposition
to the legislation.
It's not,
you have a do pass 8 to 08 in
the affirmative, and 0 in the
negative.
Thank you.
The committee members, we are
invited to a breakfast of um,
eggs, bacon, sausage, pancakes,
and coffee in room 303.
Do, madam chair.
