Representative step in the lord
here.
Representative Marian Matthews
Abbey daylight savings time I'm
here.
Representative Roger Montoya
happy to see you all I am
present thank you.
Representative Lewis that loss.
Representative Liz Thomson I'm
here and I have to stay
Representative I'm Marian
Matthews you've got I needed the
first shot this morning.
Representative Britney but I.
Representative
Chair ari I'm here thank you and
madam chair Deborah Armstrong
I'm here so we have a quorum so
I think we should go ahead and
share I'm still here I said I
stepped away for a second I'm
sorry about that thanks
Representative.
Of first on our agenda is Senate
bill two forty four
Senator Hickey you want to go
ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
representatives it's a my honor
to work with the Linda Siegel.
Who is Representative the nurse
practitioners for significant
amount of time this bill very
simply
Allows nurse practitioners
without having to have a
physician co signature.
Or have a physician signature
make a medical
document and allow a medical
exemption for immunizations and
to kind of spread our wings a
little bit we
Also included physicians
assistants in this one there was
also some talk and some other
amendments that those have been
withdrawn and I would like to.
Do it this or going to do it
this morning we haven't changed
anything yet right.
Okay and we have Linda Siegel to
talk as the expert on this
Linda.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Big.
He.
I think you're gonna have to
take a video off the signal for
the New Mexico nurse
practitioner care staff and one
of her patients.
I'm a minor needed to to get an
exemption from the vaccination
because okay.
Okay so she are she realized
when she submitted the form and
the department of health said oh
sorry only a physician can sign
this form which is absolutely
absurd we have about our staff.
Nurse throughout the state
practicing in New Mexico over or
over half of them are in primary
care and they're the ones that
you know they have their own
patients and maybe see them for
multiple reasons so this was
just another example of one of
those areas of the law that we
haven't caught up with because
of the full scope of practice in
prescriptive authority that
nurse practitioners have had for
years and so this is just a
clean up of the statute we
really need to get it done
because actually it's hurting
patient care because now this
young woman who's been a patient
this minor child is been a
patient of this nurse
practitioner is going to have to
go to a physician who has never
seen her before to get an
exemption so this is one of
those things that we really need
to clean up in the statute thank
you.
Thank you.
And
We do have an amendment and I'm
offering the amendment
this morning yeah I'm not I'm
would like to do that now before
we go to the audience because I
think it may make a difference.
to folks in the audience so.
I'm and it's in your share file
let me give you the two oh two
number.
Point two two zero seven three
eight point two.
Well folks I'm a moment to find
that so
And if all move it for just a
moment for discussion.
The Senate on the floor
get an amendment that check out
nurse practitioners and foot and
instead took out sufficient to
and put in instead providers
licensed providers within their
scope of practice.
and what that did was really
open it up two of without any
definition of what licensed
providers are talking about that
could have done.
potentially physical therapist
to demonstrate chiropractor or
acupuncturist you know a whole
host of of our providers and
podiatrist
and so and.
We
So my amendment strikes the
Senate for amendments.
And reasserts nurse practitioner
but also adds of physician
assistant is of physician
physician assistant nurse
practitioners are the primary
primary care providers in this
in the state.
Physician assistants aren't
quite as independent as nurse
practitioners but they have full
prescriptive authority do
primary care
and
have the at least a
collaborative of practice with
someone but
but essentially practice
On site at Wiley not necessarily
with was supervision so and we
have traditionally treated them
like nurse practitioners
For the most part so
particularly when it comes
primary care so that's the
amendment that I'm offering and
I believe Senator that's a
friendly amendment.
Correct.
He's not in his head absolutely.
Okay okay I'm here I move for
adoption.
is there any objection to the
amendment.
Seeing I see had had shaking
saying none hearing none okay
you're you're bill is adopted
and I mean the amendment is
adopted.
Which you know means that you
have to get concurrence back on
the on the Senate floor.
So next if you're ready US
senator will go to the audience.
Okay yes we start I'm here with
a full.
To see who in the audience might
be in favor or opposition.
Of on Senate bill two forty four
as amended.
The quick ones of if we were in
person we would have people
raise their hands in the room.
Madam chair I see Representative
but also this is in the
attendees with this pandemic.
Well there is.
Yeah we'll get a more.
Thank you for.
You know arching them you're
welcome.
Okay we've got six in the
audience and support on line in
opposition we will now go to the
audience for anyone who wishes
to make
public comment and first we have
NM PCA if you could introduce
yourself.
Good morning this is David Roddy
from New Mexico primary care
association health policy
director madam chair members of
the committee we stand the
strong support of this bill we
have over a hundred and fifty
clan acts most of which are in
rural areas and many of which
are staffed by by only nurse
practitioners oppositions
assistance so we think the
sponsoring or to support thank
you.
Thank you David.
I'm sure reduction.
I'm sorry madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is three dots and and I am
actually speaking as a retired
school nurse with thirty one
years the public schools and we
strongly support adding nurse
practitioners and physicians'
assistants to of being allowed
to.
Sign the medical exemptions we
just caution against adding any
other types of exemptions to be
immunization rolls at this point
thank you.
Thank you.
I'm and it looks like that's.
All that we.
Have in the our public comment
so we'll go to members of the
committee and first I have
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator for bringing this
legislation forward
this is something that really
needs to pass I just wanted to
let you know I appreciate it
especially for rural New Mexico
and
I would love to former Linda
hint hint to reach out to me
next time to run some of this
legislation thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Matthews.
In two simple questions first of
all this is applied to
immunizations aware the
exemption is based on religious
grounds versus medical grams.
I may just may with my experts
the R. I believe that it does
include the religious grounds in
other words it allows them to
the that exemption by itself and
I see on chairman Armstrong.
Now now now now.
It doesn't affect it at all.
Okay
that's done in some other method
I assume.
I'll step in because I've I've
run a bill of right around this
a few years ago so I'm I'm
familiar with it there are three
ways to get an exemption one is
medical second is religious and
third is can't remember what
it's called a sensually
philosophical and personal
beliefs and this is amending the
medical exemption only as to who
can certify for a medical
exemption it doesn't touch the
other two provisions.
You madam chair thank you for
that enter and this is the other
question I have an and this is
just my ignorance
what's the is the basic
difference between a nurse
practitioner and a PA the
training.
As opposed to scope of practice
I'm just curious and I could
just a question now that I'm
sitting here.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Matthews the
trainings are quite different
from a nurse practitioners have
a
Yes.
Yes yes and to begin with they
then go on and take master's
level courses become a certified
nurse practitioners
as with them that has a masters
and.
The position assistance.
You know both come into a
training program I believe the I
remember correctly it's been
awhile about three years
and then they become certified
but they don't have the nursing
pre requisite that nurse
practitioners.
Okay I'm madam chair as
Representative Eli and I'm sorry
senator thank you for that
explanation
Yes in this state I think this
is a good bill and glad you ours
bringing it forward and I would
definitely support and I most of
time most of is never never see
an M. D. anymore except for very
special the kinds of things we
always CPA's or nurse
practitioner so very important
thank you.
Thank you Representative
Matthews and if we can get.
Chairman Armstrong the bill
passed and the R. through the
Senate we will look at all hi to
practitioners at Gerry expand
primary care but including
physicians.
Thank you madam chair and
centers.
Madam chair I move for adoption
for Senate bill two forty four
is amended.
And we have a we have a motion
made seconded and a second by
Representative Ferrary is you
want to call the roll dollars.
I'm Representative Paul
Sanderson.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Britney but a hot
yes.
Representative care on that page
yes.
Representative Stephanie lord
yes.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Representative you're muted.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Representative Louise that off
us.
Yes ma'am.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Well.
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Anderson brooch yes.
Thank you Representative
Representative Roger Montoya.
Representative okay you're
muted.
Representative Roger Montoya.
What do we do have chair madam
chair of Representative Montoya
just text me that his audio is
gone now okay it looks like
you're muted though.
Can use our signal with a yes or
no had not.
I think I think it's all you're
coming out of this computer that
actually went out I don't think
he has any idea that we're
talking to them right now we we
can say anything about
Representative on Twitter right
now if you have no idea.
Okay we're gonna we're gonna
have to use the moment.
Chair Joanne Ferrari.
Yes.
Madam chair.
For a second time.
Yes.
And so Senator you have you have
a do pass
Two forty four as amended and
tend to zero.
Thank you very much madam chair
and growing.
Santo it is nodding up and down
and giving a thumbs up you can
make that eleven to zero he's
having troubles okay and I'm far
enough away that I'm going to
get three points and
Representative Vera basketball
hoop back there are.
Thank you thank you senator.
Share yes I just want to do a
quick audio check thank you I've
done okay.
Thank you
and that next we will go to
Senate bill twenty three and I
saw Senator Padilla here so
we'll get him in.
Pretty sure I did.
Representative Hochman Vigil is
going to present.
Of this bill.
Her offer.
Good morning madam chair can you
hear me yes it is Senator
Padilla gonna join us our.
I'm not sure madam chair I know
that we have been talking about
me presenting the bill this
morning okay because he called
me this morning letting me know
he was going to be on his way
and would.
yes here but I don't I thought I
summer earlier but I don't seem
now so when we go ahead okay
also haven't a quick text
message to thank you madam chair
back members of the committee
Senate bill twenty oh and I also
have an expert madam chair look
if we can move him over G. see
more.
K. we've we've got J. C. and
I'll keep watching for Senator
Padilla okay very good madam
chair members of the committee
Senate bill twenty three would
dictate that insurance products
offered for sale in New Mexico
are purchased for state
employees could not impose a
higher coinsurance percentage or
copay amount on a consumer for
services provided by a
chiropractor then is already
required for primary care
services it's this is defined in
each of the bill sections is the
first level of basic our general
health care for persons health
needs
and it also a amended was added
by Senate tax to make the bill
effective on January first
twenty twenty two with that
madam chair I'll defer to my
experts Mr Morrissey if he wants
to say anything more.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you for the
time I considering this piece of
legislation my name's Dr J. see
more I am the vice president of
the New Mexico chiropractic
association as well as the owner
and clinic director of height
Care practice in sports medicine
the language of this bill is
very straightforward with the
straightforward purpose
this bill will improve access to
conservative non pharmacological
Care musculoskeletal injuries by
removing a common barrier
created by health insurance
policy decide the purposes
reducing opioid prescriptions
and other more invasive
procedures chiropractic medicine
continues to get support from
health care consumers and
medical institutions recent
guidelines for the treatment of
acute and sub acute lower back
pain from the American colleges
American college of physicians
endorses manipulation as a first
line treatment additionally the
FDA and CDC had specifically
recommended chiropractic care as
a strategy to help resolve the
prescription drug crisis as
recently as earlier this year
many studies published in
various periodic journals.
Report a significant decrease in
the risk of billing opioid
prescriptions for patients that
are under the care of a
chiropractic physician and also
it's pretty straightforward more
conservative care equals less
opioids and other more
aggressive treatments
unfortunately the current health
care delivery system
Creates barriers to access this
care the barriers come in the
form of.
Visit let's limitations are
Jewish pre authorization
requirements and high copays the
nature and the nature of
chiropractic care and other
physical medicine often requires
multiple in office treatments a
single fifty dollar copay make
easy the budget for with the
specialist but the typical three
to six visit treatment plant can
add up quickly you compare this
to an opioid prescription it
probably cost a few dollars out
of pocket patients are too often
making decisions on their wealth
and Senator well being the
problem is further exacerbated
for patients with chronic
conditions.
Government agencies and
organizations have been pleading
with the insurance industry to
self police to address this
discrepancy.
In two thousand seventeen thirty
seven members of the national
Attorney General association
including New Mexico's Hector
Balderas signed a letter to end
it insurance industry leaders
requesting them to review their
payment and coverage policies
and revise them as necessary
appropriate to encourage health
care providers to prioritize not
opioid pain management options
over opioid prescriptions to
date little is been done to
address the policy design issues
now is the time for more
aggressive intervention from
lawmakers.
Today I'm certain you'll hear
from representatives of the
health insurance industry tell
you how this bill will result in
increased costs to health care
consumers consumers portion we
have a some data to assess this
claim in the past ten years
seven other states have passed
similar legislation with some of
the state's boasting the lowest
average health insurance
premiums in the country and none
of the state's all drastic
increase in premiums following
implementation additionally
similar laws have already been
passed in New Mexico for other
provider groups.
In conclusion Senate bill twenty
three will lower copays for
hardworking new Mexicans to
improve access for state
affected evidence based care
that significantly reduces the
risks associated with
prescription drug use and that's
why I'm asking for your support
thanks for your time and I will
come happy to stand for any
questions or comments.
Thank you and Senator Padilla
has joined us
Senator do you want to add
anything before going to the
audience thank you madam
chairwoman I did find
Representative Hochman Vigil
with a complete outline of for
an introduction did you receive
that Representative I did at
Senator I I I it looks like it
was stuck in my outbox but thank
you so much okay so if she's
introduced at I'm happy to just
go forward I don't want to take
up anymore time manager okay
thank you can I just say one
thing just your apologize the
only thing I would add I'm not
sure if it was in the outline I
gave you Representative Hochman
Vigil but we did add madam chair
a small amendment as a result of
the superintendent of insurance
waiting and wanting to make we
don't have an effective date are
that slip by when we introduced
it but The effective date would
be January first twenty twenty
two that that's something I
would at this point and that's
it that amendments already been
adopted correct that's correct
yes okay great all right so
before we take public comment we
usually do a poll.
and see who's in the audience
that might be in support or
opposition.
You will give it a few seconds I
tried to vote madam chair but it
wouldn't let me.
I know it won't let us vote.
Okay I think we I think we've
got it looks like we have
tenants support and one in
opposition.
And we will just
go to now to and probably in any
order if you wish to speak on
this bill and trying to keep
your comments to to one minute
to get us close you can we don't
have very many people with their
hands up to speak so I won't cut
you off mid sentence but
first Dr Michael pritom.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dr Michael
pritom Medicare practices Isshin
in Albuquerque I have a private
practice and I treat patients at
First Nations community health
source which is a federally
qualified health center I'm a
volunteer faculty member of the
United States at the university
of New Mexico's department of
neurosurgery in the pain clinic
I've been a frequent guest
lecture at project echo to the
New Mexico overdose prevention
and pain management advisory
Councils integrative treatment
committee and on the American
chiropractic association
delegate.
We've had several meetings with
insurance representatives over
the years to Whittle this bill
down to the current version and
I just ask that you please vote
yes and thank you very much for
your time.
Thank you next we have brought
more.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I believe I'm the
only one standing in opposition
to the and I will try to do this
as quickly as I possibly can my
name is Roy Moore I am a
registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance plans
and we stand a respectful
opposition to Senate bill twenty
three we stand in opposition to
Senate bill twenty three because
what it is is it's a restriction
on help with design help plans
come up with multiple different
products to put out in this this
bill proposes to limit the ways
that we offer those products
which you'll see or would you
have seen this year is you've
seen a bill very similar to this
in house bill thirty four that
was for podiatrists now you're
saying that chiropractors
version of it you will see soon
I believe the behavioral health
providers will come forward with
Senate bill three seventeen and
say that they don't want to have
any costsharing whatsoever so
it's a continuous progression of
different providers coming in
saying either treat us as
primary care or have no
costsharing whatsoever that
progression it messes with the
balance between costsharing and
premiums and we do appreciate
the amendment that was added in
the Senate to allow for the
effective date to be pushed out
because as we've said many times
when you do these types of
restrictions premiums go up in
the extended effective date
allows us to rebuild our Rick
premium right so that we can
adjust for all of these changes
I would just note that this will
not be the end of the different
types of providers coming in
asking you for different
treatment costsharing next year
we'll probably see a new batch
of provider saying treat us
like.
I merry Care or no copay in all
of those adjustments have to be
built into premiums thank you
very much for listening to me
this morning.
Thank you Brandt next we have a
see now I'm not going to even
try to pronounce your last name
all you you know do off okay
thank you chair committee
members my needs at the net
crease to do little I'm sure you
would have been fine job I am
the political director for the
auto wanted progressive caucus
and this is bill is a good
example of how we can reverse
the trend of corporate money
over health it is the number one
reason we have opioid addiction
epidemic because we ignored
Chinese history.
This bill begins the harder task
of putting people over profits
because we are indeed a
government by the with the
people for the people I ask for
to pass on SB twenty three thank
you thank you.
Okay I'm we will go next to of
the Committee and less Senator
Representative you want to say
anything before we go to
Committee questions.
I thank you very much madam
chair I I think that concludes
my presentation on of Senator
Padilla wants to add anything.
I know madam chair I think we're
fine and I you know I was
respectfully did that work and
speak with them Mr more before
we came to the session and and
we just you know have a
difference of opinion there and
Regis are continuing to move
forward thank you yeah don't
feel alone we've that you've
disagreed on when we did it for
PTA's or we have an and for a
podiatrist so Representative
Lord.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senators will be super brief on
this because I know we have so
much to do today so I don't know
if you guys know this I'm really
dating myself on chiropractic
I'm lot of people don't even
know the coverages you still
deliver babies.
Yet the my adopted mom graduate
nineteen forty one for you need
to have this opportunity.
Ways to say it I know there's a
police state she graduate
nineteen forty one just one
first female doctors and
naturopathic medicine and they
were encompass everything just
like chiropractors were one time
so chiropractors make graduate
have a lot of knowledge the
Study all kinds of diseases a
study lab work they do OBGYN I
it's unfortunately been narrowed
down to distribute the spine
chiropractic so I'm very glad to
see to pro corrected bills
coming up this session because I
remember back in the game
cartridges could even bill
insurance they were not allowed
to bill insurance it also be a
come a long way and that's also
contained his your chiropractic
the especially on my house went
to west by access to western
states chiropractic college and
they are true they learn a lot
just like a medical doctor does
so I just wanted to make two
sense thank you madam chair
Senators thank you
Representative.
Thank you
any other questions from the
committee.
I just wanted to point out that
it and if we may all be too
tired to pay attention but this
bill repeats and repeats and
repeats the same information
and that's because it has to
address different areas of the
insurance code so it has
do it multiple the same language
multiple times to get that work
group and individual and state
employees at cetera so yes.
Any other questions what's the
pleasure the committee.
Which is passed all.
Representative Lord wants that
honor of.
Thank you I was already.
doors you want to call the roll.
Representative Bob Sanders.
Yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong
yes.
Representative Nibert a hot yes.
Representative Karen bash.
Representative term bash.
Yes.
Thank you Representative
Stephanie lord yes.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes Representative Roger
Montoya.
We've had offsite.
Yes I'd like to explain more
low.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Representative.
Representative Roger Montoya.
By chair Joanne Ferrari.
Yes.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong.
Yes and it looks like we lost
Representative Montoya he's
having technical difficulties
this morning so you have a do
pass tend to zero.
US senator and representative
and thank you thank you.
One that will come with your
personal privilege of madam
chair one welcome Representative
but at us my neighbor to the
legislature so good to see you
in committee representative.
It's great to see you and
Representative trousers you
wanted to explain your vote.
Yes I'm just real quick thank
you madam chair but just.
Concern about all these bills
were passing that are
manipulating.
Some of the copays and stuff and
I just hope that it doesn't
affect our premiums but I you
know I'm trying to see how this
will also be a little further C.
R. if you'll do anything else
but I at this time of support
thank you so much thank you
thank you all right.
I'm next we have a Senate bill
sixty one.
And.
I don't know if we have Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino here or if there
is a representative that's
planning to.
Present for him.
I'm sorry madam chair which bill
are we going to go to next I'm
sorry sixty.
Thank you.
But I'm not sure who's here to
present.
madam chair I didn't receive any
info on anyone else that could
be presenting.
We'll go ahead and re email his
assistant doors if you could do
that make sure they have the
link.
And to all of I will text him
and so we could go on to
a Senate bill two twenty nine
the healthy food financing act.
excuse me madam chair I don't
send them the link okay.
The state do we have.
Representative Rubio.
Here first for twenty nine.
Okay well while we try and find
folks for those two bills
representative Thompson do you
want to go ahead and do Senate
bill one ninety all know there's
Representative Rubio yeah madam
chair I just promoted her sorry
I didn't realize you're moving
so.
Thanks
Representative Rubio Senate Bill
two twenty nine yes good morning
and I believe Senator Hamlin is
is going to be on as well and
then we have to experts Kristin
Aguilar and I think Tim Davis is
going to join us as well.
K..
There's Christian.
Sting to the time when.
I know you said Christian we
have Christian and who else
attended Davis got it.
Found him okay and I haven't
seen.
Don't there's Senator Hamblen.
Okay thank you welcome Senator.
Good morning good morning sent
Senator and Representative go
ahead.
Great thank you so much madam
chair Committee members so
this bill you've heard before I
believe in the inner it's better
legislation that we've been
working on with last man food
center for a few years now and
it is really to address food
desert's across the state I
represent a district here in the
city of Los crucis that has a
very low access to healthy
healthy foods and and many of
you all I'm sure throughout your
own districts have issues with
that as well this this this
legislation in court works to
create mechanisms within our
state infrastructure to not only
mostly to to get access to of of
federal funds to then be
directed to many farmers that
work around the state usually
very small ones and so this bill
for me is important because it
addresses a lot of the food
justice issues that I care about
and access to to quality foods
are to quality healthy foods all
handed off to Senator Hamlin who
did a really amazing job caring
this legislation on the Senate
side and and then we can let
Kristin the and and ten speak to
the mechanics of how the bill
works and then and then go from
there.
Thank you Representative Rubio
madam chair it's so so great to
see our faces given that we
haven't been able to to see you
here in the the state capital
you know I I have to give an
incredible amount of credit to
Representative Rubio but also
the folks that lost me because
they're making Karen this bill
so easy because of the work that
they do not only in southern New
Mexico but around the state and
I look at the it's Senate bill
two twenty nine as an
opportunity for job creation
especially in a time of a
pandemic people having access to
healthy food is becoming much
more important now I mean it was
important before but it's it's
really rough been been lifted up
in terms of where there is food
disparities but we also have
this opportunity of creating
jobs and creating solopreneurs
of the solo businesses and and
we're going to see more or of
that as we do this you know I I
had the good fortune of having
this we should be received very
well in the Senate and that
there are a number of other
bills that are very supportive
of agriculture four H. clubs
youth farmers that this bill
actually compliments so we look
at the bigger picture we're
really going to be able to have
an incredible amount of support
for agriculture in our state in
the coming years and helping to
financing act is going to really
provide those resources and
access for people thank you
madam chair.
Thank you I'm just like your
experts to.
Say something so madam chair
Kristin I you are from left me
up would center K..
Thank you representative madam
chair Representative it's great
to be here at early this morning
with you all
Sen could executive director of
an organization we're in
southern New Mexico but we work
statewide with several partners
throughout the state from the
four corners region Albuquerque
southwest part eastern part of
the state so we're working with
partners in the food and farm
systems throughout the state in
a really strong collection to
figure out how do we move the
needle for things like poverty
and hunger and childhood hunger
and malnutrition in the state we
think and we believe that the
HFA is a fantastic opportunity
to create a public private
partnership in order to really
advance the route really direct
advance issues that address the
root causes of a lot of the
problems that we have in the
state so not only whatever use
the food and farm systems as a
tool to do that not only are we
talking and addressing issues
such as poverty and economic
development but because we're
using the food and farm system
we're also able to directly
address things like hunger or
low food access throughout the
state so it's really a double
sided when when solution to a
lot of these problems.
What this bill will do is
establish a much needed
mechanism for philanthropic
private and federal government
dollars to capitalize the
community investment vehicle
that will help create and fund
the ecosystem of community
wealth in our state.
We're able to really work with
several different foundations
and other philanthropic entities
on both the local and national
level my organization myself run
several national steering
committees that are focused on
food systems and community based
economic development and
originally invited to
participate in national funding
affinity groups such as the
sustainable ag and food
assistance funders network and I
will say there's an incredible
amount of interest in HFA funds
and these types of investment
vehicles in the New Mexico food
system.
So we know that if the state
supports the creation of this
fund impact investors will
capitalize it if state
investment even a small amount
of state investment can unlike
unlock up to five million
dollars in potential funding
fairly easily.
it support it will support a
fund that will be a strong
public private partnership we've
been working very closely with
economic development to make
sure this works for all parties
we have partners in the CDFI
philanthropic in impact
investing sectors that are ready
and willing to make this work
and
Really we're looking at the
creation of a fund that is going
to provide low interest and
forgivable loans and grants to
entities along the entire food
system self small farmers mid
size farmers food hubs
aggregation points market stance
and even retail outlets in a lot
of our we know a lot of our
reach rural communities have had
a lot of closures of grocery
stores right so we know that
there is no needed support along
the entire food chain in order
to really invest in our economic
development from the roots up
and so what we're looking to do
is.
Really support the creation of a
fund that starts moving the
needle on how we begin to
address a lot of our issues in
the state and to do so with a
lot of enthusiasm a ton of
coalition support a lot of
really fantastic and strong
partners who are ready to start
moving this forward so also up
there and we'll look forward to
answering the questions as well
thank you madam chair thank you
Mr Davis did you want to add
anything.
Thank you madam chair I don't
have anything to add but I'm
happy to stand for questions and
help answer anything that the
committee mask great then of
Senator and Representative are
you ready for us to go to the
audience yes thank you okay we
start here with a poll to see
how many in the audience might
be at present in support or
opposition.
So if you can just respond to
the pole.
We'll give it a few seconds.
K. looks like we've got it you
have twenty one people here in
support and non in opposition.
And so we'll go to the audience.
for those who wish to make
public comment.
And first we have David Roddy.
Madam chair members of the
committee Mexico primary care
association stands in support of
this bill and thank the sponsor
and just committee support thank
you.
Thank you.
I'm Tiffany Rivera.
It just a second to okay.
Go ahead definitely good morning
madam chair members of the
committee to hear that
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
I stand before you this morning
in strong support of Senate bill
two twenty nine healthy food
financing act the bill will
support healthy food commerce
production as well as access to
healthy food we support
strengthening our local food
systems providing our producers
with additional markets and
further connecting and
strengthening the producer
consumer relationship we're
extremely excited that Senator
Hamblen has chosen to push this
piece of legislation this year
and also very excited for her co
sponsor Representative Rubio
thank you for the opportunity to
come in this morning.
Thank you next we have and I
apologize I'm going to put your
name says foreign Neftchala
nefesh you're gonna have to
correct me.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Secora Nefish and I am the
registered lobbyist for covenant
pathways.
Coming at pathways is a
demonstration farm the
checkerboard area of the Navajo
Nation where we combine of
healthy soil farming practices
with traditional Navajo farming
practices.
And the pandemic exposed the
weakness of the food
infrastructure here in New
Mexico we stand in strong
support of Senate bill two
twenty nine to create the
framework for developing New
Mexico's food infrastructure
thank you.
Thank you I'm next year we have
so we think.
The morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is that we think and I'm a
registered lobbyist for the
national young farmers coalition
based in Albuquerque's south
valley my husband and I also our
farmers ourselves to go
diversified vegetables and raise
small livestock some goats and
chickens the national young
farmers coalition is impressed
and inspired by Senate bill two
two nines focus on equitable
food oriented development for
historically underserved
communities here in New Mexico
for this and all of the reasons
state are we urge the committee
to support this trans formative
an important piece of
legislation and thank the
sponsors for bringing it
forward.
Thank you.
Next we have lowly Irvin Vitela.
Thank you madam chair committee
members my name is lily Irvin
Vitela and I'm the president and
executive director and a
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico First.
I'm we're hearing strong support
Senate bill two twenty nine and
the really thoughtful work that
lasted me a has done with the
Sanchez.
there are multiple reasons why
we supported one we see alliance
with the New Mexico agriscience
plan that we've been working on
for seven years and see this as
a way to advance equitable
economic development we also.
have been working with a number
of groups strengthening local
food systems so both through our
health body mind and spirit town
hall and also through our
coalition of food hunger what
water an act of policy work
group of folks have come in
strong support and so we're here
representing all of those people
who are also inspired by the
good work
the last semi and the sponsors
are proposing to do thank you.
Thank you next we have Helga
Garza.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Erica Garza and executive
director of article to the
cooperative network a member of
former member organization
representing forty urban and
rural farmers all using
sustainable and regenerative
methods and keeping our
production local on the local
and regional level we are in
strong and full support of house
Bill SB two twenty nine for all
the reasons that have been
stated and we congratulate
less imia and the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward it is
a much needed bill and
strengthening our food system
and our long term vision of New
Mexico becoming a sustainable
And regenerative.
Food supplier to our communities
all over the state and this our
bill will help us get there and
will be the shining light for me
all of our farming practices and
to keep developing future
farmers and and the ability to
our our production local thank
you thank you bye next we have
Rebecca long room.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Rebecca Lambro and the
register.
My apologies I just I just
accidentally cut her off.
No problem I'll just start over
just yet go ahead.
Is trying to manage the listen I
I I turned off the wrong one the
problem too many buttons all
right my name is Rebecca.
I am a registered dietitian and
I'm here on behalf The New
Mexico Academy nutrition
dietetics which is the largest
organization of food and
nutrition professionals we stand
in strong support for Senate
bill two twenty nine which is in
direct alignment for our vision
and mission is to promote
nutrition health and well being
for all New Mexicans we expect
that Senate bill two twenty nine
will lessen the test
disproportionate impact
nutrition related chronic
diseases of under served
populations thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee and to the sponsors
for their hard work and
dedication to bring this bill
forward.
Thank you thank.
Next we have Alicia Robinson
Welch.
Thank you my name is Alicia
Robinson last thank you for the
opportunity to speak today I'm
here representing lack of such a
CSA which is an aggregated CSA
and Bernalillo county and we
distribute fresh produce boxes
sourced locally from farmers all
over the city at especially on a
communities that have
traditionally not had access to
that food
and so we we started to stand
strong support of Senate bill
two twenty nine because it does
address the root causes of
poverty hunger and inequity here
in New Mexico and help secure
federal investment
For it can be available to you
our food and farm businesses and
create jobs and better access to
healthy food for our urban and
rural communities so I ask that
you stand in support of SB
twenty nine and appreciate your
time today thank you.
Thank you
next we have ascena
Christodoulou did I do what did
I say your name right this time
you did awesome thank you it
even came up and spelled it
correctly.
Good morning chair committee
members my name subpoena
Christodoulou and I'm not
political director for Adelante
aggressive call but I'm here as
a citizen as well did you know
that food travels on average
twelve hundred miles to get to
our now this and that New Mexico
imports of more than ninety
percent of its food this is a
great bill as it encourages
public private partnerships
which is how New Mexico was able
to be so successful against
COVID it promotes community
supported agriculture I love
those boxes delivered to my home
and growers markets which I'm
trying to develop in northeast
Albuquerque let's build more
connection between the urban and
rural people with Bill SB two
twenty nine and I ask two passed
thank you very much thank you.
Next well yes.
You need to on you yourself.
Jill Yazzie.
Yes or head.
Yes thank you.
Okay madam chair and committee
members my name is chilly all
day from Shiprock I am with the
show brought traditional farmers
co operative we are small
farmers and our mission is to
obtain a condition food
resiliency to provide fresh
produce to our tribal members
are pueblo relatives our
children through the farm to
school program as well as our
families across the state who
struggle to keep enough food on
the table thanks be to do non is
a visionary piece of legislation
it will demonstrate we are
serious about ending hunger and
food insecurity in our state as
we go together forward into what
appears to be perilous times our
communities must have the tools
to afford themselves that means
to a secure and healthy future
this legislation does exactly
that we are as farmers have the
natural resources and capacity
to feed our communities we stand
in strong support of H. B. two
two nine thank you very much
thank you and last we have it
right here.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Karega with
that littered advocates minister
Mexico will speak on behalf of
the conference churches New
Mexico conference of churches
and I will simply state that we
support this very visionary bill
for all the reasons have been so
wonderfully articulated by the
previous speakers we urge your
support for SB two twenty nine
and thank you the stock options.
Thank you and I lied about whose
last generally.
We can turn around there you go.
Pam I'm you yourself and go
ahead and share madam chair and
committee members thank you so
much on behalf of the New Mexico
food and agriculture Policy
council farm to table in the
rocky mountain farmers union we
stand in a static support.
Senate bill two twenty nine and
we want to think Senator Hamblen
Representative Rubio and
blasphemy of food center and
many partners for bringing this
for this is long time in coming
couple of things of that
examples of how this bill could
work now this funding could help
at corner stores small tiny
stores in our rural sector could
benefit from and this investment
to expand that storage to create
of food access for healthy foods
local foods in those stores the
other thing is that this also
provides the opportunity for the
economic development department
to draw down up to two million
dollars a year from the federal
treasury from healthy food
financing initiative.
Federal program so we are in the
static full support and thank
you so much for on the
opportunity to present.
Thank you ma'am.
Okay I don't see any more public
comment.
So we will go to.
Members of the committee
and first I have Representative
Lord.
Thank you madam chair and
senators.
Okay you guys are really gonna
have to walk me through this
bill because I'm gonna date
myself and age are in the
seventies since the seventies
there has been massive
accessibility to fresh fruit
fresh vegetables and minted
resilient farmers markets I
spent thousands and thousands of
dollars at whole foods and
trader Joe's and my own market
here in cedar crest has their
own health food section I've
lived all over in small towns
that have access to.
Excuse me fresh fruits and
vegetables.
Coops and important to table and
I'm trying to figure out now why
do we need the government
involved in this can you explain
it to me thank you.
Madam chair Representative Lord
I can certainly hand this one
off to our our expert miss I do
lad I will say though that
I don't know if you know this
but I grew up in a really small
town in the southeastern part of
the state to start the were to
show up
called lake Arthur and in my
entire life it wasn't until I
actually moved out of state that
I actually realized that there
were opportunities for access
for for healthy food so
my experience in terms of that
is really much different and I
will certainly let as I cannot
speak to that but there's a lot
of communities throughout our
state who don't have the access
who don't have the the the the
the ability to really
the the the availability for
depression healthy foods is not
as accessible and
Our.
The strength in in being able to
find that for communities can
certainly be supplemented by
having federal funds directed
into our state that many other
states throughout this country
actually have a lot of
accessibility to and have the
mechanics to be able to do that
because they've taken those
steps in doing so and so New
Mexico just hasn't and so
and I'll let you
Take over.
Thank you madam chair
representative Ford so whenever
we think about talk about excess
be there's really two key
factors to that one is can
families four the food that is
available and our families able
to get to where the food is
available where is that located
on both those fronts New Mexico
is doing fairly terribly that's
the bad news
The USDA and we can share these
maps with the entire committee
afterwards that that would be
helpful as well and.
Late lays out that low income
areas and with low excess food
areas include areas that are low
income and low access where
there are at least five hundred
people or thirty three percent
of the population are more than
one mile away from a food source
in urban areas or ten miles in
rural areas from the nearest
food source or supermarket and
so this actually is a vast
majority of New Mexico we've
heard from several folks and
even senators representatives
around the state especially in
rural areas The seems to be
really problematic for example
in northeastern New Mexico a
grandparents actually have a
small cabin in mills New Mexico
and so if you're familiar with
the northeast part of the state
there used to be a supermarket a
little locally owned grocery
store in Rahway New Mexico
that supermarket has closed and
so you're looking at a huge
stretch of land between
Springer Representative tone and
down south in Logan where people
would have to drive up to an
hour sometimes over an hour to
get to a supermarket and so
because we know it's really
difficult to have food access in
rural areas this bill really
looks at not just
Supporting through low interest
loans and forgivable loans full
scale supermarkets but we wanted
to make it fit New Mexico so
it's looking at the entire food
system from small farmers
roadside stands CSA boxes food
hubs in corner stores or small
grocery stores to make sure that
it works for the population in
our state and because this bill
is focused on supporting
economic development through
really focusing on social
entrepreneurship in the food and
farm business community we're
looking at being able to address
that other part of food access
which is affordability because
they were able to start really
cultivating that community based
economic development so that our
farmers who often make actually
very little money rightly people
are going to farming to get rich
unfortunately and.
They have to also be able to
feed their families food
operators and grocery stores
have tiny margins have to be
able to feed their families so
what this is act does is really
create a system.
And a financial vehicle through
bringing in dollars from federal
HFI funds would be eligible for
up to two million dollars per
year through federal agents I
funds and other impact investing
to be able to create quality
jobs and all of our community so
we're being able to address not
only the distance people have to
travel to get the food but also
address the affordability
through increasing the buying
power of our small farmers
through our food hubs grocery
store owners and families.
Thank you for we finished size
cut people often are forced yes
I'm dead thank you
Representative thank you I I
appreciate the answer on that so
my next questions chair so if
we're going to say we're going
to go into a small town which
unfortunately has lost their
store and then we're going to
get them funding and grants and
loans how would they become
sustainable meaning okay we get
them started and if there's not
an economy to support it then
what happens and let's say three
years.
Thank you madam chair
Representative
Kristen I can go ahead and hand
it off to you.
Thank you madam chair
representative right so the
reason this these financial
vehicles include the forgivable
loans and the grants is to
increase the likelihood that
those businesses would be able
to survive in that condition so
we know that grocery stores and
selling produce that there are
razor thin margins for a lot of
those and a lot of the is
enterprises are having to
compete against a global supply
chain that is heavily subsidized
rate and is functioning and has
all the infrastructure needs and
so we need to make we need a
level that feels right to make
sure our small businesses and
our small farmers are able to be
competitive and so we do that by
pulling together these financial
packages that include the grants
right and included the low
interest loan so that it
increases their likelihood of
being able to be successful and
along with this simply the
financial packages we're really
looking also at including and
making sure that it's built into
the system technical assistance
in the form of business and
financial planning or other
supports that folks would need
and.
You know the reality is that we
would like to see when I one
hundred percent success rate for
every single one that went out
the door for this program
and that's what we would be
working towards you know a lot
of our partners in the
philanthropic in the committee
develop financial institute the
CDFI fields are really looking
to make sure we do everything we
can to make sure that those
businesses are successful it
might be unrealistic to expect a
hundred percent but if we're
hoping that through the
technical assistance whatever
markets or whatever businesses
put in place is one that meets
the demands of the area and
meets the market need for the
area so we're not looking at
doing a full scale for example
supermarket in a very rural area
with three hundred residents
immediately and eighty five up
to five hundred you know early
in a little a little bit further
away they really are wanting to
make sure that whatever those
market outlets are they meet the
demands in that area they we see
it and we have heard that there
just needs to be a little bit of
support at the front end to help
get that going so
I hope that answers your
question Representative just yet
thank you for internet question
thank you madam chair and
etcetera so when we're trying to
determine.
Hi Mister I two different
questions that we go to this
other one I'm what if let's say
somebody in that area decide Sir
going to they want to be the
farmer for I don't know insert
some professional nobody needs
or wants and there's no demand
for how are you going to oversee
that and say okay you know what
we give you money for three
years nobody's buying your
product nobody wants your
product and normally with
capitalism they would just go
out of business how do we make
sure that we're not sustaining
somebody for a long period of
time developing something that
nobody wants on the market.
Madam chair representative and
if you could trying keep your
answer says St that would be
helpful we've got a lot of
people with questions.
Just just a few more questions
and record at yep.
Thank you madam chair
representative generally
speaking when folks are starting
businesses will do market
testing right and will not
generally want to be growing
something that they're not going
to be able to sell farmers are
pretty conservative when it
comes to.
Just throwing a bunch of food
that they don't have a market
for so in our experience that's
pretty highly unlikely to happen
but as put in laid out in the
bill and as part of this there's
like a whole there's an entire
process that they have to go
through to make sure right like
what is the plan to get food and
underserved areas are they
serving an underserved area what
is their business plan and so
there's a lot of that laid out
in the bill itself and.
Care about sex.
Section four I believe
Representative thank you last
question I'm much more
administrative hassle more I see
here eligible projects would
include like new grocery store
construction for renovations
that include like a whole foods
or trader Joe's or would that
just include call out to is
eligible who's not eligible and
this are like a
income level of eligibility
thank you.
Madam chair representative yes
so to be eligible there is a
list of things that these
businesses would have to me
including their ability to
implement the project their plan
to accept snap to increase
affordability of healthy food if
possible and one of the the main
one of the biggest pieces of
eligibility is whether or not
this loan or grant and will
primarily serve underserved low
income or moderate income
communities and so this is
really going to be a process
through which the CDFI and the
five board would make that
decision based on their
the parameters laid out in any
other state would decide to put
in place
And typically those other types
of grocery stores the larger
ones wouldn't go into these
markets which is why we're doing
this and what also have you know
access to other funding.
Representative is yes thanks for
answering thank you center
spring this Billboard and madam
chair yield my time.
Thank you Representative next I
have Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you all for this presentation
I I don't have any questions
about the need for this program
on on the agriculture and water
resources committee and I am
quite frankly somewhat appalled
by the lack of investment in
our.
Rural and agricultural sectors
in the state I it is been an eye
opening experience to learn all
the things we don't do and
haven't been doing
but I am interested a little in
understanding the structure of
this program a little better
is so
It is first of all let me just
ask you
economic development department
is in support yes Sir now.
Madam chair representative yes.
Okay and because they'll lead
the administer of the program
administrator of the program
Madam chair representative yes.
And madam chair
Is the CDFI used to community
development financial
institutions are are they on
board yes or no Madam chair
representative yes I believe I
can lack of agency you are speak
to it but I think it's Greenleaf
that's the one that
has already shown strong
interest in in this problem this
process.
Madam chair representative yes I
dream spring is one who is
highly supportive and has a very
fast portfolio to pull something
like this often we've also
spoken to several others
including you send up and a few
others of age of the CDFI send
state process support of.
it madam chair thank you for
that answer in general it I know
that I worked with the CDFI is
putting together a small
business loan program and
have you actually worked with
the bankers and the association
and no Sir taking their
temperature on this because.
very important to the process.
Thank you madam chair
representative all all at just
I. E. last speak to that.
Madam chair representative I'm
only peripherally we've speaking
specifically to CDFI is because
that is the group that would SCG
CDFI is who is eligible to tap
into the federal HFI funds that
unlocks that two million dollars
per year and they have that
philanthropic focus are able to
include the grants and
forgivable loan pieces as well
I'm so that has been the focus
of the outreach to this
partnership a coalition building
Representative.
And madam chair thank you for
that answer
show the two million dollars is
that is that the total amount
that can be generated through
the program annually or is that
per project I didn't really
understand how that works.
Madam chair representative so
that is just one particular pool
of funding that we would be
eligible for through working at
the CDFI Federal HFI funds get
distributed through the farm
bill it's recapped every year so
two million dollars per year is
what a CDFI who is helping
coordinate this project would be
eligible for in addition we're
working closely with several
philanthropic partners who are
interested in impact investing
and our we're pretty confident
through working with those
partners that we would be able
to capitalize this at around an
additional three million dollars
initially and then hopefully
right as we're going forward
this is also a revolving loan
fund as the as the money is
being repaid into it and so
we're fairly confident that we
could be looking at a five
million dollar fund initially
with a minimum of two million
dollars available yearly on top
of that.
I'm madam chair at.
Thank you offer that ensure wow
it doesn't seem like she's
Hector needs to be more money
I was surprised New Mexico as a
statewide healthy soil program I
noticed healthy soils with
something on mentioned and I was
it was created several years ago
and has never received an
appropriation of which kind of
stocks which would which kind of
in my mind illustrate some of
the issues and the whole
question of food production
Healthy soils and so forth in in
terms of the state I mean
there's so much to be done here
but I'll get off that soapbox
You chose EDD is the
administrator of what role if
any do you see the New Mexico
department of agriculture
playing in putting these
programs together and these
projects together.
Thank you madam chair.
If any yes we did reach out we
have reached out to the
secretary of act so they are
they have been consulted on this
I can I can lead a secular speak
to the reason why we focused
with EDD but for us we felt that
at least for me anyway economic
development just seemed like the
right place especially when
we're talking about
our recovery our economic
recovery moving forward it felt
like a just a good fit
But I'll let miss the secular
speak to that Madam chair
representative yeah that's
precisely right and I see the
average department back is you
know we work with them
frequently on many different
things and I think as far as
like outreach and marketing and
pipeline development on the
agricultural production side is
probably maybe something we
would work with them on in
addition to the other coalition
partners and groups that we're
working with throughout the
state as well okay.
Madam chair I I would really
encourage trying to create some
of those collaboratives with
other state agencies and
organizations
again in this area we just seem
to be so far behind the eight
ball that we need all the that
involvement and and and energy
we can get
My last comment is on sponsoring
a homemade food bill to allow
homemade food the people cook
and bake cookies and all kinds
of things like that so I wish
you great success and I hope
that to the
stores and so forth you create
will have a little let it let's
put a table out there sometimes
and that people seller homemade
goods I just put that question.
Presented I think there's a lot
of opportunity for for
partnerships on this and so I
think that's really why I'm I'm
I'm super excited about this
legislation.
Thank you I thank you very much
for granted for manager I yield.
Thank you Representative next I
have Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair I think
I'm set now
I thank you Representative and
Christine for bringing this
forward I'm glad to see such a
strong at southern New Mexico
contingency even though this is
a program that will help the
whole state I'm really excited
about.
You know how our food hunger in
ag workgroup has come together
should for many people from the
public comment speech were on
that also and work so hard but I
am glad to see that we're trying
to leverage for more federal
dollars to go into the this
program to help and do you have
a ratio of what New Mexico
dollars are needed to
to get more federal funds or is
it are the federal funds just
straightforward you don't have
to have a match.
Madam chair representative I can
I can let Representative miss
Aguilar speak to that but there
there certainly is opportunities
for the state to get involved in
this but but at this point we we
do feel that federal funding is
available
and and and while there are
requirements for some matches
there are there are also some
that don't require that but all
all let secular state.
Madam chair representative yes
so technically the two million
dollars a specific two million
dollars from the federal HFI
funds that flows the CDT CDFI do
not require a match so
technically those would be just
be available even about
investment from the state what
the state investment does or
what do you right it would be to
create a leverage point for
additional dollars there's a
huge need in the state I think
it speaks to the states
intention and investing in our
local food system if we do put
dollars that are and so I'm
going forward I think it would
behoove us to make sure that
this is something invested in in
order to complete just multiply
our dollars in there's this
exists in several other states
and municipalities throughout
the country and on average for
every one dollar of local or
state government money invested
there these funds are leveraging
nine to fifteen dollars and
other private funds or federal
funds so there's a huge return
on investment for any investment
that goes into this from state
coffers.
That's great madam chair and
Senator Representative I also
was wondering
it was mentioned about some
Philip philanthropic groups and
you just said that in the wanted
nine.
Dollars and fifteen cents match
also who would that include like
the state del Norte which is a
group in el Paso and southern
New Mexico area
what other groups are there.
Madam chair representative so
some of the folks that we've
been speaking to their several
national groups and funders are
interested including groups like
how often does program related
investments into programs like
this in addition to grants
specifically
our local foundations are
interested in support of this
including the Keone and foreign
Burke for example and then
there's several larger groups
throughout the country Crespi
different philanthropic groups
like that and then you have
individual impact investors who
are also interested in as of
investing and the stock market
Wall Street or somewhere else
through interested investing in
something smaller and slower
like these types of funds so
it's a pretty diverse and wide
pool that we're looking at
whenever we're talking about
this match funds where else that
could come from.
Madam chair and Senator
Representative Kristin I think
this is going to have hello a
lot of the cooperation is
already established between like
casa de Peregrinos and the food
banks and
that different co ops at this is
a great.
great beginning for New Mexico
students security results so
thank you very much for bringing
this forward.
Thank you next I have
Representative Montoya no no I'm
sorry Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee members thank you
for bringing this legislation
forward I have a couple of
questions
so first of all I I come from
and representative rural and
frontier actually New Mexico so
I'm looking through the bill and
I I would love a lot of the bill
but some of the bill that I have
questions on is on page eight
line twenty one.
I don't know why we would put
limitations on businesses that
are trying to open and
communication in communities
that need this so I'm picturing
Magdalene in New Mexico we lost
our grocery store they have been
open for a hundred years.
We lost our grocery store about
six years ago.
And
so in the meantime I have bought
the little the little gas
station in town and I've brought
in fresh fruits and vegetables.
For the community because of the
need and because of the what the
same reason I bring it back was
because of the need and the one.
And so in this language here to
be able to.
Apply for this
you have to.
It says including the degree to
which jobs will be created or
retained in the community that
provide employees with a living
wage that adjust to compensate
for inflation paid sick leave.
Career building opportunities to
help employees develop networks
and skills provide access to
training and mentorship advanced
within business.
But then the business so I'm
envisioning a little business
and Magdalena and where are they
going to advance to.
They will be.
You know.
Possibly janitorial staff we
will have sales clerks stocking
shelves I'm just wondering where
are they going to advance to
possible ownership or are we
just trying to promote a skill
sets and I'll stop there and
then I have several others.
Thanks thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative I think
those are all very valid
questions and and I appreciate
them I can I can certainly let
miss Aguilar speak to a and
and but I feel that especially
on the pieces around advancement
because as as I mentioned I I
also grew up in a small town and
many of my family and friends to
live where I grew up and so I
think a lot of the advancement
isn't necessarily in terms of
like transitioning away from the
community or anything like that
but really finding opportunities
within the the
the the place in which you are
working that that if we are able
to connect people and and
provide some network
opportunities like the funding
the federal funding I'm not the
federal funding but like the
foundations in the philanthropic
work that's happening that
there's so much there's so many
different resources out there
that I think our rural
communities don't necessarily
have access to because of that
network opportunity and that
through this through this
legislation and through this
process.
there would be opportunities for
advancement in terms of just
in terms of ideas I think are
are critical in terms of how one
is able to provide for their
community in a way that maybe
they wouldn't have without this
this process.
Madam chair representative I
would only add that was yeah
exactly that and I would only
add to that if all of these
would be like a spectrum and the
scale of you're looking at a
matrix on how much a proposed
projects answers to each of
these points and it would be
highly dependent on the project
right we're looking at something
very different for talking about
a small farmer who is growing on
one acre and doesn't have any
employees right verses a full
scale grocery store in an urban
area that has understood is
underserved and low income
they're all going to be very
different and I think the point
of bill is to make sure that it
includes you know that's why
it's includes right like the
degree to which right so we're
looking at a scale and the
warden CDFI would be directed
right to also be made up of
folks from the affected
communities in the business
owners were we're doing that
work and so being able to
understand the varying degrees
to which each of these plants
are able to be for felt also.
Okay thank you I just I just
feel like you know what if the
governor doesn't sign the the
paid sick leave
you know I just
opening a business and I
understand there's federal
dollars attached to this and of
course we would do that anyway
but having it having it it just
makes it more difficult and and
really small rural frontier New
Mexico having it in the
legislation in the bill the
other one is right underneath
that on page nine line for
number five whether the
applicant resides within thirty
mile radius of the location of
the proposed project.
So in rural New Mexico I I know
I heard the statement in the
beginning where it's a ten mile.
While at Alamo Navajo
reservation they drive sixty
miles to go to the coral New
Mexico to get groceries if they
just happen to come to my little
convenience store where they can
get a few things that's a that's
a whole nother story but a lot
of people live out on ranches
that might be the business owner
and this would make sure that
they don't.
They don't this doesn't apply to
them they may live and Dowdell
out on a ranch between battle
and and Eragon New Mexico and
have a grocery store in Eric on
or reserve which is more than
thirty miles so I think madam
chair and and Representative
that that that language may be
restricted to people who may be
willing to open the store and
thirty miles to me is nothing.
An hour two hour drive is
nothing but to a lot of people
thirty miles is a long way so I
I just think that's restrictive
language I'm just wanted to
bring that to your attention.
the other part is
You know I can't go to I can't
source might fresh fruits and
vegetables from a local farmer
input in my grocery store it has
to be there's regulations
involved where I have to buy
from from food that's been
inspected
so how are you going to get
around.
That information.
And regulation.
Thank you madam chair
Representative that's a great
question I will I'll hand it off
to to Kristen I thank you madam
chair representative so a lot of
the we as an organization we
work with over thirty small
farmers in our region and are
selling to restaurants grocery
stores and schools and so most
if not all of the small farmers
who are doing this work working
through food hubs and
aggregating or working on their
own have their own food safety
requirements that they're
required to that here too
including traceability and other
things like that whenever as
part of the technical assistance
for small farmers for example
technical assistance is going to
vary by project will be
different for a grocery store
and what we do for small farmer
but forget the food safety is
incredibly important one one
that we take very seriously as
an organization asked you you
know all of our coalition
partners throughout the state
and so on the majority of small
farmers agency I farmers are
ready at hearing to these
Federal guidelines even if they
don't apply to them because
they're a little bit smaller
than the you know that meets the
federal requirements for the
food standards he just
modernization safety act that is
not forget the whole afternoon
so really what
is happening is that these
farmers are ready at hearing to
that and the technical
assistance would ensure that
happened so that it makes it
more feasible it's also
difficult right for us grocery
store owner somebody else to buy
local because of the quantity
especially we're talking about
very small farmers right in are
you gonna be ordering like one
box of apples doesn't
necessarily make financial sense
so and there's not necessarily
the infrastructure
transportation that processing
facilities that that the scale
so this bill is also looking at
really be beefing up as
supporting the infrastructure
needs throughout that value
chain as well to make it more
likely and more feasible for
store owner or farm stand to buy
from our local producers as
well.
Okay thank you madam chair and
representative I also see that
the the healthy soil content is
is in here and that you can
only.
Is this tied to because of my my
thinking is as I know a lot of
small farmers and they may not
be
part of the healthy soils Act
but they're still they are still
producing.
Healthy vegetables fruits or
other alfalfa whatever it is and
so do they do are they
disqualified if they are not in
conjunction with the healthy
soils Act.
Madam chair representative go
ahead percent Madam chair
representative I'm no so all of
these are really just
considerations that are taken
into account all of these points
just considerations the the CDFI
and advisory board to take into
account when deciding
and prioritizing which
applicants to get these
financial packages the and and
the reason it was included as we
work really closely with the
healthy soils working group and
others and you know the majority
if not all of the farmers that I
know and work with and that to
suggest are you know they do
care about their soils because
that's how they can grow their
food so even if they're not
maybe necessarily part of that
coalition or they're not you
know where that the majority of
time and a lot of times they are
really working towards having
healthy soils so
You know in the in the again the
technical assistance could help
support that but again it's not
the key point is that all of
these points are considerations
taken as a whole
to for the session making
process for this okay thank you
thank you madam chair so it
would be adding to them if they
didn't have that as well the
other part is applicants plan to
promote for at least five years
of hiring of local residents and
the matter Representative of the
community at the apple can't
possesses to serve so are they
if they receive these grants or
loans does this mean that they
are mandated to stay open for at
least five years I see five
years in several different
places I just picked that place.
Madam chair representative so.
This Is Your can can help drive
Madam chair representative
so five years is the call again
there's no you know guarantee on
whether or not a business will
succeed we know you know it's.
After last year right we the
uncertainty is big and looming
so
it's the goal of including five
years as we'd like to see a plan
for when the players you for
that are but there's you know if
they don't stay open there's not
you know we would hope they
would that's why they like
working to support them through
various means but yeah there's
no
requirement right and I don't
think that would be
Something we would all right
anyway okay okay so it's just a
you want to see a at least a
five year plan madam chair and
and Representative and that's
understandable
Does it doesn't say in here with
the board that they're going to
receive any kind of.
Stipend or anything for for
their meetings is that in in the
under the economic development
will they propagate those rules
of the site that.
Madam chair representative we
believe so
that that's how it will happen.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair
There was one other party here
that that caught me.
I can find it of course I can't
find wanting to.
Applicants.
Red in here somewhere.
That that applicants.
Must be
These kind of hold on one second
They get more consideration.
If they are part of.
If they are at the heart of a
disadvantaged group did I read
that in here.
Madam chair representative we
there within the legislation we
did we did want to prioritize
communities that have been
disproportionately impacted
I can find I if if we can share
some of the examples
Representative miss Aguilar
might have some of those late
because in many of of
communities around the state and
we've we've just seen a very six
apples where particularly black
indigenous and communities of
color have been historically
impacted around the issue of
wrap around farming and so it
was we wanted to make sure that
we elevated that as not not that
they would be the only ones that
would be that would be able to
have this opportunity but that
they would be
highly considered just due to
the fact that of just some of
the historical issues we've
we've dealt with in the past.
Thank you madam chair and
representative just that part of
the application I found it it's
on page nine line sixteen the
equitable food oriented to
development advisory board may
give priority to applicants or
members of socially disbanded
disadvantaged group at nine I
understand that but I also take
offense to that
because.
If I tried to do this for my
community that would be to be a
dang against me first of all I
live on a ranch thirty miles
from my the place that I would
open it I'm not socially
disadvantaged so there's two
teams I'm not part of the
healthy soils Act so there's
three things when you live in a
small community in your trying
to to do something good for the
community and that's not based
around making money it's based
on the reason I bought the
convenience stores because it
was closing.
Because it was mismanaged.
And yes I have the ability to to
purchase that and it cost me
hundreds of thousands of dollars
to get it up to par to be able
to through the environmental
health department and all these
other issues and not everyone is
able to do that and I am blessed
and completely thankful for the
things in my life but if I
wanted to do this in my
community there was already
three games against me not that
I would even apply but there may
be people that apply that that
art that and and so I I just I
understand why you're doing it
but when we put that kind of
language in law.
It ends up could be detrimental
and and hurt the communities
that we're trying to help so I
will support your your bill but
there's three or four things in
there that are just going to
make it more difficult and when
we as a community and as a
legislature.
Make things tougher instead of
easier.
We might want to think about
that thank you madam chair thank
you Representative.
Thank you next we have
Representative Montoya.
Madam chair and representative
and senator Hamlin I I rise in
support of this legislation
previous to my being elected I I
knew of this bill and I sought
out last state media and I
attended meetings and just was.
Utterly impressed with the
vision the school the
educational programs for public
schools in particular really
impressed me I hope that if this
passes I can drive and make a
intentional linked to the north
I don't know that if you have
colleagues allies in the north
but I will absolutely work for
this.
The words food justice are
appropriate there are
communities in desperate need of
economic development with
opportunities hiding in plain
sight no The New Mexico has some
of the most beautiful and
plentiful sick yes but we are
under resourced under inspired.
Older farmers have died off
which prying to attract younger
farmers to come back and and
apply appropriate technology on
legacy farming this bill may not
be perfect no bill is but if we
can begin to connect the dots on
food insecurity that COVID has
so clearly outlined at the
saying closing that with the
pandemic started to have a
nonprofit and we have a very
powerful food program but we
were able to rally ten
nonprofits.
Who had some semblance of a
desire to provide food in an
emergency setting and I have to
say this bill would support half
of those in leveraging and
scaling opportunity economic
development so I will stop their
I'm I hope to vote for this and
I hope to see all the way
through to the governor's desk
it is a brilliant piece of
legislation thank you are you
back.
Thank you I'm next we have
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman of
Madam chairman of the to the
Representative Rubio.
From LA.
in Chavis and Eddy County we we
talk about somebody being from
LA and it's always good to.
I'm here from
someone from that community.
my question is
kind of.
Well and it goes like this.
I worried that we may be trying
to create a new funds that will
keep marginal producers in
business.
Marginal producers of.
Contribute to America's food
supply and contribute to of
Americans paying the lowest
disposable income of any
developed nation in the world on
food.
So I I want to be careful of
about.
Doing it on government subsidies
to marginal producers.
So my question goes like this if
you have the objective here.
Yes.
To get fresh produce produced
locally to consumers.
there are two things that
roadblocks.
Consumers
in New Mexico New Mexico
consumers one is affordability
and the second is they get to.
What I think about to get to.
And I think you know they're
they're not Mexicans who don't
go to Walmart
I don't say that because I'm a
Walmart advocate I say that
because Walmart Services a
tremendous amount of New Mexicos
grocery of.
Consumption.
Expense of losing local grocery
stores as we've heard today so
I'm a little confused about the
get to because I think that if
you get to a Walmart you're
probably given a choice of
affordability on food so I say
okay we're gonna we're gonna
we're gonna take this one
hundred thousand dollars.
We're going to leverage it on
two million dollars a year in
federal funding.
And this money goes out to New
Mexico bratwurst to grow local
produce to sell at a local
market.
The representative in in my
correct sort of more last so far
in my logic question.
Madam chair representative I can
I can hand it off to miss you
are but I think there's just I
think overall you have some idea
of what we're trying to
accomplish but all eight miss I
you are to them.
Madam chair representative yeah
and please redirect if I'm
misunderstanding at all
Representative and it's you know
one of the things with
small to mid size producers and
getting into markets and
affordability like this is a
very complex and multifaceted
issue as I know you're well
aware so
right it's hard for for small
farmers mid size farmers to or
any farmer to grow food if they
don't have the market for it's
hard for markets to commit to
buying local if there's not the
production for it and so you
know we're very well aware that
these are very complex issues
that are take many different
pieces of a puzzle to fit
together right and I think
throughout the state there are
various programs that are really
focused on for example that for
New Mexico farmers market
association and the double up
food Bucks program that they
work on in order to make sure
New Mexicans can double their
snap dollars right to buy New
Mexico from produce which
supports are small farmers
increases stronger economic base
so
I think you are late yeah on the
right track and you know we're
aware that it's a highly complex
issue and will require several
different
answers and strategies in order
to.
Prioritize New Mexico grown
foods fruits and vegetables
in our communities it's a
complex issue and yeah I'll stop
there thank you thank you thank
you very much for that madam
chairman I want to follow up the
two earlier statistic of twelve
hundred miles was twelve hundred
miles that food in general
travels prior to being consumed
or is that twelve hundred miles
just for fresh produce being
consumed that's a question
please.
Representative I think that I
believe in that was from a
public comment support and if
I'm remembering correctly I
think that this would in general
I don't think it's a big
difference matched all different
remembering correctly thank you
very much for that and I
apologize for pose you a
question that you didn't offer
the statistic
I think
One last question was a hundred
thousand dollars in the general
fund money in this bill come
from.
Question.
Madam chair all I care and I'll
let Senator Hamlin speak to that
thank you Representative Rubio
madam chair and representative
that money actually we
originally designated
appropriations however after
consultation with some of my
Senate colleagues and our
finance committee decided to
dedicate my junior money toward
that.
Thanks for that money comes from
thank you very much for that
Senator and I was I was thinking
that it might be junior money
there for at least on the house
side Senator we talk about the
junior money being planned for
as a nonrecurring.
And I was just curious whether
or not use of scribe and that is
a worry going forward on
creating a fund with one hundred
thousand dollars in money yes
Sir up and expected longer term
funding for this Fund.
Question.
Madam chair representative
Anderson when working with miss
Aguilar and the different groups
that can participate in this
this fund it actually can
generate the funds to continue
going and I let the secular go
on to that because she can talk
about the CDFI said also help
with that.
Thank you you madam chair
representative yes so we realize
it's not recurring there is you
know a large possibility that
there would be future asks for
this fund because we think it's
imperative for the state to
invest in this type of economic
development initiative that
focuses not only on economic
development but health outcomes
and poverty outcomes and
however we are also as an
organization and as a coalition
of different folks including our
CDFI partners and other
philanthropic partners dedicated
to this as well and dedicated to
bringing in dollars for this
fund through the CDFI
from other sources so well we do
think it's important for the
state to put its money where its
mouth is so to speak and best
important initiatives like this
we also realize that it's gonna
take a lot more from a lot of
other sources and fully realize
that are committed to doing so
thank you thank you for that
Indian years every bill is
certainly entitled to future
Bill I'm not troubled by that
but just want to clarify on the
non recurring component to the
current funding mechanism last
I'm gonna finish briefly it goes
to the fact that
processing is one of the our
food aggravation aggregation of
a dance that could receive
funding under this bill my
question goes up.
The hoping really for short
answer that goes like yes yep
New Mexico legalizes marijuana
and if marijuana is grown
locally can somebody take
marijuana and make it into
brownies in a processing step
and receive funding from this
Fund question.
Madam chair representative.
all at missile you are answered.
Madam chair representative I'm
gonna go ahead and say no
because really the focus and the
what is been drawn out and is
undefined in there is the focus
on healthy food so we're really
focused on making sure that
we're talking about getting
nutrient dense food to folks so
it would be highly unlikely if
not impossible I believe thank
you very much for that I was
also hoping Representative that
I would hear that the federal
match would preclude of matching
dollars for a the substance in
the processing that is illegal
at the federal level so I'm
gonna leave that alone but it is
a very real concern of mine that
I might get to return home and
here that I had managed to fund
of you.
Fund that kind of processing
I'll leave it there madam
chairman thank you very much for
the opportunity and my questions
are that.
Thank you Representative next
Representative Terrazas.
Thank you madam chair I was.
Thank you
Representative Anderson you have
me laughing I did not expect
that the last COVID years it was
a good one is a good question
very good question just.
I have few legal gosh I didn't
see that one coming anyway madam
chair Senator Representative.
you know.
I live in a rural part of the
state and I have this is
literally that are a hundred
miles of it takes a hundred
miles one way to get to one of
my businesses and so I know what
what Representative Armstrong
was expressing up for us I mean
it's easy I I can drive hundred
miles of like nothing in a day
just take care of a Google my
business and so I I do you know
we do want to so I I don't
support your your legislation
here of course and I just hope
that you I think a lot of the
questions that I some of the
questions I was gonna ask
already were asked.
By Representative by some of the
reps before I believe that
representative Armstrong
who hands on has experience in
this.
Very very much
Articulated the issues with this
legislation and I hope you
really take that into
consideration because I know I I
know all of us are trying to do
the best of the best of
intentions but sometimes we we
are we're not really sure I
don't.
Just my experience when I
proposed to that that
information that possibly could
help us.
Understand what the other side
but what what you're about to to
legislators going to impact I
guess I hope I said that right I
was trying to find how to how to
navigate that but you know
something we don't see the other
side of how how things are going
to be impacted so being that she
has a lot of experience in that
and so what was she answered by
asking some of those questions
that really cleared up all a lot
of
the questions I had and so I
really truly hope that you take
into consideration
those
Those things and hopefully on
the floor we we can continue to
support it with those changes
okay thank you so much for your
time.
Thank you I don't have any more
questions but I do wanna I do
want to say something also and
and thank the sponsors for doing
this because as it as you all
know we're one of the.
highest level student security
in New Mexico and particularly
for children and we're rural and
frontier
the state and we have many small
farmers and.
But there's lots of federal
money
That would make a difference are
real difference here but without
an infrastructure and something
like this in partnership in an
actual fund developed.
A small farmer can't it just
doesn't have the capacity I
don't believe to go apply for
grants a federal grant or or for
start up of a you know a
roadside food stand I mean these
days are are really important
and integral ways to get food
delivery and what we've been
doing is just investing in
people's ability to buy food but
not the infrastructure where
they can't can go to buy food.
And so they're they're we have
left money on the table federal
support from USDA and other
other sources just because we
don't have an infrastructure to
manage it and get it a mechanism
to help support and get it to
just small
businesses small farmers and and
create in our rural and frontier
areas just a way to and
infrastructure to get food there
so people can buy it and we
we've invested in snap and we've
invested in
you know
the
of farmers markets and so forth
but
for people to buy food there but
not in supporting the actual
infrastructure to to deliver
food and produce food so I want
to thank you I think this is
brilliant
away to support particularly the
small farmers and small
businesses that want to be part
of the the food chain and so
thank you for doing it I and we
should have done it a long time
ago we have left millions and
millions of dollars on the table
that we have access to
at a number of years ago I was
the congressional district
director for David congresswoman
Michelle Lujan Grisham and part
of what and she sat on the Ag
committee.
and part of what we do is a
district director trying to get
people in New Mexico hooked up
with federal grant opportunities
and there were I mean some of
the stuff we couldn't even find
people to do it because there
just wasn't the infrastructure
to help them apply for it and
manage it so I really appreciate
are I really appreciate this
effort and just needed to make
those comments.
what's the pleasure of the
committee madam chair and move
it to pass I would do.
And the second for
Representative Ferrary do you
wanna go ahead and call the roll
Torrez.
Representative Anderson
I vote yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong
yes.
Representative Brett.
Thank you Representative term
bash yes.
Representative Stephanie lord
no.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes.
Representative Roger Montoya.
He's excused.
Representative Louise that also.
Yes.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Representative thanks chair
Joanne Ferrari yes.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong
yes.
So we have a nine to one.
You and one that is okay US
senator and representative you
have a do pass on Senate bill
two twenty nine thank stated
thank you and next we have a
Senate bill sixty one and
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino as been
waiting patiently.
Skin him over here.
Okay.
Welcome Senator.
Do you have any experts you want
us to load
in writing from the primary care
association or when the light.
Adam okay.
Morning madam chairman bill.
Sixty one will seem very
familiar to a lot of new because
it is a Bill endorsed by the
Legislative Health and Human
Services interim committee.
And I noticed a number of you
serve on that committee.
There is a number that another
in our many undoing efforts at
finding ways to get health care
professionals to serve in rural
communities in New Mexico.
This one takes a little
different tech from some of the
things we've tried in the in the
past in this instance this
creates a fund.
Would then be available to
clinics that serve the rural
communities and the clinics.
Would have that that that Fund.
When they go out to try to
recruit professionals for their
there are two working there
clinic.
But unlike some of the other
bills we say if you come work
here you'll be eligible to apply
for some of the state programs
this one is almost eighty the
guarantee that we've got this
money and we're looking for
somebody to fill the slide here
and if you look and work your
for least two years will be able
to to pay a portion of your the
lone senior medical school or
nursing school or state
college's men's program loans
for every quarter the issue the
issue continue to work here.
And while the The appropriation
was initially part of the bill
has been stripped.
We do we do still want to move
ahead with this because in the
future in the future we may be
able to get requests we may be
able to in the future actually
some of the state
appropriations.
Disincentive for requests or
whatever but at least we'll have
the vehicle through which these
clinics can can record staff the
bill is further amended and
the committee in the Senate to
add you to the other professions
listen we added of Thomas and
nurse midwives.
And with that I'll turn it over
to David Roddy and let him say a
few words about this Madam
chairman.
Thank you David.
You need to unmute.
There you go.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
David Roddy on the health policy
director of the Mexico primary
care association thanks to the
support of this committee the
legislature bipartisan governors
New Mexico has developed one of
the finest primary care safety
that's in the country there are
over a hundred and fifty medical
clinics a hundred thirty of
which provide behavioral health
care either sixty dental plan
next eighty percent of these are
in rural areas around the state
they serve rural residents and
New Mexico low income residents
two thirds of people under a
hundred percent of poverty
living in New Mexico get
services at at the primary care
clinic supported by the state in
addition almost half of the
uninsured receive services we
serve over forty thousand
diabetics hundred twenty five
thousand people with depression
anxiety and other mental health
conditions and do a tremendous
job screening people what will
be said the depression and and
other potentially costly and and
debilitating diseases are this
program as the sponsor mentioned
it is very important the world
clinics they range everywhere
from from jollity are Sierra
Maria from animus to spring are
and the biggest challenge they
have is recruiting clinicians to
serve in these clinics are there
its loan repayment is the number
one priority are enticements for
us students who come with large
medical and other deaths this
this bill includes behavioral
health counselors and a number
of other important find is and
they come with that and as the
sponsor mentions the existing
loan repayment program that's a
good we good job of rewarding a
few people make a commitment but
when you're trying to recruit a
a position for us.
Stance and they say do you have
loan repayment you have to tell
them come to work yet and next
may you know possibly six to
nine months later you can apply
for a program and you may have a
one in four chance of of of of
getting loan repayment this
money would go to the department
of health how to spend the money
they would make a commitment to
a clinic and they would then
have nine months to recruit a
provide us so every dollar spent
in this program would result in
a new high up in New Mexico we
think the committee and for all
that you do for help yes
certainly in the LHS and and I
would stand for questions.
Thank you
We will go
add to the committee to the
audience now and we start with a
poll see who in the audience
might be here in support or
opposition of this
Senate bill sixty one.
Okay I think we've got it we've
got thirteen in the audience who
are here who supported and zero
in opposition and
So for those who would like to
To make it public comment we'll
go first to Linda single.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Linda Siegel
representing the New Mexico
nurse practitioner council and
the American college of nurse
midwives New Mexico chapter so
we support this bill we stand
strong support of the bill many
well a few nurse practitioners
and nurse midwives come from
rural areas and they would love
to go back but they have such
data that often they are not
able to so this would be
certainly if we can get some
more money into the fund would
be very helpful to get people to
go home and practice in their
local communities and have their
debt forgiven so we stand strong
support thank you.
Thank you next we have it says
and C. R. if you could introduce
yourself.
Good morning madam chair this is
Larry Martinez with up
presbytery.
Ups that's my fault I.
I apologize Larry go ahead okay
good morning madam chair members
of the committee of this Larry
Martinez and I'm the director of
the north central region for
Presbyterian medical services we
are a
Primary care provider throughout
the state a member of the New
Mexico primary care association
and we have numerous clinics
throughout the state we
specialize in providing services
in remote and rural areas where
people have had access problems
with respect to care and up we
also serve a disproportionate
number of people who have no
means of paying for health care
but being a federally qualified
health care operation we do not
turn anyone away with respect to
their needs and we are playing a
very key role also right now in
the dispensing of
vaccinations for COVID nineteen
as well as conducting testing
for it on behalf of the state
and I believe we're already
closing in on around twenty four
thousand vaccinations that we
have provided ourselves the
passage of Senate bill sixty one
would greatly enhance our
ability to recruit and retain
providers in the hard to serve
areas and we stand in very
strong support of this
legislation thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you next we have Ashley
Wagner.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Ashley Wagner
director public policy for the
New Mexico chamber of commerce
we support this bill because it
is no secret The New Mexico has
a health care professional
shortage SB six one provides a
valuable tool in recruiting and
retaining clinicians in our
rural communities thank you so
much.
Thank you I'm next our Carmen
potato.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Carmen
to check with the office of the
CEO and I have family health
center hi Representative
community health centers in
Roosevelt Chavez and curry
counties your support of the
primary care clinician loan
repayment program is very
important to our community
health centers it gives us the
opportunity recruit and retain
providers and to improve access
to health and behavioral health
care services I'm helping the
health professional and practice
site finds matches matches so
your support of the Senate bill
sixty one or primary care
clinicians only pain Act is
crucial to communities that we
serve thank you madam chair and
members of the committee for
your time thank you next Rachel
Biggs.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Rachel
Biggs policy director
Albuquerque Health Care for the
homeless a community health
center serving approximately
seven thousand individuals
without homes throughout finally
a County and we stand in strong
support of Senate bill sixty one
as we're facing a continued rise
in homelessness due to the
fallout from COVID nineteen we
are currently stepping up our
efforts our recruitment efforts
to meet the increasing demand
for integrated health services
this program would help us
immensely in our recruitment
efforts particularly as we're
facing challenges in recruiting
high quality clinical staff with
leadership experience that can
meet the complex health needs of
the population we serve one
repayment programs are really
essential tools in our
recruitment package and having a
guaranteed loan repayment order
to offer prospective candidates
will really allow us to better
compete with other states for
top quality commission leaders
we urge your support Senate bill
sixty one and thank the sponsor
for bringing it forward thank
you.
Thank you next is virtual
Medina.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is working the building on the
chief executive officer for the
for the media serving
approximately thirty three
thousand patients you need
patience Dona Ana County area we
are full support of SB sixty one
there's nothing worse than
disruption of services every
time we have a providers that
leaves our community for
whatever reason and you have the
long dont ask a feeling of
agency in our rural communities
the the amount of destruction
it puts no lives are patients in
these rural communities is this
is this.
It really needs to be thought
about here and an additional
really allows us the opportunity
to be able to upfronts be able
to find any providers that we
are recruiting into our
communities a solution in terms
of that one we can so maybe is
in full support of this bill and
thank the sponsors are bringing
this forward thank you madam
chair members of the committee
thank you our next Health Action
New Mexico.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Barbara
Webber on the executive director
of Health Action New Mexico we
have one in three New Mexicans
who live in rural areas and
having access to quality
healthcare is essential for our
population.
we know that we have the
disposition workforce in the
country and many are retiring so
this is has been critical but it
comes even more critical as we
move into the.
Recovery period so we think this
is a strong tool to bring more
professional into Mexico and
urged the committees strong
support thank you.
Thank you and next to I have D.
day up.
Yes
my mic turned the apt it
director of the clinic as well.
we're a community health center
located in northern New Mexico.
By primary care services in Rio
Arriba county we're the only
point of access of the four
Espanola I've had the pleasure
of being the director for over
twelve years and I'd like to
share with the committee that
we're in strong support of
Senate bill sixty one I also
like to share with the committee
that during my tenure I have had
an experience where I think that
we have actually lost out on
recruiting of providers because
of our inability to guarantee
loan repayment we had a period
of about four years or we were
unable to fill vacancies so
to me having access.
A guarantee loan repayment is
paramount in health centers
ability to recruit and retain
provider so a lot of public
strongly stand in support of
Senate bill sixty one thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
Okay that was it for public
comment will go to the committee
and I have Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman madam
chairman I'll be short
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino if you
could cert I was set up I'm what
first of all of the title of the
bill a very catchy for those of
us who who come from a more
rural part of the state Senator
I guess my question goes like
this I look at the amount that
the bill asked for in funding in
fiscal year twenty FY twenty two
and I think of the.
I think you know the reason this
didn't get funded it HB to
junior yes there were too many
priorities too little money.
US Census and I see that the
state revenues are are a bit
healthier than we previously
thought and the thought came to
mind Sir that whether or not of
there was.
Do you think it would be
detrimental or not to try to
pursue.
The possibility of a of.
general fund appropriation in
that about a hundred seventeen
thousand dollars of prior to the
end of the session or would that
send your bill back to the
Senate with not enough time I'm
I'm asking for your your
thoughts on that please Sir
thank you.
Chairman and and Representative
Anderson I love the sentiment
but I think that the realities
of the of the process that it
would have to go through now
we're apparently on the verge of
bringing stability to the to the
floor of the Senate.
And the usual.
I swear give and when we bring
in the you Rachel happened
probably tomorrow or Wednesday
at the latest is don't try to
make any floor amendments
because
No.
The.
The mathematics involved so
introduction that if you add
something to make a change
somewhere else in the whole
thing box and
I think of this that you need on
this is to create a fund.
And then to work during the
interim.
To convince the LFC to put some
money into next year's budget
for this and and and and the
availability of some of this new
federal money
of a stranger is a celebration
he costly to do something even
before next year's budget is
created.
That would be up to the or the
ministration and and
particularly the secretary of
the health department to try to
advocate for that and for us
advocate for it with them.
I think those two strategies get
some federal money in for this
coming year and then for the
following year trying to get the
budget to include this item as a
recurring item.
Thank you senator I certainly
wouldn't want to uh suggested
the idea that might slow down
your effort or worse yet because
it not to be successful I look
forward to supporting your bill
and I appreciate them very much
your interest in this
loan in this particular program
madam chairman that takes care
my questions thank you very much
thank you Representative
process.
Thank you madam chair center
committee I just have a quick
question I was reading here
maybe can clarify this for me
the department me grant and
award to an eligible
organization to repay the loans
of recipients obtain for health
educational expenses of the
recipient I just want to know is
it having to.
Just have to get elected to the
organ an organization I'm
assuming that's a clinic or
whatever can you just explain
that.
Sure
Madam chairman and and of
Representative Terrazas yes
that's what makes this
particular.
Program different from some
other.
already existing loan repayment
programs to.
Do we have in place that give
the money directly.
The.
Actual clinician this one
but as as David Roddy explained
what that means is there's never
enough money for all the
clinicians working in rural
areas who might want to
participate so there is a.
An application process by the
individual clinicians and.
Some of them are not going to be
fun.
There's money to cover all of
them this way the clinic knows
ahead of time how much money it
has and when it recruits the
examination you can assure them
that they're going to be the
you're gonna be able to get
there the educational will repay
and and so that's the the new
ones on this bill the nation
this program a little different
and we take a little more
responsive to the needs of the
rural primary care clinics and
the existing programs are.
I'm sure etcetera so.
Make sure I will just to make
sure I understand this correctly
so rather than the state
directly paying the the new
physician they're gonna send it
to the client the clinics apply
they receive the funds and then
then they're able to pay out
that to their new recruit those
are some is that some what you
said.
Madam chairman and and
Representative yes you are
exactly the one thing I would
add is a do it quarter by
quarter so that if you know you.
Making sure they hang around
they don't get it all repaid is.
Each quarter of the year a
portion is repaid in after
they've completed their needs
their culture two years of
service All Things repaid.
I'm sure us etcetera so now what
happens this is a the clinician
I'm I own the clinic right have
the clinic and I get this money
M. I. funded our just granted it
and then when I get some the new
recruit then I get some money.
Questions that the way it
functions as a function.
Chairman and and and
Representative the that some
that's a very good question I
energy storage my expert witness
on that one I think.
That that he can give you a much
better answers and I sent.
Madam chairman members of the
committee Representative
Terrazas actually the the funds
will be controlled by the
department of health and when
they say the clinic gets on a
law of the lord is a commitment
for the sum of money so friends
sense of position being recorded
you may get a fifty thousand
dollar a two year commitment
twenty five thousand dollars a
year and then the department of
health.
Our it's emissary sometimes they
subcontract with the finance
authority they will make
payments directly to the
clinicians loan fund and that
makes the the payment non
taxable to the clinician as
well.
Would be very effective in that
respect and that the total
protection but the actual
organization will apply and
receive approval on them I have
nine months to go out and and
they can tell us a clinician
look you're guaranteed loan
repayment you know
and then that's how it would
work madam chair members of the
committee Representative
dresses.
Madam chair Senator members of
the committee my next question
Sir Mr Radhi at our well Austin
center in the you can differ
he wants the
So does the clinic in any way
shape or form.
Take any piece of that those
funds because are distributing
through them or is it a hundred
percent going to the physician.
Mr are you madam chair and
representative Mr Radhi would be
able to answer that.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee representative for
access no there is no drag off
of percentage taken by the
clinic a hundred percent will go
directly to loan repayment so
the commission.
I'm sure Senator and
Representative this is awesome I
really really like this
legislation I'm just kinda sad
that it didn't get appropriated
or funded and so but I am for
support of this is definitely
helps us guys out there in the
outskirts.
Once some of our.
Clinics will resume by
physicians thank you so much for
your time.
Thank.
Thank you no other questions but
I I just have to I just have to
comment that this is a a
brilliant idea years ago I used
to do provider recruitment for
federally qualified health
centers and including
Representative Armstrong
recruiting to reserve on New
Mexico in capturing County it
would have made a huge
difference to be able to tell a
provider you have a loan
repayment certain as opposed to
saying yes you come here and
then you can apply and you might
get one you would be eligible
because of war and underserved
community but we can't guarantee
whether you'll get it or not
because there's more there's not
there's more applicants than
there is money so there's it
would make a huge difference to
in recruiting to be able to do
that so thank you I think that's
in many ways a much better way
to do this so I was a pleasure
the committee.
Remember to pass madam chair
I've almost passed and the
second from Representative bash
doors you want to call the roll.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Gail Armstrong
yes.
Representative Brett.
Yes.
Representative Karen bash yes.
Representative Stephanie.
Yes.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes.
Representative Roger Montoya is
excused Representative Lewis.
Yes please.
Representative Liz Thomson.
Yes.
Representative Anderson.
J. Ferrary.
Thank you.
Representative Bob Sanderson.
Madam chair Armstrong yes and
you can market Representative
Anderson as excused okay.
Nine zero okay you have a do
pass
senator and Senate bill sixty
one thank you thank you very
much Mr chairman and on behalf
of the interim committee I thank
you thank you.
Okay representative Thompson.
On Senate bill one ninety thank
you madam chair can we promote
out west quarry to be my expert
witness.
Absolutely.
got her.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee so I'm
Senate Bill actually the Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate help and public
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill one ninety
it's it's a bill regarding that
developmental disabilities
planning council and what it
does is brings it up to date
it's got a lot of changes but
they are and.
They are to follow the federal
law and just a quick primer.
The GDP state federally funded
and mandated agency that works
to do that.
I change policy and now work to
make things better in New Mexico
for people with.
Developmental disabilities and I
was just I was reading through
this bill in preparation I was
thinking back madam chair about
fifteen years ago when I was
chair of the GDP the and we knew
back then we needed to get rid
of the Pete the planning part
because we've been planning for
decades and we wanted to stop
being planning and start
building working and now at that
time that the that was major
fear that if you open up your
practice act or your whatever
act that we I wasn't we then but
that the legislature was going
to go after it with the
hammer and nails and and choirs
and tear it apart and luckily I
think we've moved past that and
so I won't go into great detail
about what the bill does but as
I said it just it brings it more
in line with how things are and
it finally gets rid of the
planning part in GDP the and I
will let out at any comments and
then we will stand for questions
thank you madam chair.
Morning welcome our director
McCoy.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for
hearing this bill today I am
the executive director of New
Mexico developmental
disabilities planning.
The primary purpose of this bill
and such as that representative
Thompson mentioned to align New
Mexico's DD Act with the current
federal TV statute known as the
developmental disabilities
assistance and bill of rights
act two thousand you'll see that
refer to the bills.
And it's the adopted the council
requirements outlined in the
federal statute which creates
and governs the state do
council.
Yes some back quick background
Mexico's current DD Act has not
been updated in decades and is
based on an old federal statute
our current DD Act reflects a
time when community based
services for the D. community
had not been developed and the
planning council's primary
activities are planning
developing and coordinating
services across state agencies
in two thousand Congress repeal
the federal law that was the
basis for the current New Mexico
do act and enacted a new law
that prioritize advocacy
capacity building and systemic
change the new federal statute
notably requires a people DD and
their families participate in
the design of needed services
and supports.
I'm the bill will allow the
council to do it dedicate all of
our resources federally mandated
work of shaping and supporting
truly inclusive integrated
communities across the state
which will benefit all of us and
most importantly this DD Act
update will signal to the people
of New Mexico the state wishes
to empower New Mexicans living
with the development of this
bill living with developmental
disabilities and.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and I stand for
questions.
Thank you okay we'll go to the
audience first and first we'll
do a poll to see
if there's anyone here who
wishes who is supporting or
opposing.
Senate bill one ninety.
Okay I think we've got it we
have six in support and no
opposition.
so we will.
Go ahead and if anyone wishes to
speak in support if you would
raise your hand.
At first we have Jim Jackson.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Jim Jackson for
disability rights New Mexico
I the.
Like representative Thompson I
was formerly a member of the EDD
council in fact I think I have
the dubious distinction of being
the longest serving member ever
of that council of this
realignment with the state law
with current federal law is long
overdue and many of you on this
committee saw similar
legislation two years ago that
was endorsed by the committee
but it didn't make it all the
way through the session.
the most important changes to
clarify the role of the DC
council and eliminate some
conflicts within state law and
the federal law
the bill leaves in place a few
existing provisions of the law
that are not specifically called
for in the federal law that are
useful to retain such as an
annual report to the interim
committee of the legislature so
we are encouraging the
disability rights New Mexico
encourages the adoption and to
do pass on this bill thank you.
Thank you unexceptional Davis.
Morning chairwoman and members
of the committee my name is Joel
Davis I am the policy chair for
elevate the spectrum local
statewide nonprofit that
advocates for autism services
and supports and families I am
also a member of the
developmental disability
Planning Council we support this
bill and we think the the name
the long committee subs that
any Canadian subs and amendments
to this bill our reflection of
the Sanchez efforts and our
director Alastair McQuay's
efforts to make sure that all
the stakeholders from
considered it at the issues were
considered in this built me that
we ask you to support.
SB one ninety thank you very
much thank you nexeo Charlie
mark as.
Go ahead Charlie.
Charlie you're on mute did but
we can't hear you.
Okay
We're gonna go on to Ellen pines
Charley will come back to you if
you can get your microphone or
sound
fixed Alan.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Ellen pints with
the disability coalition and we
stand in support of the bill as
the sponsor and her expert have
explained over the years this
state statute has kind of lost
touch with the relevant federal
law and it is in sore need of
updating we urge your support of
the bill thank you.
Thank you hi Karen would lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee for all the reasons
stated by the sponsor and every
all this people we
we support this
this bill thank you very much
thank you Sean Powell.
yes madam chair committee
members on Chantelle a present
of eastern New Mexico university
Roswell I appreciate the Senator
bringing this bill forward
we do have a program for
individuals in transition
usually from the public school
system into adult life it's a
residential program on our
campus and that special services
program would benefit from this
particular legislation we
appreciate the attention to the
developmental disability
legislation and are specific
populations so thank you and I
would encourage it to pass.
Thank you okay we'll try Charlie
Marquez again.
Sure can you hear me yes now we
can hear you Charlie all right
great thank you yes madam chair
members of the committee Charlie
mark is registered lobbyist for
the association of developmental
disabilities community providers
we have been working with the
director we're going.
She is very graciously worked
with us in making changes.
With regards to the make up of
the planning council or the
Policy Council and we also we're
looking at changing some dates
for reporting so that we would
have data in enough time to to
work with of.
The budget and so.
We've not had time to address
the fully and we look forward to
working continued work with
director McCoy over the next
year and hopefully come back and
and rectify the in the statute.
but to this point we appreciate
her working with us and look
forward to a very good working
relationship thank you.
Thank you.
Okay two members of the
committee.
I'll I'll well anyone is
deciding when they have a
question I just want to say
director and Representative.
We did representative Thompson I
worked on this two years ago
trying to update
the this to bring it in
compliance and and it just
didn't get through so I
appreciate are coming and again
I appreciate that it maintain
some of the suggestions that I
had last time around about
conflict of interest and
recusing oneself from a vote if
you're representing an entity
that's also applying for funds
or potentially getting funds for
the to date if you say so thank
you for that I I have one
question and that is does the
council have any roll over
overseeing your function and do
do the state of the guardianship
program.
Thank you thank you for the
question madam chair so that
council itself
Troops are budgets every year
and so the HSD does the work in
this is how it's done you know
across the country agency does
the work I'm presenting the I'm.
The budget to the council the
council does blessed by you know
approving it before we submit it
to to the legislature for
approval.
Okay but Representative and and
director call eight they don't
have any
supervisory or or direction kind
of a sorority over the
guardianship program then to the
council essentially hires and
fires read director and and in
that but no no direct guidance
over that over the guardianship
as in terms of a person and
things like that right because
it doesn't exactly fall within
the federal mission of a of a
disability council so thank you
I just wanted to make that clear
Representative trust as you have
a question.
Just real quick of madam chair
of.
Representative etcetera I just
my question that I have is is is
what up someone just brought up
about the reporting the time
period I'm reporting is I'm
gonna give them enough time to
study it for the budget.
Thank you madam chair
representative trust says I'm so
as far as reporting we have one
major reporting that we're
required to required to do under
law actually takes about three
months to get done and that is
our federal reporting and it's
done from the federal fiscal
year the federal fiscal year the
majority of
the D. P. C. as far as the
council's activities are federal
funds I'm most of our general
fund money comes from or it goes
into office of guard that's the
vast majority of the general
fund and so I have you know that
I'm doesn't usually isn't
usually informed by the council
activities and so when we do our
big federal reporting I'm from
October to end of September year
to year I'm though that
report is usually due around
January between January and
March and so because it is such
a big resource
our commitment to do that kind
of reporting I'm you know we
want to stick to that role
reporting period I think that
it's important for us to get the
information we need to make the
priority is that we want to
bring forward I don't think
that's that reporting should
stop us from doing that you know
for example this year we have
two major bills that are this
with three including this one
that we've brought forward to
the council.
And at you know they have
approved it for us to move
forward during the session and
that you know that had nothing
to do with the reporting period
so I think we still continue to
do that advocacy work you know
it's part of our mandate to do
it to do that policy work I'm
I'm half of the state and then
our community starving from
committee.
Thank you madam chair of center
Representative I adjust my issue
with it is.
Isn't the budget input in
September and if this is being
reported in November how are
they gonna be able to do that
post budget.
Discussion.
Madam chair and representative
your office as well as the.
As the executive director
discussed the big the big guy
report that they do is for
federal so I'm not exactly sure
what what what question you're
asking.
madam chair of Representative.
So so the I know that the
agencies have to report their
budgets even though it's it's
it's maybe not the vast majority
of it there's some that does
have some just a budget impacts
or some impacts on the budget
but
I'm just curious to know you
know even though they may be
smaller isn't this there cannot
be not be any.
Budget impacting your
legislation of all for the state
even though most of it is for
the federal government.
maybe I understand the question
it in that the report are you
talking about reporting to LHS
by November of every year.
Because that's that's common
when you're reporting to in an
email.
The budget madam chair yeah so
Representative they they do just
like every other state agency
does they they do their budget
report
for for the state and they have
their hearing in front of the
probation and I'm front of house
appropriations so I don't think
she was saying they don't do but
you just saying that they're
they're big budget report is to
the federal government because
that's where the majority of but
they do make the guidelines and
the timeline for the state
budget as well.
And to add to that it's very
common that any entity or
project that has to report to an
interim committee whether it's
LESC or LHS that the date is
given as by November first or by
December first because that's
when the interim work wraps up
and so they put a so it's
reporting anytime within the
interim so it's not necessarily
that it won't be until November
first or whatever but that's
that's usually in any report or
any entity that house reporter
and interim committee they say
it's done by that by that time.
Okay ma'am I I think I think I'm
just trying to I I know that we
have some federal requirements
to have that done I I I
understand all that I just want
to know how it's going to be
able to.
Levers information that we need
that the state needs in order to
get that information and turn
around and see how.
Impact the state and and
possibly our budget there will
be a small budget impact is that
correct.
Madam chair and representative
it is it is a line item in the
budget they get budgeted so it
affects the budget just like any
other agency in the state they
they put in that request for the
budget they have their hearing
and appropriations
it.
Either accepts the the executive
or the.
With the recommendation but it
doesn't none of that is any
different than it is now than it
is for any other agency in the
state so I again I'm not exactly
sure what you're what you're
asking.
That representative madam chair
representative I the timing if I
could Representative might help
the timing for state agencies as
they have to read submit their
budget request by September
first then all the hearings
happen after that so LFC and and
then eventually House
Appropriations all have the
hearings so that they can then
put together the budget that
they publish and propose in
January and the executive
proposes a formal final budget
in January that we've done gets
presented to the legislature so
the timing of their reporting or
hearings or when they have to
submit their budget is all
completely normal for state
agencies the report mentioned
the other report mentioned for
the federal government the
federal government is on a
different fiscal year it's in
October one to September on the
end of September so the federal
government has its own reporting
time for federal of funds based
on their fiscal year but the the
state reporting and in budget
requests are all our normal
timelines.
Thank you madam chair I hope I
hope your help by.
Express what I was trying to get
out of it basically that they
have the information needed to
put the budget I I think you
just answered that thank you
madam chair representative I
appreciate that that was the
only thing I was going wait sure
we got that address right thank
you thank you Representative it
does seem backwards sometimes
but the sun the numbers and then
I do all the hearings and make
sure they understand everything
and then put together the budget
final budget proposal what's
the.
Yeah I'd like to move for the
past on Senate bill one ninety
thank you.
I'll second.
Doors you want to call the roll.
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Yes.
Anderson yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative Brittney about a
hot.
Yes.
Representative Karen bash yes.
Representative Stephanie lord
yes.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Oops yes.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Representative Thompson yes.
Representative Lewis but I asked
us.
Yes ma'am.
Representative Gail Armstrong is
excused thank you.
Representative T. vice chair
Joanne for our.
Yes.
And madam chair Deborah
Armstrong yes so you have a due
pass I think it's nine to zero
with two excuse yes ma'am.
Chair thank you
and committee that in that
concludes our work for this
morning.
I know we have at least one bill
coming to us for Wednesday and I
I expect we may get some
additional ones referred to us
today or tomorrow so I will keep
you informed if we end up with
just the one we won't need as
early so I will adjust the time
and I will keep you posted as I
as I know anything but we do
have at least one bill for
Wednesday.
Thank you madam chair all right
can I ask you a question I on
the on that the people that we
get in on on the floor or desk
and stuff from the golden
called the golden ticket all in
Rod.
It ensure that we're having a
meeting this morning
LSI.
Yeah that's something now you
don't know anything no you
didn't miss anything at that I
don't know why it didn't you you
really need to pay close
attention not to the golden rod
because it's only printed once a
day and I don't know why they
didn't get it updated the posted
calendar online and for in
particular it still was wrong
this morning and then it didn't
have one ninety but our our
particular page committee had
all the bills listed it gets
pretty crazy at the end of
session with we don't have a
twenty four hour time line and
so we're we're putting bills on
and revising agenda is pretty
fast so the probably the most
safest one to check is the
committee website.
Thank you madam chair that's
what caught me off guard as well
wait a minute and then I've been
here I've been here a.
An announcement yesterday either
I was putting on a bill and in
order in the Senate so I
apologize but just so you know
we we have we will have a
meeting on Wednesday I just
don't know what time or how many
bills yet.
And madam.
A little more students a look at
that.
Okay I was I wasn't sure of the
time so I didn't make the and
now.
and
you know by Friday it's it it'll
be really hard unless we've got
one that really is is on a path
to the floor and passage so will
because we and at noon on
Saturday so
and if necessary will work in a
special meeting at some point if
we've got a bill on the pathway
to the floor so I'll I'll keep
you posted but we do for sure
have a meeting on Wednesday.
Okay will be missed almost where
madam chair.
Thank you the interim whole
anyway but as you see you guys
god bless you thank you so much
bye bye even if you hour by.
