Zoom in opposition, raise your
hand, and I'll come back to you,
anyone in the room in
opposition.
OK, please come forward.
And you're limited to one
minute.
Just stop.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I am
not in opposition or in support
of the policy of the bill, but
uh my name is John Clark. I'm
the state investment officer and
I'm here to address a concern
about how the bill is drafted,
uh, right now in statute, if
there are positive or negative
earnings from the treasury, they
get allocated to the general
fund if they're, if there are
negative earnings, that means
money is taken out of the
general fund. This bill then
applies that same method to the
new Medicaid Trust Fund. The
problem is
there's no money being
immediately allocated to the
Medicaid Trust Fund. So if there
are negative treasury earnings
in a given month, money would
need to be pulled out, but if
the money's not there or if it's
not sufficient, then it will
result in audit findings and
could potentially result in, uh,
impacting the state's bond
ratings. Thank you very much.
OK, and I don't see anyone in
opposition on Zoom in support,
um, please raise your hand on
Zoom if you are in support in
the room, please come forward if
you would like to speak.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is JD
Bullington and I'm speaking to
you today on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce that supports this
bill, which does a lot of things
which are all aimed at ensuring
the state can sustain the
Medicaid program, whether there
are reductions in federal
matches or through expanded
usage or levels of care, and as
we know, the costs of Medicaid
have grown exponentially to the
point where it places the 2nd
largest demand on the general
fund just below public
education. How does the pill do
this through a creative.
uh, through a variety of
creative mechanisms, seeding it
with an appropriation.
Accepting unexpended,
unencumbered balances from state
agencies and also reverting
capital outlay, and it
distributes the money in a way
that'll help gain federal
matching dollars, so this bill
addresses what's likely to be a
critical need and the chamber
asks for your support.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Fred Nathan. I'm founder
and executive director of Think
New Mexico. We stand in strong
support of this bill. A couple
of quick points. First of all,
this bill has 17 co-sponsors
from the Senate, Democrats and
Republicans, including every
member of leadership, Senator
Wirth, Senator Stewart, Senator
Scherer, Senator Woods, the
primary sponsor is uh Senator
Munoz, chair of finance. Um, we
think this is the most
important bill perhaps in this
legislative session because it
addresses something that the
legislature has been struggling
with for decades, which is how
to raise our Medicaid
reimbursement rates. This is one
of the reasons that we have such
a hard time keeping doctors
here. Doctors tell us that in
most cases with Medicaid
patients, they're losing money
on every procedure. This bill is
clever because it's gonna get us
a 3 to 1 match from the federal
government and potential
it's going to be raising $400
million a year. Take $100
million is 5% of 2 billion, you
match that 3 to 1, and you've
got $400 million to raise
Medicaid reimbursement rates.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Jason Thompson. Um, I'm here on
2 hats today. Uh, first, I'm
standing in for uh Charlie
Marquez, who's uh has a back
injury, so he, he's at home and
um on behalf of Broad Spectrum
Consulting, which they both
represent in the Mexico Health
Care Association assisted living
facilities. They stand in full
support of this legislation, so
I'm speaking on behalf of, of
them this morning and they
definitely appreciate all the
sponsors' work and proponents
work on this. Um, and on my
And I'm also representing the
Mexico pharmacy Business
Council, um, the mom and pop
owners of all the independent
pharmacies in Mexico, the vast
majority of which they're,
they're, uh, patient share uh is
primarily Medicaid. So this is a
really practical and really
creative, um, plan for this,
especially depending on what may
or may not happen at the federal
level, just so we have um
something that's put in place
that can lessen our dependence
on the federal government for
this Medicaid funding,
especially with.
the amount of folks we have in
the state that are dependent on
that. We support the bill. Thank
you.
OK, I see a lot of hands on
Zoom, we're gonna take the 1st
5, so that's Richard.
Um, Jackie, Gabrielle, Jim
Jackson, and Ellen Pines. So go
ahead, Dick.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Dick
Mason. I'm a board member of the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico, and the league stands in
strong support of SB 88, the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico supports a healthcare
system that provides a
comprehensive level of health
care for all New Mexico
residents. Medicaid coverage is
an important part of that of
providing that comprehensive
coverage.
With the federal government
proposing to cut Medicaid.
Cost sharing, it's important
that Mexico put aside the funds
to maintain coverage, but the
over 40% of New Mexicans who are
covered by Medicaid.
But there is a concern, not
knowing what is in HB 2, the
league is concerned that while
while SB 88 addresses the
long-term needs of Medicaid
funding.
It does not address the short
term needs. I just read that
Nebraska faces a $90 million hit
on its budget due to federal
cuts in Medicaid cost sharing,
but still, the League of Women
voters wants to thank the
sponsors for introducing SB 88
and urges the committee to give
it a due pass. Thank you.
Thank you, Nick, we have Jackie.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Jackie Cooper and I'm a
volunteer advocate for AARP New
Mexico, uh, on behalf of AARP's
240,000 members statewide AARP
New Mexico certainly supports
Senate Bill 88 Medicaid is a
lifeline for millions of older
Americans and thousands of older
New Mexicans. It means access to
care that helps them live with
dignity, whether in nursing
homes or receiving home and
community-based services that
enable them to
in place, this trust fund will
help improve access to care and
increase the healthcare
workforce. We respectfully ask
you to pass this very important
legislation. Thank you.
Gabriel
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Gabrielle Dietrich.
Gab Gabrielle, we lost you, so
I'm gonna go ahead and go on if
you can um raise your hand and I
will call on you. Um,
Actually Gabriel Gabriel, are
you back on?
Gabriel
Yes, I am here. I'm so sorry. Um
that's OK. Go ahead.
Um, speaking on behalf of Nami
New Mexico. Nami New Mexico is
in strong support of this bill
for the reasons that others have
mentioned, we are looking for
sustainability for Medicaid
dollars. Thank you very much.
And for the record that was
Gabriel Dietrich, um, Jim
Jackson.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
Jim Jackson for Disability
Rights New Mexico. Uh, Madam
Chair, as you well know, uh,
Medicaid is a, uh, a principal
source of support, not only for
regular healthcare services, but
for the home and community-based
services that so many people
with disabilities rely on.
So, uh, it is important that we
uh do as much as we can to
support the Medicaid program, as
you also know, uh, Medicaid has
become a, a real economic
engine, uh, in our state and
supports
Uh, healthcare services
including uh hospitals and other
uh facilities and services
around the state, particularly
in our rural areas.
And uh finally, as many folks
have noted, um, the uncertainty
of funding at the federal level
makes it even more important
that we make sure that we're
setting aside some funds that
will help uh provide the
financial support for Medicaid
in the future and we encourage
your support of this bill. Thank
you.
Ellen
you
Thank you, Madam Chair. Can you
hear me?
Yes, we can.
Great, um, Ellen Pines
representing the disability
coalition being the last one to
go means that previous speakers
have covered the points that I
had intended to make, so I will
simply echo those comments and
urge the committee's support of
the bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, so we will go
back to the sponsors. Do you
have anything before we go to
the committee?
No, madam Chair, we're ready for
questions. OK, so I have so far
representative Ferrari,
representative Anaya,
representative E Chavez,
representative Martinez.
OK, go. Oh, the representative
Jones.
OK, so we'll start with
Representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator and
Representative, um, I, I agree
this is a great idea. My concern
is, um, some of the financial
things that were pointed out,
um.
And I was wondering, um,
If this is in HB 2 already.
Madame chair, members of the
committee representative
Ferrari. So the initial fund was
set up at a at a 3 $300 million
dollar amount for uh making sure
that the fund was first
sustainable, and then putting an
additional amounts uh from the
interest from the investments
from throughout the state that
would go into the fund until we
reach a maximum amount of $2
million. And so we have uh
another expert here with us who
can further explain, but yes.
there is money to start the fun
and what we're looking at is
continuing to grow it based upon
the investments and if you were
able to see a copy of the uh of
the, of the FIR you'll see how
much money we're expected to
earn each particular fiscal year
as we continue to grow the fund
and what the expected amount is
to be at the end of 4 years
particularly.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, I think you
meant billion dollars, $2
billion but um what is the
initial amount?
300 million. 300 million and the
guesstimates, I think, of every
year after that close to that,
and that's still only get going
to get by FY 29 to 1 billion, so
we're only halfway there after
um 5 years of investment, um, my
other question, Madam Chair, and
um senator um.
The point about how the um.
How this maybe should be amended
to realized.
Instead of, you know, us having
to go back and pay the treasury.
Have you considered amending and
fixing that so that we don't
have, you know, money going back
or taking it out of the general
fund if we don't um meet that.
So, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, this is Adrian,
um.
Ala, he's with uh the the
Senate.
Finance Committee of Chief of
Staff, and I think he can answer
most of those deep financial
questions, if that's all right.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Ferrari, so to, to piggyback,
right? Uh, this bill will have
an initial injection within
House Bill 2, Senate Finance
hasn't adopted anything yet, so
I can't relay that information
as to the specific amount, but
it will be able to cover that
small initial fluctuation until
money is able to flow in. In
terms of potentially amending
it, uh, there is talk with the
executive of a potential
amendment that might be coming
down, which will be adopted in
HAFC.
To address some of these uh
financial concerns.
So madam chair and um
representative senator and
expert, um, we have to trust
that this is going to change
because otherwise we're putting
our whole budget at risk.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Ferrari, the, the budget as a
whole isn't being put at risk.
It's an audit finding that's
being put at risk at the worst
case scenario. Um.
Which is still bad, not to say
it's a good thing, but in terms
of why the decision was made to
keep the overnight investments
at the state treasury being what
gets deposited here. It's the
most volatile revenue source
that the general fund has more
volatile than oil and gas, more
volatile than anything else, so
we're moving that volatility
away from the general fund,
creating stability within the
general fund to enable the
actual appropriations you all
make the budget itself as a
whole to be more stable.
This is meant to address
potential shortfalls in Medicaid
and potential unknowns in
regards to the federal
government during the next few
years. Um,
But at the same time creating
that initial corpus to then.
Provide an opportunity to once
things stabilize, build up
Medicaid throughout the state.
So it, it's meant to serve as
kind of a stopgap for many
different concerns that are
being raised by the legislation,
um, expert, um,
What programs are going to be at
risk if
And we're expecting, you know,
Terrible drops in Medicaid to
our state. So is that going to
make it so other programs that
that
Um, treasury would have to, you
know, make up.
by the statute to Medicaid, what
other programs are going to be
affected.
Uh, Madam Chair, representative
Ferrari, as of right now, we did
receive a presentation from the
various economists in relation
to what's going on at the
federal level.
It is still unknown the specific
programs that are gonna end up
potentially being cut. That's
not something that we will know
until October, so there's a lot
of unknowns in terms of the
specifics. Um, however,
This fund, especially the
amendment that was adopted in
um.
The Senate floor enables the
fund to be fully tappable.
If there's a single dollar.
And lost revenue from the feds
for you all to be able to
backfill those programs so we
don't jeopardize them. So it's
an opportunity to basically
safeguard money.
Medicaid in the event that there
is a shortfall, but we won't
know until October.
Man of cheering expert.
I agree that we need to protect
Medicaid, but I'm worried about,
you know,
If other things considered, we
would be forcing other things
not to be so at 300 million or
nearly 300 million every year,
this will go to appropriations,
so, um,
So
So we can support as a health
committee and let them, OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for
reminding me that, but the
responsibility still is with us,
um, thank you, that's all.
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, Senator
Representative, for bringing
this forward. There were a
couple of things I just want to
clarify. I think this is what I
heard during the presentation.
Um, 300 million into House Bill
2 right now. It would generate
279 million a year on interest.
Is that what I heard, OK, I see
you shaking your head. Can you
just rephrase them?
So, uh, Madam Chair.
What's in House Bill 2 right
now, at least when it comes out
of the Senate is as of yet
defined.
The idea was to do 300 million,
if I can twist.
Senator M Munoz's arm hard
enough, and he's
Primary sponsor, then yes, we
should have money in there to
start with. And then the growth
on the FIR 279,262 million. So,
That is, that is growth.
from interest, so that's not
general fund growth or taxpayer
growth, that's just interest
growth. Thank you. I definitely
got the interest piece, and I'm
also wondering, I, I know this
is going to HTFC, but I'm
thinking about us as the health
committee and future cuts that
we know, I know we keep saying
if, but when they come, um, I'm
just wondering how that interest
compares to the amount of cuts.
Will it cover it? Will it not
even touch it? Do we have any
kind of estimation about that.
Madam Chair and Representative.
Don't know. Potentially, the
state faces $9 billion in cuts
across the board. Well,
This ain't gonna cover $9
billion but we're still putting
money aside right now, that we
can access. It's not out of our
reach. We can't access it too.
Use it, but
But how much cuts don't know.
But this money is there, and we
can use it.
Sure. I mean, I don't disagree
with the premise of this bill at
all, I think what I'm trying to
do, um, as somebody who's
approached both our chair and um
the chair of HAFCA really want
to dig into this particular part
of healthcare in particular, the
budget piece. So we can have
some good communication back and
forth. So, um, Madam Chair,
Senator and Representative, um,
let's see, I have a few other
questions here.
I know we talked about the
federal match and the potential
for this to grow upon itself,
especially with the federal
match dollars, but I was
wondering, um, how much would,
would we be making without the
federal match.
So, um,
out of the chair, about $100
million a year would be 5% of
the 2 billion.
But then with the federal match,
that 100 turns into 400.
But it's still 100.
Thank you. And I know, um, it
was said, uh, during public
comment that um we could raise
Medicaid reimbursement rates. I
also just kind of want to give
us a reality check that we have.
Potentially a lot of federal
cuts coming for Medicaid
programs. And so I just kind of
want to set an expectation as
well for reality check in which
we're actually probably gonna
need to use money like this to
shore up the amount of money
that we were getting before and
not um necessarily give false
hope that there will be Medicaid
reimbursement rates that raise,
um, I also wanted to ask about
Um, the potential losses, I know
I'm called mean for talking
about what's happening at the
federal government level often,
um, but I think it's something
we really have to take into
consideration here, um, because
we kind of live in a bubble
sometimes in this roundhouse,
but um, how do we cover any of
those potential losses like it's
the general fund is on the hook
for it, imagining we as a state
are on a hook for any potential
losses.
So Madam Chair and
Representative, are you speaking
of?
The overnight losses or are you
speaking of federal losses.
Well, I guess a little bit of
both, um, Madam chair and
Senator, but I'm speaking to uh
some of what was expressed in
the public comment. I know you
said there would be a
forthcoming amendment and I was
just wondering what that would
consist of if there's any kind
of detail, we might be able to
know about that amendment.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Anaya. So the amendment would
actually focus to basically say
that.
There's a
kind of a limit, right? So let's
say.
50 million. That has to stay in
here to be able to account for
those fluctuations when we do
experience losses.
Um, what that amount is is still
being negotiated with the
executive to ensure that if
there is overnight losses, we
don't result with the audit
finding by going into the
negative, that it's able to take
that hit.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair and
Senator, I have one last
question. Um, given that the
federal market is currently
falling. I was just wondering,
you know, in our potential
scenario, we're here, the
federal market is following our
Medicaid cuts are coming, um.
For the first year, what is the
potential that we'd be on the
line for? And is that what
you're speaking about in this
particular amendment that
That a particular amount is yet
to be negotiated.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative. So what's on the
line is assuming that the cuts
do hit in October, whatever
those cuts end up being. The
estimates we received were about
500 million.
However, there's a potential for
other cuts in case they decide
to remove some waivers, right,
so it all depends. It's, it's
very much in flux. However, we
have 3 billion in reserves.
That's the first thing that's
gonna get hit.
And this will help backfill as
well. So, initially by the time
you all come back in session,
um, next year, uh, this fund
would have roughly 150 million,
so that's an extra 100 that you
could potentially utilize to
backfill some stuff on top of,
you know, targeting the reserves
and maybe doing other uh
budgetary magic, right? All
right. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, no other questions. Thank
you. We'll go to Representative
Eleanor Chavez. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
So
I have some um questions kind of
along the same lines, but I
think a little bit different,
um, Madam Chair, Senator
Representative, and in the first
um question that I have is what
kinds of assumptions are you
making with regard to growth,
because right now.
We don't know when or if we're
going to be in a recession. Um,
there's a lot of, there's a lot
of moving parts, um, based on
what's going on at the federal
level. So I just kind of wanna
know, Madam Chair, Senator
Representative, what assumptions
are you making with regard to um
the growth.
Uh, in terms of this fund.
Madam Chair, let me start with
first, this is not a
comprehensive fix the state
budget bill. It's not a
comprehensive fixed Medicaid
Medicaid bill.
This is, this is a bill to try
to put something in place where
we have nothing now to try to
stabilize Medicaid. So, this
bill doesn't address whatever
the federal government's going
to do, it doesn't address
whatever the market's gonna do.
This puts aside some money with
the potential of growth. Now, we
think it's gonna grow.
And it's because if we look at
historically, uh, what it's
done, yes, in 2022 it lost
money.
But most years,
It makes 200+ million dollars,
the just the the overnight
deposits due.
So
I can't give you a, what are we
gonna do if the federal
government does something or
what are we going to do if the
market does something, or what
are we going to do if it snows?
This isn't that bill. This is a
trust fund.
So that we can start moving in a
more stable way to fund
Medicaid.
That's what it does, yeah, madam
chair, Senator Representative, I
guess my question was around,
you know, the assumptions and
you kind of answered it a little
bit in terms of um the um
interest piece, I think, um, but
I wasn't talking about the
entire federal budget. I'm
talking about, you know,
specifically, um, Medicaid and
aimed at this bill, um, and so
uh
I, I
I guess what I want to say is
that I don't know that we can
necessarily rely on some of the
numbers that are in here because
we don't know what's going to
happen, but the other, the other
question that I have is, is this
where is this money going to be
invested? Is it invested in the
stock market? Where is it
invested? Or is it put in the
bank and that's where the
interest comes from, Madam Chair
Representative Chavez. So the
investment portfolio will be
determined by the State
Investment council, and they
will make the most prudent
decision based on.
Prudent investment law that's in
place, so based on the way the
market's going, they might play
a more safer route, it could be
in bonds, it could be in like a
savings account. It could be in
the stock market if the stock
market stabilizes a little bit,
which
We'll see. Um, if you look at
the FIR on page 4, you will see
there what this estimate is in
terms of the potential gains
that are estimated, so they're
estimating that the gains for
this fund would be roughly 6.2%,
but realistically, on average,
the state Investment council
goes anywhere from 5 to 7% in
terms of realized gains on any
of these trust funds that
they've been managing. So they,
they are very prudent with the
money. Now, in terms of the
money that's being deposited.
From the state treasury, right?
The reason we had a very small
amount or negative numbers in
overnights back in 2022 was
because of COVID. We didn't
exactly have much money in the
treasury to be able to, you
know,
Have overnight gains. Right now,
we're sitting at over 6, roughly
$6 billion in capital outlay
that's sitting there at the
treasury.
In savings account.
Gaining interest on top of all
the other money that you all
have appropriated with the House
Bill 2 that are anticipated, so
we have billions of dollars that
are going to be gaining
interest, and that's gained
interest is what will get
deposited in here to build up
the corpus.
Um, so that kind of gives you a
lay of the land.
Mm
Um, so then my other question
is, when
Um
And it may have already been
asked if it has, I apologize,
but in terms of the money being
able to start flowing.
Um, what's the anticipation that
anticipated time frame.
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee, Representative Chavez
is not until fiscal year, uh.
2029.
And then I just have one more
comment. And I think, I mean,
this committee during the
interim, um, had a lot of
presentations with regard to
health care and what's driving
the high cost of health care.
And I think that as a
legislature, we need to start to
look at that really very
seriously, because that's one of
the issues in terms of, you
know, the growth in Medicaid. We
really don't have a good handle
in terms of how our money is
being spent, um, what outcomes
are in terms of the money that's
being spent.
And I don't think that there's a
whole lot of transparency with
regard to MCOs. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Next they have
minority Whip Martinez.
man chair Senator
Representative.
Uh, another great idea.
I have a couple of questions,
um,
How is, how is this gonna work
with the Medicaid forward the.
Addition.
To the Medicaid rules.
Um, is that what we're trying to
fend off here because we're
looking at.
About 900,000 in the next couple
of years.
Is that what we're trying to
fend off here.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee representative
Martinez, the answer to that is
no. What we're looking at right
now, there's a possibility of
federal cuts to Medicaid. What
we need to do is to protect the
833,000 people in New Mexico,
about 40% of our population to
make sure that they continue to
receive the Medicaid, um,
protocol and that they are
receiving now. So that's what
we're trying to protect against.
So that
That was my question. I mean,
that's what we're trying to fend
off is the cuts to.
That, uh, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, representative
Martinez, that may be coming
down the line.
Because, um, Madam Chair.
Senator and Representative.
We have promises from the new
administration that they're
gonna
Finally balance the federal
budget.
I don't know that we're gonna
have the 7 to 1.
It's gonna be closer to one, so
we need to keep that in mind. I
just.
Seems like we're moving around
money here.
Uh, money that.
We're counting on that we don't
have at hand yet.
And that's always a concern.
I think planning for the future
is a great idea.
I'm not too worried about what's
going on in the stock market
right now, it's gonna correct
itself.
Uh, we will have good returns.
SIC will this will this money.
be managed by the state
investment council or
The treasurer
The, uh, Madam Chair, the State
Investment council.
Same people that invest today
will invest this.
Because they, they are doing an
incredible job when you start
looking at.
Some of the returns on the
funds. I'm just concerned.
That
Moving around money that we
don't have this.
We still haven't seen.
What's gonna be in House Bill 2
and my fears that we're just
gonna create without money in
it, with the hopes of putting
money in it.
We may not ever get.
Like I said, I think it's a
great idea.
I just
The financial side is what I'm
worried about, whether and with
the the looming increase in
people getting pushed on
Medicare.
Um, or Medicaid, I just think
that we're, we're hoping that
things are gonna happen.
My fear is that those hopes are
gonna be dashed when they
bounce.
Thank you. And just a reminder,
Medicaid forward is a bill. It's
not a law. So, um, I believe
there's a long way to go before
it becomes a law. So
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Representative. I
had a lot of questions, but I'm
just gonna
cut to my bottom line here.
Um,
I don't know why we have money
bills, everyone's talked about
money. I don't know why we bring
a money bill to the healthcare
committee. You want to bring him
up and I know it's not you who
made that decision. I'm not
saying that. I'm just, I just
am.
Irritated with
Having to make a decision on a
bill that is a money bill. This
is all about money, even though,
you know, we acknowledge that,
yes, it's going to go on to
finance and they're gonna fix
everything and amendments and so
forth, but I have to make a
decision on a money bill. You
came to me, madam chair.
Senator Representative, and you
asked me, you ask any of us, do
you want New Mexicans to have
Good healthcare. We're gonna say
heck yeah.
We love good healthcare. We want
that for New Mexicans. I want
good health care for New
Mexicans. I want to make sure
that we can pay for it, but I
can't make a decision on this
bill. I, I'm tired of that. I
really am. Um, I'm tired of
having my name on a bill, and I
don't I have no idea how this is
gonna work out. So that's where
I stand, a little frustrated.
We're at the end of the session,
and, and I think that we've seen
a lot of bills that we really
can't um verify or going to
To be good for New Mexico in the
end because we can't make those
future decisions, so if you're
here asking me, Madam Chair,
Representative Senator, if I
want good health care for New
Mexicans, absolutely. I spent my
whole life trying to make people
well and uh live longer, but,
but I'm not gonna put my name on
this, so that's, that's all I
have to say. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Um, I will entertain
emotion, but I'm sure I'd make a
motion for do pass on uh.
Senate bill.
88 as amended.
OK, so I have a motion
frompresentative Kates and a
second from Representative
Anaya, um, Karen, will you take
the role, please?
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative in Chavez.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones.
No.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez.
Madam Vice Chair. Yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
About 6 to 1 by a vote of 6 to
1, you have a due pass.
Thank you, madam. Thank you.
Representative Duncan, you have,
you have a bill in another
committee, correct? So we're
gonna go ahead and you're
finished, OK. Well, I'll still
let you jump ahead.
Yeah.
And Representative Duncan, I
appreciate you letting me know
yesterday that, that you may
have a conflict, so see it pays
to let the chair know what's
going on.
So go ahead whenever you're
ready. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um,
Uh, good to be with you today,
um.
This is a department bill and it
has been um amended.
And so we'll talk about two
different things here. Um, one
is the timeline for
HMOs to for the department to
look at them, changing from 3
years to a 5 year. Um, so we do
have a committee substitute.
So do you, do we have that in
our books? It's oh, OK, so you
just, so I need a motion to um
discuss the substitute.
OK, so we have a motion, any
opposition, so we are discussing
the substitute. Go ahead, I'm
sorry to interrupt. I just
wanted to make sure.
We do our analysis on the
committee substitute.
The analysis is not on the
committee substitute per se.
But, um, our, oh it is OK. I
was, OK, OK, never mind. Yes, it
is. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'll
let the secretary, uh, answer
some questions on this.
Madam Chair representatives, uh,
would you like me to address
just the substitute. We have 2
pieces here. We have the
extension.
I'm
um, I'm Alice Cain. I'm
superintendent of insurance.
Madam Chair representatives, I
think there are 2 pieces here.
Uh, first we're asking for an
extension of time to review our
HMO examinations from 3 to 5
years, at the substitute bill is
addressing a technical, um,
amendment to the insurance code
that, that uh will allow us to
comply with uh NAIC
accreditation standards. It's
got 2 pieces, uh, there's a
group calculation for holding
companies and then there's
a second piece for stress
testing for largelicensurers.
Would you like me to go into
more detail about the group of
rep Madam Chair Representative,
would you like me to go into
more details about the group
calculation or the stress
testing. No, we'll, we'll go to
the, when, when you're finished,
we'll go to the audience and
then as folks have questions,
they oh would help if I turn on
my mic. Um, so yeah, we will go
to
OK, um, uh, first up, are there
any questions on the committee
sub before we adopt it.
Yeah
OK, it's it, um, do I have a
motion to adopt the committee so
Madam Chair, so moved.
And is there any opposition?
OK, you have an official
committee
and we will go to the audience.
If you are in opposition, and
it's nice to see former chair
Deborah Armstrong on here.
Hello, Debbie. Um, so if you are
in, in support in opposition on
Zoom, raise your hand. Anyone in
the room in opposition.
OK, and I don't see anyone on
Zoom in support.
On Zoom, raise your hand and
I'll come back to you in support
in the audience. OK, there goes
your award for the most exciting
bill of the day.
Um, so I don't see any anything
anywhere, so we will go to the
committee for questions. Any
questions? Representative Anaya.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, for
bringing this forward.
I think my biggest question is
because we have so many issues
with HMOs generally. It's just
kind of concerning that we're
letting more time go by and
Or, you know, until we're
checking up on them again. So
you just address this concern,
Madam Chair and Representative.
Madam Chair Representative, this
is extending the please
introduce yourself. I am on top.
I'm the financial analyst
supervisor. Um, this is
extending the HMO examination
period. This is not necessarily
saying that the HMOs domiciled
within New Mexico are not going
to be looked at on a quarterly
basis as they are in general. So
this is just an examination
where it's a more deep dive into
significant issues that I'm
seeing throughout my day to day
analysis of them.
So an examination is just a more
in depth.
And it's
bringing us up to national
standards. As of right now, it's
at 3 years. We currently only
have 2 HMOs domiciled within New
Mexico, so it's not gonna be
significantly
hurting.
To New Mexicans, if we extend it
by 2 years.
And um,
Madam Chair Representative, can
you also just address what are
the, I mean, not in complete
detail. We don't need to take a
ton of time, but just for my own
knowledge, what are the
differences between those two
types of observances. I know you
said one is a little bit less in
depth and, and the second one is
more in depth, and what are the
differences between them? Madam
Chair Representative, so for
financial analysis, it's
basically on a quarterly basis,
we look at all of their
quarterly statement filings,
which include, you know, cash.
It's liabilities, anything that
stands out that could be a red
flag, and those red flags then
eventually will get looked at in
a deep dive during the
examination.
I'm
So,
so basically what you're talking
about are more like financial
audits then quality of care
audits and that kind of thing,
Madam Chair representative, yes,
OK, that is helpful.
Thank you. So, any other
questions representative Ferri.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, um, I, I was just
wondering what other states, um.
are moving or, you know, what is
the percentage that have it at
the 5 years, which they say it
should not be any more than 5
years, but you know, uh, why are
we changing it from the 3 to the
5.
Because other states are or
madam chair representative, I, I
don't particularly know about
HMOs, and we can check again,
but traditionally it's 5 year
examinations for all the um uh
entities that uh insurance
departments regulate this seems
to be an outlier, uh,
historically here, but we will,
I can get back to you with the
details to make sure that I'm
giving you the correct
information.
OK, well, that won't help with
my vote now, but I have here,
um, yeah, it's this, so this is
a national standard for the 5
across the board, even for HMOs.
Madam Chair Representative based
on my knowledge, but I, I
haven't checked today,
traditionally it's a 5-year
examination period for entities
that insurance departments
regulate.
OK. Thank you, ma'am.
Minority whip Martinez.
That's the proper time, madam,
sure, I'd like to move a new
pass.
Are there any other questions?
OK, so the motion will be a do
not pass.
House Bill 398, but a due pass
for Health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill 398. That's what you meant
to say, right? That's correct. A
second. OK, so we have a motion
by Representative Martinez and a
second by Representative Jones.
Is there any opposition?
Seeing none, you have a due
pass.
6 to 0.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. I'm glad I could
present a um thriller of a bill.
Yeah.
Sometimes calm is good.
So since I'm not sure where.
Uh
00, OK, Senator Hickey.
I didn't see you.
I was prepared to present the
bill and then I realized I don't
have a vice chair, so I'm glad
you're here.
So whenever you, do you have an
expert?
Uh
No, I don't. I've, I've had
experts in multiple
presentations. I think I've
learned it. OK, all right, go
ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. Uh, I am presenting a
committee substitute for Senate
Bill 20.
And the Senate Bill 20 has to do
with the imposition of a
nicotine tax on nicotine
products. Um,
And let me give you just a, a, a
brief context and, and then uh
we'll open for questions. The,
uh, this is really a health.
Um
For you, Bill, particularly used
transitioning into adulthood and
the risk of addiction that they
have and, and enhancing
addiction pathways as Madam
Chair, as we learned a few years
ago from Doctor Zidonis, a
specialist in nicotine
addiction, nicotine is called
the gateway drug to addiction in
this bill is to hope to reduce
that probability. Uh, we know
that
The increase in price in
cigarettes and uh that is now
coming out on e-cigarettes that
the increase in price as uh
achieved through tax increase
leads to a significant decrease
in demand, particularly in youth
who have limited, uh, additional
expenses.
The
Um
Vaping is, uh, in this bill
really focuses on vaping, uh,
originally we considered raising
cigarette taxes and cigars and
cigarillos, but we really wanted
to emphasize the youth
prevention in this bill and the
money that it generates for
their education. So it really is
only on vaping products, um,
which now we're come in flavors,
uh, Star War games and other
inducements to youth, and
We we've seen a decrease in
vaping from about 32% of high
school to 25%. We are
unfortunately seeing a
commensurate increase in pouches
and pouches, you know, don't
create vapor and smoke for smoke
alarms in bathrooms. And so
there's still uh the tendency to
use nicotine as a, a, a stress
reduction, uh, in youth. The
money, uh, that would be
generated in this.
has no impact on the general
fund, and it would generate
about $5.6 million to add to the
Department of Health and its
program in New Pack and that
program would be coordinated
with the higher education
department and PED to target
youth from 20 from 5 to 25. So
the increase in the tax is 40%
of wholesale price, um, which is
certainly not the highest.
in the country, um, but it's a,
it's a pretty high amount and by
passing this bill again, the key
is to keep our you or hope that
our youth is not induced to
uptake, uh, vaping, which then
leads to uptake of other, uh,
addicting drugs and to keep them
healthy and with that, I'll,
I'll finish for questions.
Thank you. So we will go to the
audience if you are in
opposition to this bill, please
raise your hand and I'll come
back to you in the room if
you're in opposition.
Please come to the center.
If you would like to speak.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Art Hall.
I represent native trading
associates, a small family owned
business in Albuquerque, serving
over 25 years with 60
hardworking New Mexicans.
Prevention is working, as is
evidenced by Representative
Ferrari's interim work,
prevention is doing well, as
evidenced by the most recent CDC
report showing e-cig and
nicotine pouches at the lowest
level in youth in.
a decade.
This bill does nothing about
addiction or cessation,
synthetic nicotine is the most
effective form of smoking
cessation. This bill will drive
folks back to cigarettes or
worse, the black market, and
remember on online sales, while
they may collect GRT. They are
rarely collecting tobacco taxes.
This is the most regressive form
of tax on the most financially
vulnerable constituents.
in New Mexico, and we would ask
you to give them a break given
the economy we're in, the super
high inflation and the tough
times they're having buying
groceries and other things
currently today, we ask you to
vote no. Thank you. Uh, you
still be the try strategies New
Mexico representing Philip
Morris International, uh, for a
lot of the same reasons that
have already been stated, um,
some of the products that are
included in this, um, bill are
being used currently as a
secession tool.
this bill doesn't talk about
secession at all, doesn't talk
about the hundreds of
individuals who are already
using the products, nor does it
provide any funding for them.
Uh, we, while we think that this
bill is well intended, we think
that there's still also some
language issues in regards to
e-liquids within the within the
legislation that was also
already brought up on the Senate
floor for those same reasons, we
stand in opposition to the bill.
OK, thank you. We will go to
Zoom. Leland Gould.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Leland Gould and I
represent the New Mexico
Petroleum Market Association.
Our members are hundreds of
small business owners all over
New Mexico. The majority of our
customers are typically lower
income New Mexicans, and our
small business owners believe
this legislation unfairly
targets and penalizes those New
Mexicans that can um least
afford this tax, and for this
reason, our small business
owners are post Senate Bill 20.
Thank.
You.
OK, now I'll go to support if
you are on Zoom in support.
Please raise your hand.
Um, in the room and support.
If you would like to speak,
please come forward.
And, and just while while he's
coming forward, the FDA has
approved cessation devices and
these are not them.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, members of
the committee, Mahesh Sita of
the American Heart Association.
So I think you all know you said
on the tobacco settlement fund
committee and, you know, we have
an epidemic of, you know,
e-cigarette vaping use among our
youth, like 25% of our youths
are using waves and
e-cigarettes, 14%, middle
school, and you know, the
synthetic products, you know,
our friends are citing none of
those products, as you
mentioned, are approved.
You know, as a cessation
products by the FDA and we are
not taxing them, and, you know,
there are new products, so this
bill would amend the existing
tobacco Control Act and bring
all those products into the
phone so we can tax them. And we
urge your support for this.
Thank you.
Thank you next, I'll go to Nat
Dean.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
Senator Doctor Martin Hickey,
the sponsor and advocates in the
room. My name is Nat Dean. I'm a
disability advocate. I am not a
lobbyist. I do not.
Claimed to represent the entire
disability community. I am also
a person with multiple
disabilities.
Pardon me. And uh I've spoken in
interim and I've spoken during
the session regarding uh some of
the information regarding this
matter, and I think that you
have some good information from
the presenter and in the other
committees, so I will just
simply at this juncture stand in
support. Thank you.
Thank you,
Dick Mason.
Madam Chair member of the
committee, my my name is Dick
Mason. I'm a board member and a
registered lobbyist for the
League of Women Voters in New
Mexico. The league stands in
support of SB 20. The Lie of
voters usually does not support
regressive taxes, except when it
is clear that such attacks
results in a social good.
SB 20 meets that criteria.
Data shows that increased cost
discourages excessive nicotine
consumption and reduces the
result in social harm. Um, the,
the league wants to thank the
sponsors for introducing SB 20
and urges the committee to give
it a due pass. Thank you.
Thank you, so I will um go to
the committee for questions. I
have representative Ferrari.
Martinez Jones.
OK, go ahead, representative
Ferrari. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, Senator for
bringing this bill. I know we've
worked hard, um, as was
mentioned on our interim
committee, um, but some things
uh were, um, said that I need to
dispel. I think the Madam Chair
mentioned about vaping, not
being a cessation product. It is
just another addictive product
that we have, um, in underage
smoking, uh, um, will not be
Um,
increased because
There are different students or
different youth that use vaping
products as opposed to pouches
or cigarettes, um, and
Uh, they will not also um.
Oh, I think I covered that part,
but it's just this is something
that's really important.
To
Save lives.
And underage drinking, having
the uh drinking. I'm sorry, um,
smoking or vaping using nicotine
products is something that
really does once a person starts
the gateway drug, um.
Can continue for the rest of
their lives. And I was amazed at
how many people, can you tell me
again how many people died from
uh smoking or using nicotine.
Um
Madam Chair and Senator Ferrari,
uh,
Incredible numbers, um, probably
upwards into the the millions
overall in in the country in
terms of respiratory disease,
um, the amount that we spend in
Medicaid for respiratory
disease, I think is like 280
million or uh uh
Smoking related uh uh expenses.
I can't remember the exact death
in New Mexico, but it's very,
very large. Um, I think I read
it was over 2000.
Um
2600, yes, so, um.
That's a lot of lives and if we
can put this funding into um
prevention programs, uh, the new
pack and the proven evidence
based programs, this makes this
not a regressive tax, and um I
uh fully support and think that
this is something we desperately
need or
Our health care for our youth,
um, and for the same, you know,
um, saving lives. So thank you.
Thank you represent um minority
whip Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
senator.
Um
I've I've always had issues
with.
Progressive taxation.
And this, I'm afraid, is a prime
example.
of a regressive tax that I don't
think really
uses the goal.
Um.
My esteemed colleague talked
about um.
Vaping products.
Not being smoking cessation, and
I, I disagree because I've seen.
A lot of people my age that have
smoked for 2030 years.
That moved to vaping products
and use that as an avenue to
finally quit smoking.
Um, does that happen in every
case? No.
But I, I have seen it and I've
have seen it.
Be successful in many cases. Um,
My question for you.
senator is
The majority of people that I
know that.
now smoke.
Or
Older people on Social Security.
People who maybe working part
time, uh, would you agree with,
with that observation?
Madam Chair, senator.
Man of chair and representative,
uh, I would agree that uh older
people have a much more
difficult time of cessation than
younger people do, that's well
documented in the literature,
and they may be smoking, uh,
probably cigarettes, but this
bill does not tax cigarettes any
further than they're taxed
today.
Madam chair, Senator, you,
you're raising the Madam Chair
and Representative, yes, that is
correct. Vaping and nicotine
products.
Nicotine, I'm sorry, uh, just
for clarification,
representative nicotine pouches.
Which is a delivery system
that's kind of like chewing
tobacco, put in the cheek and,
and dissolves.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
You're raising the tax from 25
to 40%.
In the hopes that it'll stop
people from using vape products.
Is that the
Basic idea of this bill.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, and I may have
to call in my expert. I believe
that vaping tax is 12% of
wholesale and pouches is 0%.
Madam Chair, Senator, I'm
looking at numbers, it would
increase from 25% of the product
value to 40.
Who would increase tax rates on
cigarettes by 50%.
The
product tax by 140%.
Uh, that's according to tax and
River, those figures not
correct?
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, I have not seen
those figures, the 140% what
you're talking about again,
there's nothing on cigarettes,
cigars, or cigarillos. This is
purely on nicotine, or nicotine
delivery systems through vape
and through pouches, and it's a
40% tax, and again, I see my
expert has left my recollection
of the numbers that I have seen
are, uh,
From 12% in the uh vaping and
from there was no tax on
nicotine, uh, other types of
nicotine products.
And madam chair, Senator, um.
You know, I don't see a lot of
people using the pouches.
Of course, it may be.
But I do, I do see
Maam chair Senator, have gone to
the the e-cigarette.
To to stop smoking, and I'm
afraid that
By raising time, those people
just go back to cigarettes.
Which
I'm encouraging them.
Not
Not that they'll ever listen to
my.
Senator
Those words are caring more.
Encourage them
I, I just, madam chair, senator.
I, I understand.
You're trying to accomplish, I
just fear that we're gonna put
chair, Senator.
I think that would be because
we're trying to move people off
of cigarettes, I remember back
in the day when.
Uh, the cigarette lobby was so
strong here that you'd walk into
somebody's office and.
You'd see cartons of cigarettes
stacked to the ceiling.
Um, I don't, I would be hard to
get into the building I'm not
sure we want to go back there,
and my fear is
Raising taxes on.
That's what that's what's gonna
happen.
That would be the unintended
consume.
And I'm not sure.
Madam Chair, uh, representative
just one small observation,
cigarettes are taxed at 37%, so
this would be a 4%, so it's
really not a, a, a price
significant price increase.
Um
So
I just sent an observation.
Thank you, madam chair
Representative Chair, thank you.
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Doctor
Hickey.
I, I just had this flashback to
the past when, when I used to be
in the nurse's station and the
doctors would come in smoking.
You know, we've come a long way,
Madam chairs, um, senator, so I
do appreciate also that I heard
and I and I know we've looked at
the the statistics that show
that um
Prevention is working with
smoking a lot less people smoke
nowadays and and we've taken a
lot of measures that have
affected those stats and and
people and I'm an ex-smoker. So
I know, I know that we can
address that in uh in various
ways and and help people not.
Not smoke, not use nicotine. Um,
So, again, I have a lot of
questions. I feel like where
does this go after tax, Madam
Chair, I mean after it does go
to attack after health.
Madam Chair and Representative,
yes, it goes to tax. Well, that
would be appropriate, Madam
Chair, Senator Hickey, because
again, you come to a health
committee and say, do you want
people to smoke and use
nicotine, and we all say,
absolutely not. We know that it
is very harmful to the health.
And the question is, do you like
taxes?
Um, where does the money come
from to help people stop?
And uh I, I heard in the last
conversation, Madam Chair,
Senator, that we have.
3 billion, I don't know how many
billions of dollars sitting
around gaining interest, not
working toward the needs of of
New Mexicans, Madam Chair,
Representative, and so,
As a person who doesn't like
taxes.
I have, I, I
It's hard to vote, um,
It's not hard to vote against
increased taxes at all, but I do
hope that we look at other ways
to spend our money wisely and
help people help.
Help people, um,
Not use nicotine and not destroy
their health from smoking and
the various other means by which
we hurt ourselves. So I am sorry
to say that I'm going to vote
against this, but um,
I appreciate the intent of the
bill very much. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Senator. Thank you. I, I
just have a couple of comments
that um
Contrary to what some people
state, um, e-cigarettes are not
necessarily safe safer than than
traditional smoking, um, we, we
don't know what's in the the
things that they're vaping, the
nicotine can be multiple times
higher in those products and,
and having sat on the tobacco
Committee for 10 years, what we
learn is that
Um, young people are very, very
sensitive to price.
And so we can't control the
price, but we can put extra
taxes on to keep them from
starting in the first place. I
mean, in the fact that 2600 New
Mexicans die every year based uh
uh from nicotine and smoking and
should be a wake-up call for us
and, and as the, the senator
said, um, Doctor Sedonis, who
was the head of UNM Health was
an addictionologist, and he said
that nicotine is
gateway drug that if you start
using nicotine, the chances of
you moving on to um
Worse drugs is greatly
increased. So we are targeting
youth.
Um, so with that, I will
entertain emotion.
I move a do pass.
So I have a motion um from
representative Ferrari and a 2nd
from Representative Eleanor
Chavez for a due pass on, let's
see.
Yeah, yes, that's right. So
substitute,
I do not pass. No, I believe we,
we don't have a committee
substitute, correct? We, we do
have a, OK, so it's a do not
pass on um let me get this all
right. Senate Bill 20.
And, and they do pass on the
committee substitute for Senate
Bill 2.
OK.
Will you take the role, Karen?
Representative Anaya.
Representative Kate, yes.
Madam,
I, I never saw the committee
suffer Hold, hold on, I think
we've got some confusion going
on here. Let me, so send it was
the, was there a committee sub
for this committee or was there
a committee sub and a firmer
committee.
Madam Chair, uh, there was a
committee sub for former
committee in the Senate, OK,
so you all made me think I was
crazy and I'm not, yay, um, so
we have a due pass on on um the
Committee sub or Senate Bill 20.
Um, so you take the role.
No, sure, I hate to interrupt
again, but wasn't this committee
sub?
Yes, yes.
That that's right, we don't need
the do not pass. We just need a
do pass on committee sub.
I'll start over.
Representative Anaya.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative in Chavez.
Representative Ferrari? Yes.
Representative Jones.
No.
Representative Martinez? No.
Representative Santa Cortez,
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair.
Yes.
4 to 2
By a vote of 4 to 2, you have a
du.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
failed in the beginning to note
my co-sponsors representative
Ferrari and Thompson.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
So next we will go to, once I
find the agenda.
Um, to Senate Bill 39, which is
uh Senator Stephanics and
majority leader Saansky.
Go ahead. Good morning, Madam
Chair, uh, and members, it's
always good to be with you.
Um, I'm here today to present
Senate Bill 39, which is really
dealing with.
Helping patients who have very
rare diseases and in the bill,
rare diseases are defined as uh
uh uh disease for which there
are less than 200,000 people in
the United States that have
this, uh, any particular
condition and uh what this
legislation does is it um.
Uh, prohibits the use of prior
authorization or step therapy
protocols for prescriptions, um,
uh, prescription medications or
treatments uh related to those
uh rare diseases.
Um, and Madam Cherry, uh, I
don't know if we're in a
subcommittee now, but um I do
have an expert, um, uh, the
former chair of this committee,
uh, Debbie Armstrong is on Zoom,
um, and there are, I also have a
couple of individuals here from
the office of the Superintendent
of Insurance. So, um, I was
gonna call you Representative
Armstrong.
So, um, Debbie, former
Representative Armstrong, did
you have anything to add? Or are
you here for questions?
Thank you. um, thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, I, I do have, um, a
couple of um things uh briefly
to add, um, just to uh be clear,
it's the other thing that the
bill does is that it clarifies
that um
Uh, off-label use. It, it has to
be an FDA approved drug, so it,
it eliminates prior auth and uh
step therapy for uh persons with
rare diseases, and we already
had um uh um in the, in the, uh,
prior authorization act, uh, uh,
precluding prior author step
therapy for autoimmune cancer
and substance use disorders.
This adds rare diseases and it
clarifies that
The FDA approved drug does not
have to be specific for the
disease, uh, but can be an off
label use of an FDA approved
drug, um,
And uh this is really important
in rare diseases because there
are so few, uh, um, available,
uh, to be able to conduct
clinical trials and in order to
get FDA approval, there has to
be clinical trials uh FDA
approval for a specific disease,
there has to be clinical trials
specific to that disease and
with rare diseases, there aren't
enough of a population, uh, to,
um, uh, generally to conduct a
clinical
trials, so it's very rare that
you would have uh an FDA
approved drug specific for a
rare disease and off-label use
is um more common. Um,
I'll just uh briefly, it's
sometimes it's helpful to put a
face to a uh to an issue. And so
if I can um if Madam Chair and
committee members, if you'll
indulge me, I can, I would like
to briefly tell you my story,
uh, cause this impacts, um, me,
uh, directly and might be
helpful illustration for the
issue.
So, um, last year I was
diagnosed with a rare um
autoimmune disease, uh, called
necrotizing myopathy, uh, where
my own, um, where my body is
killing off my muscle cells.
And I was fortunate to get a
diagnosed so that I could move
on to getting uh treatment.
There's no cure, but it can be
managed with appropriate
treatment.
Um, as we said, um, federal law,
and now in the state um defines
rare diseases under 200,000
cases in the United States. My
particular uh disease, there's
less than 10,000.
And so there aren't any clinical
trials specific, um, uh, to, um,
this disease. Um, there are
clinical, um, uh, guidelines and
best practices that are um uh
for uh treatment, uh,
That are seen in, in places
around the country that
specialize in working with
myopathies, uh, various
myopathies, but um it's not an
FDA approved specific to the
disease. So I had to fight my
insurance.
Uh, to get approval for um
Uh, for treatment.
And by the time I, I went
through multiple appeals.
Uh, because it was denied, it's
not FDA approved for the disease
and um and uh and they uh even
did peer to peer, um, but
there's very few who specialize
in it and uh my particular uh
provider, uh, neuromuscular
neurologist who specializes in,
in uh neuromuscular diseases.
It's the only one in the state.
And so, uh, peer to peer, um, I
think did with a uh um
Um
I, another neurologist, but not
one that specializes and so it
didn't, we were denied there
too, and uh some multiple
denials and um
By the time I was successful in
getting it approved. I was
almost completely dependent. I
could not lift my arms. I could
not lift my legs. I was
contemplating, I couldn't live
alone or take care of my mother
who lives with me. We were gonna
have to find alternative living
arrangements because I couldn't
function, uh, independently um
anymore. And um
Yeah, and every day I was
getting worse as I was fighting
um these denials, uh, when it
was finally approved and I got
the treatment I needed, uh, it
was like a miracle and I'm now
fully independent, um, taking
care of my mother, um, who needs
full-time caregiving and
completely independent of my
function. I'm not completely
normal yet, but I am uh very
functional and independent. It
made all the difference in the
world to finally get it. But my
point um also
I'd like to make is that I know
how this works and I know who to
call.
I run an insurance program. I
was chair of this committee for
many years. I understand the
appeal process. I understand the
medical guidelines. I know how
to um
advocate for myself and I know
who to call. I can call the CEO.
I did. Um, uh, of the insurer.
It did me no good. And if it, if
I can't, uh, if, if I have to
struggle through it, um, imagine
individuals who don't know
anything about insurance are
intimidated by a denial, don't
have a doctor who is um wants to
take the time.
Uh, to go through so many
appeals. Fortunately, mine uh
was very cooperative in that.
Um, uh, because it was, it was
an ordeal and um I think
carriers can on uh people not
pursuing those denials. So it's
really important, um, I think to
add the rare diseases and um
with that, I won't take any more
of your time. I'm happy to stand
for, uh for questions with the,
with the sponsor, um,
I thought it might be helpful to
put um a known face uh to what
the issue is. Thank you.
So, so we are a subcommittee
now, we've lost our quorum, but
we can continue with the debate
and um we will take a motion, we
just can't vote on the motion.
So, uh, Madam Chair, Armstrong,
thank you for your story. Um, so
we will go to the audience,
anyone in opposition.
Anyone on Zoom in opposition to
anyone on Zoom in support, OK,
anyone in the room in support.
If you would like to speak,
please come to the center. You
don't have to. Um, I will take a
maximum of 5 for a minute each,
so go ahead and come to the
center.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Viara
Annakiva and I'm the life and
health division director with
the office of the Superintendent
of Insurance. Patients with rare
diseases often require
specialized time-sensitive
therapies and delays in
treatment can lead to worsened
health outcomes and irreversible
disease progression, eliminating
prior authorization for
off-label use of FDA approved
medication, removes unnecessary
barriers in ensuring that
individuals with rare diseases
received the appropriate care.
In a timely manner. I think the
sponsors and Miss Armstrong for
bringing this bill forward and
or just its passage. Thank you.
Thank you. And on Zoom we have
Nat Dean. Go ahead, Nat.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee and uh
representative Armstrong, um,
Um
I stand in support of the bill
and I think that it is very uh
Moving to hear from someone who
has extensive experience and
expertise.
The, the struggle to obtain
adequate and appropriate care in
a challenging situation is very
illustrative of what I deal with
being very experienced from
lived experience trying to help
others or even help myself. It
is very hard on your worst day
when it's even harder on your
best day when you're advocating
for someone else or you have the
skills, you have the experience,
you have the
phone numbers to the direct most
direct person who can help. That
is the challenge that is faced
in this.
It shouldn't be as hard.
through any system to achieve
the adequate access to the
adequate care to address the
scenario where the outcomes will
be improved. Thank you very much
and I stand in support.
Thank you, Nat, um.
So we will go to the committee
for questions.
I, I just, I will say as the mom
of a.
Getting older man with autism,
um.
Interestingly enough, at least,
I mean, I have kind of stepped
away from being totally involved
in that world, but there were no
on label drugs for treating
autism. And so everything that
he had for sleep, for behavior,
for depression, for anxiety, for
were off-label, um, and we, we
did have to fight some battles
with that, so, um,
So with that, I will entertain
emotion unless there's questions
and, and we will come back and
vote when we, when we regain our
core.
And I'm sure I like to make a
motion for a due pass.
For uh Senate bill.
Uh, 39 estimated.
And Madam Chair, I'd be proud to
second it and also um to say hi
and thank you, um, former Madam
Chair, to always be our chair,
Madam Chair, to us.
OK, so we have a motion by
Representative Kates and in
emotional second by
Representative Ferrari, and we
will, um, when we get back to
Quorum, we will vote and so
thank you.
And I'm looking for um
Or, I mean senator for Figueroa
is presenting a bill in another
committee, um, is representative
Tarasas around. I thought I saw
him earlier.
Um
OK, and um Representative Jones,
so I guess we will take a little
um halftime break, even though
it's more than half time.
OK, so we're gonna see who we
can track down and so.
First come, first served, that's
right. So, so just hold on for a
minute and those of you on Zoom,
if it gets quiet, it's because
we're waiting for a
For a sponsor to come in and
finish up these last 3 bills.
So
Hold tight.
Thank you, Brittany.
Good morning. Good morning,
Madam Chair. Good morning. We
will go to House Bill 562.
Well, my question, Madam Chair,
is when we don't have quorum,
can we, we continue as a
subcommittee, take the motion
and when we get a quorum, we
come back and vote.
OK, so, but should I present to
the more members you were,
you present to us if we don't
have time to wait till we have a
quorum, so that's how we
proceed. We listen to it in a
subcommittee, and then when we
get a quorum, we go back and
vote.
Um, because I really would like
for the rest of the committee to
hear that man.
Well, I, I will tell you, um,
this is the last day we're
hearing house bills. We are
gonna move on. So if you want
your bill first, ma'am it's
today. OK, Madam Chair, I just,
that was the only thing that
Like, look, look, would love for
them to hear that. So Madam
Chair, thank you and members of
the community, thank you so much
for, for
Putting me on the schedule today
and so basically uh House Bill
562 manager is making an
appropriation to the healthcare
authority to increase Medicaid
reimbursements for independent
rural healthcare providers do
have a, um, expert, uh, Mr.
McMillan on the, on the uh Zoom
manager.
Um, I, I, in, in my apologies.
I represent what's what's his or
her name? Mister MacMillan. He's
on. He's on there, yes, ma'am.
So would you like him to say a
few words you can, Madam Chair,
I would appreciate it. OK, so
Mike McMillan, go ahead. Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is Mike McMillan. I'm
with Southwest Bone and Joint
Institute in Silver City, um,
when I thank the sponsor for
bringing
This forward small independent
rural healthcare providers.
has been struggling since and,
and, and during the pandemic,
but especially since the
pandemic, uh,
With high overhead costs and
decreasing reimbursements this
year is the 5th consecutive year
that
Medicare reimbursement rates for
providers has decreased with
Medicaid increasing.
Rates that has greatly helped,
but it is not impacted all
providers.
The Medicaid increases a
specifically or targeted towards
maternal primary care and
behavioral health providers.
Which is great for those
providers.
Um, but not all rural healthcare
providers have seen uh increase,
increases across the board, and
with those rates tied to
Medicare and Medicare rates
decreasing.
Any increase to Medicaid rates.
Uh, would be greatly
appreciated.
So, I, I will be on the Zoom and
will be available for additional
uh comments and, and questions.
Thank you.
Thank you. So, um,
Are you ready to go to the
audience in questions, OK, so in
the audience, if you are in
opposition, raise your hand.
Anyone on Zoom in opposition.
OK, in on zoom in support.
OK, in the audience and support.
If you'd like to speak, please
come to the center.
As always, it's one minute.
And
Mm
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Carrie
Robin Bruder with the New Mexico
Medical Society. We think that
more investment in our
independent, particularly rural
healthcare practices through
Medicaid by creating
differentials or additional ways
that we can get dollars in their
hand is just gonna help build
out a more robust health care
system, um, that will alleviate
some of the burden that we're
feeling in our urban areas if we
can support these practices as
well, so we do support this
legislation. We think it would
be a great idea.
OK, and um.
OK, not seeing anyone on Zoom.
So questions from the committee,
Representative um Kate.
So it's all right, madam chair.
It's so I'll go by whatever.
Thank you very much uh for
bringing this port. So is this
uh reimbursement, is this for uh
federally qualified.
Health clinics or I know I know
they were all for rural
providers, but it does it also
include the federally qualified
health clinics. I'm sure I'll
defer to my expert.
Madam Chair and Representative.
The definition, I would propose
would be for independent would
be a private practice,
non-hospital employee, and non,
uh,
Governmental uh healthcare
provider.
Uh, whether that be the uh state
facility or a federal facility.
Madam Chair is federally
qualified health care clinic, a
federal facility.
I'm I I'm sorry, uh, presenter,
I'm asking a question in my
chair. I, I'm, I'm not familiar
that that is a federal facility.
Uh representative.
Um, it, it's
Federally funded, but I don't
think it's considered a federal
facility.
Madam Chair representative, we
won't be able to vote on this.
We can make a motion, but I will
say I need to know whether or
not this
Uh, reimbursement.
is federally qualified health
clinics are.
eligible. So these are the
backbones of our rural areas of
being able to provide primary
care sometimes, uh,
Even dental or psychology or all
kinds of care. They do receive
federal and state funds, but
they are
Not that I'm aware of, they're
not considered a federal state.
They're not a VA. They are,
they're federally qualified
health clinic that is usually
100% Medicaid.
Um, so if you could answer that
question for me and I understand
you may not be able to do right
now, but um I would appreciate
it. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mature uh expert, do you have
any anything else you'd like to
add to that?
Madam Chair and representative,
if uh the definition of a
federally qualified health
center is not uh
technically a federal facility,
then I would say those providers
would uh receive the uh rule
bump if they're located in rural
areas because
Most of them uh are in our rural
areas of our state.
So just out of curious.
Um, so Representative, is this
in HB 2. This is, are, are these
funds in HB2 Madam, I, I'm not
gonna say that there are, but
we're in the health committee
and I so I I'm, I was thinking
that we were going to uh vote on
it as the health committee, not
the appropriations. We will
represent. I'm just.
Asking the question, is it an HB
2? I haven't had that discussion
with uh uh uh representative
chairman Small, yeah, the budget
has left the house, so it would
be a Senate.
Yes, ma'am. So we're, we, we're
working with, with anyone that
will help us with that.
We're hoping, and we've seen
that you've been champions,
madam chair, in helping rural
communities with such
initiatives and with your
concerns that I've been hearing
in your committee over uh the
possibility of Medicare cuts and
all that, so anything we can do
that this, this committee has
done with other bills in
supporting any initiative to
help our, our, our health
initiatives.
And not just in New Mexico but
all over New Mexico is
appreciated. We've seen uh that
other um primary health uh
Medicaid rates for maternal
health, primary care, and
behavioral health providers,
they, they've had increases uh
of Medicare while other
providers are still at 100%, you
know, I'm just trying to, to see
what we can, we can do to
leverage that a little bit. This
committee has been a champion of
that, so that's why I'm here,
I'm not.
Questioning, I just wondered,
and then you said it will help
all over the state, but then
it's rural rural Mexico, let me
rephrase that this.
Committee has been a champion in
supporting health care needs
throughout the state. This will
be an initiative for rural New
Mexico. Thank you. Just making
sure that we're on the same
page, representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Tarasis, um, uh,
I'm concerned that you don't
really um have an explicit
definition of independent rural
healthcare providers, and also,
um, you don't specify, you know,
the explicit increase in their
reimbursement rates.
Ma, I'm sure representative, the
definition is, I would say, give
me a second here because I, I
looked at that and.
Give me a second, let me find
where it's, it's, it's already
is defined in other arts, um,
rule is defined by the HEA Rural
Healthcare Delivery Fund, and
their definition is a county
with a population of 100,000 or
fewer, or the most the most
recent census.
OK, I will entertain emotion.
Or not.
Me chair, uh, can I ask what
what what is the other committee
that this is going to finance
appropriations appropriations,
OK. I, I will make a motion for
a due pass, madam chair.
And I'll second it, madam, so we
have a motion um for due pass by
Representative Kates, a second
Vice Chair Herndon, and we will
um take the vote when we get
when we get a quorum.
Thank you, ma'am. This is, this
is the first time I've presented
with the whole quorum. I didn't
know what to do. So thank you so
much at this time in the
session, people are presenting
in 3 different places, believe
me, I understand, but thank you
so much for hearing me.
So again we are waiting, we
still have left on our agenda,
um, Senate Bill 252 represented
uh representative Figueroa, I'm
going in the past, Senator
Figueroa is presenting a bill in
another committee, and um HB 579
Representative Jones, I'm not
sure where she is, but so we'll
wait.
Um, well, we, so we are supposed
to be on the floor at 10:30, so
we will wait until 10:30 if if
anyone shows up. So thank you.
Again, um,
OK. Thank you.
gonna say should I follow the
speaker's lead and have anyone
in the audience have a good
joke?
We could use a chuckle this
morning.
We could have Britney model her
wonderful shoes.
I love, I love them.
So I apologize again for the
delay, but that's kind of how
things run around here
frequently,
so,
oh, OK, Karen, come up, come to
a mic.
It's.
Something that people of my
generation might appreciate. So,
um, there were 3 women, they
were very, very good friends.
Can everybody hear me? Yes. OK,
they were very, very good
friends and they got together
routinely on, on Sunday morning,
and they would have a coffee and
maybe a donut and talk to each
other and, and uh.
One of them one day said, you
know what, I'm, I'm uh
I'm really frustrated because
Sometimes I walk upstairs and
I'm at the top of the stairs and
I can't remember if I went up
there on purpose.
Because I have something to do
up there or if I'm like waiting
to go downstairs. And the second
one said, boy, I know, I know
exactly how you feel about that.
I, I sometimes open the
refrigerator and I can't
remember was I gonna put
something in it or was I gonna
take something out of it?
And the third one said, Well,
thank goodness, I don't have
that problem at all, knock on
wood. Come in.
Good joke, Karen.
So with that, we have Senator
Figueroa and Senator, please
excuse me if I call you
representative because you'll
always be a member of the house.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I will
carry that title with honor
forever.
I am.
Apologizing for being out of
breath, I'm doing a lot of
running this morning, but it's
nice to be before you. This bill
is 252 as amended, and it's to
address an ambiguity in law that
in this last spring.
Um
caused a lot of our license
master social workers who were
providing services through
telehealth to be told they could
no longer do so. A new reading
of the law and if you look at
page 2, line 17.
That's what inspired this bill.
Um,
A new reading of the law said
independent in New Mexico only
means our licensed clinical
social worker.
So license master, social
workers can no longer provide
telehealth, which they've been
doing for a long time.
Um, and it was just a new
interpretation of law that we
had on the books, they received
permission after about a month
of chaos, uh, to go back and
provide services temporarily
pending legislative
clarification of this law. So
this bill is the legislative
clarification to say no, a
licensed social worker can't
provide telehealth at the
master's level and the clinical
level. There is
In addition, the amendment added
language to reiterate what is
already in the social worker Act
in their scope of practice, it
says that master social workers
are required to have
supervision, and we wanted to be
clear that this telehealth Act
does not supersede that they are
still required to have whatever
supervision their board
determines they need to have.
And since we opened this piece
of law like we always do, they
make updates and changes, so
line two is changing podiatrist
to podiatric, podiatric
physician, apparently that's the
proper term now.
Adding certified peer support
workers so they can do
telehealth and then just to make
things simpler in the future.
Any other health care
professional who's received a
Medicaid provider
identification, so we don't have
to keep going back to this list
and adding things to it.
And that's it, Madam Chair.
Thank you. So we will go to the,
if you are in opposition on
Zoom, raise your hand.
Anyone in the room in
opposition.
OK. Anyone on Zoom and support,
raise your hand.
And anyone in the room in
support.
OK, well, that makes it go
quicker and so questions, first
off, I wanna thank you for this,
Senator, and it was one less
bill I had to carry, so it's
much appreciated. Any questions
from the committee?
I move and do pass.
OK.
Oh, go ahead, um.
Senate Bill 252 as amended. OK,
so we have a motion. I gladly
second it, OK, a motion by
Representative Ferrari is second
by Representative Cates, and
once again we will take a vote
when we get a quorum.
Unfortunately, it may not be
till Friday, but we will do it
first thing.
Absolutely, madam, I'm gonna run
back to my committee, so they
have a quorum. Thank you all
very much. Too bad you can't
fill a quorum here
OK, so we are waiting now for
Representative Jones.
If any, I will text her.
So again,
I have a joke, OK, since we're,
since we're wasting time, um,
which we don't have to waste,
but so, um,
There were 33 strings hanging
out together, and they were, you
know, so the first one goes into
a bar.
And he sits down in the
bartender says.
We don't serve string in here.
And so he goes back to his
buddies and says, you know, they
don't serve, and the second guy,
the second string said.
They'll let me have a drink, so
he goes in and the bartender
says we don't serve string
drinks.
So the 3rd guy ties himself up
and fluffs up the ends and and
walks in and he said, Are you
the bartender says, Are you a
string? He says, no, I'm afraid
not's great,
I'll tell you a, a stab at this.
Uh, what's the condition of the
boy who swallowed the quarter.
No change yet.
Oh.
Wait,
yeah, this is my hair keeps
falling out. What a patient
says, What can you give me to
keep it in, keep it in.
And the doctor says, a shoebox.
Oh, I was gonna say a hat, but
OK, we, we've devolved quite
far.
Let me see if I can get
And HB 579 will be the last
house bill we will be hearing.
We will be switching over to
sendate starting on Friday.
Since we are a, a first
committee, the chances of a
House bill getting through.
The 2nd committee, the floor,
and the Senate in.
What is it now 10 days?
are slim.
So we're gonna work on the bills
that have actually have a chance
of.
crossing the finish line.
So Representative Jones is here,
we'll give her a second to
gather her.
So we are um now on House Bill
579, New Mexico resident
physician recruitment program.
Whenever you're ready. Thank
you, Madam Chair, committee
members, um, this bill, um,
House Bill 579 would establish a
New Mexico resident position
recruitment program, as we all
know, we have a, like the
shortage of
Of a physicians, and this would
be um a program that would help.
I have a Doctor Royal from UNM
as my expert and I think he can
further address this bill.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, Nathaniel Royvale, a
graduate from the UNM School of
Medicine, MD PhD program, the
first graduate in 2007, a native
New Mexican, uh, former
president UNM School of Medicine
Alumni Association in the
Greater Albuquerque Medical
Association and this morning, I
want to speak on the New Mexico
recruitment residency
recruitment Act. Let me start by
sharing some statistics with
you.
21% of the MDs and DOs trained
at UNM are currently practicing
in New Mexico.
If you only did a residency in
New Mexico, 19% of those are
practicing here, and so those
are certainly concerning
statistics, and they show that
there's room for improvement.
Within those statistics, there's
some.
Glimmers of hope though if you
did residency and medical school
at UNM 53% of those are
practicing in New Mexico.
And if because of our BAMD,
although it's a small number, if
you did undergrad.
Medical school and residency 68%
of those are practicing in New
Mexico. So taking together these
statistics tell us.
That the stronger the New Mexico
ties that a person has, the
longer they spend here, the more
likely we are to retain them and
New Mexico resident recruitment
Act is a tool that has been
discussed in countless school of
medicine community-based town
halls. There's really an outcry
from our community hospitals and
independent practices asking for
some dedicated time with these
highly trained professionals
before they choose the future
town or city that they want to
live and work in, and this bill.
aims to give our UNM resident
physicians stronger ties to New
Mexico, and it does have an
appropriation request of $1.2
million which would allow
approximately 25% of our
residents to do a two-week
rotation at a non-UNM outside
hospital or clinic.
There is some precedent for this
and successes in the past for
those of you are familiar with
First Choice Community
Healthcare clinic, they had a
joint residency with UNM, where
4 family medicine residents per
year would spend time at UNM and
at this non-UNM community
clinic, 50 to 75% of those
residents stayed in New Mexico.
And most went to underserved
areas.
And so we ask you to consider
supporting this important tool
for physician recruitment. This
creates a legislated priority
with associated money, it allows
the relationship to form between
these young doctors and the New
Mexicans that they will serve
and the potential ROI is
astronomical. If we just kept
10% of those who rotate 30,000
New Mexicans would have a doctor
180 New Mexicans that have high
paying jobs in New Mexico, our
biggest selling.
Point is our communities and our
people. Let's get our young
doctors into our communities and
let our communities recruit
them.
Thank you, Madam Char.
OK, thank you. So we will go to
Zoom, anyone in opposition,
raise your hand, and I'll come
back to you. Anyone in the room
in opposition.
seeing no hands either place in
support on Zoom, raise your
hand.
And I'll come back to you in
support in the room.
You can come forward if you'd
like to speak.
In one minute, please.
Good morning, members of the
committee. Nick Audio with the
New Mexico Medical Society, the
New Mexico Medical Society is
very focused on recruitment and
retention of medical providers
here in New Mexico. Uh, it's
incredibly important to try and
address our severe shortage of
healthcare providers. We believe
this bill will take a huge step
in the right direction to um
achieve recruitment and
retention, especially um in
rural New Mexico, we stand in
support of the bill. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Nathan
Bush, I'm staff at the
University of New Mexico, uh,
with me today, we have Doctor
Teresa Vielbaca. She is head of
our medical education programs
here at the University of New
Mexico. We certainly, uh,
appreciate this.
Effort to contribute to a
broader effort statewide to
recruit, retain, educate, train
the best, uh.
You and M students collected
from our from our high schools
and colleges, this, this is an
important step that we're taking
to really prioritize the rural
outreach in those programs that
we already have, so thank you
very much. We intend to be a
resource moving forward.
Thank you, Nathan. We will go to
Zoom Mike.
Hello, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Mike McMillan,
Southwest loan and Joint and
Silver City. We are in strong
support of this bill are
providers are from New Mexico,
our providers grow our own by
participating in resident
programs providing mentorship
for those residents and medical
students. This would help that
greatly, and so we're in strong
support. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, so we will go. I
have Representative Kates and
then Representative Ferrari
And then representative me,
which is representative Harden.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you, uh, Representative
Jones for bringing this forward.
I, I love this idea, um, but I
do have some questions about it,
so the one point.
2, I think it's $1.2 million. Is
it in the budget currently in
HB2.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Kates, no, it's
not currently in the budget, but
I know that, um, higher ed
receives um a scholarship money
appropriated for scholarships
and so forth in a block grant
and and they determine how that
money is allocated, so that
would be one potential source of
that. This is a framework.
For a very good um initiative to
to provide more doctors. Good.
Thank you, madam chair and thank
you, Representative. So what uh
I I appreciate Nathan being
here, um, to talk about UNM
because what we're seeing in the
analysis is UNM is saying they
do a 4-week rotation and this is
supposed to be a 2 week
rotation. Are you saying you're
gonna pay for half of their
current 4 week rotation, or now
we're gonna get 6 weeks of
rotation.
ation
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, so it is the two week
is, is sort of a starting point,
and when it comes to residency
schedules, I think we're gonna
have to all remain somewhat
flexible with that. It is a
massive moving part, and I think
the 4 weeks was was a big ask
and they made uh be able to let
them out for two weeks out of a
current rotation, and I think
that that would just have to do
with program directors and
chairs, and I think they will
support this particularly if you
as the legend.
legislature say that this is
something that you also are
highly supportive of.
Thank you and thank you
representative.
I love this idea. I am concerned
that this is not.
Doing what you want it to do,
so.
Let's go through the details of
it because I want this to be
successful.
But what is being presented to
us, I, I'll read it to you one
of the analysis, UNM notes
current rural residency rotation
programs are typically 4 weeks.
It's unclear if HB 579 would pay
for half of the typical
rotation.
So the one, the the the funds in
the program are not increasing.
The residency slots.
I would love, I would, I would
support that and put more money
into it.
It's, it's as you're saying,
we're trying to get them rotated
in the community because the
community is our best asset and
we're thinking that if they're
out in the community more
serving outside their UNMH
they're more likely to stay, but
it's not clear.
First, let me just go back.
I'm going to support this
because I want something. I, I,
so I wanna start off with that.
I'm going to support this cause
as far as I'm concerned, worst
case scenario,
Um, is it doesn't, it makes
status quo when our federal
funding our Medicaid funding is
under jeopardy, and so having a
little bit of extra funding with
our residency program, um,
there's nothing, uh, that would
be harmful about that. And so I
am going to support, but I am
concerned, it is not currently
set up in a way that's gonna do
what you want it to do.
I would look at more residency
slots, which means it's a bigger
financial ask because you'll
need more supervisor or clarity
in what those two weeks are.
They are two weeks outside the
already funded federal 4-week
rule rotation that the federal
government is already paid for.
I think if you, I'm fearful that
if you are not clear in this
bill, you and him will be gladly
to receive this little bit of
money for them, a tiny bit of
money for them.
But I'm not we're not clarifying
exactly what we want them to do
with it. And so, uh, thank you,
Madam Chair, and, and thank you
representative for bringing this
forward.
Representative Ferrari, thank
you, Madam Chair, um, and
representative and.
Expert, uh, my questions were
along the same line of the two,
you know, uh, week gap of not
having the paid residency, but
um I also agree any money we can
get to it, perhaps, um, someone
else will or UNM will pay for
the other two weeks, but my own
niece, who went to UNM medical
school and.
Didn't have the same
opportunities that we're trying
to provide in a lot of other
bills.
Um, went out of state and it's
gotten closer, um, but not back
to New Mexico. Um, she's in
Tucson right now. So, um, I
support this and also wish we
had more residncies, um, fully
paid for. So maybe those bills
will go through. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Madam chair, and I'm
asking clarification questions.
How many residents would be
coming as a part of this program
that you're, so the calculations
were done for about 25% of the
current residents.
The numbers of residents at UNM
tend to fluctuate, but in their
2024 report averages about 590,
and this would provide for about
150 of those to do these
rotations and um
And so those, that money is uh
not just salaries, which I think
we tend to be caught up on, but
also the money to go somewhere
and stay and travel and medical
malpractice insurance and some
of the other expense
expenditures, and so it is a
very small amount of money, but
I think it's a low hanging fruit
that we can potentially get a
big.
respect for. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
And thank you, Madam Chair and
presenters. Now you're talking
about 2 weeks.
These individuals are not going
to medical school here if I'm
understanding you correctly, may
not be going to medical school
here, but you're getting them to
do a residency for 2 weeks. What
makes you think they're gonna
stay in, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, so this is uh not
with the medical students. This
is the residence, so the
resident is someone who has
already completed medical school
is in the final years of their
training, they're trying to
decide where they're going to
live and work, and the purpose
of this bill is saying, hey,
let's get them out to silver.
City for a couple weeks to work
with a general surgeon there who
maybe they see like, hey, this
is pretty cool. Ela National
Forest is here. There's great
people here. I can live great,
and that's the purpose of this
bill is to get somebody right
before they make that decision,
and, and they can see that
there's a life in New Mexico
that they can really thrive in.
So thank you and Madam Chair and
Mr. Brainer, so this may be
Nathan Bush to answer this one,
but I, I know that I have been a
strong proponent of trying to
get more residents at UNM uh
through the medical school, not
just through the program that
you're describing, but what
would it, uh,
Uh, I guess my question would
be,
Are there, these are 100 more
residents slots than what we
already are feeling. I just want
to make sure that I'm
understanding your description.
I'm sure, I think I've been
unclear on that, the way you're,
you're, uh, this will not create
any new resident slots. What it
does is create a legislative.
Uh, mandate, if you will, to
allow current residents who are
already in UNM, uh, who were
retaining at a very low rate to
get out into New Mexico clinics,
and hopefully we can keep them,
and that's why the expenditure
is so low, because these,
they're they're already paid for
it, they're already here, um,
but we wanna just push them out,
and this is something that the
medical school does that I was a
beneficiary of uh with the
medical school, they have about
1200 faculty community.
Members outside of Albuquerque,
who work with medical students
and are available to take these
residents and work with them as
well and hopefully keep
A few more of them.
Thank you, Madam chair. That
definitely was not clear that
what you were doing is taking
residents that are already in
the program and asking them to
go in rural areas for this short
period of time.
I, I think I understand the
process now. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you.
I just address the issues that
we had, um, considering we, we
don't have the ability to vote
on this today. If we were to
clarify the concerns about the 4
weeks and 2 weeks in an
amendment of some kind before
Friday would, would we still
need to come before the
committee again and and and
present, or could we vote on an
amendment, how would we go about
doing that, Madam Chair? Um, I,
I, I think that it's kind of
been.
cleared up. Um, and you are
going to appropriation, so
An amendment may slow you down.
So if you need to do an
amendment, I would try to do it
in appropriations, but we're not
gonna be able to vote on it
today, so we're not gonna vote
on it till Friday, and then it
will be read out on the floor on
Friday in time is moving, so if
you feel like you need to do an
amendment that's um that's up to
you, but I, I wouldn't advise to
do it here cause that will slow
you down.
Very good. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you many members.
So I just, I just have one
question, I think, so you talked
about a, a general surgeon. Are,
are you, are there certain types
of residencies? I mean, is it
more primary care? Is it
whatever, what, are there any
parameters around, around what
kind of specialty or
non-specialty. Madam Chair
members of the committee, and I
think the one thing that we all
know in the state of New Mexico
is we could use every kind of
doctor that there is, and I
think that's one of the purposes
of this bill.
Is to push a specialists as well
as primary care physicians out
into the committee, um, in terms
of the two week versus.
4 week uh issue in terms of how
residents are scheduled.
I am not personally that uh
worried about that. I think
there's a lot of really smart
people at UNM who make uh these
schedules and are used to doing
that and I, I feel confident
that they could figure out how
to get these residents out in
the time allotted. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you since now we have a
quorum and um.
So let's just review your you
this program you're asking for a
very small amount of money, $1.2
million we will have the same
amount of residents at UNMH that
we have right now.
Whom all do they all or only a
portion of them have opportunity
for the 4 week rule.
Um, residency. The 4 week rule
uh rotation.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Case, I'm going
to allow Doctor Roy Royal to
maybe to um add to this, but the
way I understand it, they will
be given the option to do a
rural residency. OK, thank you
so much, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. What I'm
trying to establish is, we have
the set amount of residents were
not increasing it at all.
Are all those residents.
Um
eligible for the what's already
in place, which is a 4-week rule
rotation.
And it, or is there only I'm
gonna make it up, 3 of them
eligible for that. And this is
where your amendment's gonna be.
You're gonna have to define
either if let's say they say
there's only 3 they're eligible
for the 4 week uh rotation. Is
this money for 3 more to get a
two-week rotation or is the
existing program is everyone can
have a 4 week rule rotation, and
you want to.
expose them to a second site
through 2 weeks, and that's what
this money is for. That has to
be clarified.
And I don't trust
for the scheduler to happen.
They can do the details, but we
have to give them the guidance
on where to put the money. And
thank you so much for uh that
indulgence, and I'm happy that
we can vote on this now, thank
you. OK.
So with that, um, I will accept
the motion.
OK, so we have a motion for a
due pass on House Bill 579 by
Representative Kate and a second
by no.
It's OK.
Who made the motion? I made the
motion, OK, vice chairing, OK.
So, um, Karen, will you take the
role, please?
Representative Anaya.
Representative Kate? Yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative in Chavez.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones? Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Madam Vice Chair? Yes. Madam
Chair, yes. 6 to 0 by 6 to 0,
you have a due pass.
And before the committee breaks,
we still have to, we have a
motion on the table for a due
pass on Senate Bill 39 as
amended.
Um, Karen, can you take the
role?
Sorry
OK, paper shuffling, got out of
order. Representative Benaya.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative En Chavez.
Representative Ferrari? Yes.
Representative Jones, Madam
Chair, what are we voting on?
Um
Senate Bill 3
adding, adding
uh medication adding medications
to the prior authorization for
um
Rare diseases. Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Madam Vice Chair, Yes, Madam
Chair, yes, 6 to 0. I had 6 to
0. We have a 2 pass.
on Senate Bill 39 as amended and
Senate Bill 252, which is, which
allows social workers who had
been providing telehealth, um,
to continue to provide
telehealth, Social workers and
um a few other classes,
master's level social workers,
so we have a motion for a due
pass and we have a 2nd for
Senate Bill 252 as amended.
Karen, can you take the role?
Representative Anaya.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative in Chavez.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senator Cortez,
Madam Vice Chair. Yes. Madam
Chair, Yes, 6 to 0 by 6 to 0, we
have a few pass on.
Um
Senate Bill 252 as amended, and
then we will go to um house Bill
562 Independent Health provider
reimbursement. This is a bill
that increases Medicaid, uh,
reimbursement for rural areas,
and we have a motion and a in a
second, so take the roll,
please. Representative Anaya.
Representative Kate.
Yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative in Chavez,
Representative Ferrari? Yes.
Representative Jones. Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Madam Vice Chair. Yes. Madam
Chair. Yes. 62 06 to 0, we have
a a du on house Bill 562, and if
only we could pass bills that
fast all the time. It would we
would just be lounging around at
this point or stop them, right,
right, so, so just a reminder,
this was the last day we're
hearing house bills we're gonna
move on to Senate bills and um
I, I did get a text that I'd
like to share with folks.
It's from Nat Dean and she wants
to um
Debunk a myth, so she said,
using my voice lately has been
intermittent, but when I've used
my text to speech app to give
commenting committees, I found
out that several people have
thought I was harvesting
artificial intelligence and
that, and that the research and
comments were not my own. So
just, just throwing it out there
for folks to know, and with that
we are adjourned to go to the
floor.
OK.
Right?
It's not one or anything.
It's 2:52, the social work
telehealth. We don't have any
compacts, Madam Chair, yes. I, I
have a schedule here that shows
you, you mentioned House
memorials that shows that HB
593ube Health, safety and
welfare, the HOPE Act is on for
Friday. Is that it's, it's not
on for Friday. We're moving to
Senate bills.
You're not hearing the Hope Act.
We are not hearing the whole
fact.
