Representative Vincent here.
Madam vice chair.
Give us a minute to hopefully
resolve that. If not, we'll just
thank you, Madam Chair.
I'm still a little scared of
these microphones. That was no,
I'm trying to remember that. It
seems like this one. I'll try to
be careful and not destroy our
eardrums.
So thank you, Madam Chair and
fellow members. I'm here to
introduce House Bill 180 making
an appropriation to the
Department of Health to develop
a pregnancy and and hotline to
provide resources.
To expect it.
So first I'd like to tell you
how this bill came about.
It's been on my mind and my
heart. After all the years I
spent in healthcare the desire
to provide patients
Patients have a writing patients
with all the information or
Knowledge is power. So this bill
was born. We want to work to
ensure that all families have
the rights recognition and
resources responsibility of this
legislature to work towards
providing access to quality
healthcare and resources for all
new Mexicans.
This is a straightforward
appropriations bill providing
New Mexico mothers and families
with information and links to
social services financial
assistance, Adoption services,
pregnancy O B G Y N
Doulas Birthing Options Planning
guidance care center and other
available public and this bill
provides New Mexico women and
families equitable access to the
full spectrum of reproductive
last year, Governor Luhan
Grisham. She, along with the
Department of Health launched a
hotline
Solely for abortion services.
We're not advocating for no
abortion, but for all of the
information to be available.
To pregnant mothers and her to a
pregnant mother and her family.
Be it adoption. Um, expected
women need to all their
reproductive health care
options, not just one option
currently offered by the
government.
The development and promotion
other that all public state are
available on an easy to navigate
website and hotline.
Again. This is about providing
women and families from all
walks of life, especially those
who are struggling and those who
don't want to go the past as
they struggle to figure out
where to go.
We've made it easy to figure out
where to get an abortion. It's
currently a much more difficult
and nuanced prospect REM of
reproductive Choice adoption
pregnancy centers, especially
New Mexico can provide
By simply providing a web to
those resources, thereby closing
the gap that currently exists
for equitable access to the full
spectrum of affordable and
questions for women and
families. So with that I will go
Using abortion.
Ultimately prioritizing your
food and over offering
comprehensive, unbiased
reproductive healthcare. They
have a long history of
disseminating misleading and
medically have to information
biased information.
It is extremely important when
it comes to reproductive health.
This is why our attorney General
warned about these things Clinic
last year in October.
Create a risk for those seeking
genuine reproductive healthcare
violence. They are also often
Oh, Janet, Go ahead.
I thought I did it. Sorry. Um,
it's just better.
Yes. Go ahead.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Janet Godkin. I'm a
member of the Santa Fe topic of
the National Organization for
Women and appeared to speak
against HB 180.
Um I don't know how much you all
know about water called crisis
pregnancy centers or the
abortion centers and in the
bill, they're called care
centers. But there are dozens
and dozens of them in New
Mexico. They are not medical
facilities. They are not
licensed. And although attempts
have been made across the
country
Who, um, wearing them in in
terms of, um their practices of
not revealing their true purpose
is these centers are religiously
oriented, and they have one
purpose, which is to keep
pregnant people from getting
abortions. The New Mexico
reproductive Hotline that was
mentioned is
Wonderful resource for pregnant
people and their families. The
crisis pregnancy centers or as
we refer to them, anti abortion
centers are a danger
particularly vulnerable and low
income women, So I'm
Yes. Hello. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can go ahead.
Good morning, madam chairman and
vice chairman members of the
committee. My name is Christophe
Peach, and I'm, a poor Tallis
resident representing eastern
New Mexico Rising I do not
support HB 180. The bill is very
vague with very few
specifications on what type of
information will be dispersed on
this website and hotline and
whether it will include all
evidence based practices as it
relates to pregnancy, birthing
and parenting, despite its
seemingly banal language, HB 180
alludes to anti choice rhetoric
in crisis pregnancy centers.
There are two such locations
called Pregnancy Resource Center
in my community with the main
campus in Clovis in the sister
campus in portals, they do not
refer for abortion services and
propagate misinformation
regarding the procedure,
including on abortion reversal.
This behavior has gone unchecked
for years because up until
recently, the closest full
access reproductive health
clinic was over 200 miles away,
Please do not allow them to
further perpetuate these
fabrications with a centralized
website in hotline. Thank you
for your time.
Um, if you're on zoom in
support, raise your hand the
roof that people in the room.
Yeah, Yeah.
Good morning, Madam Chairman
Canvas and I live in Santa Fe,
New Mexico, and I got pregnant
with my son. I was new one alone
in the city. I didn't have a car
and I barely had a place to
live.
But they picked me up and took
me.
Took me to and from appointments
to get the carrot needed.
I mean, you felt very understood
and state
Financial situation.
Ever used in a mighty way to get
me and my baby on our feet.
Completely self sufficient.
Anyways, and Apollo has directly
benefit emotional
Today. The gravity of how much
help I received from this. This
is why I kindly ask you to vote
Yes, on each of you.
Yep. So I'm going to go to the
list. Um Angelique.
He
Hmm. Hmm. Good morning,
Chairwoman. Time. Nicky McCarty,
Mystique. Director. Concern for
America, Mexico.
Today. I'm testifying for
concerned with operations in
support of a charity's weapons.
Oh, my God.
First I would like to thank
representative jokes and
Terrazas for bringing forth is
still each one hb 18.
There's a common sense bill
providing mothers with services
financial assistance, adoption
services, pregnancy and
parenting, information planning
guidance care centers, agencies
and other available public
private adoption agencies,
Country services or crisis
pregnancy centers.
Expected women need an easy way
to know what resources are
available. No mother should ever
have to feel alone. A woman with
an unexpected pregnancy may be
in fear of whether she can get
support during I strongly urge
you to support that's only one I
have.
Distance is facing eternal less.
Despite heretic rhetoric that we
heard today those pregnancies
stop and that is why we must
member of
my and have currently no access
to relearn.
Oh, yeah, she was, um we might
have other people that
June Becky Chung
Madam ceremony. That is not who
I am. I was I was not allowed to
get on the list. Members of the
committee. My name is Angie
Smith. And I just want to say
how grateful I am. That could
come together. Um
But that was that believe in
choice. This is an opportunity
to offer a all the choices
available to women all the way.
I'm not here to advocate against
them as as someone that has a
pregnancy resource center, I can
verify that there is a licensed
certified doctor on staff as
well as a special trainings in
order to get proper and accurate
ultrasounds.
We are allowed women to know all
of the options available to her,
and I can't say that doesn't
include abortion, including what
to expect and what could happen
and no matter what was, she
makes whether it's for life,
whether she awesome opportunity
for those on both sides to come
together and offer something to
women that allows them true
choice. You just one.
Is there anyone in room?
Go ahead, essential as well.
Decision.
We were in
Go ahead.
You need to amuse yourself.
Suzette. Hi. I am needed. Can
you hear me? Yes, we can.
Wonderful. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Suzette
Presti from Albuquerque, New
Mexico, speaking in favor of HB
180. I am a diagnostic medical
sonography. For another words, I
do ultrasound registered in O B
g Y n as such. I've seen
pregnant women from the very
beginning. Part of the job is
actually measuring the heartbeat
from the time the embryo is 5 to
6 weeks and only about 4 to 7
millimeters.
All the way through labor and
delivery time. Now I know New
Mexico is not a rich state.
But I hope we can all agree that
pregnant women that I've seen
deserve to know that they're not
alone that there are resources
available to them, such as free
ultrasounds, diapers, even
housing, parenting classes for
moms and dads, child development
programs, etcetera, HB one
eighties simply here to empower
women and give them what they
want and need for a better
future for themselves and their
Children. Now the state of New
Mexico benefits with the
healthier population, lower
healthcare costs.
Simply by providing a link in a
hotline to services that origin
exists.
I'm Gail Martinez.
Public. Gonzalez. Go ahead,
Paula Paula, you need to mute
and a reminder for folks to
please, just it was a good
reminder. Go ahead, Paula, Mute
yourself.
Jodi Hendrick. Hello, madam
Chair members of the Committee.
Thank you so much for allowing
me just a moment. I do urge you
to support this bill. I'm very
thankful for representative
Jones bringing this bill about
because I think the fact is that
new Mexico has, um very wide
variety of valuable resources
available to families, whether
it be housing assistance,
Medical Assistance. Food
assistance, Childcare Assistance
colleges. That's
And all of these things that can
help a young woman who is
choosing life for a young family
who already has Children and is
trying to figure out how to
navigate the path ahead.
But unfortunately these types of
resources are often buried in
hard to find websites and hard
to navigate websites. And so I
really believe that this website
and hotline can truly bring
options out for families and
young women who do choose life.
If new Mexico wants to be a
state where it truly is a
woman's choice. Then I echo the
sentiment that we should be able
to lay out all of the options
before her so she can make an
educated choice.
So that she doesn't
Feel like abortion is the only
option. But if she does want to
be a mom, she has the
opportunity.
Lord and, um
Ferrari.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Presenter.
And thank you for the testimony
in the audience.
And this is this is always a big
challenge for since I'm the only
man on this committee.
And
I hear this stuff, and I'm
really not that great at it.
But what I did here
And what I like is that
This is a resource.
I like the fact that
It is a choice.
And I like the fact that if you
it's your choice to pick up the
phone and call the hotline if
you don't want to call it, you
want to go to another route. You
can also do that. And I noticed.
Bless you.
I noticed that this is a one
time $100,000 appropriation.
In a resource like this. Why
would it only be one time?
Thank you. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Because this would be
appropriations.
Because of that, I didn't really
put what what we would call.
This is a new project based on
the fact that I don't I don't
really know how they would
implement. I
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative, um so
One thing that I do like is
oversight. And or I like, Dad. I
like people to let us know. And
is there anything in place to
where if this did go through
this resource, be talking to d O
H and would d O H B talking to
our interim committee and
telling us if it's if it was
good for people are bad. Good
for winter, you madam Chair and
representative Vincent
Again. That's something that I
report back to this committee
would be, um about how it's been
implemented. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
representatives. So on your
bill, blaming me Ideally what
that would
Thank you, Madam Chair, and like
I said, I'm leaving that up to
the D O h. Currently we
If you look up, um what is
included on reproductive
services. There's only one
option. There's extensive
resources that are included on
the website. Do H website and
the hotline. Um so what? I'm
hoping to see Madame Chair and
representative Lord is in In
addition to this, and to include
all of the resources that would
Be helpful for a woman whether
she has an unplanned pregnancy.
Regardless of heard that that
the website within a someone
pointed out, there are women who
don't have
A very good reason can get on
the phone and call. Thank you,
ma'am Chairperson after remind
myself to speak up because my
husband complains all day long.
He cannot hear us anymore. Since
we got the new microphones. You
can't hear us at home. You can't
hear the people the audience.
You can't hear us. You can only
Okay, So you bring up an
excellent point, because not
everybody has Internet. Not
everyone has a lecture of
getting on StarLink.
Um
So when you're talking about
services versus what's on the
Department of Health what you're
looking for other
To be
I don't wanna put this. Do you
want to be more well rounded, so
you want them to have more
information?
About financial assistance,
Adoption services.
Pregnancy and parenting
information planning guidance
care centers.
What is I Can I just ask you
bluntly, Since I don't have that
list on there, if somebody were
to call that in and say they
were pregnant
What did the where? What are the
things that for references?
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative. Lord, were you
referring to this from the
hotline?
Um, it was abortion on demand
abortion clinics dot org
Eight access via US based
provider.
Alamo, all women's care.
Already a medical
Older abortion clinic.
Sarafem.
Cedar River Clinic.
Cherry Hill Women's Center.
Choi Health DuPont Clinic.
Forward midwifery.
Full circle Health center
Juniper midwifery Las Cruces
Women's Health Organization,
Park Med Clinic, Planned
Parenthood farming tonight.
Planned Parenthood lost Cruces,
Planned Parenthood, Northeast
Heights, Planned Parenthood San
Mateo Health Center.
Planned Parenthood. Santa Fe
Planned parent Presbyterian in
Espanola, Southwestern Women's
Options Trust Women Wichita
Clinic, Tst.
University of New Mexico for
Center for Reproductive Health.
Whole woman's health of New
Mexico with
Not currently accepting new
orders and women's reproductive
clinic. This was a list given to
me, and honestly, I'm not sure
if it is, um comprehensive if it
was all of them, but I know that
these are available on the Web
on the hotline and website.
Thank you, Madam Chair. The
reoccurring thing that I heard
on there is that the only church
choice for a woman is planned
Parenthood. I heard a lot about
abortion.
I didn't hear anything else
about any other services. So if
we're doing my body, my choice,
Uh, I don't understand why
there's no choice in their of
Other than saying abortion is
your only choice.
It's kind of horrifying. I mean,
we're supposed to be
Offering choices to women, and
all I hear is abortion.
So
With what you're saying in this
bill, if if I'm understanding
correctly, that would add other
choices like there's a center
that you could call if you're
questioning what you what we do
have other services out there
that will say to you.
If abortion is your option,
there's other abortions, or I
mean there's other choices.
Um, like I know, Karen. It is
one of them where they go into
great detail, diapers and all
the services that you need.
So is that what you would like
added on there so that there's
more choices for women other
than just abortion? Yes, madam
Chair and representative Lord.
Basically, the bill provides New
Mexico women and full spectrum
of reproductive health care
options through an online
website portal.
And a hotline And as I said, in
my introduction that I think
some of really been on my heart
and mind for for several months,
especially since I found on the
Department of Health website
that there was only one option.
I always my patients and I know
we should Health Committee to
offer them information. They we
need to provide them with all
the information needed to make
Choices that work for them.
Um, as an integral part of their
care their own care because
knowledge is power. And so this
bill was born out of that desire
to empower women. And thank you,
Madam chair. Did I hear on there
when you were giving the list?
Did it say Tst? Okay, so that's
the satanic tape us. They want
to see if that was on there.
That's the satanic temple that
wants to so I guess I can see
how one side and I can
understand your frustration and
wanting to expand that out.
I don't understand why that
would even be an issue unless
we're saying we don't want
anyone to choice.
So can you explain to me? Um
right now?
Madam chair represented with the
hotline as it is.
Because the F I R goes in great
great detail of needing all
kinds of experts. When do you
call into the hotline? Is it a
person who's just answering the
phone? That says Here's the
places you should call or their
actual experts in the field? Um
I know that I know that these
are the these are these are the
resources, says the
Newly thank you, Madam Chair
appreciate it because we had
printer issues through there.
Okay, So Madam Chair
representative seems like if
there's already nurses, they're
they're adding in more er,
because if we already have
nurses and nurses fully
available, correct as a nurse
that they understand that
There may be people who come and
say I just wanted abortion. Give
me the game doing. I need some
help. What are my options so a
nurse could answer. Correct.
And, yeah, I failed to mention
that that that the people who
are answering those calls on the
hotline, our nurses and I
believe that that is in the f I
r. It shows that, um, that
they're fully staffed.
With a nursing staff who could
easily provide and that's why I
was hoping, you know, provide
all the options. That's why I
was hoping that what we already
have take all the options and
just representative Lloyd. Thank
you, Madam chair and I think the
answer is most of my questions.
I just look at this way. If
we're telling people they don't
know why we
Why we're having issues with
myself to, um, get the cure.
I don't know. It just seems like
it's common sense because we're
giving people not insisting
we're not telling. We're seeing
these are the options that you
have available you as a woman
who is having a baby and his
pregnant. You have options if
you make the decision, I don't
that the nurse
Is going to
Well, and then here lies the
problem. It all goes down to
what? But
I would just like to
That women have a choice.
The woman don't see a dot issues
with all of that. So anyways,
that concludes all my questions.
Thank you, Ferrari. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
Representative Jones. I'm
apologize for missing your
introduction. Um, but
Knowing about the D O H. Are you
asking to have another hotline
or just add to theirs and then
to your list? What we're putting
forward is that that women have
access to all the options and
I'm I'm really allowing
Department of Health to make
those decisions. I personally if
if they were to ask me and not
recreate anything so that you
can call this that's been set up
by the D O H.
Um, approved of by this body and
funded by this body, and, uh and
say, you know, I need I need my
resources. I need to know what
autumn chair
Thank you. And, um I hate to
hear that, um
It's perceived that planned
parenthood or that, um
Only promoting women to have
abortions they give full and
it's not, you know just one
thing or another, but it is
everything all of their options.
but what's really bad about the
crisis pregnancy centers that I
think you want to add to this
list is that they're they have
very misleading practices.
And, um
I I think it's a danger to, um
The options and the delays that
they imposed for women like
they'll say, Oh, come in, Um,
those they use that as a delay
tactic, um, by having their
appointments out far and then
for when, right away, Um
And then that keeps women from
accessing real, um, legitimate
healthcare. I had a friend who
went through this and by the
time and she thought she was
going
Pregnancy center.
That would give her all of her
options. And that's not what
happened with. She got delayed.
She got all of this
misinformation and by the time
that she did find out, you know
how far along she was.
It wasn't right for her to have
an after being a mom of Tina's
her option for her life invest
decision
She would have wanted to have an
abortion, but because she went
accidentally to a PCP she did
was not
Able to do that.
To determine what they're
already doing what their plans
Thank you, Madam Chair and that
information is available on our
f I R and represent. I
understand. I'm just asking. Did
you consult with the Ohh? Yes.
So I feel like it's both d O. H
and bites and and the hotline,
representative, Vincent said.
It's 1 1000, and this is not a
hotline specialist nurse through
rapid contractors. That implies
that 78 hours a day says nothing
to do. I'm just making that,
noting that. So, um
Chair and move for Do Pass Pass.
Bill 180. Madam chair. Um so we
have a most lord for a do pass
in a second. Okay, so so okay,
so we will go ahead and take
roll on the table in motion. So,
yes, go back to the original
motion.
Representative.
Note to table
Representative Lord Table.
Madam Vice chair. Yes.
Madam.
180 has been tabled. Thank you,
Madam Chair. May I make some
closing statements? Okay. I
thank you for the opportunity,
women and and families all of
their options, and I hope that
we can work in the interim to
find solutions to some of the
issues that you all have. Get
all the information out there. I
think we should trust women and
respect them enough to give them
all of those options that they
deserve.
Next on our agenda is House Bill
181 Life and Health Insurance
Guarantee Act changes.
Uh, representative Thompson.
Will be presenting. We are ready
for you, Representative to move
forward. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So House Bill 181 at a time it's
relating to insurance, amending
the Health and Life and Health
Insurance Guarantee Association
Act to include health
maintenance organizations as
members of the life and health
insurance.
Guarantee.
Um, association. So that's about
as much as I understand. So I'm
gonna let my my expert with Good
morning madam chair members of
the committee.
My name is Mike bad. I'm the
association. Oh, sorry.
My apologies. Um, the guarantee
of so state law.
Back in 1975 or approximately
38.
Policy, holders of life and
healthy system that we use in a
you know, your bank accounts are
insured Guarantee Association
basically provides that for life
and health now.
The
The bill that was passed back in
1975 model legislation over the
years. The that model act as
been amended as insurances.
Chance of change.
We've tried the last time we
updated 12. There were some
further amendments in 2000.
Since that time there have been
other amendments made to the
Parents Commissioners Model Act.
And, uh, House Bill 181
essential 41 states currently
have their laws consistent with
that model and jurisdictions
that has a essentially a really
good consumer protection bill.
The purpose is to some of the
key changes in the expanding the
membership and changing
modifying and kind of making it
more fair and equitable. The
method in which offers to pay
for these and Sullivan there. It
also is adding the number of
permissive uh, the board and it
also makes some modification
repeals part of the H M O Act.
Is how
We currently take care of of
those, and, uh, this would make
that section and, uh,
With that.
Thank you is Is there anything
else, Madam? No, madam, And I'm
sure there will be tons of
public bill of the session.
We're gonna go to the audience.
Is there anyone who stands in
support of this legislation?
Thank you.
Please come forward State your
name.
Thank you.
Is there anyone else in the
Audience. Yes. Please go ahead.
Thank you. Is there anyone else
in support? Seeing no other
hands, Let's go to the zoom.
If there's anyone in support on
zoom, please raise your hand.
We? I don't see any hands there.
I'm going back to the audience
here in the
Committee room. Is there anyone
who stands in opposition to
hospital 181.
I see no hands. Let's go to
zoom. Is there anyone on Zoom
who is in
Opposition to hospital 181.
I see No hands there. I'm going
to the committee.
I see first? Yes, ma'am. No, no,
no. I see first represented
Vincent, Are you all right?
Thank you, Madam Chair and I'm
calling myself Lady Lord. Thank
you, madam chair, ribs and
experts. So I have some
questions for clarification. So
if I understand correctly, so
this we're mending. I just I got
to kind of look at the bigger
picture for his own in on the
questions. So are many of the
life and health insurance
policy to include
HMOs, So HMOs were never on this
before was just CPOs or before.
Uh, Madam Chair that's correct.
There was a considerable
difference between how HMOs
operated and the way
There were differences in
Um
So
The HMOs that we're in
organisms.
Over the years.
We've We've only had
policyholders. Probably we're
taking this bill will correct
that. Thank you. That also
because the first they were very
specific. The question was how
many HMOs have gone so and
what's the data? Madam Chair
represents expert on how many
Life or health and over the last
10 years in the state of New
Mexico, we've had
We've had policyholders.
Maybe venture ribs. And so right
now, as it stands, I'm not
treading off. So when we
incorporate this, the a chicken
So before then.
To be rectified with that. But
now with this, there will be. Is
that what I'm understanding?
Under current law, there is a
process parents tries to find
homes. For all those, There's
nothing in current law, too.
Uh, spiders who have already
provided benefiting paid for the
benefits. They
So that's sort of the difference
of what there is a way to those
policyholders on just that.
And appreciate it's it's an
interesting bill because madam
Chair expert I didn't
I never really thought about
what half goes insolvent and you
go to the doctor and
Right now, as it stands do they
have? Is there anything in this
bill?
I don't know.
I don't want to go back to the
original, but I'm trying to say
Is there anything in the bill
that
Says.
How they have to con. Is that
already something that's in
there or something Receivership
law actually puts the insolvent
company state state.
And the judges. And when the
time comes that coverages
At that point in time.
The judge. Thank you, Madam
Chair and okay, So on page
three, Madam Sharon,
representative.
So we're adding in online 10,
the health benefit plan.
To now mean various things, are
we? Is this something that
wasn't in there before? This is
something we're ad
To make it clearer Just because
I'm looking at what was in here
before, and we didn't have this
Only so, is this something?
That's been added to this bill.
It's more for clarification.
They're trying to kill and they
want to make sure that coverage
for health benefit plan
That it doesn't include and
And and part of the other area
in the law where it's being
right. Um, a major medical
policy right? Different limits,
Madam chair. This is being added
to a lot of bills that
healthcare bills that have been
updated because and so we want
to make sure that we're not
accidentally catching folks.
Okay, Thank you. Man Chair
represented by prom? Yes.
They're all different kinds of
lives.
Um
But
Um, there was something in here.
I wanted to get to
So if I'm understanding
correctly, there's no insurance
that just come is there because
I want to make sure it's usually
like a p p p, R and a or would
they not have long term care in
there I'm talking about. I just
want to make sure people are
going for long term care. Have a
Insurance that provides benefits
for long before, uh, final.
Those are the long term care
policies and they're currently
covered under committee Isn't
that coverage amount is not
being changed.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair
represent expert. I didn't see
it in there. Oh, there it is.
right there in front of my face.
Sorry. I wanted to make sure
that their long term Okay, so on
page
On line four. We have this new
material added, Can you just
quickly make a brief summary of
what? This new language? Madam
chair this? They put in a
definition of structured
settlement Factoring
transaction.
There are annuity.
Casualty coverage.
So we want to cover those
structured settlement in there
also.
People purchase.
You know, what's the perfect
court action and gets a series?
Go to them and offer them a cash
lumbering, too.
Thank you, Madam Chair, ribs, an
expert. I knew it structured
settlement, So I knew that part
but I didn't understand how it
played into this bill.
Um
To add some levity to this.
Um And I thank you so much. I do
appreciate them. So on page 13.
Um
Online for a person who acquired
mentioned represent, um person
who acquires rights to receive
Oh, that was Was that what you
just explained to me? Just a
second. Okay. Thank you Got that
in their page 14 you address the
long term care on this page 19
line five. We're going. Okay.
Let me see. I may actually know
this one because since you okay,
just explain to me briefly,
Madam chair, um, when it says a
structured settlement annuity
benefits to which it pay E or
beneficiary.
Has transferred the What? What
does that mean? Just briefly
explain what that means, Madam
So the people at home know what
I'm doing and let me go to page
37.
Okay, is that
If I'm understanding online
nine, so unless prohibited by
law in accordance with the terms
and conditions of policy or
contract
Far for an
I'm not gonna say that. We're
just spread rate of premium
increase for a policy. Can you
just briefly explain to me what
Madam chair when guaranteed
contract so insurance company
holders that gives them the
right to adjust the premium if
they can get it approved by the
Department of Interest, uh, a
lot of health insurance. What?
all this provision if it's
appropriate for the guarantee
of, uh
The
Regular tour just makes it clear
that Madam Chair, so it's right
If somebody has a and has this
coverage and then the guarantee
annuity
Gets it.
To get them back to a they could
raise the premium. Is that kind
of what? I'm understanding here
or my off on that? No, it would.
It would be more like, um you
have major medical policy
premium was based on last and
the actuaries have thank you.
That helps me to understand that
but to lead to the question I
had
If they had an insurance. That
was okay. Let's just say, for
example, that they got the money
and ran. What
With another policy. I don't you
know, the guarantee Association
would try to admit me a rate
increase, actually.
Not only associations parents
the same way they approved and
madam chair represent expert if
that rate increased did happen,
because if somebody came and do
you how do you inform them? You
let them know this is what's
about to happen. And do they
Notice is given
Okay?
To either change.
Thank you for that again. This
is like unknown territory. I
didn't and again It was just
yesterday when somebody brought
this to my attention. I thought
that never really crossed my
mind that this could happen, But
I'm also trying to figure out if
somebody's pain, a very low
rate. And I think the last
question I have hopefully
It was on page 47.
Um, line five or talk about the
amount of the class B assessment
just briefly defined what a
class B assessment And what this
parrot, can you some
There are two types of
assessment Class A is facing the
association classes, okay?
Did not know that okay? Um,
Madam Chair representative. I
think that's all that I have.
Thank you so much. I appreciate
decide how to vote on this,
bill. Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Lord,
Representative Vincent
were
yes, it is.
Madam vice chair and
representative.
On page and what is the purpose
of excluding Bennett home
healthcare and community care
from the definition of health?
Madam chair. It's It's because,
uh, so this was a way to Claire
for the long term care.
Insurance policy was called.
Again the health So on page 10
line, 25. Why are the
The example. I would Madam chair
the example that I would give it
again when HMOs the biggest
loser.
Um, chair. That's a great
question.
Um
The office of We don't We don't
hear about it. What we do is
hear about when they approved
something they shouldn't have.
But one of the strongest things,
uh, solvency monitoring them.
You've never heard about. It
really works well back. Hundreds
of banks went on.
Life insurance companies, okay?
Nationwide.
To life insurance companies.
So
As a
As a provider, or as a
You won't know until the company
And they don't wait until the
company
They have early again the
insolvency earlier that 11 of
the reasons you haven't heard of
our association is the other one
is agree with representative law
is
What is the purpose of
Madam chair. We're adding HMOs
as members and
We wanted additional members.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you, representative
Vincent.
I don't see any other questions.
May I take it?
Madam chair. I'd like
For do pass for house Bill 1 91
81. Yes, I'm Cherry second that
motion.
It's been seconded by
representative case.
Is there any up?
Um, would you please call the
roll of case?
Yes.
The Ferrari? Yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Voted 9 to 0. You have a do
pass?
Budget. So if the table so with
that we will go take over. Thank
you, Madam Sheriff. That's
exactly what I wanted to say.
So, Thank you.
Madam chair and committee
members and everybody here.
Ah, coming to listen to and
support. Um
House Bill 192.
How hospital 192 would simply
appropriate $100,000 from the
General fund to the healthcare
authority for a program
utilizing a network of
navigators in Santa Fe County to
connect people in need with
community resources to improve
individual and community health
outcomes.
The bill would also appropriate
for 100,000 from the General
front to the healthcare
Authority for a referral and
suspected low level nonviolent
offenses. Madam chair I'd like
to say that this is one of the
most important programs one of
the the investments that we need
to do and why we're focused on
Santa Fe County, which will all
introduce, um and have our
expert witnesses here in just a
moment is
These are the programs that are
court systems use. These are the
These are the systems that we
need to have in place in order
for better outcomes for our
public and this is really,
really essential public health
and policy that we, um
That we are looking to support
and and dedicate funding towards
and I would just now have our
expert witness.
General Jennifer County
introduced herself and give some
background. Thank you.
Good morning. Thank you so much.
Jennifer Romero in the health
Services division Director for
Senate, they county community
services and very thankful for
representative Luhan for
introduced cosponsoring Madam
chair members of the committee.
Connect is requesting 800,000
and funding to support housing,
food utility support and other
basic needs.
Connect with established in
Santa Fe County in 20, following
a model developed by the
Centers.
We address the health room to
improve health outcomes.
Access to housing, food,
employment transportation.
These resources have been shown
to improve individual and
community health and to reduce
hospitalization Since April,
2019 connect has helped over
8000 people in Santa Fe County.
The National Association of
Counties has recognized Annabi
County with an achievement award
for Connect.
And many counties are interested
in implementing a similar
similar model in their
communities. Dona Ana County has
Come on board the North Central
New Mexico Economic Development
District, also, um, under them,
the northern New Mexico
Workforce Integration Network
has now deemed to their program.
When connect and covers. Colfax
will sell most. Mora River San
Miguel, Sanofi and House.
The of Albuquerque. Um, we
appreciate your, um
Support for this program. Um,
engage is our local law
enforcement assisted diversion
program.
Senator Rodriguez was a champion
for this program several years
ago. Our local program is doing
great, uh, engages or lead is a
law enforcement this diversion
program in Santa Fe County that
diverts and refers people with
substance use and or mental
health challenges who may have
committed low level crimes.
Into lawman at the Santa Fe
Communities. Partners include
the Santa Fe County Sheriff's
Office.
Edgewood, Police Department,
First Judicial District
Attorney's office the law
offices of the public defender,
Santa Fe County Adult Detention
facility.
Thank you, madam chair and
members as you can see that even
though this request is
originated in Santa Fe County,
it is really benefiting the
entire state. And as it grows,
um, we have heard numerous times
in our interim committee work
diversion programs work. Um,
understand that. Not only do we
have relatives and, uh, whether
or not you're in a domestic
violence situation. Corrections,
substance abuse people.
Places and being able to
Um, have referrals and, uh,
places of support throughout the
state are essential and we stand
for questions.
Ah!
First we'll go to the audience
Is there any if you're on zoom
position and then come back to
you? So is there anyone in the
room in opposite
Okay. Who? Whoever it is on
Zuma, NAMI. It's pretty Patsy.
Patsy. Are you in support or
opposition?
No, it's Patsy as assistant
Betty Cisneros show over. And,
um, we're here to support this
bill is something that our
anonymous Santa Fe affiliate is
very involved with. And so we
are in support of Mexico is in
support of House Bill 192.
Thank you. Thank you, Assistant.
So it looks like that's all we
have on zoom so
Oh, there's one more. Two more.
Okay, We'll just go ahead with
zoom. Then we'll come back to
the room.
Edward Archuletta.
Okay. Good morning, Madam Chair
Committee members. My name is
Edward Archuletta, and I'm, the
executive director of Saint
Elizabeth Shelters in supportive
housing. Here in Santa Fe, Saint
Elizabeth is the oldest and
largest agency in northern New
Mexico. Serving the homeless
sleep, approximately 250
homeless and formerly homeless
individuals, men, women and
Children on any given night in
one of our five programs.
And we provide food, water,
clothing, blankets and other
items to over 1000 people a year
we're still on the streets. We
stand in support of this
legislation for these two
programs as a partner agency
with engaged we rented, we rent
to them two apartments in our
supportive housing program, one
for an individual that are
costing surreal departments and
one for families that are still
in recent family program were
also a member of the Connect
project with the city and county
of Santa Fe.
With her financial assistance
were able to provide navigation
and case management services to
our clients to help them get
back on their feet, both engaged
and connected by vital services
to our community and ST
Elizabeth's stronger support
these appropriations Thank you
for your time, Jill.
Go ahead, Jill.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Jill Dixon and I'm the
deputy director of the Food
Depot, which serves as northern
New Mexico's only food bank.
Each year. We serve about £10
Million of food to 40,000 people
in nine counties, and we joined
the connect Network as a member
in 2019.
I can't say enough about how
absolutely transformative this
network has been to our work
helping us serve more people and
helping them move beyond acute
temporary solutions to hunger
towards sustainable solutions
that support people as they move
through an experience of poverty
rather than residing there on a
constant basis.
We have seen results from our
engagement with the connect
program that are so compelling
the in 2021. We made it. One of
the three focal points of our
strategic plan moving forward.
Because we serve nine counties.
We have a very good source of
comparison for seeing how our
communities that do not have a
connect network exists in social
services compared to the one
that we have here in Santa Fe,
and there is absolutely no thank
you.
So that's it from Zoom, Um
Anyone in the audience freedom
That next?
Madam chair members of the
committee. My name is Elizabeth
Tony and engage.
The program has been in
existence better that they have
stable housing this
appropriation would support
operations. Thank you so much.
A little slow on the uptake this
morning, Okay? Represented
Ferrari. Go ahead. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you. Um,
this is, uh, a great use of our
funds. And, um, I just wanted to
make sure even though you
mentioned other programs and
around the state, this is only
for them as well.
Um
Committee. Yes, this is for
Santa Fe County Specific New
Year's.
And madam chair and of sensitive
Um, this funding is just for one
year. It's non recurring.
So this works out, Madam chair
Really? Well, um, if this
funding can start, you know for
next year
When we are able to have our
alcohol harms alleviation
funding at a really, um,
substantial rate in, uh, going
to programs such as this we can
have this sustainable
Thank you, Madam Chair. Okay.
Hold on.
Okay, so I want expert on this
Is this Santa Fe Navigator? I'm
sorry. It's just some kids with
whoever wants to speak. You can
just Madam Chair representative
planning in 2017. We long
released Arctic collecting data.
And so it is. It has been a
chair, representative expert.
So how is this, um, different
from the navigators to clinics,
community or to your social
workers? How does that
Is more of a collective in this
that they can connect you or
what I was trying to say, is,
what's the difference between
this Connect the different
network? Is that correct? Or
there are the same, okay?
Madam Chair, representative
Ward. It is the same program.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you for
the clarification. Ma'am share
expert. Um
So how does the lead the Santa
Fe verse itty
With our
Hardest part so
From
Or early 2021 Week, partner,
Madam Chair.
Lord. Yes. Okay. So, Madam
Chairman, So they go into these
places were lead and they
already have.
And when you stood a hub
navigator, did you mean there's
information there is an actual
from people are in crisis or
about a live person. Another
memory I appreciate there's also
a way to call services grace
body just like in times in this
state.
Um, the Hub Navigator, Madam
chair. I'm going to assume that
in that case, it's just a
Yeah. Mint social work.
Um, working with independent
sure that this madam Chair
representative expert that if
somebody called in it's not just
here's a list of some case
management.
Okay, Um
I wanna before I go on. I want
to zero in a little bit on edge
to it. I used to have Santa Fe
County. I lost that one inlay.
Um, so in Edgewood
So with Edgewood do they have
When they come to him. Everybody
thinks Santa Fes can
Can you tell me Are there
enough?
And thank you, madam chair and
expert Torrance counties in this
weird limbo patient is always an
issue. We do have the one food
bank, but nothing specifically
And thank you, for that was I
had heard that and again, Um
I have a couple. So this
Some questions. So we're looking
at people who could be
People impacted madam chair by
substance or disorder Suspected
low level
But then I think I also heard
something about domestic
violence, which would not be so
are we
Including
Yeah, Madam Chair. Would I care
about it is that they just don't
because that's a whole nother
but would have a victim of this
because you've got nodding back
there. I just want to make sure
Madam Chair representative.
Paul.
Okay, so domestic and
So in our referral process.
The frustrating part of
So it
When we all tie into this, we
need to make sure that, um, but
when you're talking about level
nonviolent
I think
I think that's all the questions
longer have.
Um Edgewood.
That's still a huge base for me.
But again, I want to be able to
talk to because I'm going to
talk to the mayor today about
this program and
Uh, um, that out there and edge
with that they're aware of and
plug into you. And if they had
more services, Madam Sheriff to
say, Hey, we have this place
went out of business, but we
have the debt.
When we get them tighten. Okay,
alright.
And we representative for I got
a text from someone, but
We were going to go ahead and
move forward with questions so
we will go to and I apologize. I
had the same issue people
they're putting their hands up
in their technology. Yes, and we
will. Let's let's keep we we
have to be on the floor and nine
minutes theoretically, so, um,
so we will go to representative
Jones and remember to stay on
the bill, please. It's a very
clarified actually,
Representative Lord God, Since
this is a it's a reverting.
I was really referring to not
the money, not reverting back
into the you know, and and
losing that money.
I think I'm in favor. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
Representative. Um, at this time
there, um, asking for one
creation for several years. They
need an influx of money to be
able to catch up to their, um,
rapid growth at this time, but
they must certainly would.
Thank you, Representative Cates.
Madam chair. I would just I
think the first step of that
where they can use it on
ongoing.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, representative and was
certainly have noted that
concern. Um, as a nonprofit,
underfunded that they don't
Have they have not expressed any
Very good. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Representative Cates. I
was confused because there are
Well, Madam chair and I would
certainly be interested in its
working. We need to tune in to
find out as much as I can and
figure out how we can use. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Does this, uh
Madam chair in Vincent. Yes, it
does 60 agencies under it.
Representative Vincent that's
not in. We're staying on the
Vincent. That's not
contemplated. I will entertain a
motion move for having 192.
Representative Ferrari
representative Jones
Yes.
Representative Lord Yes.
Representative Vincent
By a vote of 7 to 0. You have a
do pass on house Bill 192.
Madam chair like to request that
my representative Lord on that
We have substitutes and my mom,
We have memorials and bills. We
are we're gonna kind of stack up
the memorials at the end since
they don't have a distance to
go, but so on in terms of, um
house Bill 95 we have I believe
has that
No. Okay. Okay, So 95. Okay. So
95 is a substitute bill. We they
ended up We had to change. Clear
up some language. Okay? And then
97 you want to withdraw in favor
of a memorial? I don't know. Let
me check on that one second,
Okay? We just let me know ASAP
appropriately, and I have
spoken.
So with that, I believe we are
adjourned until, um
Friday morning at 830 Back in
