C. sixty is K. and for purpose
I'm here.
Four five six okay we have a
quorum so for those of you in
the audience if you're here for
house bill two thirty five or
two forty four were rolling both
of those so as I said before you
go because it's we're just
getting.
We're not up on we're not
appointed webcast yet so have a
seat noted to have a seat there
to Barbara and Gabby going to
have a seat hopefully it won't
be too long.
And we're gonna start with house
bill fifty one was there
I'm ready to go I.
This
is.
Control of.
All of these things.
It.
Yes that.
to.
All
Okay I hear work could start.
Because.
I was trying to remind people.
Thank you yes.
One day that we're we're in
state yes we will be here
Wednesday to.
So we're going to start with
house bill fifty one.
And Representative Fajardo is
running a little late so
Representative Ferrary is going
to start the presentation I.
All.
What and there is a committee
so.
So I need a motion to discuss
that okay
so go ahead Representative thank
you madam chair
House Bill judges go ahead and
find out how filler Justice
Committee suffers.
Probably the the substance
that's what we're going to be
considering okay thank you I am
going to introduce my experts
this Barbara Webber and
Gabrielle of Rivera and
I'm sorry I don't know anything
about the sub so I'm going to
committees of the two just a
minute let them just like.
Madam chair committee thank you
for having me my name is
Gabriella Rivera on the policy
communications coordinator for
health Mexico we also represent
the New Mexico consumers for
affordable prescriptions
coalition so just to explain
this this is very similar to the
filed bill and concepts we're
creating an independent boards
under the.
Office of the superintendent of
insurance to continually
evaluates the issue of
prescription drug pricing and
work to lower them pretty
Mexicans the major changes to
the committee self we added the
ability to hire staff.
He added the ability to
implement voluntary non
regulatory programs.
Okay I'm sorry.
But it only feels.
Yeah.
So the webcast is down we're
going to wait and stacked up.
No no no pressure.
Basis for.
I guess this just walked out and
went back to.
Okay.
It's hard to keep up.
It's
as a text
tax out of the office and
started to convince.
The.
This is where we are.
If they were good to go okay
we're we're back in business so
Gabby I think you were speaking
madam chair yeah so this the.
Makes more sense I'm just going
to do a brief introduction about
the whole bill okay
okay so HB fifty one an axe the
prescription drug affordability
port Act and the board is
charged with developing
strategies to lower the cost of
prescription drugs for consumers
health care providers business
and government entities and
further duties and powers of the
border identify and the
superintendent of insurance is
required to report to the board
all relevant data and I dress
and it also creates a
prescription drug four the
portability I I think it's
supposed to be in the state
treasury and it's funded by
assessments on manufacturers
wholesale drug distributors
pharmacy benefits managers and
manufacturers and the funds will
support operation of the board
an annual report is required to
be submitted to the legislative
finance committee and interim
health and Human Services
Committee recommendations and
findings and it was endorsed by
a interim Legislative Health and
Human Services Committee so
hopefully that will give you
better context of why we need
these other of Canadian
substitution.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Barbara
Webber executive director Health
Action New Mexico we can in New
Mexico for almost thirty years
working to see that everyone
gets access to an affordable
affordable and quality health
care coverage
in the state.
Absolutely critical to having
health care coverage in the
United States to having health
care in New Mexico it is Mr
access to medications we know
that forty four percent of can
you please.
Close.
And we're
the staff is.
Although someone texted me and
said the webcast wasn't that.
The joys of.
This.
Okay sorry.
Of.
This.
This is.
With that.
Yeah it's always gives me a
stress test.
Yes I in.
It's going to fault.
The only virtue Mexico on.
Because
the here today.
Once you.
Again I apologize.
Unfortunately none of us have
control.
And just in case anyone came in
late we are rolling two thirty
five and two forty four at the
father's request so.
I was hi this is
I was.
For the two.
At four.
Chair just saying the webcast is
of okay
it just come up check.
Just keep quarter.
Okay.
Okay so we are back.
Hopefully permanently at least
for a few hours go ahead
barley thank you madam chair
ready go back to the committees
okay okay.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you everyone again my name is
Gabby Rivera and with Health
Action New Mexico on the policy
committee cations coordinator
I'm just going to go through the
changes for the committee sub so
we have added the ability to
hire staff to support the board
we've added the ability to
implement voluntary non
regulatory programs we've added
a requirement to study a few
certain promising initiatives
including entering a regional
purchasing consortium and
contracting with the statewide
pharmacy benefit manager
and we've clarified that the
assessments funding the board
are on the licenses of each of
the entities rather than
introduce themselves
and finally we've added a couple
more components to the annual
report to HHS and all the LFC
and I'm gonna pass it back to
Barbara to give you a little
more context on the.
Really go for the committee
says.
So do I have a motion that the
committee substitute and to
accept that.
Any opposition.
Okay remember to do the motions
right later on.
Definitely thank.
Madam chair at like to refer to
our provider.
Thank you again them and tear
members of the committee of this
committee is no stranger to the
issue of prescription drugs in
fact the LHS committee had two
different days devoted to that.
Challenges of drug pricing and.
Can affordability for people in
New Mexico so I don't need to go
over too much of that
information a couple of your new
I mean for this in the United
States one out of of seventy
percent of people have the at
least one medication they take
every day twenty percent at
least five medications that they
take every day.
Of so we know that this is
the health and of the not being
able to medications is really
access issue because and for the
area.
to manager conditions even if
you're able to see a doctor or
provider eccentric.
for twenty five years in United
States there's been an effort to
lower drug prices at the federal
level and for twenty four of
twenty five years we did not see
in the movie finally they were
success last year for Medicare.
And
those will roll out slowly
the changes that are that are
happening but we think in New
Mexico that it should be every
that has access to the same
things that we're looking for
the Medicare changes for having
access to their medications
several years ago.
Thank you for five years ago
states begin getting together
and talking about what the
states do because it's not
happening at the federal level
and therefore the conception of
the prescription drug
affordability board came out
there are now seven
deaths with for sure.
Prescription drug affordability
says process United States or
seven one legislation in fact
last New Virginia just passes.
Is Senate passed it's pizza in
New Jersey is on the task of
passing their pay gap as well.
Of in when we started looking at
this we were going wireless with
the.
Coach that much just for using
which is a regulatory approach
so that you can maybe take a
line for us and study them and
sent limits at the state level.
Of the New Mexico is that we
only have a very small
commercial market and that's the
only impact that that would have
to see what the regulatory model
thinking about who we are in New
Mexico are demographics great
diversity we decided that we
would go with a non regulatory
model innovative model we're not
basing this on hi and this guy
we see this is actually
happening now in the process in
the prescription drug market of
the good example is a cost plus
that was set up by mark Cuban
just to give you an idea for a
few by the generic of of
Lipitor it it will cost you
fifty eight dollars if you go to
cost plus it cost three dollars
and fifty eight cents
so we know that there's a lot of
wiggle room in the market to
take advantage of that here in
New Mexico by setting up a.
Collaborative volunteer
stakeholder of process in which
we look at a lot of different
models that could be used
innovative model study in first
and then employment New Mexico
what could some of those three
right now it's a very non
competitive market the PBMs
thoroughly agree that most of
the market the wholesalers.
Domino's to the market we think
we can introduce more
competition as mentioned in
other places
in the market by setting up
simple state of PBS that that
would not have the bad
practices excuse me many people
but there are bad practices from
our point of view
instead what mark Cuban showed
that for example eliminated the
PBMs and let the district
fifteen percent increase across
the board so is also what we
hope will be model that will
drive transparency a lot more
transparency in our state but
it'll also be consumer focused
and it will do cost containment
in creative ways and just to
give you some examples other
states have done Louisiana for
example took their have C. drive
and they put it out to the
people said oh that's not going
to work well it worked great
they brought down the price then
they were able to get a lot more
people this year perhaps see
we've got something like forty
thousand people in New Mexico.
Dying suffering from Habsi would
be cured inform us if we can get
right so this is the challenges
people face when other people
are not paying the rent
I think one of the hardest
choice always hear people after
fifty five there start digging
into the retirement fund so they
can pay for their medications
then at the other end they're
not going to have the retirement
funds if they thought they would
have and we're going to see him
back on Medicaid which is very
expensive proposition
for where people that.
When to stop there and we have
time limits and be very happy to
address some of the.
Questions the committee has but
I do think it's one of the most
it's one of the most impactful
things that we can do in New
Mexico forty four percent of the
people in New Mexico in the GAO.
reported that they skipped
iterations their trucks I was
standing in line for a.
Building to file a complaint
and the woman behind the this is
an the end of the summer.
Started telling me that she was
not going able to to be able to
afford her as a drugs for her
son because he was going into
middle school she said the
expenses of going into middle
school having to buy uniforms
having to buy new activities
Smith that she find her.
As a drug for her child said so
what would happen is he actively
she's actively has as well the
time so I'm just hoping the
school or school setting to the
E. R..
So these are the stories we hear
all the time and that we need to
make sure are not happening in
our state.
Thank.
Again if you want to give us
some overview of just for the.
All eyes you all know the bill
well at this point we went over
the changes so we will be happy
to answer any questions rather
than go through the bill too
much more.
Representative her did you want
to add anything no I think the
third step of W. job of it's.
Okay so we will go to the
audience for opposition.
Okay you want to speak you can
just speak from there to speak
loudly.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is John
Boston's here director of state
affairs farms association or the
national association represents
PBMs we appreciate the
opportunities we have a special
sponsor in the offer discussions
received earlier this morning we
respectfully oppose those
current form to reasons
primarily this bill fails to
protect confidential and
proprietary information in its
current form and this bill
creates an unfair I'm just bored
that's going to be lopsided
filled provide you all the
recommendations for the first
confidentiality this bill fails
aggregate data it settles to
protect confidential and
confidentiality that that means
the patient data can be exposed
through the plan information
that the PF.
And for our Jerry measures can
be exposed and burgers nearby
those which drive up the cost of
use our ability to provide that
protection to our previous years
that is so thank you please
record FY didn't start the timer
our take that information I if
you're going to move forward
this this idea also varies
November I need to be on the
that don't just exclude pharmacy
benefit managers manufacturers
and wholesalers you also need to
exclude any member that makes my
in the okay Sir thank you thank
you
Right madam chair members of the
committee my name is Frank work
number registered lobbyists for
America's health insurance plans
a national trade association for
health plans and respectfully
oppose the bill in its current
form the confidentiality
protections and Mr Fox madam are
really really important
especially on that individual on
the on the patient level and
very much like to work with the
sponsors and try to address that
of really significant problems
exist.
We also have concerns about is
included within the scope of
this bill but we're having with
the sponsors and try to
addresses that is thank you.
And a reminder to please silence
your phones.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee received Travis on
behalf of CVS health we also
respectfully oppose the bill
passed right hand however we
appreciate the opportunity thank
you for work for fun for
advocates to address the call
right.
Members of the committee on the
show's first of this the
prosecution of New Mexico
currently stand in opposition to
this bill Houston stated we've
been working with the sponsors
and Health Action New Mexico
three in a row.
Of legislation but we do believe
that the starting point for
addressing waited taxpayers you
Mr costs as previously stated
the sales to provide that
transparent about the supply
chain we believe until that's
done we're going to get to the
true cost of what it is to
manufacture the we also do have
some concerns in the
confidentiality we that's very
important for our members but
again we have been working with
the sponsors and advocates for
the we look forward to the next
time more thank you.
The master gardener with
disabilities for cigna
healthcare professionals the
reason previously stated we also
respect we are in opposition
still needs of.
The also recognize that we agree
with some of the most we believe
that it's important to look at
costs and how we can all work to
drive that's what we do every
day for the people
Representative the patients that
we represent every day help them
get the drugs are so important
for them to save their lives and
decrease the overall cost of
health care it's what we do is
so exclude folks like the V. Ms
for being able to give the input
office for other folks in the
supply chain on really does not
give you the pictures so we
think it's important look for
speaking sponsor make sure that
you get a full three sixty view
of what's going on and how we
resolve this as a group make
sure the people we represent the
best support possible.
Thank you anyone else in
opposition go ahead madam chair
members of the committee my name
is our fault.
Through this for yes Hey
we respectfully oppose this
legislation.
Because we believe in because
times it's really done that the
governor established
restriction frog Task Force
that's been me throughout the.
And in fact has developed eleven
provided recommendations that we
believe would actually go a long
way to reducing the cost of
prescription drugs to the
patients in other states where
these point of that but in
places that excess of a million
dollars a year shown little that
the budget actually reducing the
cost of drugs to patients of
those reasons we pass away for
the for the prescription drug
task force comes and implement
that legislation thank you thank
thank you.
Go ahead madam chair members of
the committee good morning
FY terribly salty registered
lobbyists for prime therapeutics
I will not repeat whatever want
to said we do have the
significant concerns with the
need to aggregate that data was
not addressed in the bill and
also the proprietary
confidential protections they
should all we also will continue
to work with the advocates and
sponsors thank you.
Anyone else in opposition that's
going to zoom.
Okay so.
I'm sorry.
Go ahead Caitlyn.
Good morning chairman Thompson
members of the committee hi my
name is Caitlyn Morello I'm a
senior director of state policy
with pharma while we believe
that this bill is well intended
there are several areas where we
have concerns and so we are here
in opposition today we echo the
confidentiality concerns that
have been stated already we're
also concerned about the lack of
details with the process of
administering the assessment on
several entities in the bill we
believe that without that
information and information on
how the boards costs were
actually determines which you've
heard that many states have
varying costs for these boards
and pretty inconsistent with
some of those other states we
have a hard time fully
commenting on the administrative
burden of manufactures complying
with the tax the board as you've
heard is expensive and it's
redundant of existing state
efforts including the work of
the prescription drug task force
we would really like to be a
constructive partner and ally in
that legislation as it moves
forward and so we respectfully
ask for your no vote to allow
the task force's recommendations
to be implemented the session
are rather than creating a
haphazard approach where several
states these are working toward
the same goal thank you.
Okay
Dr MacNamee.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I also
respectfully employed up close
this bill I have the honor of
sharing the prescription drug
task force and we propose to the
pharmacy drug boards because we
didn't feel they would be
effective we are definitely in
favor of controlling drug prices
but we think this process would
have several unintended
consequences the first is that
it would slow down the process
bill from the task force will be
delivered to the legislature
within the next couple of days.
We would prefer that to be
considered secondly New Mexico
does not have the market share
to affect prices at my major
concern of this would be that if
the price were set at it we're
at less than we paid for the
drug when we deliver these drugs
to patients the ultimate suffer
would be the patients because
they would have decreased access
I go that other drug boards have
not yet I think we.
You.
Thank you.
Hey will the.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee William day and
registered lobbyists
representing the healthcare
distribution alliance thank you
for your time today on behalf of
HTA the
nations pharmaceutical wholesale
providers I just want to say
that we respectfully oppose the
bill as introduced I have in
this state chance to read the
committee substitute
I won't repeat what others in
opposition of stated all but to
say that I agree with that then
add to that
wholesalers and the fee
structure the seemingly don't
make sense it appears that this
legislation is just looking for
wholesalers to help fund boards
that
frankly really hasn't proven to
do much of anything in other
state elections that enacted so
with that I ask that you respect
I just be respectful opposition
at that you.
with the no vote.
Local.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm just going
to echo previous testimony that
I was on the governor's
prescription drug task force and
examine factors driving the
costs patients providers paid
for drugs and we developed a
list of recommended legislative
solutions that will be coming at
this point soon and we did not
recommend in that listing of a
prescription drug advisory board
because they have not produce
results and other states and
this bill house bill fifty one
does not provide patients with
any guarantee that before not
meant hi price caps on
prescriptions in the future so I
respectfully opposes bill it
just in terms of what is coming
down the pipeline for future
legislation for lowering
prescription drug costs thank
you.
Thank you.
very Barnes.
Great okay go ahead.
Great.
That's so back to the.
The room for for people here is.
People here in support.
Okay and if you want to speak
please stand up will start in
the front on the side.
Okay.
Good morning madam chair members
of the list of our garden I am
here on behalf New Mexico
consumers for affordable
prescriptions of our coalition
thirty process in organizing
three years in support of
percent of four.
I believe you had a packet
handed out you need for your
attention to the last page or
you can see the tax echo base
working.
I'll be doing this for
portability for provide for
people all over the.
do have state constituencies
labour constituencies health
experts on policy folks
impatience you're going to
verify your story so and that
was our life.
Want to make it very clear.
This Pete our prescription drug
affordability for will bring
meaningful financial for the
to families in a time of people
according to pay rent or
utilities even four thousand X.
including this board in place
will be people have a champion
in their foreigners to provide
some relief in the face of the
state.
The best time thank you John in
the back.
Thank you madam chair members
for the job.
Federation of labor AFL-CIO we
believe that affordable quality
healthcare is a hallmark of our
organization and we that
everybody should have access to
that so for those reasons more
members and supporters of the
concert thank you thank you.
In in the back will start in the
back Madam chair members of the
immersion Martinez executive
director of the quality New
Mexico we're on the verge of
ending the HIV aids epidemic
science shows us that those
three Chevy positive on
treatment and mention other
taxable viral loads cannot
transmit the virus to others
because of that pre exposure
prophylactic drugs those who are
negative but exposed to the
virus cannot be contracted these
drugs which are the same by the
way have an average ten thousand
dollar per month retail costs we
have to fix a lot of the service
access to these medications
which will help us and each of
you need to have them but we
can't fix the problems we cannot
create better access if we do
not first to determine clear
that people must be able to
afford access to the medications
that will prevent the virus and
state that we believe that this
is one of many steps we take
especially to increase access to
meaningful life saving
healthcare LGBTQ folks
specifically again by actual
then and change of women of
color and so for that reason we
stand strong support thank you
Anybody else.
Okay that go ahead.
The
members of the committee carbon
you have see how we do want to
thank the sponsors for bring
this you know so frustrating few
weeks yeah we're Senate finance
hearing how the state is going
to have to.
Nearly a hundred million dollars
for state employee health care
just to keep the seat.
And I don't know what percentage
of that is for my prescription
drugs but it's not insignificant
so we think that anything can do
to try to get a handle on a
wrestling prescription drugs
something this good not just for
state employees but for the
state we urge your support thank
you thank you Parker.
anyone else.
Yes go ahead yes your turn.
You madam chair members of the
committee my name is three
thousand and I'm a volunteer
advocate for a a RP my friend
and fellow volunteer G. hundred
lives with multiple services the
average cost of medication she
needs three thousand dollars a
year in Canada the same drive
costs around twenty three
thousand dollars.
Recurrent Representative person
would escalate fifty or sixty
years having to pay this cost.
The ability for to help lower
drug costs and make them more
affordable for all of us.
Sadly many seniors have to
choose between putting food on
the table are taking their
medications please support house
bill fifty one because
medications don't work if you
can't afford that.
Thank you.
Anyone else.
Okay we'll go to soon a river
healthy fall.
Good morning.
I'm the river how like all my
organizing director of
interfaith worker justice New
Mexico we are a statewide
network of people of faith and
people of conscience to add it
for working rights for workers
rights and economic justice.
New Mexico is a state with the
unique health issue so many of
us are immune compromised as a
result of exposure to legacy
uranium and or radiation
exposure from the nuclear
weapons industry going all the
way back to the Trinity test in
nineteen forty five so working
families in the state have a
particular catch twenty two
health issues result in the
inability to work at a time when
wages and paychecks are
essential to staying alive this
bill by reducing drug costs is a
lifeline for so many working
families across our state we
urge you to pass this bill thank
you thank you
this year.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Debbie I share with New Mexico
voices for children and I'm
speaking in support of house
bill fifty one no family should
have to choose between paying
for a life saving prescription
medicine medication and paying
for other necessities like rent
and groceries expensive
prescription drugs for children
the most especially the twenty
nine thousand children in New
Mexico who don't have health
insurance for these children
families may be able to pay
fifteen dollars for a mock
Cicilline to treat your
infections but they may struggle
struggle to pay six hundred
dollars for an at the pen when
their child has severe allergic
reaction or seven hundred and
fifty thousand dollars for
medicine to treat spinal
muscular dystrophy for example.
Even families whose children
have insurance agency struggle
to pay for essential
prescription medicine due to
different costsharing
structures.
Family should not have to forgo
life saving medications for
their children due to
unregulated prescription rates
it's time to hold the
prescription drug industry
accountable and improve health
outcomes for New Mexicans by
passing house bill fifty one
thank you for your thank you.
Eight two of Alex Williams.
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Alex
Williams and appearing on behalf
of the New Mexico Center online
poverty we stand in support of
HB fifty one because we believe
that healthcare is a human right
and making prescription drugs
affordable is crucial to
ensuring that all New Mexicans
have access to the care that
they need no one should ever be
denied health care only because
they cannot afford it
prescription drugs can be a huge
cost Mexico families in addition
to the high prices they already
pay for all their essentials
like housing food and health
care in a poll from early two
thousand twenty to thirty seven
percent of New Mexicans reported
that they either had to ration
or completely sacrifice a
prescribed medication because it
was too expensive in that same
poll eighty four percent of New
Mexicans supported creating a
prescription drug affordability
board to reduce the cost of
eight we need a board they can
develop strategies to lower
prescription costs so that
everyone has access to the
health care they need we join
the vast majority of New
Mexicans and ask the legislature
to create a prescription drug
affordability board by passing
HB fifty one thank you thank
you.
No that was Alex data Parker.
Good morning my name is Sarah
Parker and I live in Los crucis
I support HB fifty one in the
additions in the committee
substitute would however also
support certain changes to
address the data concerns stated
earlier New Mexico ranks near
the lowest of all states and
personal income and almost one
fifth of New Mexicans live in
poverty we need to invest in the
results if you dab offers well
beyond the state term of a
single governor with the
predictable bipartisan and
accountable process reducing
prescription drug prices will
help reduce the overall cost of
health care directly and
indirectly by reducing barriers
to proper management of chronic
and other health conditions no
keep us healthier overall
statewide improving quality of
life increasing productivity and
sparing both personal and state
budgets my own story is a common
one reflected in the polls I'm
even with insurance I recently
changed the form of one of my
daily medications to one that is
less affected to save money out
of pocket costs and occasionally
delay taking one of my ask
medications until my symptoms
reach a certain point just
reduce the number of inhalers I
have to purchase implementing
the P. dad cannot wait time
thank you very much you.
To conduct their.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm a contact speaking
for the league of women voters
of New Mexico we haven't had an
opportunity to see the committee
serve but we strongly support
the original bill we believe
that healthcare needs to be
affordable for all New Mexicans
and also the cost and pricing
data should be transparent a
statewide drug bills
affordability board would help
on both counts we are to do pass
on H. B. fifty one thank you
thank you.
Patsy Romero.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Patsy Romero
representing the National
Alliance on mental illness both
at the state and national level
and all the reasons stated here
this morning in the interest of
time madam chair we support of
house bill fifty one thank you
thank you Patsy.
great burns.
Go ahead great.
Yes.
Okay all right we'll skip over
breaking the record right here.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
correct secretary Lujan admixed
ministry of New Mexico with our
advocacy also expresses this
morning a position of New Mexico
converts of churches and the
Presbyterian Santa Fe I'm here
to state this morning stated
support for H. B. one we
strongly support all efforts to
further open access
affordability to health care and
of course.
But for more prescription drugs
for all New Mexicans and we
believe that the formation of
prescription drug affordability
board with certainty help for
all the reasons stated by the
experts for H. B. fifty one and
for the reasons stated by those
before me.
With that action administrative
of New Mexico the conference of
churches in the past few Santa
Fe urges support for H. P. fifty
one.
Thank you.
Okay that looks like all of.
We went to great twice and
didn't get a response so so I
apologize but we must go on so
based here heard you have any
remarks based on the yes the
public comment.
Madam chair and thank you very
much for the opportunity to
explain this to you to listen
very carefully to the to the
support and those against this.
This legislation when you heard
over and over again with the
people who are actually going to
be specifically benefited from
the legislation we heard from
advocacy groups consumers
community organizations those
people you also heard from the
people who are posted where
those who are benefiting the
most from the money and the high
price of prescription drugs and
I actually do consider and weigh
that very carefully because you
are the consumers you are the
community and you are the people
that were most of Representative
when they were talking about the
in in support of this piece of
legislation and thank you madam
chair okay thank you we will go
to the committee Representative
Jones thank you madam chair I
don't have a microphone
everybody hear me of no probably
not this one there's not.
Okay.
So so what I'm hearing even from
those who are opposed to parts
of the bill is that.
we need to lower the cost of
prescription drugs
that seems like everybody agrees
on that and and I especially on
an empathetic having taken care
of a lot of patience.
As we make progress is saving
lives and treating disease some
people have very lengthy list of
medications they have to have to
to survive so I guess what we're
needing to decide here is does
this bill actually accomplish
that
and so that's why I do have some
questions.
So madam chair and
representative
That there's already been a
board created in twenty nineteen
and and there's a different some
very names I'm not sure if the
prescription drug task forces
the same as the twenty nineteen
board interagency
pharmaceuticals purchasing
Council.
Are those the same.
No and also I Health Action
initiative after of.
Price gouging DO transparency
bill then we will the I. P. C.
C. so that the state could come
together and join purchase.
They were required to do that it
illustrates the need for the
pharmaceutical work has so they
met quarterly they did produce
stated going to the website and
so a lot of the data set
produced but they were unable to
operationalize because they were
they had no staff they had no
board accepted representatives
from the state agencies on the
table and that's what we think
that you need to have it's a
complex industry need to
understand it we may be able to
function and it and in a way
that benefits consumers so that
the I. P. B.C Ford
without disruption without a
mission without focusing without
the expertise was never able to
do very basic.
Thing which was simply joint
purchase drugs together for the
state agencies.
Madam chair representative and
experts I guess I'm I'm I get
confused about why we need to
start all over again it seems
like we do a lot of that we're
we we already have.
A body in place that's doing a
certain work like you said they
just didn't have what they
needed so why couldn't we just
continue with that rather than I
guess scratching or do we just
leave them in place and then
start a whole all over and with
the new.
Level of bureaucracy there are
Iglesias yeah I think two things
one is that it was only for
state agencies only mandate was
for doing joint purchasing and
even those two things which
relative simple I'm not sure the
board still is meeting
an estimate for Sino it in over
a year so again I think without
having an official board that's
accountable to the legislature
that has expertise hired
expertise and that's all they
focus on is that the drug market
without that kind of structure I
don't think we can the company
had completion even some of the
reforms that are being talked
about for the PPM percent
operation says we have another
thing that's coming down the
pike the governor also put a cap
on and that allowed us to go to
Canada to buy drugs and with
the.
Third in line and now the
administration federally is
moving to finally allow them but
again the question is who's
going to operationalize that New
Mexico we don't have support
who's going to distribute who's
going to do all of the things
that you need to do to bring
drugs from Canada so thank you
madam chair representative you
just said something that really
piqued my curiosity we're going
to Canada by drugs that are not
FDA approved.
Know the FDA has member please
go through the chair on site
manager sorry Madam chair
representative
The if the drugs to go to Canada
you are allowed to buy the drugs
actually you could go tomorrow
to Canada in the drugs online
you don't have to go and is
probably one of the programs we
will look at but yes we will be
going to Canada for bringing the
drugs here will be more you
don't have to go can
something is to bring drugs here
that from Canada and that was a
bill that the governor did a
couple years ago and now it
looks like it could happen again
food we have to operationalize
New Mexico.
Mr chair I'm sorry madam chair
just to clarify is that of they
are the same drugs in those
cases that are being sold here
under the same name they're just
being sold at a lower price in
Canada.
I sing yeah it's the same tracks
thank you.
Okay
so remember to go through the
chair.
I.
It's okay do that you are.
Yes so
So I'm madam chair and
representative experts
I am really concerned about the
confidentiality issue as well so
many people spoke out on that I
actually know patients who would
to avoid having their name on a
list they would not take
medication I mean I actually
know people like that so how how
likely is it that we would we
would have people's patience of
personal information available
I think by having them on
a registry list or.
well first of all madam chair I
want to mention that we have
didn't we only received the
proposed amendments from that
PBMs and the entrance industry
about confidentiality to weigh
in the process to get them in
for this committee but we're
happy to consider them we just
mention to them this morning
would be happy to meet with them
were even willing to take out
that reporting section tyre Lee
if that doesn't add to the
benefit of the bill so it's just
a small section saying any data
that office the superintendent
receives through clients or
upcoming transparency laws also
gets forwarded to the board and
all the same regulations that
the office the superintendent
insurance would have to follow
for that data but and we didn't
have any flags of
knowing that that would be a
problem until last week and we
can included for this committee
we're happy to include that in
future committees that's going
to thank you can you should know
that trade secrets are are in
every straight state are
protected by law it's mandatory
so the state trade secret to
always be protected in New
Mexico and I respect okay thank
you very much thank you madam
chair anyone else have
Representative Chavis thank you
madam chair representative I I
have some questions in terms of
some of the issues that were
raised in our previous FIR by
the office of the superintendent
of insurance I don't know if you
have that in front of the
federal.
or I can I have for the I can
read it to my question is House
Bill dress those concerns.
Did you madam chair
representative thank you for the
question in the first bill is
for the corrections we made and
the.
So.
Committee substitute it should
have been.
And was submitted as the license
it's not the licensed entities
so long supply chains you have
to drug manufacturers should
have three packages at the
wholesalers.
All of these groups have various
license so we are like all other
states we are assessing the
license not license to introduce
some courting to the board
received there's thirteen
hundred and twenty nine license.
In New Mexico of the drug
Of the supply change and in the
course in that we included fifty
three PM etcetera etcetera as
well to be licensed so.
Yeah Madam chair representative
we
hi I think the other one was
about I was are not having the
requirement our ability to
enforce the collection of
assessments and that was implied
is an issue for us in earlier
conversations with the outside
at something else for happy to
consider adding to the bill if
it's necessary but we need
clarification from us I on
exactly what they need them in
the bill for them to be
satisfied on that piece so Madam
chair representative have you
passed side because the thing
that was an issue that was
brought up in conversations
earlier so have you have you
have the opportunity to to talk
with the superintendent and
figure out what is actually
needed so that he has the
ability to it will be having
that we had it with the previous
superintendent but then there
was a change so we now need to
go through the new
superintendent to confirm that.
Of Madam chair representative
the other question that I have
is in terms of
the actual assessment can you
tell me what the process is in
terms of how that assessment
will figure out.
madam chair Representative we
had a little more detail on the
original language we submitted
for crafting the idea for the
process is that every year the
board and its annual plan of
operations will decide on a
budget for the following year
and come up with the flat a flat
fee across all assessments that
would fund that.
What would be the same for each
license so when very based on
size or anything else one flat
fee that would cover the
proposed budget that the board
puts out every year thank you
madam chair representative so
that I have a question with
regard to that because of the
fact that it's been a few slides
of those testament in a rely
for the a point budget is going
to be in the systems
how quickly will you be
considering legislation that
allows the offices.
Was actually called.
I'm sorry I didn't
Representative madam chair did
you say how quickly will we
consult with us high in and
introduce legislation so that
the that assessment pieces and
force right we will be trying to
have that conversation this week
if possible.
Thank you madam chair
representative I have additional
actually I have a couple of
questions on.
The the issue of data has come
up and in the previous.
Of if I are the superintendent
express that he wrote in here
she really didn't have the
ability to mandate the
collection of data two four step
so does the new bill the new
bill address that issue.
What in terms of of data I mean
the data that we ask for is for
generic data.
Actor get data
we can also purchase that data
from other people in other
places so it's maybe not
essential to build makes more
sense to have New Mexico data
which can find out generic into
data that's that's happening so
again a conversation to be had
about how that will be assessed
I work another point where we do
assessments and collecting the
assessments has not been a
problem.
Madam chair representative I
would hope that you'll consider
adding that as well because I
think that
purchasing data and I I agree
that we need to have some New
Mexico data but we have some
very specific Mexico data so
that we can do so that were
formed in terms of which
prescription drugs and their
costs and the impact on.
So the other question that I
have is in terms of the and
actually it's on page five it
talks about examining the
feasibility forty three coop of
prescription drug purchases and
second is the possibilities
Mexico.
Question.
Goes back to that.
Of the contract.
So can you will confuse in terms
of between these ability and
possibility you kind of tell me.
What you're seeing in those
terms and then before I forget
all no go ahead.
I just.
madam chair representative in
our regional traffic just had
examine the feasibility of ABC
so those just attracting
decision but essentially all
we're looking for is those three
points are we want them to
specifically look at the
possibility of contracting with
statewide PPM of entering
regional purchasing consortium
and selecting a statewide
wholesaler also to contract with
so those are just three specific
items we want them to look at.
So Madam chair of my next
question related to that is
India it speaks to Mexico
possibly joining and existing
regional process purchasing
consortium is that mean
regionally terms of the
southwest or does that mean
regionally terms of another
region of the country.
I think it could be either.
The and the reason I say that is
that we know that costs less has
developed Miller regional
purchasing of that they're doing
through their program that's
the.
mark Cuban situation but more
importantly it with if we want
to for more phones purchasing
group will be a volunteer
purchasing group and I think
madam chair representative
you'll say well why what makes
the difference for if you're not
regulating if you're in the
market then what drives down is
being able to get for oil prices
and right now we're on the cusp
of something really exciting in
the market which is biosimilars
are coming out to generic for
the biologics and they're coming
out with regulations are
loosening almost every day so
we'll have opportunities to
really be frontline for special
care for this year as those are
rolling out and get the best
price we can and be able to
also we want to be able to work
with employers so when we say
joint purchaser's yeah they
would be.
In the address but they would
also be
They would also be giving us
input as to what they really
need not only the purchasers one
should be around the table for
that we do we know what the
industry on the board for
obvious reasons of conflict but
we would certainly want to be
meeting with all the
stakeholders it should be
something that's consensual as
much as possible and as you'll
see in the report legislature
holds that board accountable for
meeting with all the
stakeholders you can't just meet
with if you're sick in the
public so
I think think think and I think
there's just so many
opportunities right now in the
market that we can try to
orchestrate a market rather than
legislative market this
regulation doesn't always work
out well as.
And we need a little more
evidence to show that it does
work but being in the market we
can orchestrate a market that's
much more friendly to consumers
we can look at for example we
can look at the.
A vaccine programs we can get
better vaccine prices become
more important because the feds
are no longer going to pay for
COVID taxing and as soon as it
was announced industry jump the
price from thirty dollars a shot
to hundred thirty dollars.
So that so we would be able to
set up a program like the
children's vaccine program that
brings of vaccines in much lower
cost to the state.
so there's things that we can do
also within four years we can
facilitate programs for them
that they don't have time to do
specially a small business state
we can facilitate how they buy
their drugs from Canada
to the direct purchase something
that could be set up for so that
just a number of things that can
be done.
Purchasing.
Madam chair representative is
the board
Subject to the meetings act
absolutely.
I didn't see that the
legislation to pass.
Madam chair representative house
also include our original
draft is a tragic decision to
remove it because they said any
government board was
automatically subject to the act
thank you
Madam chair representative I
have not so much a question with
a client we heard someone
earlier basically say that New
Mexico this type of market share
to to he will establish
something like this right I
disagree with that
because there are country
there's one country that I know
of Montana has the same number
of residents asked New Mexico
does so my comment is that I
think that the is the other
piece that should be included in
this legislation is looking at
other countries and seeing how
they have basically worked there
the cost of pharmaceuticals.
In the FIR you know it shows
that
People who live in the United
States pay yearly it nearly
three times as much as I think I
really think that we need to
look at the experience of
countries to look at Walter and
see if they did thank you thank
you Representative Lord.
And it's back.
Thank you madam chair
representative expert so I I'm
gonna change my one question
real quick because I was unaware
of the governor's prescription
drug task force I just received
the email report if you look at
this report it's very long very
very lengthy and the task force
met every two weeks for to our
session to investigate
pharmaceutical supply chain
there is a really well the
information in here and there
Levin bills being written up
with the governor board so can
you tell me are you aware of
these bills are coming with the
governor's consent and pushing
forward Madam chair
representative madam chair and
representative thank you for
that question we are aware we're
anxiously waiting to see those
if they are going to happen
so we have not seen the bills
yet so it's hard to come in on a
bill that we haven't seen but we
did attend virtually no one
allowed to participate we tended
those meetings.
Okay thank you madam chair so
there's a lot of lot of lot
information here and it seems
like they have been meeting a
lot.
This is a governor's
prescription drug task force and
it would seem that we would all
be together chair representative
to work on these eleven bills
rather than bringing something
forward that I have so many
questions on service reading
through this this is so much
information about lowering costs
and I don't have time to do a
deep dive Madam chair
representative
Madam chair yes Madam chair
representative I know there is
somebody that is here and it's
unfortunate they are part of the
expert team because they
actually work of the task force
and I would love to ask you a
bunch of questions like it's
been because this is fascinating
the stuff that I'm reading in
here about how we can actually
do this in the works already
been done so I don't really like
redundancy and I don't like at
bureaucracy and I don't like
government bloat and I hate to
see this go by the wayside just
push something forward that
you know the governor is already
done this work with this
prescription drug task force
which I'm extremely grateful for
because we do have an issue.
With huge issue nationally not
just in New Mexico about drug
prices so what I want to ask one
of the other questions that kind
of glance to participate here or
who's going to be on this board
and who will appoint them on
this board.
Percent.
Madam chair representative it's
going to be a five member board
one member appointed by the
governor one member appointed by
president pro temp one member
appointed by the minority floor
leader of the Senate one member
appointed by the speaker of the
house and one member appointed
by the minority floor leader of
the house
as we use it's specified that
the use should be experts in the
fields but not represent any
anyone in the actual supply
chain and they will also be
supported by expert staff.
Okay thank you madam chair and
representative
So explain to me how you really
want to ask
sorry.
Miss Macatee that's what I'd
rather be asking the questions
or would love to be asking the
questions yeah but we want to
madam chair I would you guys be
opposed to allowing her to speak
as an expert.
This means that you guys chair
representative as the chair of
the state we we cannot do that
at this time okay thank you
because I want to ask you just
make a thank you Mr lots to talk
about this so picture some time
hi well I definitely to hide
itself we will because it and I
want to say madam chair and
representative side we've got to
work together we got to figure
out a way to get substitutes to
us earlier because the scanning
the last minutes of the person
you know that too because I want
people to be able to read the
substitutes it's very
frustrating that they are asking
questions based on the other
bill and they can't see the
substitute on there so madam
chair and representative so if
we already have.
This task force.
Then what is the purpose I'm not
gonna ask the question never
mind because every now what I do
have is I did chair
representative have a look at
some of these boards and they
get quite costly I'm gonna put a
cap or anything because Maria
Collett million dollars you can
put a cap on anything and how
much they can charge the
taxpayers every year for what
they are going to be doing they
will be charging the taxpayer
madam chair representative that
we charging the supply change
along the way so if you have
about fifteen fourteen hundred
licenses that you can process if
your budget is going to be like
seven hundred thousand dollars
which is what we anticipate that
would be about a five hundred
and fifty dollar assessments per
license.
There is a cat can go above two
thousand.
Bernalillo buses they have to do
with that it's limited but it
will not be.
Get their regular budget will be
what's going to be at the base
base Madam chair representative
of yeah this was a taxpayer
because no matter how you cut it
you we raise something that gets
raised along the way so that
supports problematic for me
okay so.
Why are we relying on the
regulation and licensing
departments to do this answer a
set up with the infrastructure.
Because we're not regulating
madam chair
I think that's and when drive
make an initiative for deciding
prices are bill does not.
Set prices not a regulatory
board it is going to work in the
market to change the market to
orchestrate a market that's more
consumer friendly with more
consumer programs and have our
own PPM that will not have the
bad practices.
Transparency of the current
PBMs.
Okay madam chair and
representative so what I'm gonna
do is I'm not going to support
this because I need to find out
more about this and I want to
see what the governor wants to
do what bill she's pushing
through because and also the
subs to come at the last minute
next so many questions and and
we have limited time but it just
seems to me that there should
have been a.
A group to sit down what we do
one of the bills are coming was
eleven bills that the governor
wants and we were to have this
prescription drug task task
force I'm all about before we
jump ahead of that let's look at
this because they do absolutely
understand it's very frustrating
with medication because
sometimes of running around
going to one pharmacy over the
other trying to see West Los
prices very frustrating but that
is a huge issue that are not
going to support this like it
more information so thank you
madam chair representative and I
will just it was the the
substitute was emailed to
committee members on Wednesday
so it's been five days the
public can't see it because
under we can't put it on the
website and tell it's been
adopted in this morning so so
the folks on the committee and
the analysts have had five days
to to absorb things
Representative Kate.
Thank you madam chair
representative expert witness I
just have a couple very quick
questions
but can you just explain to me
somebody who's has nothing to do
with the business if we received
a shipment of drugs from Canada
we respect who's distributing
here in New Mexico.
That's not been determined.
So and it's just been in the
last couple weeks Florida was
able to successfully move
through the administrative
process and finally open that up
so that I can be operationalized
or third in line.
So I understand the purchasing
I'm just finance as a consumer
is is the state distributed them
much like the COVID shots or is
pharmacies distributing them so
the average consumer is getting.
When we get there we don't know
the answer to that yet that was
not in the statute but what we
do thank you said if you had a
few deaf in place can help guide
that process to be the most
efficient process to get it out
to be.
Thank you very much Madam chair
of representatives expert
witnesses I understand the
nobody on the expert witness is
sitting on the current
prescription drug task task
force you do have some
information about as and when
was it formed.
It was madam chair and
representative it was one in
August we got in August of
twenty twenty to twenty I'm so
sorry and how often in the in in
you not sure how it will be the
it is part of New Mexico two
months for two months but often
and it's the twenty seventh day
of the sixty day session and we
don't have any bills from it
correct.
Right thank you
thank you Representative Ferrary
thank you madam chair I'd like
to make a motion to do not pass.
Okay.
Go ahead.
Hopefully I can hear because of
the Michael here either.
Staff was made I was just going
to make a statement so you
everybody can think about Madam
chair representative is that.
I heard plenty of people in the
audience stating that they want
to work with you on the field
you had a substance to that you
said you would include things in
the mail you would be opposed to
that.
And also ordered one of the
Representative say that they
didn't have enough information
on the bill.
To make a good decision so.
Is going to Matt madam chair
representative I'm just gonna
put this on here that may be it
you know if we could.
Roll the bill.
That you can work with some of
the people that this and and
maybe give the governor and find
out work with these other eleven
bills are and then we don't have
to vote on this bill today until
we really get it is complex it's
super complex and.
My next question is madam chair
representative is.
An important call.
Eradication could you walk me
through how many people is
involved in that one medication.
Is that too long that would be
too long okay I mean when you
look at what the federal
approval processes and you walk
at with the manufacture.
Agree on the prices and everyone
does their rebates we're not a
fan of the rebate process we
don't know where they go to
school eight
and then it gets distributed
depending on whether it's
through a direct purchaser of
the hospital through Medicaid
through the veterans association
that's got a lot of ways that it
can come down to the pharmacy
and one of the things that we
really want to protect other
pharmacies
Mexico in one of the discussions
that we've had just how do you
protect the pharmacies.
It has to be integral to process
whatever it is that you use
thank you madam chair
representatives the the is it P.
M. B..
Jim Peavy of so the PBM has come
up a few times and there's a
piano in the audience and I'm
hoping that you get with me
after this is over with
but.
It sounds like this is a big
horse trading market.
And everybody's gonna make their
their money while the people
that need the medication are not
reaping any benefits from of it
all and.
Senator.
And I know everybody's in it to
make a little bit of money but
not retire on one thing.
Madam chair representative and
one of the things that comes to
my mind is insulin.
And I know lots of people that
need it and it's super expensive
and M. in my mind whenever I
think of.
From where the insulin is bills
are made all the people to get a
piece of the pie.
The person at the end of the
line that needs it to live.
Is the person who gets punished.
So.
Madam chair representative that
doesn't rescued with me and I
was open that maybe we could
work with everybody work with
these other eleven bills that's
being made and really make this
what they call madam chair sexy
built Iraq.
Senator out of the six year the
better for me on this particular
bill to where we can all be on
the same page.
So.
Madam chair since I am new I
know that Representative Ferrary
was going to make a motion but I
would like to make a motion that
this B. roll we were.
With everybody that wants to
work on this and.
That way Representative Vincent
the people who have been working
on this happened working on this
for decades or longer and I used
to serve on the board of Health
Action New Mexico and they have
contacts within all it's that if
we roll it the chances for to go
anywhere our decreased so I'm
gonna go to Representative
Ferrary for a motion thank you
madam chair I'd like to move it
do not pass on house bill fifty
one do pass on costs Committee
substitute for eighteen fifty
one.
To have a second.
Thank okay okay if you will take
the role Monica.
Yes.
The.
Yes Representative Ferrary yes.
Of the many of yes
Representative Jim Miller.
Thank you.
Representative Lord.
Madam we're able to pick up for
boxes was way over here he said
now and would like to explain
her way back to
of course not.
Representative of Penske yes.
Representative Vincent no ma'am.
Thanks chair.
Yes
Representative yes.
Representative Jones to explain
your vote.
Yes I know this is this is this
is a complicated and with all
these people I may very first
concern was.
Yeah how do we actually make
this work and and reduce the
cost of medications I think if
we stop repeating yourself over
and over again.
And work together I think that
would be a better approach and
because of that I just can't
vote yes on this okay by a vote
of seventy three you haven't you
pass and just in time because I
have to bills and other
committees so Representative
heard from one hospital to the
other.
That's right.
Now.
The next one on there.
Once.
Do we roll a.
The.
The need.
Hello house bill one ninety
early childhood fund transfer.
And we have.
Senator.
Do you have witnesses with you
also.
You madam chair this is the
house bill one ninety one which
I signed on to of late I think
on Friday.
So H. B. one ninety one it is
the legislative finance
committee bill that is one and
only one thing its purpose is to
increase to the fund from sixty
eight million two hundred
million and that the transfer to
ECECD the early childhood
Department this will allow for
investment in more early
childhood education beginning
this year the annual
disbursement is determined by
three year average however the
amount this year is artificially
low because you're one of the
calculation is zero.
There will be no significant
differences in future years even
by bumping that the disbursement
of these funds will allow us to
increase support for infant
mental health tribal services
and child care assistance
program.
Thank you.
It would just
Experts like to speak.
Thank you madam chair fell apart
with the legislative finance
committee just here to have any
technical questions about early
childhood expenses there.
Thank you very much all right
we'll go to the audience is
there anyone here to speak in
opposition to the bill.
Right I will go to this is there
anyone on the zoom here to speak
in opposition B. L..
Said no hands of back to the
audience did anyone here to
speak in support of the bill.
All right I am going to the so
is there anyone also wishes to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hand.
Thank you lastly one hand they
could be healed you have two
minutes.
The morning madam chair members
of the committee on I'm sick of
the Helen with New Mexico voices
for children we support this
bill and thank the LFC and the
sponsors for bringing this forth
as the presenter said this
is a crucial part of that would
support both the goals of the
executive and the legislature in
their budget I am the vision for
expanding early childhood
services and making sure that we
have a fully funded
system that that supports
childcare home visiting and pre
K. so
for all those reasons New Mexico
voices for children supports
this bill thank you thank you Mr
the health.
So I'll go to the committee
have.
And are there any questions that
the committee.
All right first go to
Representative cases into
representatives.
Thank you madam chair of
committee as of.
Representative argument I
question your expert witness it
is so I'm assuming your presence
here is the LFC supporters felt.
Madam chair I was committee just
LFC sponsored bill it was
included in the LFC budget
recommendation which was
accepted by the house
Appropriations one.
Thank you for bringing this bill
forward sign thank you
Representative that's a yes
ma'am thank you madam chair
representative.
The LFC charted in the FIR seems
to indicate that of.
Raising the distributions of a
hundred billion twenty four
million twenty five twenty six
and twenty seven.
In the.
I'm sorry this chart if you.
Madam chair on the going to
defer to my expert witness.
Thank you madam chair so these
are forecasts from the consensus
revenue estimating group the
Craig which comes up with our
revenue forecast that's a
combination of forecasters from
the executive and the
legislature and so the forecast
on the first chart is the
current distribution estimated
out of the crate showing that
you're distributions for FY
twenty four which is the budget
we're working on now would be
sixty eight point one million.
Now this chart below it is an
estimation of increasing that
distribution sixty eight million
to one hundred million shown in
this bill
for the secondary chart now
doing that distribution that we
project out what that
distribution would due to the
Corpus and what that would do
for investment purposes in out
years and you'll notice on FY
twenty six twenty seven twenty
eight there is a small
difference but because
distribution is so small
compared to the corpus of the
bill which is about corpus of
the fund is about three point
four billion it really doesn't
have like a large meaningful
difference in out years.
Okay thank you very much
for that Madam chair
representative.
If New Mexico just passing the
additional permanent fund money
why do we also need the state
funding.
Madam chair I'll defer to my hi
expert witness.
Thank you madam chair so the LFC
recommendation which was
approved by the house
Appropriations finance committee
with some adjustments coming out
to the house for a couple days
has money in it for both
purposes LFC of both the learner
permit fund a hundred and forty
million dollars into the ECECD
budget and most that money is
going to the expansion of pre
kindergarten for four year olds
three year olds and hold this.
Of the trust fund money is going
for us several different
appropriation I do ahead if the
committee once again
technicalities.
In which the chair would like
but basically the increased
distribution is going to go to
support child care assistance
rate increases some tribal
grants into in mental health and
a lot of this is going to
expansion of services for child
care that are already existing.
Okay and the manager I think
that's all I have thank you
thank you the other any other
questions Representative Jones
thank you madam chair
representative for I I just like
to go back to my district how
can how can I help them with
this money.
And and how is.
What is early childhood trust
how's the.
Those who spend the money and
how the council to the tax.
Representative.
Madam chair I'll defer to my
experts witness.
Thank you madam chair so when it
comes to accountability there's
several things that we can talk
about first to be in your
general appropriation act you'll
notice that there's performance
measures and house bill two and
so those are included to make
sure that there's accountability
for key programming is that the
legislature funds in house bill
two right now I believe there
are several measures on
childcare pre K. in addition to
those measures quarterly reports
are reported from the early
childhood care and education
program to the LFC the only
policy quarterly report card
most key measures on things like
our child care assistance
children enrolling in high
quality care Water the
copayments for parents that
supportable is home visiting
happening in a meaningful way
that they're going to the home
are receiving building and math
outcomes for prekindergarten
when kids and teachers
that point of the system and so
we're looking at that quarterly
and almost every year for about
the ten years LFC is about key
performance reports looking at
early care and education because
it has been such a large
invested by the legislature for
the last fifteen to twenty years
and so there's a large body of
work coming out of LFC for
accountability for these
purposes when it comes to the
funding going to your local
districts each one of you
received a volume three which is
probably your offices at the
blacks Feyerabend look from the
LFC in in that book I have laid
out worry pre K. contracts are
were head start contracts are
average cost for childcare and
that all kind of looks at
district wide and so I'm happy
to help with your local
districts spending in case of
what's happening there and
quality was.
Thank you thank.
Thank you Representative Jones
Representative Lord.
This
you forgetting to move this
around
Madam chair representative can
make a statement more than a
question so my very first degree
was early childhood development
superset hand puppets me lot
excel at San Juan to.
And one day my teacher came dean
our press and said by the way
did you know there's no studies
to show the early childhood
development works.
So I'm looking here and I still
it's unfortunate.
Of this was in The New York
Times.
And it says unfortunately more
more evidence shows that we may
be wrong on early childhood
development and most recent
study says the early childhood
development early childhood
education market suggested
tending pre K. eight might
actually make students struggle
more skip classes and misbehave.
So that's why I actually got out
of that because I thought this
was great to realize that you're
not really making a difference
because what you learned pre K.
eight.
They took children and they said
you're going to go to pre K. and
your not and those that's no
different the six great with it
will so I just based on that it
has not to do with anything of
this is yes I don't support that
I think if we did what we really
need is places for children to
go that's really safe in your
great babysitters go back to
school and they're learning
things but this account cannot
agree with just based on science
so thank you madam chair
representative thank you
representative will go to
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and hi to
senator Lee childhood education
back in the seventies when it
was first being developed and
everything from then and now
disagrees and supports that
early childhood education does
make a difference the
development of
of children from birth you know
to their careers they have a
better start when they have
early childhood education
support and people who are
working with them in their homes
or their child here all makes a
difference of of knowing the
developmental stages that they
need to be achieving and to make
sure that there are any
Differences to that so with that
it increasing the early
childhood fund
Makes their distribution make
sense because we need those
supports in all of our
communities throughout the state
and the different childcare
centers and the early childhood
education to prepay and on so
with thank you madam chair enter
just one more thing I'm basing
this off of what I learned when
I was going to school and say
when it was not that year but
later.
But anyways I'm going off of the
effects of statewide pre K.
programs it's most recent study
March two thousand twenty two
and that is in the public study
thank you madam.
Thank you both of any other
questions.
Madam chair I could I could just
respond
Madam chair representative lord
I'm so sorry that you got out of
early childhood because I think
that you would have been amazing
if you had stayed there I am in
the early childhood education
home visiting programs and I
have done that for nearly thirty
years I know that in New Mexico
children may not have access to
services that develop that
increase their development and
help them become better students
and school that is why I go into
homes and I help with
developmental milestones with
families but it's not just
working with the child is
working with families coaching
fan what what is development and
how can we support development
throughout the years as well as
child advocacy for those
children throughout their
lifetime so I I respectfully
disagree with with that study
and thank you.
Then.
Thank you thanks I'd like to do
pass I was the second.
It is that would be passed on
house bill one ninety one please
stay below.
The case yes.
Representative chat.
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative how to me yes
Representative Jones yes.
Fifty cent large enough.
Penske yes.
Yes.
By chance Kernan yes.
Eighteen.
By a vote of eight to one you
have to do tax thank you for
thank you.
We are rolling house bill twenty
one and we are on house bill two
twenty two that failed those.
Since
that for you are you.
My goodness I just.
I
see the
The ticket.
The children once in the
current.
Okay.
Twenty two twenty two
yes.
Of the okay Dixon.
Hernandez.
Her nominal so.
Mr.
This is a reason.
Is
your.
To to.
Okay.
So.
As.
Representative reed is here for.
Possible to thank you
Representative revert to
previous for.
What is it press.
Is.
Yes Sir.
Well whoever gets here fully
intact.
It is.
Okay.
Yes.
Do.
On.
It is.
She.
We're on house bill two thirty
one CYFD.
R. Representative we I thank you
madam chair members of the
committee also are also like to
introduce Merioles actions my
experts in this case
this bill basically what it does
is it provides
well it we notice after the
report that it didn't have an
age and and we are going to be
have to accept to age twelve and
above where you require
basically children in foster
care to get ID cards and the
basis behind this is in the past
twenty years cases of there's
over a thousand missing foster
children on average of an
average day fifty five children
will disappear in the United
States and what what happens is
approximately at twelve these
foster kids will run away and
then they disappear there these
kids end up in trafficking
situations and never are found
on the one of the things that
has that
used in other states is that if
we get them mandatory ID cards
were you suggesting that at age
twelve at least the police
officers and people have a
picture of that in order to
provide them otherwise the cases
just educating close and there's
no identification for that and
so really the into the kind of
bills to help us locate these
missing foster kids that I don't
think people realize how many of
us are just running away and and
found again we don't know where
they are did you end up in
trafficking situations
prostitution situations and and
we want to protect our foster
kids so that's the intent behind
the bill that I'll defer to my
experts to really go into her
knowledge in this area.
Thank you madam chairwoman
committee members and the court
intend at eighty two thirty one
is to create additional
resources available to assist
New Mexico in meeting its legal
requirements intended to protect
children and youth and the child
welfare system as Representative
Reid said from negative outcomes
like human trafficking eighty
two thirty one works to ensure
that older youth in foster care
have access to free
identification card a photo ID
is important because it can help
police search identify for
children who have gone wrong as
well as in power use to apply
for jobs apartments etcetera
this is a growing recognize
practice that many states have
otherwise recently adopted even
within the past two years
including Texas Louisiana
Washington state and Arizona as
you saw in the FIR according to
New Mexico's own Attorney
General child welfare agencies
must provide use to leave the
child welfare system at age
eighteen or older the regional
or certified copy of the final
documents including a state
identification card or driver's
license we have heard from many
young people in foster care and
young people who are recent have
recently H. out that you would
think this would be a simple
process ensuring access to their
own vital documentation however
sometimes it's not so simple and
is it fair you today successful
aging out lifeline for rent the
American Bar Association notes
that it is recommended for these
documents to be obtained while
before discharge ideally around
sixteen or seventeen to make
sure they are available for
twenty you've just charges and
to facilitate effective
discharge planning which may
work include application for
benefits housing and other
crucial services that require an
eighty ensuring older you think
heresy the state identification
card is a growing national best
practice and it works to keep
state have children in state
custody in the event of becoming
missing exploited and endanger
kicks each year an estimated
four point two million using an
adults will experience
homelessness in the United
States use in foster care face
additional challenges that
increase their risk that risk of
becoming homelessness including
the number of foster care
placements they've had running
away from placements and time
spent in a group.
since twenty fourteen state
agencies have been required to
report missing foster children
to law enforcement research
overwhelmingly shows that most
sexually trafficked children
come from foster care because
human traffickers know that
children without stable homes
and families become easy prey
and children you are missing or
have run away from foster care
have a greater likelihood of
experiencing adverse childhood
outcomes including I'm a human
and that's a C. virus infection
substance use academic under
performance and involvement with
the juvenile justice system
research supports an association
between running away from home
increased another lady for
experiencing sexual exploitation
and human trafficking the
national center for missing and
exploited youth and children
estimates that nineteen percent
of children and youth ran away
from foster care will likely
experience sex trafficking
within their first year.
Adding to federal data from
state child welfare agencies as
of September thirtieth two
thousand twenty about five
thousand children use
approximately one percent of all
children and youth in foster
care considered missing from
runaway status in fiscal year
twenty twenty according to data
reported to the NCS in can I
thirty five states the rest
proximally thousand children in
you for determined by top child
welfare agencies to have
experience out sex trafficking
twenty nineteen study analyze
administrative data on nearly
thirty seven thousand ewes aged
ten or older with at least one
foster care placement in Florida
between two thousand eleven two
thousand seventeen the study
found that approximately seven
percent of those useful reported
as experiencing human
trafficking during around we
just had over thirty seven
percent of those used grant from
care for more than ten times
before experiencing human
trafficking and for seventy
percent of those use the first
human trafficking allegation
occurred during a cluster Care
right away at the set law
enforcement states that the
single most important critical
way for them to help get these
kids back safely is a single
picture or identification card
as of January first twenty
twenty three according to CYFD
our numbers are approximately
thirty youth and run from foster
care New Mexico and media
sources put this number closer
to forty currently in twenty
twenty to CYFD documents that
nine of these age that kind of
these youth aged out will
actively on run which poses
another issue in terms of
getting these youth are vital
documents that they need in our
forties under law when he turned
eighteen a photo whether an ID
card or as a standalone shot is
important because it can help
police once again search for and
identify these children who run
away from their foster care
placement can become created
dangerous situations a current
photo can go into databases that
highlight runaway children such
as the national center for
missing and exploited yes.
Under the federal law preventing
sex trafficking in strengthening
families active child welfare
agencies must develop policies
and procedures for identifying
documenting and determining
services for children under
state travel for supervision at
risk for or heard of it who have
experienced human trafficking
house bill two thirty one is a
strong supporting effort towards
this initiative I get a photo ID
is important because it will
help police search for and
identify children who have run
away and the power used to apply
for jobs apartments and act
house bill two thirty one
ensuring identifications for
children under CYFD custody age
twelve all children in care
above twelve having access to a
free state identification card
we hope to receive bipartisan
support of this bill and are
looking at I heard us and
sponsorship the bill is also
very similar to house bill one
twenty seven homeless youth ID
cards from twenty twenty one
that was sponsored by
Representative Johnson and then
with the senator Stansbury thank
you.
Thank you will stand for
questions.
Thank you we'll go to the
audience is there anyone here
who is opposing.
House bill two thirty one.
I'm going to the zoom is there
anyone else who is opposing
house bill two thirty.
Centel hands on going to the
audience is there anyone here in
support of house bill two.
One yes ma'am please stand in
introduce yourself and you have
to.
Madam.
And we Martin I'm the director
of protective services what CYFD
we we do support this bill this
is a practice we already do have
in our policies and procedures
ensuring that ground I am people
aging out of foster care system
do you have charters are
availity to get a driver's
license or ID card
we we support this and also ask
that there be one small
modification to ensure that the
right language is being used in
the bill it identifies the child
under the supervision of CYFD
which is actually do justice
term when we look within the of
definitions and that'd be
identified that is for a child
with in the in foster care.
Thank you.
Is.
I
is supported.
What is is there anyone else
that would like to speak to
support of house bill thirty
one.
It is with your hand.
I see no it's there I'm going to
the to the committee
Representative Lord thank you
madam chair representative
I'm thinking CYFD for supporting
us I appreciate that because I
understand the importance once
we get a kid in the system to
have the ID they can on a fake
name they take affected because
are going to go on that you're
not your name and they're gonna
keep going until they get the
correct thank and we do have
kids that are human trafficked
and run away and Senator as I'm
learning twelve this age when
they start with the way so I
understand why you would want to
have the age of mentors and I
wanted to ask you would you when
if this moves forward in
complete please consider this a
friendly amendment on page one
line twenty one to twenty two
change from a top place in the
supervision the department to a
child over twelve years of age
place and cussing taxed and job
of protective services
department the same with line
twenty four twenty five so that
we have the explicit aged twelve
years old with a beer from the
moment if you put them Madam
chair representative it would
and I would at if we can put
twelve and over so catches the
twelve years old yes that would
those be for the amendments that
we would also want to change it
in the title if that would be
something you would be agreeable
to also to to save children
partial families department to
change identification for
children twelve and over thank
you madam chairs and that was I
just wanna make sure this bill
goes forward yes the amendment
you would guess what drafting
put in there so that the agent
and the other that I really see
a problem because I I know for.
I know.
The state no teens my life that
used fake names.
And it does have it and I think
this is a great tool for they
provide a child with a believe
it's being trafficked or as I've
heard a child that wanted to
move back in with their primer
which is that that's happened
that they can catch that name
and realize that they're under
that they should be should not
be in the situation so thank you
madam chair this all had thank
you thank you of the the
Representative K. the
representative and.
Thank you madam chair and
committee I just had a quick
question another friendly
amendment E. C. in in the title
is the CFC wide at the with the
required to provide C. ID cards
but in section two it says may
apply for and receive so I would
respectfully ask for it's wired
in those areas I also just added
curiosity why only twelve an
older one younger.
Madam chair of Representative we
had this discussion because we
finally got it now says
yesterday were like what
obviously you can't take a baby
to have to get him you know an
ID card and so we just passport
given what we discussed and we
we basically discussed it when
it when respectful which is
really all the research shows
that fall this age where they
start running and so that's why
we picked the age of twelve but
I'll defer to her thank you
chairman and and Representative
Kate I actually think M. C. made
in favor of this bill I think
that it works we could discuss
it with them I think we would be
open to having a conversation
some states rather than a state
identification card require
photo identification on file and
so I think that this is
something that I think we should
have that conversation with CYFD
about what they would want this
is minimal fiscal impact of to
keep our kids safe I'm again
amber alerts require photographs
so so the I think this is a
really good initiative the room
the reason we looked at that
twelve NH was basically on that
that higher yesterday that said
all ages was impractical but I
think if there's a will of the
legislative body to really
ensure that these use in state
custody are receiving I think
that we can work with CYFD
before the next committee thank
you very much madam chair and
and committee I understand the
intent is to protect our
children being sex tractive bit
just as I know many adults and
faster despite the requirement
of having legal documentation
they don't always and knowing
that that is available that is
created is something
the for all the children even
those who haven't run away but I
I applaud you for this bill and
thank you I was supported.
Appreciate you bringing this to
the table and I just want to
make a quick statement for I go
to my questions.
Whatever we used to have fires
in my area.
We had a system to where when we
evacuated the school we can put
a tag on kids and we were to
keep they were accountable and
they couldn't leave until they
were standing we knew who was
picking them up so.
I was also wonders about that
twelve years of age thing
because I know that if you.
If you get too far past you know
you're doubling the word but
what one of my questions was
when do they start to run.
Madam chair representative talk
about I'll defer I I don't know
if there's a great chance for
that but I'll defer to at this
back but I will say that we were
definitely immutable to lower
the age we just want you know it
to be something everyone's
comfortable with.
Thank you chairman heard and
Representative said there's
actually House memorial that I
encourage everyone to sign on to
that is actually looking at why
do kids run away from foster
care placement and to say it
starts at twelve this is a
misnomer right that kids are
going and all ages and so there
there's actually an existing
house tomorrow for that help the
legislative body really put some
thought behind really starts to
ask these questions and figure
out how to keep our kids safe so
it's not just the second you
turn twelve and hearing care
it's it's that it's that growing
issue actually I'm so grateful
that the legislative bodies
having questions I know that
tournament Thompson is on the
NCSL board specifically
addressing youth homelessness
and using round and so this is a
new and burgeoning issue that is
drawing national attention and
one that New Mexico can really
lead with efforts that our
legislative bodies doing and yep
great work like new day on a
special tour trying to figure
this out but I am excited and
hopeful to see so many
legislators can gauge on this
issue thank you.
And madam chair Representative.
So would you say eight years old
is our data this shows when they
start to run a five year old
probably not going to do it
maybe six rules not gonna do it
will seven will an eight.
Our.
If you.
I just grew in the prosecutor of
yours.
Representative chairman heard
and Representative that's a
great question for CYFD and one
that I think we can all really I
I don't think there's a good
answer for that okay V. thank
you madam chair that's all I
have thank you Representative is
the we now Representative
Ferrary thank you madam chair
and thank you.
Yes Representative for bringing
it in
we appreciated.
the one
I guess distinction of that we
need to need to consider is that
you know in CYFD points out the
children.
In foster care are not under
their supervision and
Bill on page one line thirteen
says under its supervision.
We change that to under its
care.
I'm sorry Madam chair
representative to support
patient line.
Editor's page.
One thirteen correct yes.
I see what you're saying okay.
And so the Madam chair
representative so.
One interesting thing about this
is.
The New Mexico statutes do not
define the term foster care so
the bill drafters substituted
the term child placed under the
supervision of CYFD that huge
problem as I'm sure most of you
know in the code so I believe
that's where the tractor put it
that way because there's no
definition for foster care for
foster child in all parts of
this back if that's correct well
it does in your in the title it
says just for children not
foster children diss under CYFD
to obtain identification cards
for children under its and I'm
suggesting we change supervision
to care.
The school.
At chairwoman heard and and
Representative for I think we
just need to confirm what CYFD
specifically because it's not
defined in statute and so if
this was actually so they were
the bills after reserve
revisions I think legally if
custody Care is also not
difference I think we just need
to clarify exactly what CYFD and
the bills after as code and
happy to madam chair if we could
ask CYFD would be a better or
tested yet that are.
Change Madam chair
representative I believe I'm I'm
happy to work with the drafters
sure got the chance to the
sponsor to ensure that language
is correct I believe it is has
to be CYFD overblown of that
that will also include children
receive CYFD is not justice
facilities we already within our
juvenile justice facilities as
well has that young people are
getting ready to transition out
of custody
if if I may I also have one more
suggestion and not just very
often there's we did put in our
our that there which is which
fiscal impact very slight with.
There's also the administrative
task of figuring out how to pay
for this to be done through our
and the the I would I would
recommend also.
We have information for the
motor vehicles department or no
other state agency that provides
these parts to
For the fees of the
administrative piece of getting
the money from the right to
motor vehicle for the fact that
we're probably looking at under
five hundred children a year Max
it could potentially be no cost
for the department
madam chair and Representative
re
is it does that sound unable for
that the next committee to make
those yes you madam chair
representative we definitely are
fine with those suggestions
amendments.
And I December madam chair
who would.
The the keeper of the
identification card the the
perfect child the parent the
faster.
Thank you madam chair and
representative and that's a
great question especially we
want to empower our young people
in foster care specifically that
is part of the federal
initiative to really help these
kids especially who will be a
take out the data shows that
once you are twelve in foster
care that's where that number
comes from to your more likely
to age out and be adopted
unfortunately find permanency so
so the goal would be very
similar to what CYFD does secret
DRT has policies and procedures
in terms of who has access to
the social security cards and
birth certificates etcetera I
think when we solidified that
the age question I think that we
can work with CYFD to make sure
that they promulgate the rules
who would control those
documents I think that's just
the way to question based on the
age of the child.
Thank you Madam thank you very
much Mexico to representative
John.
My question was answered chair
as the fiscal.
Thank you Representative is the
Penske thank you madam chair
just quickly Representative on.
Well we're so glad you brought
this bill forward.
Madam chair and
I think it's great page five
line.
Six of fifteen eighty having
done a lot of work with
constituents trying to obtain
either a real ID for New Mexico
ID cards you may benefit from
putting in standard
identification card instead of
or or maybe specify realligned
D. or standard identification
because right now it just says
identification card and.
I just don't know how that might
be interpreted real ID compliant
ID cards are so difficult to
obtain and requires such a chain
of documentation that I know
there's a lot of difficulties
with documentation that children
foster care may or may not have
and similarly.
You are let's see why if you may
want to sit with TRD go through
the list because right now you
have to have one form of proving
Agen identity and that two
thirds of the Mexico residents.
And in the New Mexico residency
they do accept like a state
government kind of affidavit
that you live in the state but
that would be important so I
don't know if you want to ask
TRD to add more documents they
do that by rural so it doesn't
have to be in the bill but I
rule that CYFD could vouch for
identity and residencies
participate streamline that
process because I have sat with
constituents many of whom they
tried to get their realized the
this and that and find their
divorce decree thirty years ago
and all that so just a couple
suggestions thing thank you
madam chair Madam chair
representative thank you for the
suggestions we like that.
Thank you we go to
Representative topics well madam
chair my questions of all births
good.
Representative Kate I look madam
chair.
What do that I have a question
of a question for the statewide
the see what the person right
now with the two thousand of
these in custody of CYFD do you
take a picture of them as their
file would you please tell and
tell us how do you maintain the
status.
You madam chair members of the
committee when a child does come
into custody we have files for
them to take a picture
keep that is not hard I we are
working diligently to upgrade
our twenty five year old
database that is being replaced
over the next couple years that
we will be able to do that while
you're in the field have a lot
have the information for a child
be able to take a picture I want
to say you also want to
respective trial to top of the
especially on the first time we
if they don't want and I do if
they refuse to get one we we
don't want to have to force that
through through statute we
should be
not apartment I got we do it
Jennifer young person refuses a
way to.
To document that and continue to
work with.
But yes we do we do to go back
and answer your question we do
have vital information
immediately upon hesitate and
filing for continued.
The child is place not because
the I law enforcement and then
we are yes our work order then
we we request in a team their
first certificate social
security card.
So my question then goes to the
to the.
Sanchez so it's kind of have
this chart on them but it would
be the same information see what
is holding now I'm just trying
to understand the difference of
what is being proposed so what
is happening now with respect to
the madam chair defer to my
experts.
At thank you Representative
chairwoman and Representative
this is a great question and I
have actually I've had I had
twelve teams in my care and I've
never once had a photo of them
that I didn't personally take on
my phone so I think there might
be some breakdown and processes
and and room for improvement and
as CYFD stated that's the fax
system is is going for its F. A.
C. T. S. you'll see plenty of
interest for acronyms that none
of us now faxes their database
system and I think that we're
all working to really improve
the outcome of this I have
personally been called by
sheriff's to go get kids off of
run
actually Representative Lord is
correct in saying you know the
that they don't give their
correct names and so I think
that as we work through this
this is the best practice and
national best practice
recognized by the federal
government and I think it's
solidifying and codifying some
things that could improve
processes and so I think that
we're working in the right
direction just to make sure
everyone is on the same page
thank you Representative Kate
I'd like to make a motion to for
the past second.
This with a motion and a second.
Position to promotion.
You have some instructions
regarding amendments that.
Thanks committee.
Yes thank you we will get this
done.
Thanks to.
You know.
Second start.
Yes.
Yes yes.
we are.
We are on house.
Two twenty two.
Sales gross receipts.
Good morning madam chair maybe
getting.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee
my colleague of Representative
Hernandez and I are breeding to
hospital to twenty two which is
simply seeking a gross receipts
tax on
Of.
Divers and.
Of.
For both adults and for children
and but I wanted to do is start
with the environment defer to my
colleague who will give you some
specifics but if you look in
your FIR is a great quote on the
third page.
That the argument was about but
equity in the regressive nature
of the gross receipts tax as
well as the argument in the
sixteenth century.
For this is does very just ask
Miss.
A good friend will taxes like
as possible as possible most
commodities which are used by
the poorest members of society
great read be here buying
clothing and all the other
staples without which human life
could not exist.
Diapers are one of them.
And if you know my history I've
supported the gross receipts
receipts tax deduction for
menstrual products a couple of
years ago of which many of you
supported and I'm asking for
your support on this bill and
I'm gonna direct my comments to
I I'm gonna direct your
attention to my colleagues
Representative Hernandez who has
a few opening statements as well
before we were expert witness
thank you Representative madam
chair members of the we're here
today to address a pressing
concern for families throughout
New Mexico as we're all aware
the burden of childcare costs
can be crushing with diapers
substantial another portable
expense on average family spend
approximately a thousand dollars
annually on this basic necessity
and for many this costs adds to
their financial struggles also
diapers are not covered by
either WIC or snap benefits I'm
honored to co sponsor the
significant piece of legislation
that seeks to exempt from the
gross receipts tax in our state
this small but impactful action
will provide much needed relief
to families and demonstrate our
solidarity with their struggles
the COVID nineteen pandemic has
also magnify the difficulties
faced by families with that
programs across the country
witnessing a two to three times
surging demand and a staggering
eighty six percent rise and
distribution efforts removing
the sales tax on diapers will
allow families to secure the
essential items they need to
care for their children is all
this is not just an economic
matter but a public health issue
as well by making sure that
every family has access to clean
dry diapers we will prevent the
spread of illness and improve
the health and wellness of
children and families let us
come together to pass this
legislation and make a tangible
difference in the lives of
families across New Mexico is
our opportunity to show our
commitment to families and to
demonstrate that their well
being is at the forefront of our
priorities thank you so much and
thank you madam chair I'd like
to.
Our expert which is important to
also have a couple of holes in
the state.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee so this bill is
nine years in the making one of
the things we noticed from
looking at the tax code was that
there is inequity around which
devices are considered medical
devices and which are not so
currently in New Mexico adult
actors are considered medical
devices and therefore exempt
from DRT file divers are not one
of the things we heard in
argument and counter argument is
that we have a tax free weekend
for that requires you to be able
to allot a certain amount of
money to be able to buy in bulk
and also need to need to know
you're pregnant and advance this
what this bill does is it says
Children divers who treated the
same as adult diapers we
recognize that there is a need
to use them fifty six percent of
Terence throughout the country
even moderateincome level say
that they have forgone going to
work because they did not have
access to clean diapers that day
and as you may know most child
care requires disposable diapers
and for parents to find them but
because wake another programs
are not provided we have to rely
on
Either banks and other ways of
getting diapers and the gaps are
just not being filled right
because there's so much need so
we're hoping that you will
presented to pass I think I
believe we have thirty one co
sponsors of this bill is a very
simple way to create equity in
the tax code and I hope you'll
see support today thank you I
think we stand for questions
okay thanks thank you and sorry
I'm cranky because I rushed out
for two bills and both of them
got role.
One thank you
so we will go to the audience in
opposition anyone in opposition.
Anyone on still may not
position.
Being done in support in the
audience come on up and you'll
have one minute.
The chair members of the
committee my name is Deborah
James and I'm here today to let
my support to HB to to to the
bill that seeks to repel taxes
on diapers diapers are
indispensable item for families
with young children and
individuals and comments and
taxed only adds to the financial
stress that these households
already face.
This tax is felt most acutely by
low income families and single
parent households who are
already struggling to make ends
meet this tax to adverse health
and hygiene outcomes especially
for children who are the most
vulnerable members of our
society during my time as
president is usually about
Turkey we started states for
state right to partner with the
national diaper bank network
since twenty twenty the
databases distributed almost
fifty thousand acres involved
over four hundred families the
partnerships with CYFD.
Each day and more they're going
to tax evaders we can ensure
access to this is item for all
state.
Is anyone else.
Anyone support on.
Okay Hateley.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is he
lease auction I'm from the
southwest women's Law Center
like feminine hygiene products
diapers are a necessity and they
are also extremely expensive
this also a southwest women's
Law Center previously put
together a list of resources for
new parents and we found that
there are very few places that
provide free or low cost tapers
and for many rural areas in New
Mexico there are no places to
find free or discounted at first
and asked present previously
been stated we can staff do not
provide support for increased so
this leaves the entire cost of
the parents they were should be
treated like the essential item
they are and should not be taxed
like luxury good the stock was
women's Law Center strongly
supports this bill thank you.
Thank you we have reporter
Richard.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Roberta
Richards and the public policy
chair for the A. A. U. W. Santa
Fe branch the A. A. U. W. stands
in support of house bill two to
two and sees it as an equity
issue since the Gulf divers are
not taxed thank you thank you.
Shellie grew.
Thank you madam chair and
committee I'm doctor Shelley
Gronik from Rio Rancho and I'm
here today to ask you to support
families and their well being by
supporting HB to to to a mother
grandmother and caretaker myself
I have witnessed families that
risk the health of children in
order to budget the use of
diapers published eliminate this
issue for this necessity in the
state by supporting this
legislation.
Thank you.
That looks like everybody on
soon any questions from and I
have asked that we be excuse but
I'm guessing they'll be pushing
us pretty so
some are there any questions
Representative consists mainly
of COVID but the question is
will.
Madam chair representative.
I'm always shocked about feels
never got there did I think
bill.
You know as I started thinking
about it I mean there's a lot of
kids needing diapers and lots of
adults that need on them I think
this is that's an admirable
thing to do.
What's the cost of the package
but bill.
Actors.
It could be anywhere from you
know the legislative finance on
anywhere from twenty five
dollars to if you have to go to
the emergency locally could be
fifty Bucks you for twenty to
thirty depending on the brand
the size and what we saw during
the pandemic is because there
was a shortage of supply to use
those prices went up
significantly remember they
don't sell them single UBS has
buy a package yes.
And then and then maybe divers
the state families are spending
a thousand to twelve hundred
dollars annually and then they
are so let's say that you get
about a week's worth of thirty
four dollars actually went to
purchase the.
That's impressive met.
Madam chair just to focus.
Would be like the one I would be
the one to.
This is Pat this passes and
nobody else has anything I just
want to do it okay okay.
Last want to see.
Back to you.
Six and records and you can do
this.
Chair of representative yeah I I
voted for this because I'm not
for taxes I just.
Especially love this quote about
not taxing beer wine that's only
to say about that thank you
madam chair.
Representative Jones thank you
madam chair I just.
Appreciate that.
Bills for two things I don't
like taxes either this is great
taxes but also on the sevens I
just estimate I probably changed
fifty thousand divers.
I would love to pay your taxes
sorry yeah I'm supportive.
Madam chair and just to add to
that
Miss Clark said we had thirty
seven signers of the bill it was
really by camel it was just
amazing help support this gets.
Representative bicameral or by
participate bipartisan and it
panel is the legislative yeah.
You madam chair.
Representative business thank
you madam chair.
Hi as a man to get softer and
softer with.
And helping people out I would
like to make a motion for a do
pass on this issue I have a
second second okay
Representative Thomas any
opposition.
In the past.
Madam chair what was this
