Vice chairwoman Herndon here
madam chair woman here.
So we will start as far as we
know nothing is rolled so we
will start with the house bill
one sixty eight Representative
Kate.
Whenever you're ready for.
And let's see if I might
problems are not problems.
Thank you madam chair and
representatives I am
Representative Kathleen Cates
and I'm here to present H. B.
one sixty eight.
On New Mexico has been on the
forefront when it comes to
impeding clean indoor air and
after Albuquerque Santa Fe in
other cities and acted the clean
indoor a laws the state adopted
the D. Johnson clean indoor air
act in two thousand seven this
legislative in the in exemption
for casinos and Racine is there
I state rest seniors which are
race tracks with casinos
And there are hundreds of
employees and patrons who are
exposed to secondhand smoke on a
daily basis.
This proposal applies only to
indoor spaces were gaming
activities are conducted
including restaurants and bars
at the Racine of the pro the
proposal does not apply to open
space at the race track such as
viewing stands at stables.
I have an expert witness here
today I just like for him to
introduce himself.
Yep.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is my hands
see the I'm with the American
heart association.
So I'm bringing this this bill
to you today because we would
like to banned the smoking in
the Racine those currently and
we've we've provided you for
additional handouts that came to
if you look at this hand out
here.
It shows that in twenty eighteen
nineteen and this is when tribal
casinos of were allowing smoking
this is their net wins ones is
after the cost of running their
gaming machines propose to their
payouts there wins so as you can
see New travel to twenty twenty
this is when COVID hit and many
of the casinos were closed down
throughout twenty twenty twenty
twenty what one the re opens but
only of partially and you had to
wear a mask so there was no
smoking at all so in twenty
twenty two they drop the mask of
mandates but maintains the no
smoking I don't know if any of
you have a been to a tribal
casino in the last year but they
have been smoke free
environments throughout the
state there I racetracks the
continue to allow smoking
indoors
this bill will allow them to
provide open space for smokers
or in separate buildings but not
in a separate room and I am I
like to turn over to my experts
witnesses see if he has a
statement as well.
Matt Matt madam chair thank you
know.
Just briefly you know want one
never has to choose between
their help and a paycheck but
you know unfortunately for the
past two decades you know
hundreds of employees at the
five racinos on making those
difficult choices you know we we
all work here in a smoke free
environment you know including
the folks who will be advocating
against this legislation and the
American heart association and
all our coalition partners you
know strongly believe the racino
employees have the same right to
smoke free workplaces as we all
here you know what is more.
More than forty one.
You know thousand adult smokers
non smokers die every year in
the US because of heart disease
and lung cancer caused by
exposure to secondhand smoke you
know CDC also reports that
secondhand smoke exposure causes
more than eight thousand deaths
from stroke annually you know
that the scientific evidence on
the health risks associated with
exposure to secondhand smoke is
clear convincing and
overwhelming madam chair members
of the committee you know what
is more clear and convincing is
the data from multiple
jurisdictions clearly indicates
that banning smoking no longer
causes a dramatic drop in gaming
revenues in fact non smoking
property still appears to be
performing better than their
counterparts that.
To continue smoking you know we
also analyzed revenues generated
by the New Mexico tribal casinos
that went smoke free says they
re open their casino post
pandemic and as you can see from
the you know the the chart.
There's no dramatic drop in
revenues and in fact the
revenues appear to be increasing
you know met many workers live
paycheck to paycheck to care for
their families and there is a
fear of retaliation if they
speak up publicly we are here to
speak on their behalf and to the
center of the laces of the
people who are marginalized and
left out of the clean indoor air
act you know tribes before the
pandemic you know
the the argument was like you
know the tribes were allowing
smoking and you know now you
know all the tribes all fourteen
tribes in New Mexico and smoke
free and the there's always an
excuse from our friends on the
side you know tribes exceeded
the safety standards of the
state on this issue to ensure
healthy conditions for their
workers and their customers they
kept the sovereign policies in
place because they are
successful for the past three
years the state can and should
catch up to ensure that
commercial gaming workers have
the same standard thank you
madam.
Thank you we will go to the
audience anyone here in
opposition.
Okay go ahead and if you want to
make testimony come on up and
This project your voice thank
you thank you madam chair my
name is Katherine Christiana and
I'm a registered lobbyist for
Sunland park racetrack and
casino we stand in opposition of
this legislation racetrack
casinos are being removed from
the exclusion well other
gambling facilities are not
we've also heard that other
facilities including tribal
casinos have made the choice to
go smoke free that has been a
choice of their own to make we
would like the same ability to
make our own business decisions
Sunland park specifically has a
state of the art handling air
handling technology and offers a
non smoking non smoking area
where patriots patrons may visit
and gamble adding a smoking ban
to racetrack casinos.
Along with other restrictions
they K. places them at a further
disadvantage and threatens the
ongoing viability of Rick our
racing in New Mexico thank you
very much.
Well over else's in opposition
no one okay on zoom if you're in
opposition that wants to speak
please raise your hand.
Not seeing anybody okay in the
okay in support in the audience
raise your hand it not
necessarily you want to speak
just raise your hand if you're
in support okay do you want to
speak please
Please get in line that.
Is there anyone who wants to
speak in support of go ahead the
death thank you.
Yes.
Let's see over here.
Part of this claim and your.
This cap knocks.
This is the last remaining
entities where the public.
That.
So far.
And private.
All.
Anyone else want to speak in
support okay on zoom if you'd
like to speak in support okay C.
shop Sade.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee when we
started today and I represent
the national organization
Americans for nonsmokers rights
and thank you for this
opportunity on behalf of our
members in New Mexico Americans
for nonsmokers rights
respectfully encourages the
house health and Human Services
Committee to consider passing
house bill one sixty eight to
close the racinos exemption in
the highly popular and
life saving D. Johnson clean
indoor air act everyone deserves
the right to a smoke free
workplace because secondhand
smoke is a leading cause of
heart disease cancer respiratory
illness and other serious health
risks house bill one sixty eight
would protect the public and
workers have racinos to New
Mexico from exposure to the
hazards from second hand smoke
if they were asking you to help
keep employees against state by
supporting legislation to close
this gap in the statewide D.
Johnson clean indoor air act to
include racinos as a smoke free
workplace and your support and
help that this is very important
bill thank you for your
leadership.
Thank you next we have Charles
good marker.
Yes thank you madam chairman
members of the committee is
Charles Makhosi on behalf of New
Mexico voices for children
action fund and urge your
support for this bill
Banning smoking receipt knows is
really important as you've heard
for that stake of the employees
there as well as for customers
you've heard already evidence
that.
It actually will benefit good
Cristino this economically as of
more patrons will patronize the
casinos instead of staying away
because of the secondhand smoke
and that we urge your support
for this bill thank you thank
you Charles Joanne Strother.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Joanna Strother I'm the senior
director of advocacy for the
American lung association well
the death and disease caused by
the COVID nineteen has been
entirely negative one unexpected
positive trend is it has
produced a growing number of
casinos that no longer allow
smoking indoors when they re
open according to the listening
tame by American nonsmokers
rights foundation over two
hundred tribal and non tribal
casinos have reopened smoke free
and that's in addition to the
eight hundred who were already
smoke free prior to COVID
nineteen the American lung
association is encouraged by
this trend developing which is
an important step forward for
protection from secondhand smoke
and lung health secondhand smoke
is a serious health hazard
causing or making worse many
diseases and conditions
including lung cancer and asthma
it is because over forty one
hundred deaths in the U. S. each
year the scene is another
building applications remain one
of the few public places where
employees and patrons are likely
to encounter secondhand smoke at
high levels recently the
American lung association
released are twenty first annual
state of tobacco control report
which gives New Mexico a B.
grade for smoke free air
policies we certainly have an
opportunity to improve our great
by creating more smoke free
establishments everyone has the
right to read smoke free air
regardless of where they work or
frequent this is a public health
issue I ask you to give H. B.
one sixty eight do pass thank
you thank you seeing no further
public comment I will take
questions from the.
Committee okay Representative
Lord thank you madam chair.
A second
thank you madam chair and.
Representative so are you saying
right now the currently
other casinos regular casinos
they have we have mandated that
they must ban smoking scenes.
Thank you madam chair
representative we do not have
the authority to ban smoking
from sovereign nations and
currently the casinos in the
state of New Mexico are on
sovereign nation thank you madam
chair and representative assume
this is it also applies to
smoking marijuana and they were
seen on.
There is a clause in the bill
seeing if there is a then that
does not allow vaping to.
Would you like I'd like to hand
this question over to my experts
witness.
Madam chair representative about
I think can you please repeat
the question yeah
Madam chair representative zero
banning smoking which I assume
that means tobacco actual
cigarette is that going to band
vaping as a also banning
marijuana.
Madam chair representative load
I think whipping is already
banned in the clean indoor air
act
and you know marijuana I think
it's also banned all dollars
and.
I'm not an expert on the
marijuana issue but.
I believe you know you can only
small can.
You know certains your private
residence or smoking lounges so.
thank you chair representative
I'm curious about this letter
that was put on here we received
a letter from somebody into by.
Trying to figure out why so many
devices have been an influence
of what we're doing here that
wants us to support that yet
they have capital punishment by
firing squad and punish
adulterers with three years
imprisonment so do you know why
we got this letter from somebody
to buy regarding this bill in
New Mexico thank you very much
madam chair representative I
will turn this question over to
my experts witness Madam chair
representative load I think that
this is you know the the
president happens to be working.
More but the this is from.
You know.
American society of heating
refrigeration and air
conditioning engineers and these
are the experts on the
ventilation system what they're
saying is like there's no system
that exist.
You know that would clean.
You know the toxins from second
hand smoke so.
I mean I'm not sure like.
He's based in Dubai but the this
is an American you know
institution.
Okay Madam chair representative
just fun ironic they want to
save lives with the death
penalty over there so I guess
what I'm gonna say is this I'm a
firm believer in capitalism if
this.
I don't like secondhand smoke as
I'm an American Legion auxiliary
I don't go to the bars where
they have smoking I don't give
them the main business I feel
the same way with this of
somebody doesn't want to work
there so we just want to go
there we still have freedom in
America that we can go to
another place we can go to
another area that doesn't have
the smoking I'm still a firm
believer in and that if they're
doing something wrong people
want want to be there that
capitalism will come in a plan
that will go out of business so
I can't support that for that
reason
everybody knows pretty much set
that smoking does have side
effects at this point eight and
again if you want to be around
this million on exposure self to
it
Then don't go to that facility
so that that's reason will be
supported school thank you madam
chair anyone.
Representative Jones.
Yeah.
So madam chair thank you and
Representative
do you know any of the Recine is
currently have an area that's
for non smoking.
Madam chair representative is
it's my understanding that they
do I have not physically
inspected all of the Recine
knows
by.
in this letter that
Representative Lord pointed out
is an expert in indoor air
quality and he clearly states
that a non smoking room in a
building with smoking is still
secondhand smoke.
So I madam chair and
representative I wonder if those
racinos that have rooms that are
non smoking if those rooms are
more popular.
Surely they have less smoke I
mean they're technically you
know if you analyze the air
there may be you know some smoke
that that is in the room but
surely there last Smokey I would
think it's fair separate.
Is no one smoking in them I
wonder if those are more popular
than.
Are are there the people who
visit there and gamble there are
they going to the rooms that are
smoke free more than they are
the others and and then okay
that's that's one question if
you know that please let me know
but but if the racinos believe
that that is better for their
business
Which I just heard someone say
this actually would be better
for their business if they were
smoke free why are Fe initiating
that themselves Representative
chair at the end of madam chair
and representatives I there were
there's been a lot of questions
here so let me let me kind of
sort down some of the answers
one is is that one is a question
about capitalism so we've
already addressed that in two
thousand seven with the D.
Johnson air
the bill stating that if you are
in a public space we do have the
right to say that we don't need
to breathe secondhand smoke so
that was addressed
fifteen years ago sixteen years
ago I will say that I I have not
been to every single casino or
racetrack in the state but the
ones that I have in fact I was
just at one a couple weeks ago
to do a nonprofit gala and when
you go up the escalator you're
always hit with a wall smoke but
it wasn't this time because it
was in a tribal casino and that
many of the the the designs are
the the less expensive
machines are in the back and you
have to travel through the smoke
room on there's also I'm
concerned about Cathrynn to
carry oxygen and other
physically vulnerable patients.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative I I I
feel like I share Representative
lords feeling about smoke I I I
will go I'll avoid all of that
state it's in every way it is
not good but there are
apparently there are people who
don't mind that and they
frequent these these racinos and
I feel like they should have the
right to make that choice it's
it's better for their business
they will do that
some leave as much as I you know
being on call the cheaters this
is really hard for me I've I've
really analyzes both ways
And and I I feel like we should
be moving in that direction if
it's better for their business
and people are going to frequent
them because they know that that
there's a risk that they will
make that choice on their own
and and I prefer that over
government restriction so I'm
I'm leaning that direction but
thank you so much.
Representative insect.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
I'm the same way I appreciate
you bring the bill up but I feel
like you know we we shouldn't be
regulating people's businesses
and I come from.
I come from I was born and
raised in Clovis New Mexico
where the main aroma and closes
Calman newer.
And I would rather see No
calendars I had to go into
somewhere there where they're
smoking.
But you had mentioned private
clubs like
cannabis smoke shops things like
that and they have they have
employees as well correct.
But they're exempt.
What's the difference in their
employees and the racinos
employees Madam chair
representative madam chair and
representative they are not
regulated by our government
gaming operations is regulated
by our state government.
Why not let the racinos have the
ability to make their own own
decisions Madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative as I stated
that further than we already
decided that in two thousand
seven when we pass the D.
Johnson clean air act that of we
would not allow public spaces to
allow smoking this was the
exception because we we I
believe as voters is a society
of thought that it would be an
economic deterrent but now
because of COVID one of the few
good things we have data that
actually looks like it's still a
very sound economic decisions.
Thank you madam Madam chair
representative.
I actually spent quite a bit of
time at the that the racino
we're on that because that's one
of my constituents and I asked a
lot of questions on this bill
and they had made a private
space for people that didn't
want to smoke or be in the
smoking environment and it's it
looks like a ghost town in there
and there's not as many so I I I
just sat there and I try to
balance it out how many people
really don't like to smoke I
don't like to smoke but I still
I still do walk in there and
I just I would like for
everybody to think about when
people invest money into private
business and they should be able
to make their own decisions on
what they're doing.
Thank you madam chair I would
just point to to this hand out
the one with the the blue and
green graphs on page two
the number two reason that
people choose to go to a casino
is that smoking is not allowed I
think the number eight reason is
that smoking is allowed so I
think that kind of a it's it's
become kind of a wide scale
because it's it's been said
through the years that the
casinos will go broke the native
American casinos can do what
they want they've chosen not to
bring smoking back and I will
tell you as someone who goes to
casinos once in a while they
have the oldest least working
machines in the non smoking area
and you have to walk through the
smoking area and what and
employees don't get to choose
where they work so you and
people say get a job elsewhere
well in Aqaba there's not a lot
of other jobs and so they're
forced to do those jobs and
we're trying to I'm a co sponsor
on this the end of my hash what
what is the cost to the state of
New Mexico for smoking related
health care.
met madam chair I think of New
Mexico spends about close to
eight hundred and fifty million
dollars and smoking related
illnesses and another thank two
hundred and forty in Medicaid.
So over a billion dollars in
smoking costs annually madam
chair.
Okay the yes go ahead
Representative consent thank you
madam chair representative so I
don't think that the not all
because Indian casinos or smoke
free because the one in my
district is not smoke free so
they do smoke there they do
smoke and and at the end of the
mountain goats thank you madam
chair Representative I will
entertain a motion from okay a
second.
Okay Monica we could take the
role.
Yes yes yes yes.
Representative I it yes.
Part of me.
No.
The for no.
The.
So.
Yes.
Yes.
Things that I.
Okay by a vote of five to three
you have a pet.
And we will next go to.
Papers one seventy two the
abatement of assault and battery
yes Representative Romero here.
I don't see here I will text her
and while we're waiting for that
Representative Hermio do you
wanna do yours are you going to
do it or Representative Dixon
going to do it.
Okay go ahead that and I will
text Representative Romero.
Whenever you're ready you can go
ahead Representative Hermio.
Having.
Thank you
madam chair and representatives
we're here today to look at
house bill one seventy three.
Imagine if you will a time when
you felt helpless alone betrayed
perhaps there's physical pain or
maybe immense emotional pain.
Now I want you to imagine that
you were six years old.
And the person that you loved
trusted word mired cause that
pain to you.
Now I would like you to imagine
that you are a parent of that
child.
How many times would you want
her to tell her story.
How many times as that small
child would you want to remember
that pain.
H. B. seventy three wishes to
rectify this this bipartisan
bill is just the first of many
that you will hear as this body
comes together to protect New
Mexico's children.
It is an attempt to join with
the forty seven other states in
this country to ensure that
victims of violent crimes all
will cease to be re traumatized
by the very system that is
charged with protecting them.
my twenty five years of work in
child advocacy I can describe
this in areas of what may happen
when a child double double does
to a trusted adult or friend.
Law enforcement crest questions
the top child and typically CYFD
then questions the child.
Following their sent for a
forensic interview.
They are interviewed by
professional trained in child
development and narrative
analysis and that interview is
videotaped.
We explained to the child and to
the parents that the forensic
interview preserves their story
so that they will not need to
tell it again or to re live this
trauma.
But in New Mexico that simply
isn't true and to my deep
concern we violate their trust
yet again.
In New Mexico they also need to
tell that story in a pre trial
interview and of course on the
stand.
H. B. one seventy three is an
attempt to keep our promises to
the children in New Mexico.
The interview was stand as the
documented statement of events
and guarantee that they have the
right to decline a pre trial
interview.
Today I am joined by
Representative Reeves
Representative Harper.
And also our expert witness
Michelle.
Well done.
who is with the children's
advocacy center who will define
what a forensic interview it.
Madam chair good morning members
of the committee I wanted to
addresses as a prosecutor who
has worked in the area a child
sexual abuse and cases of that
nature for twenty six years so
I've gotten to work hand in hand
with these small children and
victims in my job and and I I
agree with everything a sponsor
saying issue went through the
process of what generally
happens is exactly true not only
does the the child have to
initially tell a law enforcement
officer more vaguely what
happened then they do go through
a an oasis safehouse forensic
depending on where you are
that's what you call a manager
and that's a very detailed
interview we're on the other
side of the room you still have
your prosecutors or police
officer children youth and
families and you to try to take
all the parties so that you
could ask questions through
microphone and make sure that
you are not it re traumatizing
the kid or are basically making
sure the interview is fair and
neutral but yet we're still
getting the who what where when
why states times all the
different things you need in
order to have enough for the
elements of the case then in
addition whether do you have a
sexual assault exam and then
that can be done with physical
abuse on a child or sexual abuse
of a child they give another
statement to sexual assault
nurse and that statement is also
something that a defense
attorney could look at in order
to prop for trial the navy with
prosecutors in this she stated
we end up in a an interview with
the defense attorney who
generally has no training or
experience on how to talk to
young children and to to use the
terms that they need to
understand the question so you
tend to get
answers that are not not
necessarily true they're very
leading professionals and it it
it can go on for hours I've had
attorneys.
in these pre trial interviews
decide that they didn't get
enough of the child for three
hours is a good interview again
another day and in our system
the court orders that and again
it's not like that in other
states and then if you don't go
to trial for a year to two years
and so that you know you're
you're still somewhat meeting
with the the child victim over
these years the new pop into a
trial and and here goes again
and so it's just so traumatizing
for that kid to watch them go
through this for one to two
years while they're probably in
counseling talking about it
there too talking about it to
children youth and families
because they're trying to decide
if the kids safe so they're
interviewing the kid's and so
it's just this ongoing process
where when you originally do
this safe house forensic
interview you're telling this
families this is so you only
have to do this once you know so
that you're not gonna be re
victimize re interviewed and it
never happens that way it just
never does and the worst is when
defense gets out this child and
is just going out of in these
interviews and there's nothing
you can do about it I would just
address also legally some of the
arguments of well this is a
violation of the confrontation
clause because you know does the
defense of a right to confront
that child and at frankly the
laws very stab us on that you do
have a right to confront the
child but the confrontation
right specifically says an
opportunity for affected cross
examination which you can do at
trial so you can take those
interviews from St and from the
forensic and they can
effectively cross examine the
child at the that the jury trial
and the child has to appear it
would be a violation of
confrontation the child did not
appear at the jury trial and
then they have their ability to
cross examine the child there
again it's just as a as a
protection to make sure the
child safe there is another law.
On the books that
might be brought up but you know
in New Mexico again not like
other states every party has a
right to to interview
every witness in the case
against a agency requests and so
in that situation I think it's
noted in your your fiscal your
fiscal report
fiscal report that there's a the
you know real five oh three
eight permits to Venice to
obtain compulsory pre trial
statements from any person with
discoverable information
as but what this does is the
legislature may still though in
excess legislation that affects
point practice and procedure and
the Supreme Court then can use
the power of a super to into the
control to fix this and so while
this goes against a role it is
something that could still be
addressed by the Supreme Court
and can he be hammered out more
if it makes a passes Committee
and judiciary the legalities of
it I think that this is a a
great deal the great bipartisan
bill we we need to start
protecting kids and we're not
doing a very good job of that in
New Mexico and this is one thing
I've seen over all my years in
the business that's just not
good for kids so I thank you
madam chair Committee for
listening to me and and all yes
you.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the.
My name is Michelle I am the
director of forensic services
with all faced over taxes and
and I have spent past twenty
seven years hearing the worst of
the worst from children I have
been the one to do these
forensic interviews within our
center of along with other
forensic interviewers I and I
have been the one to facilitate
that understanding and
communication for the adults I
have seen many times health
professionals who are not
trained in developmental for.
in trauma informed practices ask
questions that are completely
out of a child.
They don't understand the
question and they may answer
because kids want to be
competent right they want to be
heard we all want to be
competent and so they may answer
yes or no depending on what
they're being asked and I've
seen how children would not
developmentally understand the
questions that are presented to
them.
Our well intentioned I
understand that but many adults
just don't understand that that
line of questioning is so
significant in understanding
what a child's we count is of
the worst abuse that they have
in toward
are all of our goal is to
determine the facts of the case
to keep the child safe but
through this process it's not
only we traumatizing the child
and asking them to recount their
disclosure time and time again
it's us in a way that is not
developmentally appropriate
because.
People outside of of child
development of teaching a
forensic interview we are simply
not trained in understanding
those types of developmental
levels so I ask you that you
consider this and understand
that we are here to ensure that
the truth come out and that we
can support children and
families to this process.
And madam chair I just take a
moment please thank you very
much
So I I just want to say.
I'm certain all of us here have
had experience either with
family or friends or even
personally.
With the this kind of.
Tragic heart wrenching
You know potentially destroying
abuse and I've been to all
faiths it is an incredible
facility those people are
trained they are they are kind
they they know exactly.
how to deal with these kinds of
situations.
I really believe very strongly
in in the substance of this
bill.
And I am hopeful that New Mexico
can join the rest of the United
States and not traumatizing kids
again and and I
the defense and the prosecution
both have access to the recorded
interview so I I I really don't
see any constitutional issues
here.
But we need to put these poor
kids first and so that I would
just urge the committee please
to to consider voting for this
this legislation.
And I am going to go back to the
tax committee and what the
experts answer questions but I
just want to stop by and thank
you for this opportunity and
when you go back to tax tell
Representative Ferrary you're
done here and she needs to be
done there so.
I certainly think you mentioned.
Though she's presenting a bill
in there I realised okay we will
go to the audience anyone here
in opposition.
Okay anyone on zoom in
opposition.
Okay
I think she was in favor because
their hand without okay anyone
here in support of this bill hi
if you want to speak please
stand up and we'll start on this
I do and the work our way over.
Thank you federal up here.
Go ahead Alexandria.
You madam chair members of the
committee my name is Alexandria
Taylor executive director of the
New Mexico coalition factual
fall program we also have The
New Mexico children the line.
Exactly the centers in our state
Michelle and I actually have a
great
Thank you Representative.
That Representative ko ko.
Personally I.
If this.
We'll be able to re travel time.
Strictures and.
The second row anyone want to
speak.
Okay anyone else on the on my
right okay anyone okay let's see
you we'll go to zoom Sarah
fitzgerald.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm Sarah
fitzgerald senior vice president
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce the chamber
strongly supports this bill
first of all this is a public
safety measure it's no secret
that crime is a problem for our
state and Americans are
uncooperative because they've
been re traumatized by the
system that's supposed to give
them justice it just leads to on
prosecuted crimes which only
emboldens the criminal element
in New Mexico victims of violent
crimes child victims the
developmentally disabled in
short our most vulnerable
victims should be protected and
supported during the criminal
justice process not further
victimize by unnecessary and
frankly traumatic pre trial
interviews thank you already
heard today these victims aren't
subjected to pre trial
interviews and most other states
and it makes no sense that we do
that in New Mexico so we are to
support victims and allow
forensic interviews for
vulnerable witnesses thank you
thank you
Melinda Williams.
The.
Yes this is Melinda Williams I'm
the executive director of the
community against violence which
houses the northern New Mexico
children's advocacy center we
have we provide these children's
advocacy center and forensic
interviewing Services inTaos Rio
Arriba you Colfax Waterloo a
moderate and San Diego counties
through the main site inTaos and
three satellite sites the reason
why we stretch to do this is
because of that same reason that
many of the speakers of talked
about.
When someone is traumatized from
the littlest child on up through
teens we need to to do our part
as adults and protect them the
forensic interviewers in our
state are highly highly trained
and exceed the national
credentialing standards one of
the things that we can all
imagine if you've been around a
child you ask them about their
Christmas even a week after they
can get so excited and see that
doozy Azam and they're repeating
what happened and this is what
they got and you can see the
excitement that's because in
their brains it's happening all
over again in that excitement is
what happens when it's something
very fun and something really
lovely that they want to tell
you the same thing happens when
something traumatic when trauma
happens again in the brain and
they're telling you about
they're having to answer
questions about that that trump
is happening we need to lesson
that we trauma to station so
keep that in mind we very much
support this bill and it's time
to bring New Mexico into into
even the middle ground in our
United States of not be
traumatized children thank you
for supporting okay we're gonna
go back to the live audience
because I miss someone so go
ahead ma'am thank you thank you
madam chair representative I am
C. under Durant's build I have a
doctorate in psychology I'm
retired health care executive
and former of licensed child
psychologist in both
Pennsylvania and New Jersey I'm
testifying today in support of
H. one seventy three child
forensic
interviews as you can see by my
gray hair I have a lot of
experience
working with in treating
children with adverse childhood
experiences known as aces aces
are potentially traumatic events
that occurred during childhood
the original a study conducted.
In nineteen ninety five to
nineteen ninety seven ask more
than seventeen thousand adults
about childhood experiences
including sexual abuse my source
for today's testimony is the
report produced by the National
Council of state legislators in
twenty twenty two the
consequences of adverse
childhood experiences years of
research have demonstrated the
link between aces and increased
risk of developing chronic
illnesses behavioral challenges
depression and alcoholism so
this is what happens to the
child follows them into
adulthood which is the link I'm
trying to make here the training
I think it's been spoken to very
well here this morning but the
training and certification of
forensic interviewers is in the
sensual requirement in a court
case we're a child must testify
in describing actions that were
traumatic it is critical and I
think you spoke to this it is
critical to minimize the number
of interviews with an already
dramatic traumatized child to
avoid regionalization is
important to have a trained
forensic interviewer and Dr in
record the interview not a law
enforcement officer attorney or
judge best practices of forensic
interviews have been published
by the office of juvenile
justice and delinquency
prevention in twenty fifteen
well there is not one
standardized national practice
best practices are well defined
please wrap it up okay I'm done
okay thank you thank you I don't
have a timer going but I'll ask
people to keep the I and I think
there's a way in already so you
don't have to convince.
Yes but but Melissa.
You work you were I don't know
how to say it.
I yes thank you my name is
Melissa you were and I'm the
director of the New Mexico
children's alliance which is a
program of that New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs Stewart and a
nationally accredited chapter of
a network of eleven children's
advocacy centers around the
state and I'm here today to
express my support on behalf of
all of our member centers and
their multi disciplinary teams
that work hard every day to I'm
investigate child abuse that our
state and see first hand the
impact of trauma on children and
the additional impacts of return
to station through the process
of having to go through the
court process so in line with
what everyone else is saying
having a constitutional
framework to bring New Mexico
more in line with other states
and with the federal criminal
practice of reducing trauma for
children we need to support this
initiative today thank you.
I have.
And then date.
So madam chair.
Thank.
Earnings are you able to hear
me.
Okay madam chair members of the
committee thank you for having
me here today I am the mother of
two children who at ages four
and seven had to testify in
front of their father and their
sex offender and he was
convicted and is serving a
thirty six year sentence the
reason I'm here is that over to
two and a half years that it
took us to get to trial I
estimate that my kids had to re
hash their trauma at least
twelve times my son who was six
at the time had a nervous
breakdown awaiting trial he had
to be prescribed Xanax and other
benzodiazepines just to be able
to make it to trial I'm also
here in support of allowing
remote testimony in my
children's offender was allowed
to stand and intimidate them
while they testified thankfully
justice was served in our case
but our justice is not enough
I'm here to speak for all the
children who are not able to
testify I'm here to speak for
all the children were scared to
testify I'm here to speak for
the kids were re traumatized by
this justice system and New
Mexico has to do better New
Mexico has to join the rest of
the country and the federal
government and protecting
children in the pre trial
process and testing testified
remote we in certain cases thank
you madam chair and members of
committee I appreciate your your
time and I us respectfully to to
pass of this bill thank you.
Thank you.
This will be from the.
Yes my name is Dave I am New
Mexico resident my whole life I
was at the trial that the allies
would you spoke of also former
law enforcement officer.
At the trial the father was a
allowed to stand on crutches
even though we have no doctors
excuse that he actually had a
real physical injury but the
judge allowed that because we
have to protect the rights of
the of the accused in the state
right so the kids however kind
of don't exist because those
kids have a stricter trying look
here data me on a a guy who
would physically pick I it's
sexually penetrated both of
them.
And they had to try and look at
look him in the eye and testify
against him a little boy did
fantastic he leaned into it
literally he leaned forward
looking at that right now and so
what he did.
The little girl was a different
story and the outcome and the
the way those kids have turned
out today are evidently
different the little boy has a
relationship with a higher power
than himself any liens on map
the little girl on the other
hand struggles immensely with
getting along with people and
social skills please look at
passing this bill that's not be
a follower like like all the
other states are doing how about
let's be a thinker and think I
have.
It's about time New Mexico's
number one and something instead
of number forty or fifty Adam
chair members thank you for your
time.
The
space
We'll go to the.
We'll go to the committee our
first Representative Lord Madam
chair representative don't wear
like your bill.
I'm gonna give you more
ammunition to why this is a
great bill so my degrees in
psychology so we did study a lot
how children can be easily
influenced when they are being
asked questions and I was
sitting here racking my brains
trying to remember what was the
case that was a complete debacle
I thought it was an eighty is
that correct Martin preschool
cakes and that was huge that was
in Los Angeles in the eighties.
California's ready to wrestle
this and why we're so far
behind.
so what happened that they
needed to move even that this
one child made accusation says
father most of and with the
teachers who knows we'll never
know if that was true or not
because they brought in three
hundred sixty children and they
were they were asking leading
questions like tell us about the
satanic rituals tell us about
the tunnels tell us where he
touched you on this doll leading
suggested questions about about
tons and tons of false memories
the budget kids later came
forward to the.
Parents were staring at me the
detective was staring at me
everybody stared at me you could
do slide suggested that crowning
when somebody says are shake
your head and when this is over
you mean this right so it's
incredibly important that
somebody is trained on how not
to do leading questions that the
psychologist you would back once
on the tenth testimony he's of
those in a proper coercive
directive problematic and adult
directed questions with the
rigid script that stuff really
does happen so we have to have
the most up most care.
That children are treated in a
way that the person asking I
understand you can't do any cues
you can not not your hat or
shake your head you have to ask.
Questions directed toward the
five year old could be questions
directed toward a ten year old
are going to be different so I'm
making your case of how credible
important just as only two
questions real quick
I see that it's up to fifteen
what I feel like we should have
sixteen and seventeen year olds
included in there too is a
reason why sixteen and seventeen
year olds were not included in
this bill.
Because it goes up to the age
fifteen correct is that correct
mentor merchant madam chair and
Representative Lord I'm actually
it's sixteen and that's because
of this provision is written
into the pre existing child
witness protection act which had
already to provide child is up
to age sixty.
elected up to it but okay this
seventeen year olds don't always
make the best decisions and we
gotta be careful with them to we
don't want a seventeen year old
girl that was right to be asked
a hundred times what happened
and what we wearing.
We don't want to I don't want to
hear that that's the only thing
I would I would like to use that
somebody had asked me a question
and when I guess it does is it
does this apply to family law
and divorce is a child being
interviewed would apply to them
as well that way they would get
the one witness or would they
still.
Go through multiple witnesses.
I mean.
Madam chair and representative I
think I think it implies if it's
it's a criminal criminal of that
okay and I'm so as for the bill
I just kind of wish with kids we
can do everything with them when
they're being interviewed for
anything in a divorce case
anytime there a witness to
anything the crime they see
something happens is very easy
even as adults we watched a
video one time a day so people
rostrum rob a bank will have to
watch the the thanks for couple
seconds and we had to describe
the people and we were all
wrong.
Almost everybody the thing with
the Blueshirts Blackshear to
Greenshirts they look like this
I look like that it can happen
so it was a completely support
bill thank you I love the
bipartisan support on that not
all the parts to have thank you
madam chair Representative.
Madam chair I did pass.
It's an okay is there any
opposition.
Thank you you have a new path.
Timing Representative Romero.
Okay we will go back to house
bill one seventy two
Representative Romero made it
just in the Nick of time I went
to three fifteen hello we've
moved up.
Right now FY.
Yes.
You can pass.
When you're ready thank you
madam chair thank you members of
the committee.
Okay if you can hear me a little
better all see we can do
Senator what we're trying to
resolve here all with this
abatement bill is essentially a
small but significant a change
in a conflict of law that
currently exists on and this is
really for
survivors of domestic violence
right now there's a conflict
that says if your perpetrator
essentially dies that your case
can go on in one form of law in
another form of law says that
your case does go on so we're
just trying to rectify the the
conflict here and with me is my
experts
attorney Linda Hemphill and
she's here to answer any
questions madam chair and I'll
let her introduce herself in
this bill.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Linda
Hemphill I'm an attorney in
private practice here in Santa
Fe I am in a civil practice and
I'm a member of the New Mexico
trial lawyers association our
offices Representative many
victims of sexual assault and
sexual abuse in the school
districts and this issue arose
for us because one of my co
counsel Cammie Nichols from the
wrong stand firm and I we're
bringing a case against the
notorious of sexual abuse or
Gary Gregori who's now setting
as serving a lifetime prison
sentence after not having been
criminally prosecuted for twenty
years
Mr Grigor was sexually abusing
third and fourth graders both in
Santa Fe and in Espanola and
miss Nichols was instrumental in
bringing lawsuits against him
the concern about this bill and
and miss Nichols is the one that
brought this to my attention and
I spear headed
Getting something done about it
the problem with this bill is
that there are two statutes in
New Mexico involving abatement
one says that if you have a
personal injury case it doesn't
go away when the perpetrator
ties the second one makes sexual
I I'm sorry assault and battery
and exception meaning that that
case does go away if the
perpetrator dies and I'm here on
behalf of that the survivors of
sexual abuse that we represent
because I can tell you once
we've initiated a civil action
in federal court and we bring
the case under as the civil
rights law forty two US code
section nineteen eighty three
claiming that the perpetrator
has taken away the bodily
integrity of that child once we
filed that lawsuit federal
judges at least one in the last
couple of years has used that
abatement statute to say it is
more specific than the personal
injury statute to say that when
the perpetrator dies the case
goes away so specifically one of
our federal magistrates in two
thousand and nineteen ruled that
a prisoner who was sexually
assaulted by a guard could no
longer maintain her lawsuit
because the guard died after she
filed the lawsuit so when we
represent these children it's
incredibly difficult for them to
come forward and to bring a
lawsuit and and I'm sure all of
you know about that and it this
sort of dovetails with the
legislation that you've just
been considering and we just
want to avoid the situation
where a sexual perpetrator can
take advantage of this loophole
in the law and get out from
under the case and would be
actually the insurance company
that would get out from under
the case because the individual
died so we think this is an and.
Medically important piece of
legislation our court of appeals
actually took cognisance of
these two statutes and in
nineteen ninety two and refuse
to
enforce the sexual assault
statute but the federal judge
said no we're not going to
follow that case law and in
nineteen ninety two the court of
appeals recognize that this is
the legislative problem that
needs to be fixed so it's been a
long time in coming and and
we're here on behalf of all
these individuals who have the
courage to bring forth lawsuits
so that their lawsuits do not go
away and just to make this a
little bit more personal
our office Representative two
girls who were being sexually
abused over a two year period
from the time they were eleven
and tell twelve years old by a
chancellor and CEO The Kareem
yes charter school in Espanola
and well our lawsuit was pending
during the COVID
the gentleman and I use that
word very loosely here who was
the perpetrator of the sexual
abuse he was seventy two years
old at that time he was
airlifted to Albuquerque because
of COVID and that was
hospitalized and we didn't a
learned our young victims that
if you don't hide we were
potentially facing the the
dismissal of our lawsuit backed
we ourselves were very concerned
about that some thank you for
considering this legislation.
We will go to the audience
anyone here in opposition.
Anyone on the zoom in
opposition.
Okay anyone here in the room and
support raise your hands.
And if you want to speak go
ahead and stand up and speak and
let's try and keep them brief.
Okay Committee LFC.
We support this bill because of
the system is one of the only
movies and survivors have to
access for healing the job
talking University found that on
average of child sexual abuse
lifetime costs over two hundred
and eighty three thousand
dollars so we.
Thank you in anyone else on the
side wants to speak on this side
okay on zoom if you want to
speak in favor okay Melinda
Williams.
This is Melinda Williams from
the community against violence
that provides social services
and domestic violence services
for survivors in northern and
central New Mexico we strongly
support this bill thank you
thank you that's that's what I
call brief.
The questions from the
committee.
Representative K..
madam chair I'm making motions
for two passed I have a second.
This whole side.
Pick and choose is there any
opposition.
Seeing none do have a due passi.
Members.
Okay and we will skip over my
bill so we can get
Representative Martinez out of
here so we're going to H. B. one
thirty one eighty seven CYFD
policies and state rules act.
Whenever you're ready
Representative.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee H. B. one eighty
seven is simply a sunshine bill
require CYFD to make public
their policies and procedures.
This bill will actually help
CYFD recruit will qualified
foster parents will be able to
review the policies and
procedures to make the best
decision when looking to become
a foster parent.
I've been contacted by few
families that would like to
consider this but without being
able to review their policies
and procedures they find it
difficult to make an educated
choice.
This bill is not punitive we've
all seen and heard the issues
facing CYFD and I want to do
everything I can to support the
wonderful men and women who work
to ensure children are
protected.
This bill is one way for us as
legislators to show that we
support CYFD because sunshine is
always the healthiest policy to
pursue.
And with that madam chair I will
stand for questions okay thank
you
One here in the audience in
opposition okay we'll start over
here.
Good morning Britain stand up
just and trying to be loud.
Good morning madam chair my name
is the seventh inning of the W.
secretary.
CYFD does actually propose this
bill it expands the definition
of rural
I'm already in the stables Act.
Apple's procedures and borders
the state definition Act tools.
At a requires this this week
requires that the physicians.
Terminally and make that
decision act have decided that
they do need to the rules and
that they go.
take into the.
Definition of what impacted
external entities that we
basically any internal policy
that they're ready.
The staff for more is like our
family medical application
process medical.
So if an employee without need
to be master in other case
worker would be taking care of
the have the client is so that
could theoretically be impacting
external entity.
Particular concern is borders so
borders Mark issued by the
agency as a result of
administrative hearings and
those orders and
recommendations.
Thank you.
Signature and then those orders
can be appealed to District
Court if you were required to go
to edition the level of public
hearing on those borders it
would be at the table and also
would violate the
confidentiality of the types of
interfering with the U. R.
substantiation allegations of
abuse and neglect so that would
be
open for public comment also
background.
Provider licenses that also come
up with the public comment so
having in order to have another
public hearing before the
secretary for.
I calculate it wouldn't fall.
Administrative hearing in order
each.
If this bill were actually to
pass and expand somehow the
definition of things that
happened that impacted
extremities there's no
appropriation for this bill I
would have to hire our view
hearing officers we estimated
four to five but that would just
have to capitalized I and then
also we would have to it would
affect our budget for for
posting and publishing an
advertising agency people one
final point is that we are in
the process
of
Act.
Go live on any website which is
going to happen hopefully by the
end of this week and all of our
internal rules policies and
procedures will actually be
posted on our website.
Thank you chair.
If anyone else over here.
Okay okay eight anyone in
support on.
My right side wants to speak
okay
Are we were doing opposition.
Sorry okay so on I'm leave the
room and you totally lose where
your brain is so anyone on zoom
in opposition.
Okay and support.
Okay questions from the
committee Representative
Vincent.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
I appreciate you bringing this
bill forward and because I'm
such of a procedural person.
I called and I spoke to some
some foster parents and a lot of
their frustration is.
Manuals and guidelines and
knowing what you can do and what
you can't do so.
Just a few questions simple
questions if I'm a foster
parent.
Can I take a child on a cruise
yes you know.
Mr chair rule
or madam chair representative we
don't know.
One of the one of the reasons I
brought this forward is because
I have been contacted by
families who wanted to know what
the policies and procedures were
and could not find them.
I made a phone call to see what
FTE to try to find that out.
I was told I'm not sure who can
answer that question and was put
on hold until I finally hung up
so all right I would like to
answer that question it would be
nice if that was made public but
I can answer that question
Representative report.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
Is there a manual or some other
document that describes being a
foster parent and making
decisions like what I just asked
and let me give you one more so.
This is kind of a hard one for
me but.
If somebody got a baby.
And there were foster Paradis
the baby could they circumcise
the baby.
Madam chair representative
Harlan once again.
I don't know.
I made the phone call as
somebody who like to inquire
about becoming a foster parent.
and I wanted to know what the
procedures were what the
policies were.
I had several questions none of
those questions were answered.
So I can't answer that question
for you representative portal.
Thank you Sir well you anyone
else Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair
representative so it's
interesting you got questions I
got questions as well actually
the constituent that sent me.
And I just want to ask if you
your the expert at their
Christmas you if you could
answer the question so the
family doctor did they have two
young children are from CYFD and
both of the children have severe
document a trauma one so got in
trouble to Senate karate had a
run in in practice
Then she went to the school and
said that her adopted dad had
hit her was reported CYFD to
open investigation at night glad
to see that CYFD is following up
on this because as we know major
times a lot of things are what
happen is sometimes they are
not.
So.
The school says they reporter
thing see with the
Is aware of this what I want to
know certainly.
I try to look at peace the dad
is afraid he's gonna loses job
with the federal government as
you know anybody has a security
clearance that's always an
issue.
So what I want to know is can
you tell me or the expert from
to do how long does
investigation stay open what
should they be reporting to the
employer how they get this
report where do I find any of
the information that my
constituents email me thank you
madam chair rooms Madam chair
representative lord I would
defer to CYFD to answer that
question if anywhere from two if
you look at what it you go ahead
and come sit and use the Mike.
madam chair representative
So as far as long as that as far
as how long an investigation
stays open there's not a
specific amount of time it just
with it depends on the just the
facts of the case so that that
would not be possible to say it
you know it stays open thirty
days sixty days ninety days some
of them stay open longer shorter
so that would not be possible to
actually respond to a CYFD would
not contact the federal
government or you know anything
like that as far as somebody
losing their background check
clearance are would I you know
yes federal rule I would think
as far as that
and I would just like to also
mention going back to a previous
question foster parents are
given manuals when when they
become foster parents so I'm not
entirely sure where the
disconnect occurred on this case
You know it's still it still
wouldn't be appropriate to
promulgate the entire foster
care manual in in state rules
and regulations
it's very it would be long for
one thing and also it it's it's
really more procedural
And and they are given manuals
so again I'm not sure where that
you know that to me that's more
of a at process question then
actually posting that manual
publishing as a rule thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair and representative
another question so where I
guess this goes back to what the
other representative asks.
Can a foster parent peer Sears
of young childhood to cuss and
if so where would they find that
and that foster care manual
Madam chair representative I
don't have the manual in front
of me right now and so I it's
not possible for me to say
and it may be in there and it
may not be in there I I.
I don't think it would be
possible to anticipate every
single incident that might occur
with a foster child I I would
think that that you know that
would be a question that might
go with the case worker as far
as that and maybe in the manual
I simply don't have the man off
and give me an apologize for
that yeah thank you madam chair
representative we've looked
that's why we're asking these
okay I see not in there this is
not about taking a child on a
cruise isn't about piercing
their ears there's a lot of
things that are in there and
that's why the representative
listening bringing this bill
forward we're trying to make it
so that I I do really well with
facts and boundaries and this is
what you can and can't do and
all of these all things should
be accessible to the foster
family so that they are you know
I don't have this consider her
completely freaking out and
trying to find it worse the
information because again we
deal with people work at the lab
or anyone is Q. clearance there
used to this than this this
happens and this happens if this
is a no this happened to this is
yes and the steps happened so
I have to agree with the
representative of why he's
bringing this bill forward so
that we can have some more
clarity on this so at thank you
at that's all the questions I
have the time and can I just and
if you think about every
decision you make for your child
through the day the book would
be a billion pages long you know
can they have hard candies
before age three can they eat
raw honey yet to I mean that
this I can't imagine what we
would need this whole room full
of pages to address everything
that happens in a child's life
and to put it in in statute
would make it be that that's the
case for everybody and each
family each child is different
and that's why everything can't
be written down but anyone else
for questions Representative the
pants the.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Martinez I really
support the intention that you
have brought this
Bill forward in terms of the
problems you're trying to
address I think
you know I've got the.
The resource family manual open
right now hi my I've had and
there's a lot of information it
looks like it's a new manual
it's a hundred pages
you know having been around when
the state rules act was passed
madam chair and representative.
You know the purpose of that act
was really to streamline.
Public rulemaking
I really
support more transparency.
But I also think it to me it
does not make sense Madam chair
representative to bring a
question like can my foster
child get their ears pierced to
a public rulemaking process
because then you would be.
But literally eliciting public
comment yes they should get
their ears pierced no they
should not
same thing with accrues same
thing with religious beliefs and
and some of the I mean you know
as a parent so many of these
decisions are made in the
context of your own family and
when you're a resource parent or
foster parent you're also taking
into account the culture and
tradition of the family that the
child came from you are looking
at how that is sitting relative
to the culture of your own
family and
you know I I do think and and
have been working for several
years to support CYFD it in
being more transparent in being
more clear I think some of this
Madam chair representative is
related to staffing issues you
know when your when your case
worker and you are managing.
I don't know what their current
caseload is that senior
managing.
Sixty or seventy cases to
respond to that text message can
I take part you know this young
person to get their ears pierced
maybe you don't get to that
message for a week or two and
that leaves that family
frustrated which is extremely
understandable
so I do feel like you know.
A piece of this puzzle is that
the exact has asked for sixty
new case workers to deal with
the case load and I think that's
really really important.
For creating this system that is
responsive.
To not just faster appears to
also parents going through this
abuse and neglect investigations
of being able to get that
information
you know at the same time I
think these policies really
should be posted online so that
that families that are engaged
with CYFD it impacted by CYFD
know exactly what their rights
are know what the processes it
should be clear easy to read it
I don't think that's been the
case I certainly I've had number
of
constituents myself that have
brought forward hearing concern
and you know when you're dealing
with issues with children the
level of emotion is very high so
you know to me I I really
appreciate that you are now
joining our team of legislators
that is really is passionate
about child welfare
and but madam chair
representative I I can't support
this because I think it will
completely tie up the agency to
the point where if they want to
change the dress code they would
have to put that on the public
comment if they want to specify
certain things in manuals it it
would just be impossible for
them to go so I'm sorry that I
can't support it but I
appreciate your rational bring
it forward.
But I.
I love this.
Representative Chavis and then
lowered and then Kate's.
Issue my call on.
Can hear me now.
Yeah okay thank thank you madam
chair representative as a former
CPS worker my first reaction to
all of these questions is did
anybody ask the case worker the
social worker
you know we often had requests
for families to take the child
that they were fostering on a
vacation and that was perfectly
fine I mean there are
considerations that need to be
made or thought about in terms
of you know is is going to
disrupt you know family visits
or therapy or any kind of court
hearings that might be coming up
on the other issues of
circumcision and your piercing
you know can you know the the
case worker and the family of
the biological family needs to
be considered in those in those
kinds of questions that you know
it seems to me that you know
communication with the case
worker social worker is super
important and that's where the
questions need to go not
necessarily by calling the
agency you know you don't know
who you're going to get in terms
of you know do they know do they
not know they may not know the
answer to your question.
And so I just wanted to to you
know make those comments and I
think that you know first place
to go is the social worker and
ask ask them because they will
no okay Representative Lord
thank you and.
This.
Thank you Representative Kate I
thank you madam chair.
Representative I I too want to
express what Representative
semansky said I really
appreciate you bringing forth
this I am very frustrated with
the lack of transparency with
CYFD as well I feel though that
the way the bill is written is I
don't know if I'm using the
wrong account here here this is
using it there is operational
manuals there is
H. R. policy and procedures
there are and there's probably
eight different divisions in
CYFD and so I feel like this is
of is there a because you you
because it's mentioned the bills
mention with the rule
This is the the issue that is
being brought up that it would
be too cumbersome to be able to
of.
As for public comment on every
role and I don't think that that
is the intent of what you wanted
I think you want transparency in
how they're operated you go to
this person when you have a an
issue you go to that person that
department one you files this
form and and I think that I
understand why you're asking I
appreciate that you are a child
advocate I I I want to be able
to support your path and that in
supporting CYFD to become more
transparent
but I I do I just think that the
way the bill is written it
forces you into this role where
you have to if you have to send
everything out for public
comment.
Thank you thank you
Representative Travis
Representative Jones.
Yes I I'm just I'm concerned
about several things and
Madam chair sorry.
Representative yes I will no is
several concerns like about
continuity state you do you do
not understand what the rules
are for a certain child in your
foster parents and you're trying
to make decisions and you you
called we have to discuss it was
someone in your past for this
person and that person and and
you have specific questions if
we don't have something in
writing how do we know what
those what that that foster
parent is accountable for and
and that we're getting accurate
information from CYFD.
I'm madam chair may I respond
and chair I'm at Madam chair
Representative Jones I
absolutely agree with you that
we should have as much as
possible and writing at
absolutely I'm.
Whether that should be in state
rule or not yeah I still have to
disagree with that I think that
it should be in in a policy
manual
and also I think it also would
very with the specific child in
assets so that would be one
concern that I have is I would
hate to set absolute hard and
fast rules like whether you can
take a child on a cruise or not
take a child on a cruise or even
something as far as your
piercing because I think that
there would be that some
discretion involved in that
absolutely you should not be
passed around from person to
person at you know that's
inexcusable and that's a an
internal procedure question that
needs to be addressed I do agree
with this trying to start first
with us to act case worker at
the social worker because
they're going to have the most
Act knowledge about that case so
so in short I absolutely agree
with you we should have as much
in writing as we possibly can
for continuity purposes I still
have to disagree that it would
be in state role.
Thank you for that and madam
chair Representative
so.
Foster parents that they're
making an effort to treat these
foster children and children how
will they know their limitations
that they're not if they're not
clear.
Madam chair representative again
I hundred percent agree with you
that the expectations to be
clear and if they're not clear
then that's something that needs
pressed and perhaps the that guy
the manual needs to be expanded
to give additional clarity on
that
and so so we should address I'm
happy to speak with you you know
more in the future of the
secretary COVID Adam and again I
I think state rule would would
not be the appropriate the
appropriate path and I also
think that with some things
there does need to be some
discretion and not the black and
white rules thank you sure thank
you madam chair representative I
I feel like yes I I agree with
what you're saying but at the
same time there if there has to
be accountability their
limitations on the one hand
there there has to be
accountability on the other so I
feel like.
We just need to have more
writing and madam chair if that
takes rule it takes
Representative
again having things in writing I
do not have a problem with I
think that's fine but but the
formal process of going out to
public comment and posting and
publishing that I think would
not be appropriate approach to
those that those questions the
day to day out parenting
questions.
Thank you and I would just say I
I keep coming back to the your
piercing thing I think that they
know if there's a a young lady
who was African American and
tends to have keloid scars can
you make a rule that it's
allowed or not allowed somebody
is going to be affected
negatively some of those things
just are to individual to put in
a rural because it will type
folks hand so I will go to
Representative Chavis for motion
I move to table madam chair.
In my allowed to make a comment
yes you are.
All right all right understand
CYFD is.
heartburn with it Iran the state
agency I understand.
You know sometimes you don't
want to put over the.
Down or have to go through all
the steps.
The comments about.
Would this force hiring
practices to be included in this
I think I think it's very clear.
That I'm talking about.
Stuff that would affect of other
governmental agencies.
People who are not employed by
the department so I don't I
don't think the hiring manual
should be should go through this
this all came because.
This you know CYFD has said that
they agree that they should be
written down but they're not.
I understand the
Narrative of ice Porcher bill
bought.
My issue is like I said in my
opening not punitive I want to
do everything I can.
To give CYFD the tools to
succeed.
Because if they succeed that
means that our children are
taken care of.
That is the whole reason to do
this.
Transparency insurance sunshine
cures a lot of things.
All right.
Understand that this will not be
tabled on a party vote.
It bothers me.
Because I see this is a very
positive bill.
A bill that people have said I
support you brought.
Understand the but part of it.
Either we want to do this in the
sunshine or we don't.
I get a little bit emotional
sometimes.
Because I ran.
To do the right thing the common
sense thing to me this is common
sense.
If we want to make sure that our
children are taken care of and
people are wanting to do that as
foster parents but don't know
what the policies or then let's
fix it.
You heard from CYFD just now
that they agree that it should
be written down.
But they don't want to be forced
to do it by statute.
Continuity is a big thing.
The W. secretary next to me says
yes we're we agree with you what
about the next deputy secretary.
It says while no we don't want.
We don't support that that's why
we come here.
So I understand I will get
table.
It doesn't make me happy because
I think we all want to give CYFD
the tools that they need to
succeed I don't think there is a
person on this panel that will
disagree with that.
I'm not sure why.
It'll be tabled.
If there is amendments that
somebody on the panel would like
to offer.
I would be more than happy to
look at those if CYFD had
returned my call with
suggestions I would have been
more than happy to incorporate
that.
But this is the systemic
problem.
Of things not being transparent.
Phone calls not being returned.
People not knowing.
they should talk to.
I just want to give CYFD those
twins.
Now we could stretch this out
and say well in my opinion this
means that hiring manuals will
have to go through a hearing
process and be made public
that's fine.
If that's all for all you want
to stretch it.
In order to justify a tabling
motion.
Then that's fine and I can
understand that just since we
have so many freshmen I'm just
going to make an announcement
that you probably should you
will learn through time just
because an idea is good doesn't
make the bill good there can be
unintended consequences it can
be written because with this
they would have to write a rule
whether you can get yours
pierced or not and that there's
too many individual decision so
just because something sounds
good I mean and it's happened to
me many times that a great idea
but the way I went about it
what's wrong so it's not that
anyone thinks that the idea is
wrong they did just that for me
anyway it's that this is not the
way to get there and I will go
to Representative if the Penske.
Madam chair representative I
wonder if we could ask the
representative to work with CYFD
on a bill that would.
I think it would not I think you
could substitute a bill for this
that would require.
Policies and procedures to be
published.
And that once they were change
that they would be published
within a certain date because I
I hear what you're saying
representative madam chair
that.
This administration is making
strides on transparency but what
happens with the next
administration of the next
administration
and I think because this is been
such a long standing issue it
may make sense for for you all
to work out some language that
really it captures the
transparency and publishes those
policies and procedures online
amended our on a regular basis
two budget updated I wonder
madam chair that would be except
Representative Martinez if you
are willing to do that we can
roll this bill and you can work
on it.
Or if you want us to go ahead
with the vote to table we can do
that it's your decision Madam
chair representative Penske I
completely appreciate your
suggestion and I am open to do
that I would love to do that
like I said this is not
punitive.
I just want to give them the
tools.
I am open I made the phone call
In late December.
With the W. here I would love to
be able to set up a meeting to
do that.
And I am I am more than happy to
do that.
Madam chair I do I spent sixteen
years looking at unintended
consequences I understand that
every bill is going to have that
so I appreciate your comment
also but I would entertain a
roll over in order to give us
time to sit down and do this I
am you have my commitment to do
that all right madam chair with
all that said I will withdraw my
table in motion okay so we will
roll it over and I'll make a
public announcement we have a
ton of bills in this committee
so we're not going to chase you
down when you're ready contact
the committee assistant and let
her know will put you back on
the schedule Madam I appreciate
okay thank you thank you for
that thanks everyone for your
and then the last one.
Is the so.
They'll still okay.
In.
It.
Sure.
I'm gonna ask you what.
This.
And madam chair I want to thank
the committee for working
together to to make it a better
bill none of us were against the
bill we were just against the.
The way the bill look so I'm I'm
going to present house bill one
seventy seven this is my expert
witness Dale Tinker and I can't
remember who is with but he'll
tell you when he talks so if the
purpose of this bill is to allow
pharmacists to substitute
therapeutically similar drug
that was prescribed for the
patient if.
The therapeutic drug is on the
health plan formulary so that's
basically the the.
Prescription drugs that will be
covered by the health plan and
each year they change their
formula ari so you may have been
on a medication for ten years
and all of a sudden you're
health plan doesn't cover it
anymore and it gets sent to the
pharmacist the pharmacist says
yanks is going to be six
thousand dollars out of pocket
maybe there's something similar
that is on the formulary I'm it
has to be in the same class of
drugs is less expensive than the
prescribed product and the
prescribed medication has quote
substantially equivalent
therapeutic effect and there
will be a place where the
prescriber can say no subs and
what happens now is that the
pharmacist wants to sign up they
have to get in touch with their
with the doctor and get approval
and we all know how long it
takes to get in touch with the
DA I mean that that phone tag
between pharmacies and doctors
is incredible so that that
that's what it's up that's what
it's all about with this bill
there will be a place for that
the if prescribed your
prescriber to check that says No
substitution but otherwise the
pharmacist can use their
doctoral level knowledge and
decide if there's something
equipment that the patient can
actually afford to use so I will
turn it over to Dale.
You madam chair members of the
committee I'm Dale Tinker
executive director of the New
Mexico pharmacists Association
and I will point out I'm not a
pharmacist and the and the
association manager and so when
it comes to some of the
technical information is I have
to defer to which there is a
pharmacist here that can
possibly answer some questions
but
the this bill came about because
over the years pharmacists
When when trying to fill a
patient's medication they find
that it's not on the formulary
have to send the patient back to
the doctor for new prescriptions
or they call the doctor and and
as Representative Thomson said
they played phone tag and it
could be days and sometimes
weeks before you can get
approval for medication
pharmacists have the education
to be able to decide
What an appropriate substitution
is and we're not talking about
generic substitution which
pharmacists have been able to do
for almost fifty years we're
talking about substituting drugs
that are in the same class
so
for that for that condition that
there this being treated they
have to be appropriate
medications and pharmacists know
that
I am I understand that.
Pharma and some of the drug
companies are opposed to this
bill and I would only say that
this is an attempt to make
things a little easier for
patients to get their meds and
it is just with that that
process and.
The drug companies.
This really with the health plan
should be with the pharmacists
pharmacist intent is to help the
patient
with that stand for questions.
They are.
On a.
Thank you madam chair
representative Representative
family physician
I really appreciate the
pharmacists do for our patients
and for our practice of medicine
and I appreciate the intent of
this and I agree that as clearly
stated there is a slow response
sometimes for positions what
nations to request from the
pharmacists to change
Senator statues I understand
that and then the bill already
possible to change within the
same therapeutic plans.
To make.
Based on fear factor.
And that is not require.
Of.
Change to the position.
What I think is being requested
with the state it is that is not
of the same therapeutic class
but is actually care putatively
once that that substitution
could be made of the discretion
and knowledge of performances.
And subsequently there will be
notification of the clinician
prescribed it within five days I
stay.
That notification of five
business days would allow the
patient to start taking that
medication.
What's missing from this
concept is the need for the
patients full medical records to
be reviewed.
The pharmacist before making
sections substitution.
President of patient use on one
particular drug.
Has a certain functions of their
body that doesn't necessarily
mean eight.
The.
Use of that substitute drugs is
not in the same there.
Say there's a kidney dysfunction
it's not no.
In the patient's mind to be a
limiting factor for making that
out of class.
So I I think I I would like to
support this but from
commissions point of view of a
lot of experience those kind of
things do need to be discussed
with the prescribing physician.
Dr this presentation of
physicians assistant and so for
that reason I would is this and
all of that there could be some
mechanism for reviewing the
medical records in the right way
to do that is.
Trying to clear that a quick
turnaround time is it.
It is important to the patient
and that's what we really want
is what's best for the patient.
Thank you very much for your.
I want to.
I see our whole.
Madam chair can you hear me we
can hear you Mr hello.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is art
hall I'm a registered lobbyist
for Glaxo Smith Kline or GSK.
Well we appreciate very much the
Sanchez desire to try to lower
drug costs we don't think
therapeutic substitution is the
way to go therapeutic
substitution assumes that each
drug product in the same class
is an identical product whether
brand or generic.
Therapeutic class get out many
different prescription drugs to
treat a similar clinical
indication however the drugs in
the same class will have
significant differences in their
chemical formulas and mechanism
of action to provide the drugs
benefits switching drugs in the
class can pose significant
danger to patient health if
they're possible side effects or
patient has additional health
concerns.
A change to any element of the
therapy plan could have adverse
results on patients health.
These changes are only magnified
to the physician notification
requirements for biologics
substitution.
We all know patients often fill
their prescriptions at more than
one pharmacy this means that a
pharmacists does not have the
complete picture of the
medications that a patient is
taking making up therapeutic
substitution even more of a
safety risk.
The therapeutic substitution S.
costs driven rather than patient
driven and jeopardizes patient
safety if the pharmacist
dispenses the medication other
than that prescribed by the
physician or nurture
practitioner the patient may end
up paying twice in order to get
the proper medication.
Maintaining the good health of
New Mexico residents is of
paramount importance allowing
pharmacists to dispense
medication not prescribed by the
treating physician or nurse
practitioner for cost purposes
alone is not good for patient
safety is bad policy and could
lead to a conflict of interest
this proposed law hello your
time is more thank you.
Thank you we respectfully
request you oppose this bill
thank you madam chair.
Thank you we're going to do
groups that are.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is drew
Center registered lobbyists for
pharma will respect the intent
of the sponsors of HB one
seventy seven farmers opposed to
legislation HB once every seven
would permit therapeutic stepped
substitution a provider
prescribed drugs with drugs
within the same therapeutic
class but with different
chemical make ups farmers
concerned this practice would be
harmful to patient health at
cost and health care system and
undermine the prescriber patient
relationship for these reasons
and reasons previously stated by
others farm opposes H. B. one
seventy seven thank you thank
you.
We're now going to T. J..
He of.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is TJ Trujillo
and I'm a registered lobbyist
for the biotechnology innovation
organization and we respectfully
oppose H. B. seventy seven
we did submit written testimony
so I won't go into the details I
would just encourage you to look
at the letter the Brian of
Warren submitted the I believe
and advanced twenty four hours
in advance and for the reasons
stated within the letter as well
as produces stated by others of
folks that are in opposition
again we respect requests that
you oppose H. B. one seven seven
thank you.
Thank you.
Right now we'll go see no other
hands raised in opposition will
go to those in support of the
house bill one seventy seven as
anyone in the audience is in
support of this bill.
All right I see two hands out
start here in the front would
you please stand in tell us in
line maybe you'll come up please
to the microphone.
Actually have a seat this is our
pharmacists.
In case any other questions come
up okay I'll stand what's
happening the morning committee
members I stand in support of
house bill one seventy seven
when I worked at a community
pharmacy in Deming and Silver
City I've seen how a delay of
patients getting their
medication can increase the
patient's financial and mental
stress especially for rural
community members to travel far
to get health care it is
stressful for me to know there
is an alternative blood pressure
diabetes or cholesterol medicine
the same that within the same
drug class that the insurance
will approve but I cannot find
the medication or more commonly
I can't reach the patient
primary care provider in a
timely manner.
pharmacists and that means I'm
talking to myself we won't make
substitution we're not
comfortable with we have
relationships with the positions
to know what kind of medications
or patients.
They would approve such
substitution and so I stand in
support of this bill and so you
know that you're helping your
fellow New Mexicans get their
medications in a timely manner
because we don't get better
unless we get the medications
thank you thank you.
Please come forth and state your
name.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jason
Thompson I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
pharmacy business council we
stand in support of the bill we
appreciate the sponsor and
Dale's work on this I just
doesn't contexts the business
council presented these
particular types of issues to
the health and Human Services
Committee and how's that going
off in August and spoke to the
same types of issues that
independent pharmacists
especially rural independent
pharmacists faces faces in terms
of frontline care and how they
treat their patients on the wait
times in the the navigation that
they themselves in the patients
have to go through transmitting
the substitution
Permitting the therapeutic
interchange in the substitution
will allow them to practice at
their full licensure and to
their level of training and
expertise and be able to fill
gaps in provider provider
availability which is really
important piece especially in
rural New Mexico.
we feel it'll increase patient
access to care in this
particular space decreases
waiting time for that particular
type of access and start
treatment and so for all those
reasons and the reason stated by
Dale and the the sponsoring
Santa Fe sport thank you thank
you.
All right thank you.
no other people in the audience
so speaking in support will go
to the system and I see Barbara
Dr Barbara McEntee.
Hello thank you Mr chair members
of the committee I speak in
opposition to this bill the one
seventy seven I am cancer dot
Miss America meaning we're on
those support.
I'm sorry I will wait and
hopefully you can call on the
for the
not support.
Kate.
said no one no other hands
raised in support of the bill of
go to the committee.
Is there anyone who has
questions for the
for the panel
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair
representative so I have some
questions that maybe you can
explain to me on this so when
you're saying about
Do an exchange and one drug for
another one.
Let's talk about some the kind
of familiar with center grants
to college with that let's talk
about
Antidepressants so let's say
somebody was on anti depressants
and they were on SS R. II would
you stick within that class or
would you move over to look at
M. A. O. wire how was that going
to play out chair
representative.
But did he introduce himself I
don't okay.
Madam chair yes Representative
so for me particularly a.
I the pharmacy you gotta know
you're you're communities out of
all your doctors and so when I
worked at Walmart that would
individual class I would have
felt comfortable with until I
talk more to a psychologist of
those primary care doctors to
tell to see what kind of
prescription they're doing and
what have they approved in the
past to switch to get a patter
of have their prescribing habits
and how I would expect more
commonly the substitution I
would feel comfortable with
these folks let.
IBD's cholesterol other drugs is
the state that I would not be
feel comfortable with the would
be the mental health have you
present that information to the
patient but until I felt me
personally comfortable with the
mental health providers and how
their prescribing habits and
healthy usually switch and the
switch was needed that I would
not do that until I got in those
relationships this page is based
on your relationship with the
doctors it thank you madam chair
and representative of and so can
you show me where in the bill if
talks about.
The often in there to talk with
the doctor or to use your
discrimination what you can or
cannot change chair
representative madam chair I
think it's in pretty pretty much
in the scope of practice in your
practice act it defer it lays
out how those things work so we
didn't put it in here because
it's a constantly changing
updating things so we don't want
to put it in statute.
Okay Madam chair representative
so.
My issue is is for example and I
don't want to pick one drug over
another so if I say one drug I
will switch it around
going back to that I worry about
the I understand the bigger
picture we try to do but I worry
about the discretionary part of
it in.
Maybe somebody is miss
considerate and as good as you
are who would say to themselves
I don't feel confident in this
and maybe might want to make a
switch to somebody and let
stated to stay within SSRIs
maybe.
I'm gonna pick on all the switch
around so maybe one person is
taking Zoloft and they say well
it's cheaper and more accessible
if you take the Wellbutrin we're
having supply chain issues
whatever but you don't know that
person took that drug before and
it made them homicidal.
Or suicidal so that's where I
get concerned and somebody swap
in this and it's a true concern
because I see here you and tell
you very compassionate and what
you're saying I just worry about
if somebody did a big chain.
And like I we can't get a hold
this is this we have this option
because of this bill I don't
want somebody to get something
like that's a pack so you can't
take you for pregnant and if the
doctor knows the pharmacist
doesn't know that's a problem
dietary changes with some of the
antidepressants can eat certain
foods is a big thing so for me I
see where this is going to
understand for like some benign
if it's that this is only for
benign things we know that that
moving things around what have a
difference but unfortunately I
wanted people to if I'm on a
blood pressure something and you
give me something else you know
that one percent out wire that
has a side effect.
Every time every stinkin time it
takes me so long to get on
incorrect medication doesn't
matter one Brenda tunnel another
everything makes a difference
for me so I do worry about that
considerably the other thing I I
have concerns about is Madam
chair representative
Who would assume the risk if
let's say somebody were to say
okay we're gonna movie for one
drive to another drug and there
is a server side effectively
comes.
Question they become homicidal
associate who who would assume
the risks and the doctor didn't
do it is that the pharmacist
it's now.
Taking taking the the assumption
of risk for the term madam chair
let me answer the first part of
the question there is a box that
that position can check if they
know you are pregnant they will
say you know no substitution if
they are aware of your history
with with the I am anti
depressant they will check that
that date that the drug not be
substituted so this is just
trying to make it quicker for
people I'm one of our members
went four months without her
Diabetes drug and her sugar's
were in the four hundred and she
couldn't get her medication
because of stuff like this so if
the position has a concern of
any sort all they have to do is
check a box and say no
substitution okay so the only
two each in the question I'm
trying to understand this bill
is so talent told.
In the thank you in the bigger
picture of Medicare reserves so.
If this were to pass.
Would that mean that every
doctor when they do when they
send a focus of prescription
that that would be part of this
or they would have to just know
like they set off for the
prescription sorry this isn't
sent off and they send it
through the the signature how
they get it to you guys.
How would the.
How would they know to put that
in there this patient had will
be Turner sars a lot don't pick
on the pharmaceutical companies
and they had a bad reaction how
how would you know that the
madam chair they would just
check no substitution so you
don't have to explain why I mean
you can if you want to it's just
great it's a field on the screen
when they do prescriptions a box
that they can check that says No
substitution so you don't have
to go into and you know all that
they have had this reaction and
that reaction it just it simple
for the the prescriber just say
no substitution to check that
box and that means no
substitution okay think about
your leasing my next question
that representative so if they
were to allow substitution then
what do they do like this okay
this person take these three SS
R. as but these other I make
them homicidal and suicidal how
does that get sent to the
pharmacist it says no
substitution of is that they
could have substitution well
then that's up to the doctor I
mean if the doctor wants to
wants to take the chance on
which one is going to do what to
someone when they know that this
one doesn't have those side
effects I would think any doctor
with the lick of sense would
check no substitution is just to
make sure that they don't get
caught up in something else so
we're H. it doesn't have to be
complicated it can be very sick
very very simple substitution is
our pay substitution are not
okay go ahead Dale Madam chair
representative I'd also like to
point out that this bill
requires interaction with the
patient so you you know what.
Your needs are and you know what
you that in the past most
patients do if they have an
interaction or whatever and they
can inform the pharmacist the
pharmacist actually should have
that record most of the time but
it does require substantial
patient interaction to make this
change I also like to point out
when
The legislature passed
biosimilar legislation a few
years ago and in one of the
people speaking in opposition to
this included language so that
pharmacists could substitute
biosimilars which is way more
complex than this I.
It's about patient interaction
the pharmacist would discuss it
with patient educate the patient
about what potential side
effects that this might have
that the drugs they were
prescribed might not have are or
what that change would be that's
required by this bill and so I
think that that interaction is
there in addition to the doctor
being able to say don't
substitute this it's not safe
for the patient and so don't
substitute but I do want to
point out to you that
pharmacists are well educated
and are the most knowledgeable
people in our health care system
when it comes to drugs.
Thank you Mr and actually grew
that but are they going to do a
full medical history with this
patient and have them fill out
forms have you ever had this
disease this disease I mean
they're going to do as
extensively as a the primary
care would Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative
they're they're not gonna do
this full history
that's really for the
practitioner that physician
prescriber financial prescriber
to take care of all
and.
They will collect information
from the patient they will
collect whatever information
they can they won't do the same
tests that a doctor would do
but they are knowledgeable about
appropriate here change and I
think if if the drug is
I would say risky then the
company they work for is going
to tell them not to do that that
that in this case call the
position and and verify what.
Right they want to substitute
this is to make things a little
easier for ninety plus percent
of patients
when when pharmacists call their
positions I would say ninety
plus percent is my understanding
the physician says change it to
something on the formula erring
that is acceptable rate if you
keep can't change it to
something on the formulary then
these a patient either has to
pay cash or if you go back for
the position for a different
man.
Committee chair and
representative so so if the
doctor suicide substitutes okay
does that mean chair
representative that you then
call the doctor before you go
ahead substitutes are you decide
what you're gonna substitute.
Madam chair representative if if
the doctor does not mark No
substitutional out that is
assuming the doctors okay with
the substitution and the
pharmacist could go ahead and
make a substitution without gone
the point of this is to get rid
of some of the barriers to
patient care
that the late patients getting
medications for can be days or
weeks at a time I will add madam
chair that I sit on the board of
synchronous which is our health
information exchange where
everyone and we are getting more
and more people more and more.
Companies hospitals whatever to
put their data and so that's
something else that the
pharmacist can check is where it
will have all of their medical
history and not everyone is on
that but that's the expectation
hopefully soon that everyone
will be putting their data into
that exchange so that they don't
have to run the same tests so
that they can see what reactions
it's not there yet but but
that's that's coming.
Thank you Madam chair
representative that's that's my
Harper with this because having
worked in the medical field for
a very long time I get concerned
the substitute would be given to
someone without seeing the
bigger picture and they just
didn't tell you or they don't
have the ability to tie you
understand we're trying to do
but if there was a data in there
that had a list of these are all
the known allergies actually do
not give this person this ever
bad reaction I I don't want to
see somebody had a bad reaction
last question I have is.
Is there going to be are you
gonna do like have both like the
person comes in and and the
doctor said yes you can
substitute they're gonna sign
anything like a waiver that says
you're allowing us to separate
legality reasons madam chair I'm
fine is is all encompassing I
mean they're not out yet but as
it is for the specific thing
right here that thank knowledge
yes I'm gonna get a substitute
they're given a consent like
this are gonna be a signature
consent for the person getting
the pharmaceuticals.
And madam.
Chair representative
I don't believe there were we're
gonna have a specific form for
if a compliance because
pharmacies are required to have
comply with it but again with
right in time but in this in
this circumstance it does
require specific patient
education and the pharmacist has
to be in the document that they
provided that patient education
right and that that was my
concern that's the last thing I
had chair representative this is
go through you probably need to
have something that you
understand that we've told you
global blah because again it's
going to go back to this
assumption of risk anyway that's
all the question have thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative film.
Madam chair representative
we've heard from several
positions that are in opposition
to this do we have any feedback
from the medical board.
Madam chair representative Jones
I have not heard back from
Medical Board on this bill I
know they get COVID in the FIR
they did not express opposition
to this bill
so it directly at I have not
heard from them we are involved
with the medical board and
several other bills and they had
brought that up so I'm assuming
maybe I shouldn't assume but
they have not expressed
opposition to this bill and
madam chair Dale Tinker is
pretty much considered the
pharmacy rule of the state of
New Mexico everyone who deals
with pharmaceutical staff knows
to come today also if they had
an issue they would have gone
straight to deal with it.
Okay well madam chair
Representative being from a
rural area and nursing in a
rural area I I really see the
problem here with getting
minutes on time but I'm looking
at the other side as well and I
know that maybe this is for the
the pharmacist when you you pull
up the patients information you
have you have their allergies
you have some basics about them
but do you have a complete
clinical record with all of
their diagnoses and their
issues that someone brought up
like kitties it kidney
dysfunction for for drugs that
are metabolized to the kidney
that you might think of
substituting do you know those
those.
Sensitive details that would
make a difference in this.
Madam chair representative off
so you won't have that
information for every patient
and again what I said.
We do substitution for is not
what that could be cut their
method of everyone blanket if
you're in charge of state we do
need to know you have to develop
a relationship with the patient
you have to know their history a
you have to know their provider
and is easier to do that in the
rural community because everyone
knows each other and talk to
each other if there's positions
that may propose they may live
in the community practiced in
the specialty where they're not
having those relationships with
the pharmacist and the
pharmacist what it feel
comfortable doing substitution
but there types of patience but
once of position gets a
relationship with the pharmacist
and the pharmacist and patient
with the patient that three I
think that would be to a
pharmacist being more
comfortable with doing those
things but without the
relationship indication
background from No Way the
patients less pharmacists will
be comparable with the benefits
of reserve making bills
executive decision but the
knowledge that.
Thank you and madam chair
representative I can tell that
you're very conscientious and I
think most pharmacists are are
most all of them I've dealt with
and they're very knowledgeable
and we rely on them all the time
but it sounds like this would
leave a I leave a lot of this
decision up to the pharmacist as
as an X. someone mentioned what
if you're just very busy and and
you couldn't get with the
physician to ask at this ask a
question and so you just out of
your own discretion decide well
I think I'll make that decision
at this time the only problem I
have with this is the class
therapeutic because I feel like
you there there is there's.
There's room for error there
that could that could be a
problem could cause problems for
the patients rather than make
things easier and and improve
their health
I'm a little torn on this one
for that reason for the
therapeutic for that one word so
and I appreciate your answering
my questions I think that's
that's it for madam chair.
When you go to see a doctor
particularly in an urgent care
or an E. R. they don't have your
full medical history either so.
In a perfect world everyone
might have access to what
everyone else in the medical
field has done for with this
patient but that's not the real
world.
You're right about that too yeah
yes I.
Not a perfect world not a
perfect world thank you thank
you Representative thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative so I did talk to
a pharmacist where I live.
And a lot of people almost have
a better relationship with their
farmers is than they do their
doctor I I get that and
especially since we're rural.
And he explained it to me last
night and I just wanted to make
sure this is correct.
So there is an opt in or opt out
is that for every purchase if it
you know say Drug costed six
thousand dollars or you can get
an alternative for three
thousand dollars every time you
do that is there an opt in or
opt out that particular person a
purchase or is it an open opt in
opt out.
Madam chair for each individual
prescription there is an opt out
there's not really an often
there's an opt out so if you
prescribe penicillin and you
find out there allergic then you
eat you can opt to opt out of
any I mean so it's it's up to
the prescriber whether they opt
out or not and it's based on
their relationship with the
patient and their incredible
knowledge of pharmaceuticals I
will bet that there are very few
doctors in this country who know
pharmaceuticals better than the
pharmacist does because they
have to learn all the other
stuff the pharmacists are
learning the medication staff so
they they really are the experts
but it's always an option for
any prescriber to say do not
substitute.
I'd like to point out also that
the patient can say that as well
if the patient doesn't want the
pharmacist to substitute they
can stay stay with the.
Regional prescription or I'll go
back to my doctor for different
prescriptions or whatever thank
you can opt out as well.
Thank you the madam chair
representative.
Just just to clarify so the
pharmacist that we have back
home everybody knows in as good
as they would a mayor of the
town so.
In your expert opinion.
If you feel like you're not
comfortable do an.
A substitution you wouldn't do
it.
Correct.
Madam chair representative and I
don't feel comfortable doing
anything.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for that
madam chair and representative
so the pharmacist I spoke with
he said I feel comfortable lot
of things but some of the things
that I might not want to do is
chemotherapies or something like
that he said that's a little
outside my range so I
I'd because I know our
pharmacist I hold all of you to
a very high standard so I do I
will support this bill thank
you.
Madam chair I would like to make
a motion to do pass on.
The of.
The motion this.
Both.
Turn on you might want to.
Representative Kate yes
Representative Chavis yes.
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative how to meal yes.
Representative Jones.
Representative Lord.
Representative Sapan ski.
Representative been spent yes.
madam chair yes.
And.
Representative Thomson yes.
Okay Representative Johnson
wanted to explain your bill yes
try.
Like I said I really understand
the problem here with the
getting in touch with the
physician with getting meds in a
timely manner but I also know
that that's the very thing that
could cause this to go wrong
because it gives the pharmacist
the
the ability to make decisions
without the physician input and
and although I think in you know
maybe almost every occurrence
that that would happen it would
be there would be no problem
there's going to be that out
liar and and also when we talked
about an emergency situation
this will be an emergency
situation this will be an
everyday thing and in no it'll
be it'll be it'll make it wide
open to every time something
goes to the pharmacist with the
prescription I need that they
would have to go through this
process of potentially
changing medications and and
causing harm rather than health
so
Although I understand.
Why were why we're having this
discussion I just I can't
support it at this time.
Can I make a comment so I'm the
there pharmacists are not going
to just make substitution ****
nilly it lets we've all heard
the stories where at venture
capital company took over and
and the prescription there were
price for that prescription you
know as a hundred fold and the
person can't afford it it's this
is about making medications the
most available to patients that
we care and it's not about this
week we have a sale on Prozac so
we're going to go with that it's
about making sure that people
can get their medication Madam
chair representative I
understand the intent I truly do
I just a I just see that it
opens up an area that we just
really don't want more we don't
want to go south.
By a vote of seven in the
affirmative and one in the
negative you have a do pass.
Here and we are adjourned in
recess basically we are not
injured we are not injured I
wish we were.
