Hi.
Everybody.
Yeah.
So
this is my I feel like.
Suggestion this is for the
house.
Yeah yeah.
Staff.
The money is.
Thank you.
Things.
Six eight.
Good.
I.
Okay.
So
Representative.
Ferrary.
Hello this is
it's still early in the morning.
Thank you madam chair notice.
good morning committee
Ninety four proposes to prohibit
the sale of flavored tobacco
products and the definition of
our defined for characterizing
flavor and flavor tobacco
products and it demands the
tobacco products to add
provisions for the intentional
or negligent sale of flavored
tobacco products.
And
this bill is about protecting
the health of our kids I be
ending the sale of flavored
tobacco products which are known
to be a popular gateway did
tobacco addiction in young
people for the ninety four seeks
to help keep our children from
becoming addicted to deadly
tobacco products.
a few facts is our that almost
nine percent of high school
students Mexico reported smoking
within the past thirty days and
the right seats to high given
how dangerous we know tobacco
addiction is the national rate
only six percent but eighty
percent of you to have ever use
tobacco started with the flavor
and more than one in four U.
three E. cigarettes daily and
eighty five percent of the
excuse use flavored E.
cigarettes according to the
twenty twenty two national youth
tobacco survey.
But in New Mexico twenty five
percent of New Mexico high
school students are using E.
cigarettes according to the
twenty one of the few survey
conducted by Mexico Department
of Health.
And of the ninety eight percent
of New Mexico high school
students who use tobacco
products use the cigarettes
seventy percent cigarette users
say they use the cigarettes
because they come in flavors I'd
like.
Labour's mask the harshness of
tobacco to make it easier for
new users particularly you to
try the secrets and ultimately
become addicted.
Prohibiting flavors in E.
cigarettes will make E.
cigarettes much less attractive
to you and tobacco use among
kids is being driven by youth
friendly E. cigarette flavors
like mint fruit candy watermelon
and other flavors and from
twenty seventeen to twenty
nineteen E. cigarette use more
than doubled among high school
students from eleven point seven
percent to twenty seven point
five percent and tripled among
middle school students from
three point three to ten point
five percent according to the
CDC twenty nineteen national
youth tobacco survey.
So we have the problems that
Making it so there are flavors
to attract people to support
their products will help reduce
the use that become lifetime.
Of tobacco or nicotine users and
help to defray all of the costs
loss and as a gateway drug it's
This is the way it started.
So that madam chair I.
Yes my experts I'm sorry I
didn't introduce him earlier the
hedge
And.
I just like your last name
please thank you that
is.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Landslides singles.
The association and I just.
Mexico.
Chairman representative broadest
set but I just want to highlight
a few things well before we can
ask any questions local one of
the arguments made by the
industry like it's going to
have.
We were then we'll make.
The fact economy and revenue.
It makes the economic sense to
address the single biggest cause
of preventable disease
extractors you know for using
tobacco use of pro life in our
lives economic benefits from
reductions in healthcare costs
that will compensate.
For any reviews.
For example in New Mexico.
Almost three hundred and fifty
million dollars federal
treatment back or is and not to
mention another two hundred and
to our twenty three.
You know in Medicaid costs well
so.
It also another argument friends
on those maintenance this will
affect businesses closed down
small businesses and get out of
flavor fan you know what have
little economic impact on
retailers you know this is Corey
with John Hopkins university
said.
And.
And most retailers sell for
radio drugs and do not depend on
tobacco for their it also does
not come back makes up eighty
percent of the average
convenience stores profit versus
thirty six percent for other
items food snacks and stuff and
for example you know
Massachusetts you know they they
uh introduced total you know
flavor then twenty twenty.
And they fall you know that for
the.
Fans there were six thousand.
Two hundred and fifty eight
schools.
And after the introduction total
ban you know that number went to
six thousand four hundred and
ninety one you know tobacco we
can so the point trying to make
is.
the the argument late this is
going to affect the economy jobs
you know it's it's not.
And it's it's just an
exaggeration I.
And also several local you know
tobacco ordinances in Minnesota.
For example they you know
Minneapolis Saint Paul falcon
heights Lauderdale.
Mendoza.
Heights.
And you know they're not going
out of business in those
communities yes I and.
And in another argument is like
you know it's they will go
across the state or.
In this case like and tribal
smoke shops.
The most important thing is
conveniences key for consumers
especially you who have limited
financial and transportation
resource.
At the end of it all.
One last.
Point that
is you know.
Long cancer is the leading cause
of cancer deaths on Hispanic and
feel.
And the tobacco industry Gressel
we column flavored cigar
cigarillos in predominantly
Hispanic and Latino
neighborhoods fifty percent of
Hispanic smokers use menthol
cigarettes compared to twenty
nine.
What small.
And you know Massachusetts
California New Jersey New York.
And Rhode Island they have total
bans on flavored tobacco and not
to mention two hundred and fifty
cities across the country at.
Flavored tobacco and currently
you know already in Maryland
South Carolina.
Connecticut New York New Jersey
Maine Indiana four months this.
You know Minneapolis and which
Michigan are considering total
bans of.
So this is protecting our kids
and you know not to get them the
data to.
You know nicotine and and you
know this is a good public
policy that was from and.
Future generation of nicotine
addicts and saves money in the
long run thank you madam chair
thank you okay we'll go to the
audience and we're going to
limit public comment to one
minute so raise your hand if
you're in opposition.
In support of okay we'll start
with opposition will start on
the on my left side so if you
want to.
Raise your hand and then stand
up and speak okay go ahead madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Lee and pool
Representative Mexico trolling
markers.
Our members are in every city
every county and that was just
dial the New Mexico I can assure
you we take you streams caution
and every then then we can not
sell tobacco any tobacco
products to minors and we will
continue to have that focus and
for that reason we do that the
New Mexico probably marketers
stand offices.
Senator my name's Scott Scanlon
registered lobbyist for Altria
we're stand opposed to this bill
the FDA and the market is taking
care of any problems this bill
would have a negative impact on
the budget so I'd suggest that
perhaps disabilities and AGFC
but I guess most importantly if
this bill is about protecting
that is it does not addressed
why six year old children and
younger are being seen in place
control
disabilities emergency rooms and
that's because children.
Her parents Canada stashes and
gummies this bill doesn't
address labor if counties for
other hands issues which is
really becoming much more
critical problem thank you madam
chair.
Anyone else thank you madam.
John.
Nonprofit trade association has
funds all across New Mexico
locally owned storefronts Mr
scale in touch on a great point
that I think is for the nose we
discussed this issue in this
committee we have here in this
position in the state as
recently you can buy a flavor
can it is the have to be twenty
one years old by that if we
twenty one years old I flavored
nicotine.
Session we should have this
discussion absent area most
those two things and not try it
would you respect winners and
losers on the issue thank you
very much.
Yes.
Senator remembers really thank
you Mr address of this for
rentals of one sometimes not
discussed black market is
briefly discussed that will come
as part of this we see that New
York City or their self singles
and we soon were that's what
will happen here milk all fans
is a huge issue in the African
American community.
The two major confrontations all
across the country where they're
trying to enforcement officer.
There will be a black market
you'll lose all the sales taxes
and you all have confrontations
between law enforcement and
citizens who perfect all this is
primarily a minute all day thank
you very much.
Okay.
Matthew month eight.
You have one minute.
Chair committee members can you
hear me yes.
I'm in strong opposition to this
bill it is highly destructive to
local business I own Montes
cigars in Albuquerque it's also
full of incredible amount of
misinformation even according to
the FDA we sell premium cigars
pipe tobacco they don't sell
cigarettes we don't celebrate
we are separate industries we
have our own definition
according to the FDA the CDC and
even the state of New Mexico are
you already have to be twenty
one by any of our products this
would most definitely lead us
out of business it would move
money out of state online into
the black market and for those
reasons I mean strong
opposition.
Thank you.
Amanda Wheeler.
Amid that she is.
Make yourself please.
We'll go to.
to Andrews.
Thank you can I interest on
behalf of Americans for tax
reform and for the public is for
the image
this bill essentially is about a
flight back and and the need to
we need food we need to ask
ourselves it's do we follow the
science the evidence and what
the FDA says about flight with
drugs and alcohol and cigarettes
been a I would not quit smoking
eight or do we follow an
ideological anti science agenda
by some activists the evidence
clearly shows meta analysis of
hundreds of studies conducted by
groups like the U. K. government
the Royal College of physicians
have state conclusively that the
products that in ninety five
percent state via the
combustible cigarettes
Georgetown University says six
point six million American lives
will be saved if a majority of
Americans take up vaping instead
of smoking this is a life saving
drugs and what we've seen in
place of that flight the budget
like San Francisco again
universities Abigail Friedman
found they don't affect fighting
right school they do with
increased smoking wrecks the
state and also a moderate that's
time Sir we'll go off back to
I guess we'll go to Lindsey
Stroud.
Yes hello can you hear me yes
okay thank you much thanks
Lindsey Stroud I'm director of
the consumers are the taxpayers
protection alliance of visiting
fellow at the independent
women's forum and I did want to
address that the tax bill so I'm
just gonna keep this brief with
the flavor band so I want to
point out that you state
building has decreased by fifty
three percent between twenty
nineteen and twenty twenty two
and use use of traditional
tobacco products is at record
lows and twenty twenty two one
point nine percent of use
reported using cigars one point
six percent had use combustible
cigarettes and one point three
percent reported using smokeless
tobacco now more most
importantly in the twenty twenty
one national youth tobacco
survey among middle and high
school students that we're
currently using E. cigarettes
forty three point four percent
reporting using them because of
they were feeling anxious
stressed or depressed compared
to thirteen point two percent
who cited the news because of
flavors so I would recommend
that lawmakers refrain from
banning flavors to protect you
is because you are not using
these because of labour's and
I'll be back to talk more about
the tax bill so thank you for
your time.
I guess over anyone in support
who wants to speak.
Okay we'll go to the committee
Representative basically thank
you madam chair representative.
All I'm trying to get my mind
wrapped around Representative
somebody else on the.
Kate.
Work okay I have.
Yes good morning yes.
I'll quickly testified thanks
for forgetting me and right
before you all started thank you
for the opportunity quickly
testify here this morning on
house bill ninety four again my
name is Claudia wrote is I am
the regional advocacy director
for the campaign for tobacco
free kids New Mexico is not
alone in discussions on how to
best to address you tobacco
usage as states and localities
across the country are having
similar discussions I just heard
the figure and had to address
this around there's a reduction
of fifty three percent I'm not
sure exactly where that data
came from because Pacific Lee in
New Mexico you've either got
usage is higher than the
national average as in one and
three high school students let
me say that again one in three
high school students that that
thirty four percent are using L.
as trying to figure it in your
state flavor policies have a
dramatic impact on reducing
tobacco money used and would
help curb the long term illness
disease and death caused by
tobacco addiction across the
state thank you so much for this
opportunity and I just have to
note that health group they're
several health groups that I
don't know how many are here
present today that are
supportive of these policies
across the country okay this.
I thank you did this year.
Morning madam chair can you hear
me yes.
Great many missed Division with
New Mexico voices for children
and I'm speaking in support of
house bill ninety four as we're
all aware tobacco usage is
related to cardiovascular damage
lung disease and premature death
especially for people who become
tobacco users at an early age
and that's why it's essential
that New Mexico take action to
curb tobacco usage especially
for teenagers and youth who are
more likely to begin tobacco
consumption through flavored
tobacco products we strongly
urge you to support house bill
ninety four to decrease tobacco
usage for use and to improve
health outcomes in the state
thank you for your time.
Thank.
Okay and I'm sorry I it was my
fault that I went to the
audience and then forgot to go
to
thank you for being patient with
okay we'll go back to
Representative thank you madam
chair representative and expert
witness.
A couple of questions I would
like to ask you know was of blue
dream is.
Madam chair.
It is.
I don't.
Do you know the wedding cake is.
Not not of the waiting game with
his wedding cake.
Things like this.
Okay of the
Shatter.
Renewable diamonds.
These are all flavors that we
chose whenever we pass the more
one of the.
They you can buy all that in
more one at any given time you
want you can get so those you
can get you get brownies get all
the any kind of enticing thing
that you want to get it as
marijuana in.
And you know I I I heard you
mention of madam chair.
Representative I I heard you
mention that
We're gonna hear some
exasperated said generations but
from twenty twenty to November
of twenty twenty Massachusetts
cigarettes excise tax stamp
sales fell twenty four percent
with sixty two million dollars
in revenue loss with including
lost sales tax that rises to
seventy three million dollars.
And
I hate to even tell you guys
this but I am I am of smokeless
tobacco user and I'm trying to
quit now in this the end of on
the legislature as I haven't had
a diverse enough since I've been
here and I'm super happy about
that but if I choose to take it
was not following purpose not so
I think that you know we're
trying to we're trying to fix
problem.
That would really.
I'm not saying it doesn't
completely exists with our use
but I'm just gonna ask you I've
Madam chair representative is in
everybody in the room.
Don't answer this question I
just want to think about it have
you ever smoked a cigarette have
you ever tried a cigarette and
do you still do it now.
So with that being said
you know for.
Banning flavored flavor the
cigarettes which are less
harmful than traditional
cigarettes what about the people
that are trying to get off of
tobacco and the smoke that
cigarette and it's it's more of
a gateway to quickly instead of
a gateway to getting on the some
of the worst and I heard that
came with the tobacco is a
gateway drug to something else
and the only I've never taken a
difference of and and thought
about doing another drugs I'm I
want to go get the and also
spring does and taco sauce but I
don't want to to try and other
drugs so thank you madam chair
this is and and.
It's it's I will tell you that I
should have said this before
there is the tobacco settlement
revenue oversight interim
committee and Representative
Ferrary is is the check post
chair with a representative and
senator and I was the chairman
for and in our health and Human
Services and tobacco committees
doctor does it down is who is
the head of the U. N. M. med
school and is an addiction
knowledges said the gateway drug
is tobacco.
Madam chair representative I
think that can be subjective I
really do because data I mean I
know dad is data but it depends
on who's making who's putting
the data in and
you know all those I was any of
T. for twenty five years and up
in the back of ambulances where
I've dealt with people that you
know have pulmonary issues due
to smoking and but it's a choice
it's a choice that they may and
after saying that it gave you
made me aware of one small those
things I've seen what it does to
people but it's still a choice.
Let's see.
Madam chair like to respond okay
go ahead
That's exactly what we're trying
to avoid that choice because
flavors are attracted to you
and trying to do deter them from
using and starting to use of
tobacco products is the main
reason for this and that choice
costs just over eight hundred
million dollars a year in New
Mexico.
and I hate to even get on the
inserts of madam chair I'm sorry
madam chair.
Representative I even get into
that because I'm so irritated
right now with the insurance and
stuff but in what ways does it
cost New Mexico money.
How how does it cost New Mexico
money is it for the people that
do not have insurance it not
only that it's in health care
costs and loss of productivity
do you have thank you I'm sorry
that Medicaid costs by smoking
is two hundred twenty nine
million dollars hello.
And in health care expenditures
directly caused by tobacco use
is eight hundred forty four.
Madam chair representative I I I
do appreciate those numbers but
I I know people that died from
pulmonary issues that has never
smoked a cigarette in their
life.
And I know that you know.
I pray every day that in my line
of work as a firefighter for
twenty five years braid and all
the nasty stuff that I did no I
you know I hope I don't ever get
the cardiovascular pulmonary
issues but I know it might be in
my in my purview but that's all
I have thank you thank you I
will go to Representative port
thank you madam chair and I
apologize I backed wise both
things back is killing me that
doctor tend to unit and all
anyway some possible slow going
so I want to say something
first.
So madam chair representative I
started smoking when I was
eleven and I spoke lucky strike
so there was no fireplace flavor
you might care everybody's.
Six had nothing do with flavor
then moved on to more ads but it
had nothing to.
Let me start with the first
secretary spoke with no filter
case you guys went home
so it wasn't the flavor that got
me was that everybody was
smoking a lot of peer pressure
my parents smoke everybody's
parents not so we have
cigarettes everywhere
accessible.
So I do have some questions how
madam chair representative so
our kids get hold the space if
they're not supposed to be
having space.
Of madam chair Representative
Lord the other people who are
over twenty one to buy them for
them or they ordered them over
the internet you know there's a
lot of different place the actor
and manager of that's going to
be the bigger issue and all this
because we have a thing called
appropriations and it didn't
work people still found ways
kids will still find ways to get
the sayings as matter of fact
madam chair representative this
virtually forward I found on
here I didn't know this until I
started doing research there's
all kinds of drops and what
happened in California
this is down okay
in California what happened was
the sale of drops one of I'm
looking at I can buy thank you
birthday cake sounds good of
chilling tease Kate by hello
honey I'm by all kinds of stuff
they're very cheap I just put it
in my heart to see what happens
and I'll send it to me without
checking for I do to see if the
team.
So the important thing so what
we're trying to do with the
banned the state can still buy
this right here online there's
no way we can regulate that
whatsoever from the internet
there could be able to get those
drops which I found people will
find a way to do stuff so madam
chair so question for you so
this spans this doesn't apply to
any of those or reservations set
for act.
The the the cell the Madam chair
representative Florida I just
wanted to comment on first on it
you're making our case even
though they might be able to buy
the products it's less palatable
if it's a flavor and they're
less likely to try and use of
nicotine products that are
flavored right and and I'm cycle
head.
I'd like to refer.
Madam chair Representative Lord.
You know this one doesn't apply
to the tribal casinos I'm sorry
tribal.
Right retails there's problems
and tribes or some of these so
it doesn't a lot of those
supplies on the state of.
Okay so my second question madam
chair and and Representative so
if somebody was entrepreneurial
teenager and there's a lot of
amount there thank you can buy
the stuff on the internet they
technically could go somewhere
with twenty one and so right so
they could still be selling them
in the parking lot executives
nothing I mean other than
they're not supposed to have I
guess my point is.
The stuff is still accessible I
started on lucky strix the
bigger purses how do we delay
kids from starting smoking
because once they start smoking
the more likely statement that I
started Levin and put eighteen
so I kind of just awesome that.
So I'm just looking at they can
still get it is still possible
to consumption on the rise on
the reservation on the pueblos.
So they're still access but the
biggest problem is.
So the parents Madam chair
representative
they smoke a flavored vape
that's where kids are getting
it.
I don't understand the
deterrents.
Because parents can still get
them they can go to.
Any.
Tribal land divide that have in
their house funds that stop the
kids from getting hold of it and
smoking.
Madam chair representative lord
we have enforcement that is you
know trying to
hold the law it is illegal for
under twenty one of if they.
You know we can't stop everyone
but we do our best.
And that and that C..
I'm always trying to look at the
root cause everything maybe
that's my problem lies some
western looking pas how do we.
Allow people the freedom because
I have got Democrats in my
district were very angry about
this of spoken out to me they're
very angry because a life to
have flavored vapes.
They're not happy about this at
all actually they've been more
vocal about it and Republicans
have my district and they want
the freedom still to be.
And if they wanted to use to
smoke which are still going to
consider maybe they'll just go
somewhere else to go get it it's
not going to stop.
Which means those are still
going to be in the house.
of where the kids can get a hold
of it so so I don't.
Madam chair representative also
saw in California one of the
things they did to me it was
given a call in the fact to
cigarettes so it doesn't have
mental it says non mental before
so what we're gonna figure ways
around it because that's what
happened with appropriations
my concern to.
The push on this but not against
the family marijuana this I'm
gonna look at got me bears and
it's flavored and I see a
conference
The pharmacy there that's okay
and this isn't.
So.
What about this much I gotta get
up and walk around sorry for
this at my back system fire
right now my main issues I
started lucky strike so that
wasn't it even so that these on
tribal land to that second stop
it.
Security issues so from the
point of facts prohibition
didn't work and also my doctor
mom smoked from age thirteen
seventy eight died from any of
that **** Alzheimer's and passed
away to some for she didn't
Spence it wasn't flavored that
got her started either so
with that in the Senate
opposition.
And I think it's a lot thank.
Representative K..
Thank you madam chair of
committee thank you
Representative
it is in is this bill to be in
the cigarettes.
No it is this is how the how to
of how our flavors introduced to
tobacco products.
Whether it's not whether it's a
flavored tobacco for cigarette
or fleet or date how House
flavor you're not mixing group
here over a tobacco leaf right
so what how do you how do you
add flavor to tobacco all
referred to madam chair out
refer to my experts.
Madam chair representative K. I
think you know what flavors are
added to different chemical
compositions and in those some
of these chemical compositions
you know some of them are the
most regulated by FCA cells.
Those in the.
And so it's it's.
Flavors.
I mean the bottom line is like
and they they want to make it as
smooth as possible so it's back
and and and try some of the most
of these waivers are targeted at
you.
and and.
Thank you very much of Madam so
just so I'm clear I is that how
you reduce flavored tobaccos to
chemicals that are not regulated
by FDA because there.
Not a food product but but since
you're introducing them into
your taste buds by heating up
the chemical with the tobacco
and that and that's how you are
able to distribute the flavor
correct but I'm sure
Representative K. just want to
clarify one point.
The FDA regulation is not as
intense.
With the Senate and house.
But I'm not on the server or.
Not.
No this.
The recent FDA regulations and
we are.
The FDA wants to regulate but
they haven't you know will
aggressively enough it all and
that's the reason the state sept
take on themselves you know to
to ban these flicks thank you
and then and and I understand
your background is health care
and with the American heart
association or not a stock
broker but are you aware of the
building of tobacco products
being sold by CBS pharmacy.
Madam chair representative Kate
site.
Okay so I believe this occurred
about five years ago I was just
wondering saucier to questions.
I believe that the CVS pharmacy
did have
That being for short while.
Thank you
and then and then tier I have
one last question it is the
American heart association do
they have a goal or is one of
their bills that is currently in
this legislature even and
national goal to eliminate
flavored cannabis.
And smoking not not the sun
candy but smoking.
Chair of certificates I think we
we have a position on tobacco
and we are working in Congress
federal advocates to.
But.
And but you know we're we don't
have a position on on campus
it's just one thing because you
know the.
This is station doesn't.
You know just go with.
You know the popular.
Flow and I think we were
conducting research on cannabis
Sonko that's
and.
Our position has been working on
we want to make sure there's no
enforcement and kids are not
getting access to cannabis and
you know clean indoor air this
protected and you know second
and can was small business home
persons so that that's that's
thank you very much just just
the clarification the American
heart association's mission is
to limit tobacco use cannabis is
not in its purview at current
time you're you're still
studying about that is that it's
you just stated.
Of Madam chair of the kids yes
okay thank you so much just it
is
first disclosure I sponsored
some of these tobacco bills as
well and I've been a volunteer
for several years of the
American heart association and I
would support this thank you.
Thank you
Did you have anything else
Representative.
Thank you madam chair I just
think this is important for
staff that we are joining other
states that take this very
seriously if we continue to let
you start smoking because of the
attraction of flavors and not be
able to to turn them we are
missing an opportunity for our
youth to have better health
throughout the rest of their
life in especially
not to.
Not to start.
In this you know very addictive
and
Expensive for to their health in
our health care also.
Okay thank you and I I just I
just want to say a few things
with cannabis everybody's talk
about campus you can even go in
the cannabis store unless you're
twenty one so I mean that is
highly highly regulated and it's
supposed to be the same with
tobacco but we do know that that
so that.
That is not necessarily true and
in terms of cannabis we have
doctors prescribing cannabis we
do not have doctors prescribing
tobacco and I also heard someone
say it's maybe doing maybe doing
it because of stress and
anxiety.
What do we want to get them
addicted to a very dangerous
drug for that should we deal
with the underlying problems or
find some other way to I mean
that actually I will say that I
talked to a firefighter recently
who wants to have firefighters
be able to use cannabis and he
told me well that our bosses
encourage us to drink and I
thought.
That no I mean so we would
encourage teenagers to drink
because they're anxious and I
don't think we should encourage
them to up to use of nicotine
products either and
can I ask you about the pouches
that you told us that one
meeting about the count is that
people can buy and how strong
they are.
Madam chair and thank the the
new products on the market we
they are made out of synthetic
nicotine.
We make it is not derived from
the tobacco leaves it's
manufactured in a in a in a lab
or facility and at worried she
Auction costs and these coaches
at what you know.
Hi content the committee and
they come in different.
Waivers same thing with no
targeting kids
that poachers they have lost
injures.
We could do to fix.
and and they are highly
addictive and what the tobacco
industry has done this
California and those states are
have regulated the spot.
And the tobacco industry has
claimed that since the nicotine
is not derived from tobacco
leaf.
All these drugs should not be
considered to that.
But it's in our tax bill to talk
more you know we want to call
then of the staff to participate
in the game drugs as part of
other tobacco products impacts
such as right now they don't pay
taxes and she.
And there are highly addictive
and the.
The state is losing.
Thank you of the Representative
and so thank you madam chair the
representative.
Communities boyish might kick my
****.
I'm just trying to figure you
know flavors we have flavors and
everything and you know beef is
going to call me up and cars are
going to turn me into a diabetic
you fight you too many but you
know how many people put salt on
their food because you want to
taste we we like taste and we
light flavors and I would I
would I'm just more into you
know.
If I knew that if my dad ever
caught me smoking cigarettes I
knew what I was and what was
gonna happen when I got home and
instead of regulating I would
like to see more you know more
parenting and I know that's in a
perfect world but we failed
enforcing laws in and
We I think you know by doing
this we're just function a law
abiding people that want to.
Smoke the your unicorn milk or
whatever different flavors they
have just to your politicians is
is the the citizens that want to
do that and they know good and
well what is going to do to but
they do it just like when we sit
down in the to be state you know
after awhile what it's going to
do to you but you still need.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay but we call.
Thank you.
Of.
S. economy yes.
Past year
Here team can't do everything
for our kids we it takes a
village to make sure that
they're not
they don't have access to
something that is purposely
attractive to kids and purposely
trying to get them to start.
Down that path of vaping smoking
and using it to a tobacco and
possibly other.
This is something that we can do
for our kids that will help
parents not to have to do it by
themselves and as a community as
a state to state seriously we
care about our kids we don't
want them growing up with this
addiction and that harms to
their health.
Thank you madam chair
representative I I I appreciate
that because I I a lot of kids
as much as you do what about the
other half that you're you're
regulating they don't have
access to it now because we're
trying to protect our kids and
you can't protect everybody you
just can't do that we don't live
in that world it's not a utopia
and the I'm I'm not trying to
you know get into a bigger in
contests but
I just I see that the there's
law abiding citizens that want
to do that and I'm one of.
If I want to if I want to smoke
the the.
Senator at I want to go Beal
give me the the flavored
cigarettes and that's all I'm
saying is more no less
regulation and you know more
parenting as far as the kids
because that's what we're
talking about right now.
I like it's a madam chair and
representative we can try.
Thank you okay I will entertain
a motion.
Would you pass second.
A second.
So.
As and.
Eight months so we we take the
role.
Thanks yes Representative
Johnson yes Representative
Ferrary yes Representative
Hotmail no.
Representative general no.
Representative your no.
Representative pants yes.
Representative insists no.
Vice chairman.
She said she's excuse
Representative and then.
Yes okay.
Of the five to four vote few
have a do pass thank you madam
chair since you're there to one
of.
Going on to.
For all you can do one twenty
three and twenty one twenty
four.
Well my advice here is.
Okay.
He
got the my did the sequel
trying.
Yes.
Okay this one is on the schedule
first madam chair one twenty
three okay this.
And.
Madam chair do you want to do.
Sure okay after we like to do
one twenty four first okay I.
Whenever you're ready thank you
madam chair.
Of madam chair.
Of the committee members house
bill one twenty four
relates to taxing increasing the
rate of tax on tobacco products
including nicotine regardless of
the source in the definition to
box tobacco product what it is
is is raising up on all the
products of the tax level.
I.
To be a parity with of cigarette
taxes.
And.
It
I will refer to my experts who
can better explain how this what
it includes and all the
different things and I'd like to
introduce
of the sequel and.
Course I have.
All.
Madam chair members the
committee Linda Siegel
representing the land can can
can I stop you for just the
second there are handouts thanks
for.
Of.
So you can go ahead I'm sorry
thank.
So I think you you've heard
wanted testimony are the.
For children.
And the young people for.
Consuming tobacco products this
bill only addresses the tax on
other tobacco products.
Those are any project not.
You know the product that has
nicotine in FY either it's a
synthetic nicotine or from
about.
And it's whether it's small
Peter to sort this all important
so it gets Senator at fifty
eight point of us give our
includes all taxes
Representative Ferrary said.
The tax on cigarettes right now
it's two dollars a pack.
And the most price sensitive
people are young people so we
are trying to raise with this
bill the tax form others tobacco
products could be comparable
with the cigarette tax so that
no longer is cheaper to go and
fight the cigarette it would be
the same comparable price and
find a regulars.
Thank you for
About youth smoking we know that
work the pandemic that we were
the third highest state in the
country with huge transaction
and the cigarettes thirty six
percent now the last report from
the O. H. we are down to twenty
five percent.
But they attribute that to the
fact that young people were not
in school or in school gathering
and we're going across the
street to get there the
cigarettes that they didn't have
as much access and we'll see
what happens with the next few
survey done by.
Also if
if goes after we hope not this
is a good thing.
Consumption is down but we have
no objections that and say that
way as
Representative.
And the impact on Medicaid is
enormous.
We have almost forty seven
percent of the population on
Medicaid and that.
Two hundred and twenty million
spent every year just in the
Medicaid expenditures we know
that kids you don't start
smoking when you're forty seven
years old generally speaking you
don't start the cigarettes at
that point ninety percent of you
start smoking before the age of
eighteen I mean ninety percent
of those that's not start.
Of of eighteen so this is a way
to really raise Romero that's
not the the public health
perspective and that's not the
important part to us the
important projects is being able
to discourage sure price having
young people being able to
access these programs and
discourage them from those.
We also.
With the tribal issue we know
from the campaign for tobacco
free kids are the the data that
they have that people find their
tobacco products within a five
mile radius of where they live.
So we're not gonna have our own
people in Albuquerque probably
driving to casinos on all right
twenty five it's just it doesn't
happen you I am ready for the
week or even for the day can you
get rules.
So this bill could have a
dramatic impact on.
And could also help to sway the
kids from smoking now we know
that the industry the industry
says are we no longer we no
longer advertise to children and
they no longer do that because
the tobacco settlement in
nineteen ninety nine said they
couldn't but the reality is.
That the marketing they do
appeals to children in New
Mexico the tobacco industry
spends thirty two million
dollars in advertising what do
we spend and prevention in New
Mexico five point four million
dollars there's no way to
compete pricing is a very
effective way of discouraging.
Thank you did you have okay.
All right we will go to the
audience those in opposition.
Okay was there on the side.
Yeah one minute.
Thank you all just because the
river on the foundation of
public policy thing your
government New Mexico we oppose
new taxes especially those that
are regressive which should for
the hardest and your create
situations where smuggling
of tobacco products what
happened including tribal lands
thank you for your time.
Anyone else on this side.
Let's go over to my right raise
your hand if you want okay.
Hi my name is Jennifer gray
Additional tobacco product in
this bill means that we would be
taxing nicotine reduction all
devices you would also be taxing
but the continuing on which is
preventing possibly patients
prior off of tobacco or nicotine
for be able to purchase those
items because they become
faster.
Thank you anyone else.
All one
hundred.
Madam chair committee members
can you hear me OK yes.
thank you.
This is another horrible piece
of legislation that again I'll
put us out of business we've
been doing this since nineteen
seventy six I am considered an
expert according to the
department of justice the
countries of Nicaragua Honduras
the Dominican Republic there's a
lot of mis information when it
comes to tobacco than caring
today premium tobacco especially
premium cigars and pipe tobacco
takes years to crack there's a
cost associated with that
average premium cigar costs
about fifteen dollars nowadays
people are gonna pay in excess
tax on that when they can go
online and pay no tax are glad
to see and pay no tax on premium
tobacco in its purest form.
naturally produces nicotine
nicotine is a neural stimulant
the same as caffeine there's no
chemical additives you're at all
according to the FDA one to two
premium cigars Attorney are
negligible your health children
do not by or enjoy your tier one
it is that you
yeah.
Andrew.
Thank you to mattress for
Americans for tax reform once
again I think the bill sponsor
of the clarifying and admitting
that this billable supports
people to fight reduced risk
products less this is to do
incentivize use but the evidence
in the academic model is very
very clear they want quick by
that will smoke deadly
combustible tobacco more and die
as a result Georgie universities
Dr Michael Pascoe has done the
model level makes he has found
conclusively and we submitted
this innovation testimony that
this is a bill that will
increase smoking rates and more
people will die as a result FDA
has stayed the reduced risk
alternatives appropriate in many
cases for the protection of
public health we want to
incentivize people quitting
smoking this bill incentivizes
people to smoke people to smoke
deadly drugs and dies a result
this bill is not a horrible from
an economic perspective in the
disruption to businesses and
families paying more in taxes in
these terrible economic times
this bill will not only hurt
finances I was able public
health.
Thank you it just but see.
That's.
Okay that's it so anyone here in
support who wants to speak okay
we'll start on the side and kind
of high.
Sen locally hands just hear that
discussion I see adolescents
everyday maybe not every week
that
that'll be that Phoebe is better
than
that see prices actually said
because that is a misconception
they could not but it is a cash
basis and basis play so.
That having a pretty similar
would actually be educational as
well thank you next.
Chair members of the committee
of Charleston marker speaking to
you on behalf this morning New
Mexico voices for children
action fund in support of this
bill
and we're all I think the
Sanchez the FY are made a
notation that the E. liquid tax
of twelve point five percent in
New Mexico the wholesale prices
among the lowest in the state
Tory.
portly the bill doesn't change
of cigarette tax regular
distributions one because
increasing taxes on products
other than cigarettes will have
the biggest.
Impact in terms of waiting
Mexico's young people do not
start down that dangerous
tobacco right.
Young people don't start down
after those are gonna be
healthier adults which will mean
fewer private and public health
expenditures as well to help
your state productivity that for
the state contact thank you
thank you.
Anyone else on site on this
site.
The folks as this as well the.
Act.
I don't know if any of you have
seen the actual prices of the
cigarette use their credit we
low yeah hi indicate team they
promote this addictive behavior
increasing taxes will help
motivate people to reduce the
not for smoking or altogether
quits sedated substance.
Anyone else.
Okay I just clarify something
and someone said it would raise
the taxes on on
Right devices and if you look on
page four line thirteen does not
need any product regulated as a
drug or device by the United
States food and drug
administration so so that comes
in the things to help people are
not going to be and create clued
in this I just wanted to clear
that up and so IT any question
yes go ahead I'm sorry
Representative I was just in
state is there anyone on to yes
there is all right.
Okay rich.
Go ahead rich.
Us to be a test of Madam chair
representative my name is rich
Weiner I support both this bill
and H. B. one twenty three not
only to raise revenue in fact it
raises revenue in proportion to
how many people start with
crease spoken of these products
so I think it's really important
to have the extra revenue to
help do advertising other
preventative measures and pay
for a healthcare and other
Medicaid expenses so I I support
both of these bills thank you
very much thank you yes share.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee at this is
Debbie issue of the New Mexico
voices for children in support
of this bill tobacco products
such as E. cigarettes negatively
affect kids help especially
given that these drugs can be
highly addictive and cause you
to be more likely to smoke in
the future however research
finds that raising taxes on
tobacco products is strongly
correlated with decreased
tobacco usage in fact a seven
percent decrease in teen smoking
rates can be achieved with just
a ten percent increase in the
cost of tobacco products reason
tobacco taxes there for you
decreases consumption for
children and teenagers which
then decreases their risk for
lung disease and other negative
health outcomes for these
reasons we ask you to support
this bill thank you for your
time thank you I guess.
Yes good morning again this is
Claudia rotis with the campaign
for tobacco free kids I'm here
to in support of house bill one
twenty four and also when you
get to one twenty three I just
want to say real quick as
everyone else has mentioned here
that we know the tobacco tax
increases are one of the most
effective ways to reduce tobacco
use especially among kids I'm
historically other type of
tobacco products such as little
cigars have been impacted much
lower rates than cigarettes even
though they are essentially the
same thing and they are there
he's carry similar health risks
I'm just not real quick that
under taxation of other type of
tobacco products cost the states
millions of dollars in lost tax
revenues that are sorely needed
time a widespread state budget
deficits and decrease spending
on tobacco control programs
thank you.
Okay that's it okay I just go to
the committee for questions.
Representative Jones.
Madam chair thank you I don't
really have a question Senator
to
To add something to the
conversation that we talked
about the.
this business thing
it doesn't apply this tax
increase would apply a tribal
Lancelot also would apply across
the border my district includes
three fourths of our.
It would send people buying
cigarettes for office down
across the border thirty five
miles and so it would increase
the bond market there.
Some okay thank you
Representative Lord thank you
madam chair back still hurts
have holidays some chair and and
Representative I want to make
sure so this applies to to
tobacco and in a place to live
with tobacco is that correct.
Yes ma'am Madam chair
representative or yes okay the
reason I'm asking madam chairs a
couple things I have we have a
lot of people.
District that to again they're
very upset about this they go
there's
There's a tribal casino in
Albuquerque our top locations in
Albuquerque just let things
where they all go so it's not
that far they can go that far go
by there so they don't have to
go all the way up to can still
get a Stokes S. hole.
And I was sitting here online.
Provide bass and what I'm
dealing but we can buy them all
day long and
thank you bye liquid tobacco I
can buy sell tobacco which I'm
learning all kinds of things
back to the combined line and
there's very little regulation
about even on a job that but the
point being.
That I'm always against raising
taxes I hate as manifested in
your W. research tax we should
raise a little or other taxes by
two thirds so we end up paying
less taxes at the end.
the problem I see that chair
representative at these are
still accessible easily
accessible in Albuquerque where
my district is and they will be
able to get them on tribal lands
which is also being unemployed
they can so I don't on my which
is not applicable so
I can't stand the bill that is
going to raise our taxes and
especially
SO stand how this helps kids I
know you will explain that you
know that they will have less
access but they're not elected
paying taxes on in many ways
it's the parents so I was going
back to the root causes that is
it's a parental issue.
It's like when I was a kid so
you're telling around virtually
around kids have access to them
so they're still going to get
them and there's going to be
people that are still going to
go get them from other locations
and again.
I just wanted to be a kind of
market the something doing
illegal it's going to be this
because it's very easy because
people still want cigarettes as
much as they want alcohol so
Committee I yield my time
manager it's going on
Representative Lord the if they
go take time to go more than
five miles which isn't likely
proven that most people don't go
you know outside of the five
million previous to purchase
tobacco and then it's for a
convenience and it's it's it is
definitely so they are likely to
go and I from
tribal lands receive news
also it is in itself.
Having that parity making it so
that
it is as it turns especially for
you.
Mentors understand trying to the
turn themselves into somebody or
twenty one point kids and
everyone that I spoke to go so
this one particular location
right Albuquerque because it's
much cheaper so that they will
try their lease for my district.
It was I I would like to
continue the work of
representatives thank you madam
chair is hasn't missed go.
I've got a lot of constituents
that's online right now and
they're watching this and I just
want to make sure that I'm
understanding that what you're
trying to do is
this tax the product when those
two are kids can buy.
Correct madam chair that is
tearing Representative Vincent
actually it's to make it so that
we have all nicotine products
people to in parity with
cigarette taxes okay.
You know I I look at this and I
propose you know raising taxes
as well but when it whenever I
see kids because I'm a
conservative because I.
My wife would tell you that I'm
kinda T..
I see some of these kids that
have the hundred twenty five
dollars hundred seventy five
dollars to issues on I use go
get five pair for a hundred
twenty five but they're getting
I see him with the two hundred
fifty dollar you know care
airpods pros.
This is I mean in my opinion I'm
not saying data that in my
opinion it's almost like taboo
and when you tell somebody they
can't have something makes more
and makes them want it more so
with that argument on thank you
in general.
I will entertain a motion.
Over the past.
Second.
Second.
Much for the call.
Representative K. yes.
Representative traffic yes.
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative huh yes.
Representative Jones.
Representative.
Now.
Representative subpoenaed yes.
Representative no.
Representative.
And madam chair yes.
Basics that three you have to
pass.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you with visa
Representative Ferrary shelf.
This year.
I.
Madam chair of house bill one
twenty three.
Is basically the same bill.
It will race it will tax all
they could to products into
bachelor products.
and raise it another two
dollars.
On cigarettes.
And with that
You know it has the same type
of.
By raising the tax on
cigarettes.
We're making it so that people
will reduce their use of tobacco
products which is more helpful.
To there.
Health outcomes reducing
healthcare costs improving
productivity
you know because they're on the
job and not being sacked there's
lots of things and especially
also again with you.
So we have all these happening
and
We need to make sure that
Increasing the cigarette tax by
two dollars other tobacco
products
will also projected annual
revenue for our state of ninety
million dollars.
And
nationwide cigarette taxes
generate over seventeen billion
dollars in revenue within a
year.
they do not lead to a drop in
the number of convenience stores
or.
Such as a lot of accusations are
will probably here tobacco taxes
we consumers to re direct their
money they might have otherwise
spent on tobacco products
towards other purchases and a
university of Illinois Chicago
study found that the number of
stores actually increased with
increasing tax tobacco tax
rates.
A I would like to see if my
experts would like to add more.
And the more.
Okay.
Okay we will go to the audience
anyone here in opposition.
Okay we'll start on the side.
It is regressive tax policies
that are as.
There is a gas station on Wall
Street right heart of
Albuquerque actually.
He usually sell two dollars
taxable.
Cigarettes and cigarette
products.
This is not hard for raising
taxes especially for low income
people in New Mexico with to the
assault.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is legal again
Representative Mexico probably
marketers for twenty five years
I've been in this room for a
will a larger.
I listened to and have C. zero
taxes for the increased maybe
not.
As we are here today.
Obviously hasn't worked so we
believe this approach markers we
need to take a more moderate
growth rather than taxing sales
of the solution.
Next.
In opposition anyone else.
Okay online
latency.
Yes madam chair thank you again
I'll let you stratosphere's
protection alliance in the
independent women's forum I just
want to address that you know
cigarette taxes do
disproportionately harm low
income people and and our TVS
fifty state analysis we've been
looking at this year and twenty
twenty one twenty two point
eight percent of New Mexico
adults that earning twenty five
thousand dollars or less for
smoking compared to only seven
point four percent of adults who
are earning fifty thousand
dollars or more here the last
thing here is that excise taxes
and twenty nineteen and between
twenty nineteen to twenty twenty
one smoking rates among low
income adults decreased by only
one percent yet among adults and
fifty thousand dollars or more
the decreased by twenty eight
point two percent and finally if
lawmakers really want to address
tobacco use among youth and help
adults quit I would recommend
they spend more of the already
existing tobacco money's I from
settlement payments and excise
taxes and twenty twenty one for
every one dollar the state
received and those payments is
that only five cents on such
programs again thank you for
your time today thank you of
Matthew.
Thanks madam speaker committee
members Matthew multi again with
multi suppliers
This would absolutely but is
that a business where six
premium cigar shops in the
entire state of New Mexico you
go to Phoenix there eighty six
DFW area seventy Denver thirty
two we don't have.
The population we don't have
income that those states have
people will just purchased
somewhere else.
Please vote no on this thank
you.
Okay now we will go in support
to the audience.
Okay go ahead.
Madam chair members of worship
overseas region here thank the
New Mexico yes side the state
chapter.
Increase the course the.
Products shown drive down the
use of drugs or cigarettes since
as well so we strongly support.
Anyone else yes.
Chair members of the committee
my name is mark is also reserve
this for me the company we don't
rise to support proposal bills
every year when the stills calls
for we have usually has two
issues was a force opposition
which prevents visitors from
being taxed twice with the new
tax takes effect the other one
is the reduction in the amount
of.
Of the of tax two of two of the
staff so my committee of.
Forms a positive mental function
be a thesis Ms this helps black
prevents black market cigarettes
also ensures an actual phones
have that amount of money to
table parties so we talked with
the Sanchez appreciate your
reading this board and we're
looking to hopefully address
issues it extremity madam chair
members the committee and with
that this is.
Thank you Markle for.
We for you we for the forget
that part of it so I'm glad
you're here to to remind.
Of.
All right.
I'm I'm sorry I'm sorry sorry.
Again research lead here as this
for mac
thank you for making the point
that this does affect of course
come folks both the because the
industry has target those folks
care disproportionately smoking
at a higher rate
and tax like this would be great
for encouraging them to reduce
the office ready for first place
additionally taxes are the only
thing affect the price of the
back of the industry seems
totally I raise and lower the
price of oil without concern for
these lower income.
Thank you.
K. A. miss anybody up there okay
we will go through research.
Yes so madam chair of members
the committee rich winter again
and I support this bill strongly
up on a large scale we need to
diversify revenue so this is one
aspect or diversifying right
revenue up but the argument
about regressivity I'd like to
say that if more people start
smoking we have more revenue to
deal with the problem that's not
exactly that's a win on one side
at least the fewer people start
smoking that's when in itself so
the.
I know I I I I am all for
progressive taxation but when it
comes to something as harmful as
tobacco I I I'm not so concerned
whether.
Cool weather lower income people
can stop hurting themselves so I
I support this legislation I
think the Sanchez thank you.
India.
Good morning this is Debbie
issue again with New Mexico
voices for children we support
this bill based on research that
finds that reason tobacco taxes
correlated with decreased
tobacco use which it is
essential that we lower smoking
and tobacco consumption for you
because of the current
consumption rate approximately
forty thousand New Mexico you
will face premature deaths due
to smoking thank you for your
time thank you I have.
The morning committee members
again Claudia rotis with the
campaign for tobacco free kids
I'm here to lend support of
house bill one twenty three.
Three kids as long study tobacco
taxes and conducted tobacco tax
projections and every single
instance where state has passed
a significant figure tax
increase the state has enjoyed a
substantial increase to its
state cigarette tax revenue well
above what they have received
absent any rate increase also to
the COVID that was saying the
cigarette tax increases hurt
poor people the cigarette
companies have it backwards it
is the harms from smoking that
are regressive lower income
communities already suffering
disproportionately from smoking
caused disease disability debt
and costs and costs and are
prompting more lower income
smokers to quit and come back
rating state cigarette taxes
rates will reduce those
regressive harms and costs
directly helping lower income
smokers and also reducing
smoking costs cost and harms to
their families thank you thank
you okay did you want to respond
to any of the comments madam
chair hi the one comment that
was saying we should put more
money into programs we do have
another bill SB one seventy
eight Senator Hickey is
endorsing I believe it got
committee.
Do from the tobacco settlement
and the young lady just made the
perfect example of why this is
not a regressive of taxes
because lower income people will
benefit from the ninety million
dollars to New a couple.
Just put in towards all of
programs to prevention and
treatment K. so we'll go to the
committee questions.
Sam Representative
Representative Chaffetz thank
you as chair representative hi
my question is.
I may have missed it but
what is the cigarette tax now
what is the proposed increase.
Yes I prefer to my best year
refer to my experts Madam chair
representative Charles the
currency correct taxes two
dollars.
The bill you just heard one
twenty three would raise another
two dollars.
But what both bills do is raise
everything else to be the same
comparable price compared with
the price of the tax on
cigarettes.
So this bill would fake
cigarette tax four dollars a
pack.
For twenty six percent.
She.
Thank you anyone else
Representative and thank you
madam chair representative.
So if if I deserve the same
design applied to it can some
of.
So if you have cigarettes it's
going up four Bucks a pack it
does that apply to attendance.
Mr please yes yes it doesn't go
up four dollars it goes are
percentage wise so it is
comparable with what the tax on
cigarettes posted so what
percentage so in one twenty
three the percentages seventy
one percent thank.
Three
this is an index of the first
bill.
Madam chair representative
on the wholesale price.
Of one form this bill raising
the two dollars four dollars a
pack the the comparable period.
Would be.
The state rates.
The two that would come to
seventy one percent wholesale.
Thank you.
And could you
could you estimate with that
would be I mean just kind of
spit balling could you estimate
what that means for a pack of
cigarettes or can of snuff.
Just for my constituents is
listening.
Madam chair representative I
think it's the fans on what the
wholesale price.
I think you know different
convenience stores the firm.
chains.
I think that this is mission
protected by you know the
producers because they sell for
example of their it's a big
wholesalers there.
There are there are price might
be different than what they're
selling it to.
Senator Madam chair
representative so if of I don't
even know what practicing drugs
cost eight Bucks so that was
eight dollars.
Times seventy one percent.
Sure enough okay Representative
it's
cigarettes are now of two
dollars a pack tax this bill
raises them another two dollars
so if it's a pack of cigarettes
a six dollars now you at four
more dollars okay ten thank you
for thank you for that I
appreciate it so pretty much of
the the thing that I'm concerned
about with this field is for
for.
My constituents at home.
Better in the retail also
business.
The only thing that this is
going to do is just drive
because I do live
I do have Mescalero reservation
on my in my district and good
for them both back from other
side because the only thing that
this is going to do is drive all
that this is mainly to the other
side.
And.
It I mean it just pretty much
since the business out of my
community two of to another
community that I do
Representative
and.
The other thing I just feel like
it's going to place a burden on
people that do smoke and that
choose to smoke and they want to
smoke so that madam chair that
the on the record that's why
don't I don't close this field
thank you Representative and
okay I'm sorry yes yes yes.
Madam chair representative the
you know whatever the state of
New Mexico and taxes.
Tribal retailers have also
increased their cigarette taxes.
So the differential between
the smoke shop.
Compared to is on state land
it's still worries between.
Ninety five to seventy five
cents difference so if if we
raised four dollars you know.
The the tribes in the past have
also raised their.
You know taxes and and that
differential has always been
what the dollar so you know it's
a.
And so I just want.
Thank you Sir thank you madam
chair and also madam chair it's
still a matter of convenience of
buying it people don't go you
know far distances whether I
might go to.
To make their purchase.
Thank you Representative Lord
thank you
Representative so I am question
SantaFe constituents asking me
so they're paying about seven
dollars for economic to so can
you tell me what the and price
of the how much is that going to
calculate for them to if it
they're paying seven dollars
right now what is going to be if
this bill were to pass.
Chair Representative Lord I
think it depends on the seven
dollars two thousand this that's
no retail costs right this is so
but the the actual.
You know seventy one percent of
the all state.
Not not right.
Okay I'm trying to give them an
answer madam chair
representative let's see the
whole so it's five dollars and
they paid seven so what is that
going to with that approximately
in because they want to answer
from its on going on right now
so approximately how much would
that be another two dollars on
top of that.
Representative think of the
seventy one percent of five
dollars.
Who's.
Family and this call yeah okay
so.
Madam chair it was five dollars
wholesale seventy one percent
would be to create an additional
three dollars and fifty five
cents okay so they're gonna I
just wanna make sure that they
know examiner to text back right
now that includes.
Okay you tell me right there
thanks
It'll go from a safe seven eight
nine ten so that our can't okay
that was answers looking for and
one last quick question
So nothing none of these are
mandated for tribal so as to
make sure that there's no
mandate they can volunteer to
raise taxes is that correct
chair representative or you know
as you know the tribes of those
so limitation so then.
but as I as I mentioned I want
to stress this point.
Is whatever the state of New
Mexico raise their taxes you
know try to follow and the
difference that has always being
under dollars sometimes it's
ninety five cents so we.
Because they see this as an
opportunity for them to also.
Get more revenue from raising
taxes thank you those are the
questions trying to answer some
my constituents are asking
specific questions in any other
questions.
Representative Ferrary do you
have any final closing thoughts.
thank you madam chair just again
the concern for low income
people to
They will either beneficiaries
of.
Smoking cessation programs
healthcare benefits of Medicaid
and also benefits them by
helping to reduce their
consumption and the harms to
their health.
So I will entertain a motion.
I will make the motion.
This is their second.
The second.
The.
It Representative K. yes.
The Chavis has.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Hotmail yes.
Representative Jones.
Representative Lord no.
Yes.
Representative.
No.
Thanks for.
Okay reserves yes.
So.
In.
Here is
yes.
So.
I thank you for you have to do
this thank you madam.
And just a reminder that.
Okay.
A fifty three I just.
The state of.
I just hope that we will be in
the House Appropriations.
Three oh seven.
So I will send in ten thousand.
