Martinez.
Representative Cortez.
presents and I go by Senna
Cortez. Thank you.
Um
vice chair Herndon.
present.
set up chair, Thompson.
I'm here and thank you, so we
have a quorum.
Let's see, we will start with
the nice chairs house Bill 53,
and for those of you who are
here to um
OK, that's right. Sorry. So we
will
We will, um, roll 53. We are
also rolling.
Um, 78 as the groups are, are
working to come up with the
compromise so that everybody can
be unhappy with the bill instead
of half, half, half, half
unhappy.
Um
So with that, we will start with
each of us with real property
from health related equipment.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
we're ready to begin.
They um
Medicare HB 46 seeks to amend
the hospital equipment loan Act
by removing real property from
the definition of health-related
equipment, making hospitals
responsible for paying property
taxes on real property beginning
on July 1st, 2025.
This change will create new
revenue for counties depending
on the number of hospitals
located in those counties.
Madam chair with me, I have uh
my expert witness, and I will
ask him to introduce himself and
also um dive a little bit deeper
into the bill and what it does.
Madam Chair, thank you for
having me here today. My name is
Damian Lara. I'm the uh Bern Leo
County stor. I'm also the vice
chair for the assessors
affiliate, and it's uh
legislative committee.
Um, we stand in support of this
bill as of yesterday in New
Mexico counties which represents
all 33 county governments, um,
voted to support and endorse
this bill, um, once again, um,
We ask for your support, um,
this is a
Um
Sort of a technical
fixed to the definition which
removes real property from
hospital equipment.
Um, initially when the bill was
um drafted and enacted, it only
included equipment.
X-ray machines, MRI machines,
things of that nature.
Um, over the years, uh, as it
expanded greatly, um, Santa Fe
County and in particular Berlio
County does have a real property
such as that $30 million parking
garage.
Um, that really
I, I don't think um it's the,
the intent of the bill to help
uh rural hospitals by the
equipment that they need to
provide healthcare services, uh,
and it's exempting again in, in
my county, uh, a $30 million
parking garage, um, that really
is just for the benefit of cars.
Um, this is a prospective, so if
hospitals have received this and
are currently being exempt, they
will continue to be exempt, but
in the future, no real property.
will be um exempt going forward.
rural hospitals can still enjoy
the tax exemptions for the
equipment.
And that is uh available. The
other thing that I want to bring
up to your attention is, is that
this is
Um, potentially, uh, anti uh
constitution. So, uh, as you may
remember, um, when the
legislature wanted to exempt uh
veterans.
That had to go before a vote
with um the voters throughout
the state of New Mexico. No such
provision exists in the New
Mexico constitution, nor was it
proposed to the voters to exempt
real property of hospitals, so,
um, for those reasons, uh, we
ask that you um vote in support
of this bill.
And with that amount of cherry
stand uh for questions. OK,
thank you. So first, um, if you
are on Zoom and want to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
And in the room, anyone in
opposition.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Drew Sutter, registered
lobbyist for Presbyterian Health
Services. I respectfully rise in
opposition to HB 46, removing
the real property exemption
under the hospital equipment
Loan Act would increase property
tax liabilities for hospitals
that historically dependent on
this exemption. This could
strain hospital budgets
delivering resources away from
patient care and essential
services.
The unfairly targets hospitals
by removing the property tax
exemption while maintaining
similar exemptions for
facilities, financed and
industrial revenue loans.
give you some context on how
this would impact Presbyterian.
Presbyterian Downtown Hospital
alone would be a $15 million tax
set.
Santa Fe Medical Center would
likely not have been built
without the signature.
We respectfully asked to pose HB
46. OK, is there anybody on
Zoom?
I don't see any hands raised.
So anyone on Zoom in support.
Um, please raise your hand if
you'd like to speak and we'll
come back to you in the room,
anyone in support. Yes.
have this you're not winning
sexy bill of the day. Sorry.
So I don't see anyone on Zoom or
in the room, so I will go to the
committee.
And Representative Ann Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative. I guess I just
have a question on
Really, what the purpose of
bringing this bill is knowing
that we have an access to care
issue and we want more hospitals
to build across the state. So
for me, I just really think if
you look at the FIR on page 2,
and you look at the over $2.9
billion in revenue bonds for
these hospitals across the
state. Who do we feel like these
costs because they're savings
now to the hospital are gonna be
passed on to.
I believe they're gonna be
passed on to the patients who
are community members, and
although this is perspective
going forward.
I would love more hospitals to
be built across the state, and
when they're not able to save
millions of dollars. I'm just
confused on what we're trying to
do. So, um,
I don't know. Why would we want
to increase costs to build and
maintain those healthcare
facilities.
That are currently struggling to
build in the first place.
That's my first question, I
guess.
Madam Chair Representative, can
you tell us which FIR
specifically you're referring to
because there are several.
Um, it's the, hold on.
My, my put all these together,
so.
It is
K2
and it has fiscal implications,
um.
FIR page 2.
talks about um
The $2.9 billion in bonds, so it
has San Juan Regional is the 2nd
hospital. But if you look at all
these, I mean, even La Vitalena.
63, I mean, these, these numbers
are
If you look at them and up at
the top of the summary $2.9
billion in revenue. Yeah, I do.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. We just wanted
to make sure which one you're
representative, so.
My understanding is that not all
of the $2.9 billion is for
Um, real property, a lot of it
is the equipment.
Um, moving forward, a lot of
these for-profit hospitals that
are making
Substantial profit themselves,
use the Bond series process as a
tax abatement process rather
than an actually financing
purposes, so they will go
through the health equipment
loan counselor. They will
receive the bonds they
themselves will purchase and buy
the bonds, and then are only
receiving the tax benefit from
that. And so,
Like as any business, uh, I'm
sure that they will pass on uh
any increased cost to their
customers, but I can guarantee
you that right now, the tax
abatement on that real property,
that shift the burden of paying
for those taxes doesn't go away.
That too is passed on to
homeowners, especially
first-time homeowners and small
businesses that have to compete
to pay for those taxes, they're
not being paid currently by the
hospitals.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I
understand what you're saying,
but I mean, even if you look at
this, I think over 90% are
actually nonprofit institutions
across the state.
And I understand these are 4 MRI
machines, those high-tech
radiology service machines which
are not cheap by any means, and
so I just want us as, as a body
here in the committee to
understand that these are huge
costs, and I understand that you
feel that some of the for-profit
hospitals may benefit, but I
think they benefit.
For the benefit of all of us,
community members, patients that
are using their facilities that
need those MRI machines, um, in
order to have adequate
healthcare. Um, so I, I just, I
don't understand why we would
want to penalize these
healthcare providers in
hospitals. Um,
And my next question is, I know
the hospital equipment loan uh
council's been in existence for
35 years. Why change the program
now?
Madam Chair representative, so I
just wanted to
make it
clear.
Equipment will still be
able to receive the tax
abatement.
So MRI machines and any other
sort of health health related
equipment.
Continues to receive the tax
abatement.
The only thing that is not
Going to be receiving the, the,
the, the tax abatement going
forward is if it's not really
equipment.
If it's real property, so if
it's
Again, I'll go back to the
parking garage. If it's a
parking garage, you don't get to
tax evade the parking garage.
That's the only thing that we're
moving. And yes, 30 years ago,
um, I believe, as you mentioned,
hospitals and all other
hospitals we're using this to
finance and purchase uh
equipment that provided direct
healthcare services.
day
Uh, I, I, you know, I can only
speak for Bernalillo County.
We have things like $30 million
parking garages.
are shifting that tax burden.
To every other property owner in
the county. So, um,
That's a, a, a policy decision,
um that this party and, and, and
that you all would, would need
to make. We just simply do as
we're told at the county level.
I, I understand that and, and
let's just go back to parking
garage because I know how
important that is. If you're
going to Presbyterian downtown
or UNM. How hard is it to get a
parking, those parking garages
are very important, um,
especially for those people or
members of our community that
are wheelchair bound or they're
truly going to get their
services and the physicians are
in those hospital facilities,
especially again UNM
Presbyterian.
Um, people that may be on
crutches, um, our dear Jennifer
Jones, who's rolling around, um,
trying to park nearby is very
important and so, uh, taking out
just using a a empty parking
garage. I have not seen an empty
parking garage at any hospital
facilities in a very long time.
I don't think he said anything
about empty parking. He did. He
referred to the empty parking
garage.
That was his first statement,
Madam Chair Representative,
respectively, I do mention a
parking garage. It is for
administrative staff and for the
doctors and the employees, but I
did not ever say that it was
empty.
Thank you. So the very full
parking garage and so
I guess I just have concerns on
where the savings to the
hospital facilities are going to
be passed on and and my fear is
it's going to be passed on to
the patients, um, and then just
reading um the synopsis from the
Attorney General with their
significant issues, um, talking
about conflict with our other
state law. I think we just
really need to look at, um, the
overview that he gave us,
looking at is, is, is this even
going to be allowed, um,
In law, so those are all my
comments. I just, I'm really
concerned on, on where the money
is going to go on this savings.
That hospitals were provided by
this.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next we have
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative
Chavez. um, what is your name,
sir?
Madam Chair Representative, it's
uh Damian Lara.
Damien, if it's easy for you.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. I, I
appreciate your clarifying the
real property aspect of the bill
that I, I think that is
important to look at, but I do
have some questions, um, and
they may be very basic, um, the,
the FIR that we all have on page
2.
I just was, I was just now
looking at the fiscal
implications past helock
financing. Uh, can you tell me
more about the, this list of um
Hospitals, um, or groups is are
these?
Entities that have taken
advantage of this, um, tax.
The absence of tax in the past.
And I, and I don't see my
hospital on there. I'm just
curious about why that would be.
A chair representative, um, so,
again, as it's mentioned in the
FIR this is since 1985. So these
are all of the Bond series that
have been issued out, um, you'll
see someone here since, you
know, 2008 or 2005, 2004.
The the law only allows for a
30-year maximum uh bond series.
So many of these have probably
already been expired. Um, I, I,
unfortunately, I can't speak to
each individual bond series, um,
as I, as I've mentioned, some
rural hospitals really genuinely
do need this as a financing
mechanism where they go to the
um lone hospital Equipment
council. They issue out bonds,
and then over the course of 30
years, they're paying off that
amount.
Other hospitals use this as a
tax abatement process. They go
to the lone hospital equipment
loan council. They issue out the
bonds. They themselves purchase
those bonds again, and the bond
is paid off, but they're
receiving the tax abatement for
the duration of that period,
which could be up to 30 years.
So currently, if, if a hospital
has real property that they are
currently abating, they will
continue to receive that
abatement and that tax savings
until the bond.
Expires, they decide to
refinance, they decide to sell
or, or any other mechanism.
going forward, however, they, if
they build this again, has
nothing to do with the cost of
buildings or anything like that.
It's just simply that they would
not receive the tax abatement.
That's not to say that they
can't federally depreciate their
assets and receive tax savings
through the federal government,
uh, which, again, if you're a
business owner and you have real
property, typically the life of
that building is depreciated
over 25 or 27 years, and you
receive uh tax savings from the
federal government. Um, again,
that's a policy decision for
this body to make. It seems like
the federal government
Uh, would be a better
Entity to provide property tax
savings for hospitals rather
than the residents of the county
in which these
Bill. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Damien. That's
helpful. So I'll give you an
example of what I'm concerned
about from my district. Um, I
know we're looking at the
possibility soon of of building
a new hospital facility. How
will this bill affect my
hospital.
Madam Chair Representative, if
they go to the bonds and receive
those bonds prior to July 1st of
2025, this bill would not affect
them. However, if they go to the
council after the effective
date, they would not receive
the, the loans or the bonding
authority for real property.
They could still purchase any uh
healthcare related equipment,
but not for the building of real
property, your structures or
purchase of land or things of
that nature.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Um, so do you see this,
this chain of uh how the money
flows here. Do you see this
affecting access of care?
Um
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I don't believe in Bernalillo
County or in Santa Fe County,
um, unfortunately, I'm, I'm not.
Well versed enough in the entire
County or I'm sorry in the
entire state to speak for each
individual county's healthcare
needs, uh, or if there are as,
as there are in your county
hospitals that need this to
actually break ground and build
uh facilities.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and you
bring up a really good point
that we have a real variety of
of circumstances all over the
state, rural versus urban, um,
even though the what you
mentioned, the parking garage,
that, that's, that's not
something we deal with. I, I get
to park right in front of my
hospital. Actually, I get to be
dropped off right there, but
even when I'm not disabled, I
get to park right there. I don't
have any problem with that, but
I can see access to care being
affected greatly by not having a
parking garage.
In the middle of Albuquerque, it
would make it difficult for
people to um to access care.
And, and that is not um
That's, that's one issue I see,
Madam Chair, but the, the cost,
um, being passed along to
Um, to the people who need care
to patients.
I, I can, it seems to me like if
the facility is is being charged
more.
That eventually,
Uh, my phone's going off too,
uh, that eventually silence your
phones. Um, that, that money,
that cost is going to be passed
along to the patient and maybe
you need to, to address that uh
uh Representative Chavez.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, so again, I, I just wanna
reiterate that, that the current
cost savings that are hospitals
are receiving isn't coming from
the state.
It isn't coming from the federal
government. It's coming from
property owners in your county.
It's coming from your business
owners. It's coming from your
homeowners. That's who's paying
for it right now, regardless of
whether or not they go to the
hospital or they go to the
clinic.
Because if you, if you narrow, I
mean, it's, it's a, it's a very
Basic tenet of, of any tax
policy. If you narrow the base
of property.
Owners who pay taxes, that means
everybody else
has a higher rate. So, uh, the
example that I'll give is GRT,
right? So,
We exempt
Medicine and food and hospital
equipment, and consumables and
everything else. And by the time
you're done,
Your rate instead of being 2 or
3% is at 8 or 9%.
So, I understand that you have a
concern that patients will be
bearing the cost that the
hospitals are currently saving
right now.
What I'm trying to explain is
that that that cost.
is currently being born by every
other single property owner in
your county.
Their taxes, their property
taxes are higher.
Because
The hospitals are not paying for
that property taxes.
The, the, the mill rate, the
yield control formula, because
you narrowed the the value of
the base of taxpayers has to
increase, so everybody else's
taxes currently, they're paying
more because hospitals and other
exempt uh property owners are
not paying taxes for on their
real property.
Thank you. I really appreciate
this discussion, um, tax is not
my area of expertise, but I, you
bring up a really good point, is
that money comes from somewhere,
and I'm trying to wrap my mind
around this as my county manager
would, because I think that that
makes a big difference. I would
love to see the possibility
like, well, the likelihood based
on what you're saying that my
property taxes would decrease if
this bill goes into effect. My,
but I don't think that's gonna
happen.
I, I've never, I don't know.
I don't think my property taxes.
I'd like to go back and look to
see how when was the last time
property taxes in my county or
any county in New Mexico
decreased. I'm just curious
about that.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, again, I, I,
unfortunately, I can't speak for
Donana, Luna, or Hidalgo. I can
tell you that when I took office
in 2023, um, steadily, uh, meal
rates had gone up, um, by the
2024 tax bill, it had gone down
by 0.38 mils. Um, so in my
county, because of the current
and correct valuations that
we're taking forth and making
sure that we're.
Having correct and current
assessments for everybody.
We have seen, um, mill rates go
down in Bernalillo County
because of that. Um,
And, you know,
Many people in industry have
I have that same stuff. I have
discussions with them both on
the residential and the
non-residential prices, um.
So I, I mean, again, I'm
unfortunately, Madam Chair,
Representative, I can't speak to
every single county, but I know
that in Bernalillo County, the
mill rates have gone down
because values have been
increased and because values
have been
Dispersed fairly and equitably
across all property owners. So
again, if you broaden the base
of property taxpayers, then the
rate will go down, uh, and I
have seen that for a fact in
Vernalillo County for the 2024
tax year.
So you have, you have seen, I'm
sorry, Madam Chair, um,
So you've seen the county
property tax has gone down. Is
that what you were telling me?
Madam Chair, uh, representative.
I've seen the mill rate come
down.
Um, which is the
Tax rate, right? So, um,
Again, I'll, I'll try and give
the example of GRT, right? GRT,
um,
Goes down
Do you pay more or less? I don't
know. It depends on how much you
buy, I guess, right? But the
rate goes down. Um, and that's
what I'm trying to explain. So
right now, the, the, the savings
that you're speaking about.
It is borne by every other
property owner, regardless of
whether or not um they go to the
hospital or if they're a patient
in your county.
If we were to shift that burden,
hospitals typically get
reimbursed for fees for
services, right? So Medicaid,
Medicare, all of the insurance,
all of those stuff. So that
cause for those patients, it
costs do increase because they
have to pay property, then
Medicaid, Medicare, health
insurance, all of that stuff
would have to pay for that.
Additionally, the federal
government reimbursed hospitals
for the depreciation of assets
they own under real property.
That's just a tax savings
mechanism that the federal
government provides to any
business who is depreciating
real property.
And they will get reimbursed for
that as well.
So again, this is a policy
decision whether or not you
think hospitals should receive a
break based on increasing
property taxes for the residents
in your county, or whether or
not that hospital should ask the
federal government to be and to
be reimbursed through Medicaid,
Medicare insurance, as well as
through their federal income tax
returns when they are federally
depreciating real property, they
get a break on their income
taxes based on that as well.
That is a policy decision again,
is, is, um, Madam Chair,
representative, you've mentioned
both of you. The money has to
come from somewhere. Um, the,
the question is here, is that
this bill is saying, let's shift
that property tax burden away
from your residents from your
homeowners and your business
owners.
Back onto the federal
government.
Medicaid, Medicare, and
insurance who would have to pay
for the services that are being
provided by those uh hospitals.
Thank you very much.
I Madam Chair.
Like we said,
The money comes from somewhere.
So I think what I'm hearing you
say is that we can pass this
bill and prices for healthcare
will go up, and then we will,
OK.
I see you need to, you need to
add something to that. Go ahead,
Madam Chair Representative, I
cannot speak.
For hospitals. I cannot speak
whether or not, um, you know,
$30 million or the, the center
series in 2022 or any of these
will actually see.
Costs go up. I do not know that.
But I do know that if the
hospital owns their
Real property. They can
federally depreciate that and
receive pro or receive.
Income tax savings.
For that.
OK. I, and
That doesn't conflict with what
I was about to say, but I was
about to say is more than
likely, when a hospital has
increased costs, those costs are
passed along to the patient, and
it looks like from what you've
explained to me that when that
happens, and it will happen if
hospitals have increased cost
that we will be looking at
Trying to increase Medicaid
reimbursement rates and that
sort of thing that we are
constantly doing to try to
relieve the excess cost to
patients. Money comes from
somewhere, um, I, I hope we can
figure this out. I, I don't, I
don't think I can support this
bill. I hope my county manager
isn't mad at me, but, but I
think in principle, I, I can't
support it. I, I also wanted to
mention one other thing, um,
it's an ideological difference
that you stated in the very
beginning.
And that is that in the
Constitution that we're required
to fight for the right not to be
taxed. I disagree completely. We
should not have to tell the
government to, uh, we should not
have to vote against taxes.
That's a principle in the
Constitution, I believe that
that um just stands on its own
that we should not be overtaxed,
and I think that's why why we
exist as our country today, so
there's an ideological
difference that we're constantly
struggling with.
And uh I just wanted to state
that, not that we have to
discuss it, but
Agree to disagree on that, so
thank you, Eleanor, for, for, I
mean, representative Chavez, um.
Um, I appreciate your, um, your
desire to, to help with
healthcare access and so forth,
but I don't think that this this
is something that New Mexico
will benefit from, so appreciate
that. Thank you, um, Madam
Chair.
Representative Herndon.
Where you can speak.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
Uh, presenters, one of the
things that I, I think it's
really important to look at is
how this, everybody actually
benefits from what you're
describing. And if, for example,
and tell me if I'm correct on
this, we are looking at a
county, for example, and we must
collect $1000. So if we only
have one person who's paying
taxes, that taxes on $1000 but
if we have 5 people who paying
on that $1000 their tax
liability is reduced. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair Representative, that
is correct. And the other item
that I think I hear you saying
is that even if a hospital is
taxed because of the
depreciation that they're
allowed to take on their
property, that is a deduction on
their federal income tax
returns, anything else that they
are putting on, maybe on the
estate tax returns, so that is
still an item that is available
for them for reduction. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair Representative, that
is correct, and, and that is on
section 2 of the bill analysis
as well for the fiscal
implications as well that
indicates that. Yes, ma'am. So
what could really happen and
with respect to what you're
presenting, is that people who
live in counties will have their
taxes reduced if they're going
to the hospital, that could help
them if they have to pay for a
hospital bill, but hospitals are
also still getting a tax break.
So this really is a good
indication on how everybody
could
We through the process that
you're proposing.
I'm sure Representative, I would
agree with that. Yes, ma'am. All
right. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you presenters.
Representative Kate, thank you,
Madam Chair, and, and thank you
very much for presenting this
and I'm so very proud to sit on
this committee. Thank you for
the questions. Um, does this
only pertain to hospitals? Is it
medical clinics or private
practices?
Madam Chair Representative, this
is any facility that is defined
as a health uh as a qualifying
healthcare facility that would
go through to the um hospital
health equipment council and ask
for uh a bond to be issued for
them.
Um, but again, it would not be
the equipment. I mean, it, it
Again, this was 30 years ago.
Equipment 30 years ago meant
equipment, um, equipment in
today's language means
Real property, parking garages,
you know, you name it. Um, and,
and all we're trying to do or,
you know, all, all this bill is,
is trying to do is to say if
Equipment means equipment.
Um, that's what it was, so, um,
it, it, it depends on, on the
definition, again, of
If they're a qualified
healthcare entity. Many can be
because again, I think the bill
was meant to help rule um
healthcare facilities receive.
Machinery that sometimes costs
more than a building in, you
know, Lee County or Chavis
County or, uh, you know, in some
of these rural counties where
land is very cheap and, um, but,
you know, an MRI machine may,
may cost more. Um, so, um, I, I,
I guess that's the long way of
saying it depends.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and, and, and thank you uh very
much, Damian, um, so just for
us, uh, non-tax people. I'm just
clarifying it, it, the
qualifying entities are
healthcare facilities that
already meet the standard of
being able to apply for these uh
grain or these bonds for
equipment, healthcare equipment,
correct? Madam Chair,
Representative, that is correct,
yes. Thank you. And
Um, and I'm sorry I'm putting
you on the spot, but you are the
tax assessors, so, um, what
other tax benefits just the
state of New Mexico offer
hospitals.
Um, so again, I know that the
GRT uh is one of them, um.
There's, uh, in, in for um
Possibly they also have the
ability to do um hospital
districts where they can impose
an additional levy, uh, on all
property owners to help pay for
costs, um, I'll, I'll give the
example of, of you and MH, um,
right? They, they have the
authority to set up a hospital
district to pay for costs for,
and that does get born equally
among all property owners based
on value, um, you know, those
are just a few that I can name
off of the top of my head, Madam
Chairs representative. OK. Thank
you.
very much.
Representative, um, Senna
Cortez.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. There were some
statements made today that that
were made as statements and not
quite as questions, and I want
to just reframe it because I
would like to get the answer to
the question, so why would we
want to increase costs to build
and maintain health facilities
in a state that is currently
struggling to provide healthcare
services.
Madam Chair Representative,
again, I, I don't know if this
bill would increase costs to
build, um, you know, costs to
build are factors of labor
shortages, post pandemic, supply
chain issues, um, the cost of
acquisition of land and things
of that nature. Um, as far as
cost to continue to own the
property, then yes, then you,
you're talking about property
taxes. I don't know if that
Affects the price to build or
not. I, I'm not qualified to
speak on, on, on that. But if
Madam Chair Representative, if
there are increased costs to
build and increased costs for
the hospital, and they need to
compensate and also raise
prices.
To get their money back.
Would you agree, Madam Chair
Representative.
Representative, again, I don't
know that property taxes.
Increase the cost to build.
Right, because you don't pay
property taxes when you're
building. Right, but Madam Chair
Representative, but if you're
paying more money out of your
bottom line, you will need to
compensate somewhere.
And if hospitals are just paying
more money.
They need to increase costs to
compensate for their money.
And so at the end of the day,
Who's compensating for all of
the costs. Hospitals and then in
return people. Representative,
I, I don't think that those
facts are, are in evidence that
We can't say that this is, you
know, if you do this bill, then
this will happen as the assessor
has said. So we really can't go
down that road because we don't,
can't tell the future, so, and,
and I will remind the committee
that many, most of the hospitals
in New Mexico are owned by out
of state um multibillion dollar
corporations.
With all respect, Madam Chair
Representative, if the
distributor has to pay more
money, for example, a coffee
shop and they have to pay more
money for their cups in return,
they charge more money for the
coffee of the customer to
compensate for the costs of the
cups. And so in return if
hospitals are paying more money
out of their bottom line, they
will have to increase costs at
the end of the day, and that
goes.
towards the people. I'll go to
my next question. Thank you,
Madam Chair,
the horse, you can stop.
Wow
So my next question, thank you
so much, Madam Chair
Representative.
Who are the beneficiaries?
On this bill.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I would say that the
beneficiaries in this bill are
all of the other.
Uh, property owners who have
property in the county in which
one of these hospitals, uh, is
situated in so you're saying,
Madam Chair Representative, that
People with all of a sudden
receive
Lower property tax.
Madam Chair Representative,
again, I cannot speak
individually for these counties,
generally, if yield control
formula is applied.
And there is an increase in the
tax base, meaning there are uh
um Madam Chair is representative
heard and indicated if there are
more people paying taxes, that
means that the yield control
formula would take an effect,
and the rate
That they pay would be reduced,
and so all things being equal,
yes, you brought in the base,
you lower the rate.
You as an individual pay less
taxes.
But the same amount of taxes are
being collected by the taxing
authorities which include
hospitals, school districts.
Um, municipalities, counties. So
yeah, so if, if you increase
the, the base, you decrease the
rate. So I would say yes, that
is correct representative.
Wow, I've never seen that in all
of my life. I mean, that would
be amazing if I paid lower
property tax, Madam Chair
Representative.
Um representative, he, he didn't
say that you, you're looking for
black and white and this is not
black and white. It depends on
so many factors. So if we could
go down a road that um actually
questions relating to the bill,
not what ifs because we can't
madam chair, thank you so much
and representative. I assure you
my questions are very pertinent
to the bill because one decision
impacts.
Other variables. And so I assure
you they are pertinent and thank
you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. So my next
question is, who is adversely
impacted if this bill goes
through.
Madam Chair Representative
Representative, again, I, it,
it's, I think it's, it's.
Madam Cha indicated it would be
the
Corporations that own hospitals
in the state of New Mexico. So
they would be adversely impacted
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair Representative, as
far as them having to pay their
fair share of property taxes on
real property. Yes, ma'am. The,
that's something that they
currently don't do, they would
have to pay for property taxes
in the future. Um,
I
If that's your definition of
adverse, then yes, ma'am. Um.
Yes.
So Madam Chair Representative,
could this bill discourage
private investment in New
Mexico's healthcare
infrastructure by limiting
assets eligible for financing
under the hospital Equipment
loan A. Madam Chair
Representatives, so again, um,
My understanding is for some of
the larger um corporations,
they're not using this to
actually finance the
construction and building of it.
They're using it to, as a tax
abatement mechanism.
Um, I can't speak for everybody
on this series.
But, you know, that, that would
probably be something that the
physical impact or the FIR can
ask the
Hospital, uh, equipment loan
council to identify how many uh
corporations are actually
Um, paying off the bonds, um,
through the issuance of bonds
and then going out to the
secondary market and how many of
them are actually issuing the
bonds.
Paying the bonds themselves,
owning the property, and then
simply using this as a mechanism
to abate their property tax
liability. Um, again, I can't
speak for, um, 30 years' worth
of um bonds that have been
issued out. Um, so,
Again, this is Madam Chair, uh,
representative, this is uh
another what if, if, if, uh
billion dollar corporation.
can afford to buy and build and
do this, they don't have to go
through the loan equipment
council to finance the building
of their real property. There
simply using it to uh the um as
a mechanism for tax abatement.
So for, for example, um,
industrial revenue bonds is
another example that many
businesses take advantage to
spur economic development. Many
of these corporations that come
in.
and receive an industrial
revenue bond, they themselves
are the purchasers of the bond
itself.
And it is an economic
development incentive for them
to come in because we are simply
abating their property tax
liability because we put in some
parameters like you will hire 10
amount of people, uh, with
certain amount of salaries, you
will pay a certain amount of
gross receipts, taxes, you will,
uh, and uh one of the
requirements for those
industrial revenue bonds is that
50% or more of the manufacturing
or the property or I'm sorry,
the, the income is being
generated from.
State. So
It, it, it
It doesn't preclude a hospital
from
Uh, if it's a larger corporation
that has, again, you know, a
billion dollars worth of assets
and financing because they, they
can pay for it themselves and in
many cases, they are already
paying for it themselves,
they're simply using the uh
help.
To abate the real property
taxes.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative. Um, I grew up in
a household with two older
brothers in a military dad and
so we did debate and
deliberation, so this was just a
Tuesday in my house, so you're
doing a great job. I don't
necessarily agree, but you're
doing a great job. Um, I do have
one more question, Madam Chair
Representative. Um, what
safeguards are in place to
ensure that hospitals and
clinics will not face unexpected
financial burdens on tax
liabilities once um this is
enacted in July.
1 2025 deadline for real
property transactions.
Madam Chair, Representative, so
again, um,
If they are currently receiving
Their tax abatement, they will
continue to receive that
abatement for the life of the
bond that's been issued.
Um, and if they're in the
process of building and they've
gone through that. They have
until Jan uh July 1st to go
ahead and complete that process.
So
Again, this is, this is not a
retroactive tax, you know,
hospitals aren't going to see
their property taxes go up on
July 1st.
This is only for future real
property that's going to go
forward. And again, rural
hospitals, clinics, qualifying
that need to finance this
because they can't afford a
front the cash to buy an MRI
machine. They will continue to
receive that benefit.
OK.
One last question.
Madam Chair Representative, will
you clarify how the tax base now
on existing hospitals raises
taxes.
Madam Chair, representative, so
again, um, yield control formula
adjust.
So based on the budgets of all
of the taxing authorities,
including hospital districts.
Everybody submits a budget
unless they start asking for
less money, yield control
formula indicates that we need
to have approximately the same
amount of money that you had
last year to continue to run
critical county public safety,
fire safety, uh, services.
And so when you narrow the base
of property owners who pay
taxes, that means everybody
else.
has to pay more to make up the
difference.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. That concludes
my questions. Thank you
Representative Anaya. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, first, I want
to thank the sponsor for sitting
down with me to talk about the
original intent of this bill,
um, and how the original intent
has kind of been skewed
throughout the years, um, I
don't think I was understanding
that when I first read it. So
thank you for that
clarification. Um, you know, one
of the, one of the things that I
try to think about when we're
passing legislation.
is like, when we pass it, what
other bills are coming with it?
What have we passed in years
previous, what bills are coming
up right now. And I know that
we've passed a series of bills,
one in particular, um, and
forgive me, Madam Chair, I
cannot, uh, think of the name of
it, but it, it was essentially a
federal matching bill that we
passed recently that's about to
bring billions and billions of
dollars to hospitals here in
this state. And I'm really glad
for it. I'm really glad that it
passed, um, because I know that
we need to
You know, be able to sustain our
hospitals. But in terms of this
bill, I think it's actually
really timely. Um, I think it's
really timely because we have
the opportunity right now to not
necessarily go back and collect
taxes from years previous, but
to say, look,
In terms of your financial
planning for your institution,
for your hospital. Here's what's
about to happen. So as you
purchase real property, you have
the ability to plan for it and
say, OK, what are my expenses
going to be?
And so I do think that's fair. I
think that it's timely. Um, but
the other piece of it that I
think about is like it's a
really good opportunity for us
as a legislature to sit here and
say, OK.
We have a lot of things to
balance. We have hospitals, we
have entities, we have to
balance, but we also have to
balance the needs of our people.
And people who are trying to
make it work, right? They're
going to their different jobs,
they're trying to make it work.
So, um, to, to the point
earlier, Madam Chair, about
Um, you know, that
The choice or the ability, you
know, to pass along those
Um, cost to patients. If you're
looking forward, then it's a
choice.
It's a choice as you're getting
billions of dollars coming back
from the federal government,
whether or not you as an
institution are going to
increase costs on patients, or
whether you are going to build
it into your regular operating
costs moving forward. Um, and so
I do see myself, like I know my
district has a lot of um
healthcare, um, in it. I have
Presbyterian Hospital, um, in my
district. I have UNM. I have,
you know, medical complexes,
etc.
Um, but for me, I think it's
actually fair to say, hey, if
you're going to buy property
into the future, here's what
it's going to be, they can build
that into their costs. And in
the meantime, not saying that we
go back and it'll lower taxes
for people.
Um, you know, previously or even
moving forward. But what I see
it as is
Not necessarily a perspective to
lower taxes into the future, but
to not have them as high.
And so I hope that makes sense
to folks, um, and I just wanted
to thank the sponsor, um, for,
for the clarifications that she
provided me earlier, um, and for
this discussion. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. And just as a
summary, this will not affect
anything that currently exists,
it's only future, so worrying
about the, you know, the
hospital in County X.
Unless they, I mean, until and
unless they decide to do
something more to build
something more, buy something
more, um, nothing will change,
so, so it's totally within their
control whether they are part of
this or not, whether they need
to use the, the fund to, to fund
things, so it's not retroactive
and I think that's really
important. So I will entertain
emotion.
And I'm sure I'd like to move
for due pass.
I'll suck it.
So a motion by Representative
Cates and a second by
Representative Ferrari, Jayden,
will you take the role?
Representative Anaya.
Yes.
Representative Kates.
Representative E. Chavis.
Representative N Chavis.
Representative Ferrari.
Yes.
Representative Jones. No.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Santa Cortez.
Repres uh
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair. Thompson, yes.
Hit by a vote of 6 to 3, you
have a due pass, sorry about the
delay we were making sure we
crossed our T's and dotted our
I's.
Next on our agenda is House Bill
74 firefighter and EMS provider
peer Support Act. This has been
presented by
Madam Chair.
Thompson.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
apologies to the committee and
to the audience for it being the
rep Thompson day in the House
Health and Human Services
Committee, but I prefiled and
they got numbers right in a row
and we're trying to stay in
order.
So
Yes, it is on, is, are you not
hearing me?
OK.
So, um, House Bill 74 is a bill
that I've run before. Basically
what it is is a
A bill to allow emergency
responders, firefighters,
emergency service provider peer
Support Act. So it allows the
state.
Local and regional public fire
agencies to create peer support
services um that are
confidential and limiting
liability. So where this came
from is some, a few years ago, I
had a firefighter call me and
say um if you don't have PTSD on
your first day, you have it on
your 2nd.
And so what he also told me was
that the supervisors encouraged
folks to um deal with it by
using alcohol.
Um, and that was kind of
shocking and and very
concerning. So, so this is, is a
way for those providers to have
support from folks who have also
been through the same thing, and
basically it gives permission
and it sets up a framework. The
curriculum will be decided by
the state fire marshal, and
there will be training if you
want to be a peer support
worker, there will be training
and my expert is Miguel Titman
from.
Albuquerque Fire Department.
He's the president of their
union, and I will let him add
whatever he chooses.
Uh, Madam Vice Chair
Representatives, uh, my name is
Miguel Titman. Uh, I'm the
president of IAFF Local 244
which represents Burnley County
Fire Department firefighters in
Albuquerque firefighter.
Uh, fire department
firefighters, as well as the uh
vice president of the New Mexico
Professional Firefighters
Association that represents
pretty much all professional
firefighters in New Mexico. Uh,
the reason that we need a bill
to reinforce the foundation of
peer support, um, is because we
don't have it. It's always been
up to the um the individual fire
departments, the individual, um,
Agencies and and memberships,
locals to kind of provide and
spearhead this behavior health
has always been on the bottom of
any list for in terms of uh
financial support. Uh, as you
can see, there's no
appropriations this year. We had
appropriations last year, but
this is, this is really just to
um to enhance the foundation of
this very needed um resource for
our firefighters for obvious
reasons, firefighters are
exposed to, um, occupational
stress, coroner's death, um,
disaster, human suffering on.
on a daily basis for at least 25
years. That's, that's how long
our careers are. Um.
Life is hard for everybody, so
couple are sprinkling all that
traumatic stress, chronic
stress, um, you have, uh,
recipes for disasters. You have
recipes for bad outcomes and and
we see it all the time, um,
we're going through it.
As we speak, uh, you had a
firefighter in Santa Fe,
complete suicide yesterday, uh,
their peer support team is
overwhelmed. We deployed our
peer support team from
Albuquerque to come uh support
theirs. So this is the reason
why we need this, not just
suicide, uh, substance abuse,
post-traumatic stress disorder,
all of marital issues, um, all
of the other issues that, that
happen in life, uh, that are get
exacerbated and amplified,
excuse me, by um the traumatic
stress.
and the chronic stress that a
firefighter sees and absorbs
over 25 year career.
Um, so what this does is going
to
Protect our peer supporters, uh,
with confidentiality, it's going
to protect the, the people that
need the peer support with
confidentiality, it's going to
give our peer support teams and,
and, um
Members, the liability that they
need to be able to do this in a
way that they will feel
comfortable and never be
attacked, um.
Or litigated against based off
of things that they know heard
has said.
Uh, so in a nutshell, um, that
is why we need this bill. I just
wanted to add is for a father of
4 daughters is very, very great
to see an entire panel of female
representatives, uh, we'll tell
uh Representative Martinez we
miss him, but this is pretty
cool for me to see.
Somebody take a picture.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
with that, we will stand for
questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Lots of questions,
but before we go to questions,
what we'll do is we're gonna go
first go to uh the audience to
see is there anyone who stands
in opposition to this bill. I
see no hands, so is there anyone
who stands in support of this
bill.
So would you please come
forward?
OK
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Charles
Goodmacher lobbyist with healthy
climate in New Mexico.
We all know that fires are
happening more frequently and
with greater intensity or
they're becoming fiercer,
creating so much more hazard for
the firefighters and other first
responders.
I cannot for a minute, uh,
contemplate the stress that the
firefighters have to experience.
This bill is very, very
important. We're going to need
more firefighters, need to
retain all the ones we have.
This is a great step forward.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Good marker.
Next.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank the sponsor,
thank you President and my name
is Gus Pedrotti. I am a
firefighter paramedic with
Albuquerque Fire Rescue and
Albuquerque Fire Rescue is here
to stand in support of this
bill. Uh, our peer support team
is being used more and more by
those inside of our department
to greater and greater
successes. And as President
Titman pointed out, we are also
deploying resources across the
state now. And it is our hope
that this bill will help
encourage other folks around the
state and create resources
that'll allow them to be able to
support their own departments as
well. So thank you for hearing
this, Bill. We hope you'll
support it as well.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam Vice
Chair, members of the committee,
John Lipshutz with the New
Mexico Federation of Labor
AFL-CIO, representing tens of
thousands of workers in every
corner of the state and in every
sector. Uh, we're here in strong
solidarity with our first
responders, our firefighters.
These are people who literally
run towards danger and chaos for
a living, um, and if we cannot
help them with mental health,
then really what are we doing?
Um, for those reasons and all
the other state.
We urge your support of this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Now, I'll go.
Is there anyone in opposition to
this bill on Zoom?
I see no hands. Is there anyone
on Zoom who's in support of this
bill.
Well, thank you. I will call
upon you.
I, I can't
What's this Gabriel.
Gabrielle, you are first. Would
you please go ahead and speak?
You have 2 minutes.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Gabrielle Dietrich, and
I am the executive director of
Nami New Mexico. Nami New Mexico
is an organization that believes
in peer support. We believe it
is a powerful means to offer
mental health support and
support mental wellness in our
communities. We are in strong
support of this bill and hope
that you will support it as
well. Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you. And next we have
Anthony.
Good morning, everybody. Can you
guys hear me?
Yes, we can hear you.
Madam, uh, Anthony Lebo state
fire marshal, uh, assistant
chief fire marshal of the state
fire marshal right next to me,
uh, we are in strong support of
this, uh, to.
Help and assist our our local
firefighters throughout the
state, so we stand in strong
support of this, uh, bill.
Thank you very much. And Pat
your next.
I'm sorry, that's Paul, not Pat.
Uh hello, my name is uh
Paulierce. I am a retired
firefighter. I retired as the
fire chief in Rio Rancho about 3
years ago. I've been involved in
uh uh behavioral health
initiatives for firefighters for
about the last decade, and we
have made a lot of progress in
this in this effort to help
firefighters and EMS personnel
across the state. Um, but the,
the, the found
of all of this is a peer support
program, and I believe that
having the support from the
state and from the state fire
marshal is critical to keeping
uh firefighters and um
Uh, EMS personnel, uh,
help with the, the, um,
Uh, the stressors that they go
through day in and day out. And
so I'm in strong support of
this. I do a lot of instruction
on health care, mental health
care support for first
responders, and I believe that
this would help us in meeting
our goals. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Now, we'll go to the,
to the committee, uh,
Representative Senator Cortez.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. I just want to
start off by saying thank you to
all of our first responders.
The way you put yourself in
harm's way on the front line so
that we can stay safe.
Thank you will never be enough,
and quite frankly, thank you
just feels shallow to adequate
to adequately express our
gratitude, and I just want to
say, Madam Chair,
representative.
Thank you for carrying this bill
to fight for our people, they're
fighting for us and this is a
small way that we can fight back
for you. Um, so I stand in full
support of this bill, Madam
Chair Representative, I do have
a friendly recommendation. I
would like to encourage the peer
support workers to become
certified because the use of the
language of peer support or peer
support teams could create
confusion with the role of
certified peer support workers,
and
That's a Medicaid billable
service and we just want to make
sure that those costs are being
covered. Um, again, Madam Chair
Representative, thank you so
much and thank you to our first
responders. Words will never be
enough for what you do for us.
Thank you, Representative. Next,
we have Representative Nicole
Chavis.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you for bringing
this, um, to us. I love that we
are now as a society that we are
no longer afraid of the stigmas
of behavioral health, and it is
so needed, um, I guess I just
have a question. Does the
current um police department or
other first responders have this
in place.
Do we know?
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
it depends, um, larger
municipalities and agencies like
Albuquerque and Buro County have
strong peer support teams,
smaller rural municipal
departments like Taos, uh, dump.
So, uh, even to tie in to
represent Senator Cortez's
comment. The reason we put in
the different um types of
training that the farm marshal's
office will be.
Obligated to, to provide.
There's a vast
variety of, of them, including
critical incident stressor
briefings, substance abuse,
grief support, line of duty line
of duty deaths, um, PTSD, um, so
we have a, a, a list in the bill
that uh we will have the State
farm Marshall govern that type
of training so that our teams
wherever they are in all four
corners of the state, big
cities, small cities, large
departments, small departments
all have resources to create
these teams, um, and, and many
Sometimes these teams need to be
deployed, uh, not just for
incidents like happened today,
it's very pertinent on my mind
right now, like a suicide, but
we've had um active shooter
events in Farmington uh in in El
Paso where we've deployed our
teams for critical incident
stress debriefings and peer
support and grief support. So
it's, it's very important that
every single agency, whether
they're big or small, um, have
this, uh, this foundational
support that they can build
these teams to answer your
question, it depends on, on who.
OK. Thank you so much, um, Madam
Chair and thank you for
answering that question. I just
think it's so important for our
first responders to have this
assistance. I mean, we've had
police officers that have been
killed in the line of duty. You
guys see the worst of the worst
every single day, and I think as
a committee, since we're passing
this, I just wonder, is there
any way we can build this across
the board for all first
responders while we're here at
this bill.
Madame Chair and Representative
Chavez, I have not been
approached this, this is, this
is the 2nd time or 3rd time
we've run this bill. I have not
been approached by anyone from
law enforcement uh which leads
me to believe and I that they
they are comfortable with what
they have. I mean, no one's
comfortable, but they feel like
they have the legal um authority
to do so. So if, if there's
anyone out there listening who
wants it to be for law
enforcement. I'm not sure this
is the
right Bill, but I'd be happy to
uh carry one for them if they
feel like they need it. Madam
Chair, thank you so much, and
I'm surprised this has come up
before and hasn't been passed,
so I hope that it does get past
this session and that we're part
of that process, so thank you.
Thank you. Uh, now we go to
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Thompson and
Mr. Titman.
I appreciate the bill too and,
and not to be just redundant. I
seeing this from the eyes of a,
a nurse who for the most part, I
worked in a hospital where, you
know, a clinical setting is so
much different than being on the
scene, out in the field and my
patients often came from, you
know, the field, um, it, I just
went.
Right back in my mind. I hadn't
thought of this in many years,
but this is a good example.
Years ago I had a 2 year old who
was who had a broken pelvis,
broken femur, was in traction
back in the day when we had
people in traction, and I
remember
He had been run over by his
mother accidentally. Mom's mom's
devastated. Babies crying. It
was, it was just an awful um
traumatic experience for me to
be that that child's nurse, but
I had to um.
I had to wash the tire tracks
off of his legs that were broken
and uh I could only imagine
being on the scene, and the
person who first responded to
that scene, how tragic that was
and how much more tragic it was
to have been there at that
moment when that happened. So,
um, can't say enough. Thank you
to you all for what you do for
us and um I'm curious mentor uh
representative Thompson.
Why did this bill fail last
year?
Madam Chair and Representative
Jones without being too.
Um
Graphic, maybe, um, there is a,
a committee on the Senate side
that
has headstones of many of my
bills.
We'll have to put the women
power behind it now.
Uh, well, let's hope that
doesn't happen to this one. I'm
in full, full support of it, um,
and the goal would be to, to get
reimbursement for anyone who
gets certified. Hopefully we can
promote that, um, as, as always,
being from the, I think the
furthest district, the, the
southernmost district is
difficult for me to get this
sort of thing down to to animus
to Lordsburg, but we have
exceptional volunteer
firefighters down there.
And with this apply, this
applies to volunteer
firefighters as well, Madam
Chair Representative Jones, yes.
Very good. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um,
Representative
I'm just in full support of this
bill. Glad. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Representative Cates. Uh thank
you, Madam Chair, and, and thank
you again for bringing this bill
forward, um, uh, Miguel, how
long is the Albuquerque Fire
Department been doing peer
support within their own
department.
Madam Chair Representative case,
it's a, it's a good question.
Um, it's not as easy as saying
it's been a certain year. There
have been factions of
firefighters that have brought
this forward at different times.
Um, we had a peer support team
went out. I've been 21 years. We
had a peer support team early
on, but it wasn't very
organized, which kind of goes
back to the reason for the bill
is that it's more organized and
it's more structured. It was
just people that were like, hey,
you can call me, you can talk to
me. Now we have classes that
teach people how to uh how to
listen, what to say, what not.
not to say what the definition
of of lethality is for
suicidality, um, how to deal
with, uh, critical incident
stress debriefing when you have
mass casualty events. So it's,
it's much more complex, and I
would say to answer your
question, um, we've had a very
functioning and advanced team
for about 7 to 8 years now in
Albuquerque.
Thank you so much. I, I think
that that is very important for
everyone to understand that the
Albuquerque Berlin, the fire
department has not only, you
know, we, we all, I believe,
understand the benefit of peer
to peer or when we're in a
trauma or stress uh related
occupations, but for your
leadership and your department's
leadership in developing
refining for 7 years.
figuring out what works, what
doesn't, how to become
consistent. Where's the
accountability of it, and then
spend the time to come up here.
3 year Madam representative
manager here, yeah, for the 3rd
year to make sure that you are
not just keeping this great uh
uh uh
this great
support for um your members, but
to make sure that we, it is
offered for all of our
firefighters across the state. I
am just um uh so pleased with
your dedication towards our
community, of course, it's a
firefighter, so thank you.
Oh thank you. Next we have
Representative uh
Anaya.
They get me and representative
of beta confused a lot. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, I just
want to thank you both for
bringing this back again this
year. Um, I just have a short
comment, um, it's really lifted
up what you're doing, um, Mr.
Tipman, Miguel, um, when you
walk into um.
The Firefighters union, it is
actually, I saw something I
wasn't expecting to see. Before
you open the door, or maybe it's
right after, there's a big sign
that says it's OK to ask for
help. And when you go and you
sit down in the waiting room,
it's another sign that says it's
OK to ask for help, and they
have this electronic billboard
that is saying the exact same
thing. And to me, it was
actually really surprising,
walking into a place that is
historically been a male
dominated space, male dominated
profession to see something like
this, and I just want to thank
you.
And commend you for that because
it wasn't something I was
expecting and for you to have a
program, start a program, um.
Um, and not have it be something
that's like secondary or like
hidden like, oh, hey, you can go
there to ask for help. It's
absolutely right in your face.
Um, and you are so proud of your
program, and I just want to
thank you for that, and that's
all I have, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Now we'll, we'll, uh,
Have a motion on this bill.
Um
I need to make it first.
We will have Representative
Thomas make the motion, uh,
representative Eleanor Chaves
make the motion Representative
Nicole Chavez to second it,
please.
that.
Uh, thank you, Madam Vice Chair.
I had a moment of
I don't know what that was.
I move uh to pass on this bill.
Thank you. Is there a second?
A second.
It's been seconded by
Representative Nicole Chavis. Is
there any opposition to the
bill?
said no opposition.
You have a due pass.
I,
our next bill is House Bill 76
congenital heart disease test
for infants.
We will continue with
Made him teared Thompson.
And you may begin whenever
you're ready. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So this bill we heard
about it in the interim
legislative Health and Human
Services Committee. I believe in
Rio Rancho, yes, so those of you
who are on that committee will
probably remember.
This bill was brought to me by
my expert witness, um, who is
the parent of a young man who
had a congenital cardiac.
Defect that went undiscovered.
So what she's brought to me and
what she, I, I'll let her tell
about it. But basically, the
purpose of this bill, there we
have a whole slew of newborn
tests that when you have a baby
that they must be tested for a
variety of um like PKU and, and
there's a pulse oximetry test,
unfortunately for infants with,
with, um, some cardiac.
effects, the pulse oxymmetry
test does not catch that. So
there will be a series of
questions that the parents fill
out.
That we'll talk about family
history, you know, did someone
in your, in close in the family
die of a heart attack before the
age of 4949, and if there's yes
to any of those, then there will
be a further test of an
echocardiogram on the infant's
heart to try and pick up
anything that um that was missed
by the pulse oximetry, and
according to the CDC, the
chances of an infant having a
congenital heart defect, um, is
3
more if there's a family history
of cardiac.
So I will let my expert witness
introduce herself and um fill
in, fill in a little more. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Mhm
Sorry about that. Um, well,
first I'd like to make a
statement. Um, I did provide an
advocacy sheet if you received
it this morning. Great.
Before you proceed, would you
introduce yourself? What was
your name,
my name is Sandra Sanchez
Farlander, and I am the founder
and president of Hole in the
Heart.
We are a nonprofit organization
here locally in New Mexico. We
are one of the first nonprofits
to promote awareness of
congenital heart defects.
We are also the first nonprofit
to
Partner with medical providers
in the state to provide CHD
education.
Congenital heart defects are the
most common birth defects,
affecting nearly 1 in 100
babies. CHD can range from mild
to life-threatening, requiring
specialized specialized lifelong
care.
Early detection is crucial, as
timely diagnose and treatment
can significantly improve
outcomes.
We are Sandra and Bob Farlander.
My husband is right here.
We are founders of Hole in the
Heart.
We advocate for CHD awareness,
education, and improved
healthcare access by working
with families, healthcare
providers, and legislators to
expand resources.
Promoting early screenings,
supporting specialized care and
ensuring no family faces CHD
alone.
Together we are building a
stronger, healthier future for
the CH community in New Mexico.
Yes, we do have um one of our on
our medical committee, our
medical advisory board, we have
Kelsey Lennbot on, she's
actually on Zoom.
And if you could please raise
your hand on Zoom so, so that
our operator can find you.
Yeah
Yes, Kelsey.
Hello.
Are you able to hear me? We can
hear you.
OK.
Thank you.
You may proceed with your
testimony.
Oh, OK. Um, thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Kelsey
Liebenh. I am a board member at
Hole in the Heart, a mother to a
child with congenital heart
disease, a registered nurse, and
currently training at the
University of New Mexico to
provide primary care as a nurse
practitioner to New Mexicans.
I stand in strong support of
House Bill 76.
Research has shown that the
social determinants of health,
such as distance to care.
Income and social support, among
others, influenced the access to
care for children with CHD and
the outcomes for those children.
With our state's high proportion
of patients eligible for public
insurance, our population is
especially vulnerable to these
social determinants of health,
and this bill will help provide
a safety net to supplement a
healthcare provider's judgment
to identify these children with
a higher propensity for
congenital heart defects that
are in our communities and get
them connected with specialists
and follow-up care quicker.
Increasing the quality and
length of life for these
children and preser preserving
families.
Children with CHD have the
potential to live long and
productive lives when they have
early diagnosis and treatment,
and they deserve every
opportunity for this.
I feel especially strongly about
this because this is the case of
my son.
Thank you for your
consideration, Madam Chair and
committee members, and I can
help answer questions that you
have.
Thank you very much.
Madam chair, uh, is there
another?
Would you like to have your
other experts speak?
All right. Thank you very much.
With that, we'll go to the
audience first, and is there
anyone here in support of this
legislation.
I see no hands. Is there anyone?
Thank you.
Would you like to speak? Yes.
I
Speaker
Yeah, um, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, thank
you for this opportunity to
present this bill to the House.
It is actually um
My name is Bob Farlander, and
I'm the father.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Is there anyone here in, in the
audience who opposes this
legislation.
I see no, no one standing in
opposition. I'm going to zoom.
Is there anyone on Zoom who's
standing in support of this
legislation.
Please raise your hand.
All right, Becky?
Yes, I apologize. I don't have
my last name on here, but my
name is Rebecca uh dear Madam
Chairwoman and member
distinguished members of the
committee.
My name is Rebecca Lane here and
I'm a pediatric ophthalmologist.
And I'm opposed to house Bill
76.
The reason why is that the
academy of of pediatrics and
cardiology, there's well well
good evidence that screening
with pulse oximetry catches 95%
of children with cardiac
disease. Uh, the screenings cost
200 the echocardiograms will
cost $2000 per patient. And the
estimated expense is 2 22,000 to
$40,000 per year, which is the
undue expense for, for patients.
In addition, me, I am a
pediatric ophthalmologist and I
screen babies in the NICU for a
blinding retinal disease, there
are only 2 of us in the state
and every patient has to get
transferred to uh our hospitals
loveless and UNM in order to be
screened and, and Presbyterian
to be able to be seen for those.
So when the patients are
discharged, there's just undue
travel burden and a lot of uh
just excessive exams that we do
based
on our screening criteria.
My concern is that there are not
enough pediatric cardiologists
to actually help perform and
interpret these echocardiograms.
And uh if there's no evidence to
support um
You know, just the, just the, I,
I added cost to the and quality
of care to the patients. I
really oppose it, just for the
undue burden on our medical
system and the, and the
excellent pediatric
cardiologists that are providing
the care in the state.
Thank you very much.
I see one other hand.
I did it. That's great.
I made it up.
I mean, I didn't make it up, but
I really feel strong about it
microphone is still on.
OK, Don.
Uh, hi, I'm not quite sure how
to uh change my name on this.
I'm actually Doctor Novak. I'm
one of the medical directors for
one of the NICU here in
Albuquerque. I am um opposed to
the bill, and I'd like to have
the opportunity, um, um, to, to
discuss why I am, uh, while on
the surface, uh, it seems like a
good idea to expand screening
guidelines. Um, I'd first like
to talk about
Um, we screening guidelines mean
and how they're developed. The
Academy of Pediatrics has very
well um
I thought out evident-based
guidelines for screening for
congenital heart disease that we
currently follow in the state of
New Mexico. Based on these
guidelines, I'm actually working
with the Department of Health,
uh, currently to review them. We
have not missed a single case of
congenital heart disease is what
I'm being told by the Department
of Health since the guidelines
have been implemented. Um, and
so to begin with, to, to uh
the screening process. We'll be
going against the American
Academy of Pediatrics, evidence
basis for congenital heart
disease screening.
Um, my second worry on this is
I'd like the um committee to be
aware that uh transporting uh
sick infants in New Mexico at
baseline is problematic. We have
one.
Uh, neonatal transport team for
the entire state of New Mexico.
So anytime we have a sick infant
in our regional hospitals who
need to come to a higher level
of care, all of which exist
solely in Albuquerque, we share
one neonatal transport team.
What that means is if I have a
team out getting one sick
infant.
Um, if I have another concurrent
in different hospitals sometimes
in the same hospital. That
infant has to wait until the
team is turned around, which
sometimes can take hours, up to
a day, depending on weather and
pilot time out.
Thank you, your, your time is
up.
Thank you for your testimony
this morning.
I'm gonna go to the committee
now.
Oh, I'm sorry. Just, just a
quick follow up, so there was
talk of um transporting sick
infants or if you look on the
top of page 4, lines 1 through
3.
If the facility doesn't have the
equipment or staff to perform
these tests. The facilities
shall provide the newborn
infant's parents a referral to
receive an echocardiogram.
So, so there's no transport, I
mean, and, and I'm not quite
sure she was saying these very
sick infants, if we don't know
that they have a cardiac issue,
they're not necessarily very
sick, it's very sick infants, so
I was a little confused by that,
but, but again, it's, it's not
like they have to be
helicoptered to Albuquerque. The
parents get a referral and then
they can go and get their, their
infant checked.
Page 4. Well, actually, it
starts at the bottom of page 3.
Um, line 25 on page 3 and then
lines 12, and 3 on page 4.
Adam Chair
Committee members, I'd like to
make a statement after um.
The ones that spoke before. Um,
first of all, I'd like to thank
all medical providers in our
state for the great care that
they have done with CHT.
Uh, children, um, based off of
our own experience, our son was
not diagnosed until the age of
15.
He was chronically ill since
birth.
We saw over 300 medical
providers, not only in the state
of New Mexico, but also at
Phoenix Children's Hospital,
Dallas Children's Hospital, and
he was actually born in New
Jersey.
This is not just a New Mexico
issue. This is a national issue.
And the lack of adequate heart
screenings is a problem.
The current screening that is
offered.
1/3 of newborns that have ACHD.
Leave the hospital without being
diagnosed.
This creates long years of
chronic illness in newborns, and
children, which happen to us.
Our son not only.
Um, went through physical
disabilities. His mental health
suffered.
As you can imagine,
Getting heart surgery at the age
of 15 after going through Ode of
longsuffering of being tested
from head to toe.
Messed with his mental health.
He had developmental delays, he
had physical therapy,
occupational therapy, every
therapy.
Due to these chronic illness.
Thank you Madam Chair, just to
follow up on that, there was
discussion of the cost.
Just
Do, do a quick piece of math and
the 300 visits in the therapies,
that's, I'm guessing, just out
on a limb. It's more than $2000
for 300 or 300 visits with, with
uh medical providers, so, so
there people are concerned with
the cost, but we have to look at
the cost of the $2000 versus the
cost to the family and to the
insurer, to whoever over the.
course until it is diagnosed or,
or, you know, there's children,
um, sometimes die from, you
know, cardiac arrest when they
have these things, so $2000 to
me seems like a, a real bargain.
Madam Chair, could I ask
somebody to please be the
timekeeper on the public
comment. I'm trying to do it and
um.
Thank you. We're just trying to
read the screen, uh, that, so
let me just say to those on the
Zoom, we have limited the uh
comment to 5 members on the, on
Zoom. They have been 2 that have
already spoken, so there will be
3 more and if we're taking
comment in opposition right now.
If you are in support, I will
come back with to you and that
will, I will take the next 3
that are on the screen.
Melissa, you're next. Hi, can
you hear me? We can, we can hear
you, Melissa. Great. Um, my name
is Doctor Melissa Mason. I'm a
pediatrician in Albuquerque, and
I'm a member of the New Mexico
Pediatric Society.
I speak in opposition to the
bill, um, I do, however, fully
support this family and the idea
and the spirit behind this piece
of legislation.
Um, the reason why I cannot
support the bill.
There are few, one,
This
is not standard of care, um, in
our state, we
Do not have the medical experts
to even read all of these echoes
currently, the wait time for any
of my patients who really need
to see a cardiologist is uh it's
a year. Um, so this, it's just
we can't do it, but 3,
it concerns me that there would
be legislation that dictates um
medical care and decision
making. And I believe I have
worked with uh this.
Nonprofit in this family, who I
really care about. I think
there's more work to be done.
We've already done work in
improving um education and
outreach. And I'm very happy to
continue to do that. Um, but
this legislation, it's not
standard of care, financially
and also resource wise, we can't
do it, um, but also it shouldn't
dictate um how providers choose
to care, but, but I want to keep
helping and supporting this
because it's important.
And all kids deserve to have the
best health and well-being that
we can provide, and I'll
continue to do that. Thank you.
Thank you.
And next
Next we have Molly, and I'm
sorry if you're a doctor, I
can't see you to give you the
proper recognition. I can only
see your first name,
so my next.
Yes, sorry. Hi, I'm Doctor I
mentioned I'm one of the state's
6 pediatric cardiologists. Um, I
met some of you guys at a recent
town hall, um, and I wanna
echo with Doctor Mason said. I
think um as a state we have a
lot of room to grow in terms of
our congenital heart disease
screening. Um, unfortunately, I,
I have a number of issues with
this bill, and I, I do have a
letter I can provide signed by
all of the state's pediatric
cardiologists coming out against
this. Um, the first issue is
that we are inappropriately
applying screening criteria to
neonates. That was actually
created for teenagers. So,
Um, the current congenital heart
screening actually captures 95%
of critical heart disease, and
when we talk about critical
congenital heart disease, we
talked about infants who are not
going to survive the neonatal
period. So the oxygen screening
that we do right now is actually
a very good study and it, it
costs $13.
So, um, we're actually capturing
95% of those patients, and then
when you look at the data, if
they see a pediatrician,
Almost the other 5% are going to
be captured.
They're going to be very, very
sick in infancy and require
urgent care. Um, when we talk
about the screening for syncope
and family history of long QT
and those things, those are
excellent screening tools, but
what they were created for was
young athletes and not babies.
So, um,
Our pediatricians are wonderful
at referring patients who need
to be seen by our cardiology
group, and if there's ever a
young adult or teenager who
meets those criteria, they
definitely need to be seen by
us, but asking a family whether
a parent has fainted is actually
not an like a a verified
screening tool in neonates, so
we're applying a screening. OK,
perfect.
Oh.
Please, please
Please go ahead and finish your
uh statement.
Molly, can you hear me?
Sorry, I was still muted.
I, I just, again, I wanna say I,
I'm very excited that you guys
are interested in congenital
heart disease, um, I worry about
This inappropriate application
of screening tools and then the
other issue is just as a state,
this is not feasible. We would
need to hire.
Probably 50 to 100 people in
terms of stenographers and
doctors, and as you guys know,
we struggle to recruit. We are a
very small group
and we have 6 of us 2 minutes is
up now.
In that last speaker would be
Michelle. Thank you, uh, Madam
Chairman. My name is Doctor
Michelle Grenier. I'm a
professor of pediatric
cardiology and have practiced
for the last 36 years. I've also
been involved in several of the
American College of Cardiology
committees as well as the
American Academy of Pediatrics
and Development of many of the
policies that we have in place
today. Our system is not
perfect, it's far from perfect.
There are silent cardiac
defects. These will not be
picked up
the newborn period, however, for
the vast majority. Uh, I wanted
to clarify the costs. I actually
have a publication looking at
the cost effectiveness of
echocardiogram and EKG in
general screening and per
patient, it would be $2000 plus
$500 for the EKG as well as the
visit and I will clarify, uh,
most of these children are not
going to be left, uh, let go
from the hospital if they
require
cardiac screening. The majority
will be transported in, so we
need to add the cost of
transport. When we calculated
all those numbers, it wasn't
22,000 a year for the state. It
was 22 million, and I would
advocate that those costs be put
towards something a little more
fundamental, such as a
stand-alone children's hospital
if we are going to be spending
that amount of money. Um, my
colleague Doctor Mention, I
believe, brought you up to date
on policy, and I thank you for
your time today.
Thank you.
I'm not sure if we asked for
support on Zoom if we, if you
are in support of the
legislation, please raise your
hand and you are on Zoom. All
right, seeing no hands we're
going to the committee.
Uh, do I have committee members,
uh, first, we have
representative Joe.
Oh, I'm sorry. I'm sorry, just a
couple, just a couple of things.
There is an amendment um with
Jennifer out, um, I'm not sure
what happened to it. I'm
assuming that so I will just
tell you tell you quickly what
it is, and we will, we will
present it in the next committee
because we didn't have it 24
hours in advance. So, um,
Basically, instead of the, you
know what, I will let Sandra,
um, and, and, but just with the
22 million, um, that's a lot
that.
That's what they say, but I
mean,
I don't know how they get to 22
million if it's only the kids
that that have a family history
based on these questions. I'm
assuming what they did is, is
multiply the number of births by
$2000 and that's where it came
up with, but obviously it's not
gonna be all newborns.
When we first started this
spill, we did, um, Madam Chair
and committee members. When we
first um created this pill. We
did start with the American.
Academy of Pediatrics, Heart
Policy screening.
We worked with a local.
Pediatric congenital
cardiologists from the
University of New Mexico, who
helped us revise this bill.
So it is not only a congenital
heart defect.
Screening, it also um it
actually changes it to not, the
screening won't be done during
labor and delivery, it would be
done during the pediatric.
And provider after care during
the newborn period.
So a health care provider deter
determines the need for further
evaluation based on a screening
that uses a standard
questionnaire developed by the
department to evaluate whether a
newborn has a family history of
CHD.
Sudden cardiac death, aborted
sudden cardiac death in a family
member under the age of 50 years
old, sudden infant death
syndrome, hereditary.
Arrhythmia conditions, and it
goes into different syndromes.
Of heart-related issues.
Has a first degree relative or
or close family member, uh
younger than 50 that has a
pacemaker implanted to
defibrillator or heart-related
condition as a first degree
relative that was born with a
heart condition requiring heart
surgery during childhood.
Had abnormal findings on a fetal
echocardiogram.
is born after a pregnancy in
which the newborn's mother
experienced diabetes, autoimmune
disorders or hypertension, has
the a systematic or genetic
condition associated with
congenital heart disease.
Has
External seizures or syncope.
So what was discussed with
transferring care and the cost,
um, we are giving.
Providers, healthcare providers.
The liability to screen these
patients when they see him after
birth during the newborn period.
And with that, madam chair, we
stand for questions. This isn't
my question. I just have a
question on, or are we voting on
this bill without the amendment
or are we including that
amendment we just got, we cannot
include the amendment because it
wasn't, it wasn't, um, in 24
hours in advance, so you have
the amendment is prepared with
Jennifer out. I'm not sure what
happened, um.
But so we will, we will
introduce it into in the next
committee, but, but we're voting
on the bill today with.
it, or we're waiting.
No
man here.
I, I, I.
I think that under these
circumstances, the the amendment
that was just read makes this a
completely different bill, and I
don't see how we can even
discuss it. I, I can't vote on a
bill.
I have a lot of the same
concerns almost exactly the same
concerns of a lot of the uh
pediatric cardiologists brought
up, um, and this changes this
amendment does change the bill.
I think we should roll this
bill.
I propose we, I'm not sure how
to say that
out of your
just just as an aside, um, I did
the math, so the last year there
were 20,951 births in the fiscal
impact report um has 11,000 of
those babies needing this, which
is where the large number came
from.
I believe, Madam Chair, as, as
chair.
You and I, um,
We, we can discuss the bill with
the amendment with my assurance
that it will be placed in the,
on the next committee and on the
floor well, if it is not done,
or if the next committee
doesn't, doesn't pass it, then
that it so we will just discuss
the bill with the amendment, um.
And, and I, I, I would prefer
not to roll it. We, we,
we don't even have the bill. We
don't have the amendment. We
have the former bill. So how can
we really discuss it without the
amendment.
So let me just say the way the
processes work, uh.
The amendment was was discussed
here, but in in if
Effectively, the only thing
before us is the bill as you see
it now. If you can't vote for it
the way it is now, then you have
the opportunity to vote against
it. When it goes to the next
committee, assuming that it
passes this committee, it will
be presented with the amendment.
And bed chair, I do have the
amendment. We could, if we could
get copies made quickly.
OK.
Madam Chair Representative, I
believe, best practices is
producing thoughtful legislation
that we have had 24 hours in
advance to see the full bill
with amendments and in prior
committees, if there is an
amendment presented, we roll it
so that we have ample time to
read and analyze the bill. I, I
want to be fair to everybody. So
being being. Thank you,
Representative Senator Cortez,
the rule is that the amendment
has to be here.
24 hours in advance. It was not
here. We are not discussing the
amendment. It is not being voted
on. What is being voted on is
the bill in front of you. You do
have the opportunity to choose
to vote against it. If you don't
like it as it is presented, but
right now we're gonna stop the
discussion on the amendment
because it's not before this
committee. The only thing we're
going to be discussing is the
bill that is before you right
now.
With that, I'm gonna go to the
committee for questions and
we'll start with Representative
Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm glad
we worked that out.
So we will discuss this bill
that's before us.
Um.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Representative
Thompson and Farlanders, um, Bob
and
Sandra, Sandra, yes, I remember
the name. That's great. I
appreciate your, your testimony
and your dedication to this.
This issue and of course your
the personal nature of it in the
tragedy of of your, the loss of
your son, um, that's actually,
it's not the loss. He's, he's
still living. Oh
sorry, I representative, um,
he's, he's 22 years old. And um
Here is the difference with
Getting a correct diagnosis.
They diagnosed him in March of
2018.
He had heart surgery in May
2018.
It was like a light switch.
All of his symptoms, all of his
chronic illness was gone.
You know, it's difficult for me
as a um as a healthcare
provider.
To to look back into question
what other people have decided.
I, I can't really speak to that,
but it, it's hard to believe.
that no one caught that. I feel
like we're dealing with much
more than just uh the lack of
screening as an infant, all
those years, not doing, did they
not do an echocardiogram?
An echo was done at 10 years
old.
Well,
I have to say that's
Unbelievable, but
But and it and it's, that's
tragic, and we are just people
and people make mistakes and
it's extremely unfortunate. I'm
glad your son is doing, doing so
much better, so that's a, that's
good. I'm glad to hear that. But
I, I, like I said, Madam Chair,
uh, Representative Thompson, I
have a lot of the same questions
that um the pediatric
cardiologist had and uh issues
with um with this bill.
Um, hard to know where to start,
but I guess I'll start kind of
at the beginning, um.
First of all, as far as a
screening tests go, an
echocardiogram.
And oximetry as an infant is
considered a screening test.
an echocardiogram or an
electrocardiogram is not
considered a screening test,
that's a diagnostic test and
that on the, the kind of the
hierarchy of uh this um protocol
that you see in treating
patients, you rarely see
someone, uh, say, well, you've
got, you've got shortness of
breath or a baby has tachypnea
or baby has no symptoms at all,
just based on other statistics,
she rarely would seize someone,
um,
Order a diagnostic test and, and
I hope that makes sense, uh,
because both of those
examinations are considered for
diagnosis, not for screening.
Um, we have all kinds of
screening tests that we do on
children and there's a long list
of them here in this bill, and
they're all good, and I believe
they're all necessary.
Um, but this, this kind of goes
to the level of um extreme and
uh so, uh, and I hope you
understand that, that comes from
years of working NICU
pediatrics, pediatric ICU, um,
new, with newborns, one of my
favorite things I did was work
with the babies.
Um, I think I'll go directly to
page 3, because this I feel like
is important. We've talked about
it, but we haven't really looked
at it carefully, and I know the
amendment does change it, but
we're talking about the bill.
So, um, this is the section.
It's section one.
tests required. This is a long
list of tests required. OK, so.
If we go to page 3,
You see critical congenit line 6
at 28 is, this is why we would
require, uh, or we would require
tests for critical congenital
heart disease, A, and this was,
you know, this is not new
material, but by means of a test
performed using a pulse
oximeter, that's what currently
is done before the newborn
infant is discharged from a
hospital or birthing facility
where the newborn infant was
born. OK, that's screening test
along with all these others that
we do and
And are valuable for the
purposes of this subparagraph
pulse oximeter means a device
that measures the oxygen, and
like I said, it's just a few
dollars to to do that test and
it's, it is um
It, it can catch.
It catches, you know, anything
below 90%, which is going to be
abnormal um abnormal oxygen
level in the arterial blood, but
then you have the word and.
And it says and so you have to
have that and then you also have
to have by means of an
echocardiogram and an
electrocardiogram, like we said,
that are uh diagnostic tests if
the newborn infant has a
familial history of congenital
heart disease. Totally
understandable. You've got
family history.
Um, that would be an indication
for maybe a um
More than just a screening or if
they're uh if either the
newborn's infant biological
parents report that they, and
this is where it gets really
broad and I want you to think
about this just
Think about anybody whether you
could meet this criteria have
ever fainted. Has anybody here
ever fainted?
Have you ever passed out or had
an unexplained seizure suddenly
and without warning, especially
during exercise.
Have ever had an exercise
related chest pain or shortness
of breath.
Uh, are related to someone who's
died of a heart problem.
Or an unexpected sudden death
before the age of 50.
Including a death from drowning,
an unexplained car accident or a
sudden infant death syndrome, or
are related to someone with
heart-related issues or anyone
younger than 50 years old who
has a pacemaker or an
implantable defibrillator.
So that, that criteria right
there includes just almost
anyone and.
I mean, I, I think I even, I, I
can include myself in that
criteria. It's so broad that
almost every infant would
qualify for these diagnostic
tests that are expensive. So,
um,
I can't ask about the, the
amendment, but anyway, that I
just wanted to point out that
almost everybody will qualify
according to this criteria. So
it's way too broad, um, so at
the facility lacks.
The if a facility lacks the
equipment and our staff to
perform these tests, the
facilities shall provide to the
newborn infant's parents a
referral to receive an
echocardiogram and an
electrocardiogram upon
discharge. So Madam Chair, um,
Representative Thompson, would
this mean this infant would be
required to get both an
echocardiogram and an
electrocardiogram?
Madam Chair Madam Chair my
expert has.
Mountain Chair representative.
Um, these standards that were
Listed out on the original bill.
These are from the American
Academy of Pediatrics.
This was not um based on our own
criteria or our own experience.
This was actually based by the
American Academy of Pediatrics,
Heart Policy screening.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair,
um, Representative Thompson.
I just heard a pediatric
cardiologist from UNM say that
this bill goes against the
American Academy of Pediatrics.
So there's a conflict there.
And I'm sure there's more
information that's missing,
maybe from both sides, but I
need, I would need to know that,
Madam Chair and Representative.
So it's not really a conflict.
What these questions are, are
from the American Academy of
Pediatrics, that is not the
entirety, the, the, the
Pediatric Society is not
endorsing this because of what
we're trying to do, not because
of this, so just making sure
that the statement that the the
criteria is from the American
Academy of Pediatrics, what
we're trying to do with it is
not.
Madam Chair, Representative
Thompson, I don't understand
that.
Um
Does the American Academy of
Pediatrics recommend an
electrocardiogram and an
echocardiogram based on
The previous
Information I read in the bill
or not, Madam Chair, no, they do
not, but the point is that the
criteria that you said was too
broad is directly from the
American Academy of Pediatrics.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Thompson, there's still a
conflict there because.
It sounds to me like they
recommend they recommend the
electrocardiogram and the
echocardiogram based on
A child who's already had some
level of diagnosis, not just
someone whose parent fainted.
That it, it just doesn't even
make sense there I have to have
more information than that,
because I, I don't believe it.
I, I'm sorry, I'm not accusing
anybody of being dishonest. I'm
just saying it medically, it
doesn't make sense. So um we'll
have to figure that out. Madam
Chair Representative, um,
Our son started passing out, and
it looked like he was having
seizures.
Starting at the age of 4.
He was passing out.
And it looked like he was having
seizures.
3 or 4 times a week.
through the age of 14 through
15.
We, we had to take him out of
school. Thank you so much. I
appreciate your input on that,
but that doesn't really speak to
what we're we're looking at in
the bill. I'm talking about
what's written in the bill and
that that is that an infant's
parent who has passed out would
be required to get an
electrocardiogram, a diagnostic
exam for heart and an
echocardiogram is two different
things, so I appreciate what
your son went through. I truly
do and, and, and the
lack of care, maybe the
inadequate, maybe even
neglectful care that you, your
son received because that's what
it looks like. I'm just gonna
say it, put it out there, but,
um, but that's not what's in
this bill. And so, and we're
looking at the bill, so that,
that's my input on that. um.
Man and Mr. Farlander, did you
have something else? Yes, thank
you, Madam Chair and
Representative Jones, um, that's
why we did the amendment. I'm
sorry I didn't get to you guys
in time. It does need a lot of
clarity, right? But it does
point to what we're trying to
get at that there needs to be
more done, there needs to be
more awareness, hence the
questioning, right? And then
what the American Academy of
Pediatrics, um, suggest is if
you do answer affirmatively to
any of those screening
questions, you would receive a
full cardiac screen.
to include echocardio.
Agram an echocardio, uh,
ultrasound, right, from your
pediatrician, most likely.
So, so that is following the
guidelines, Mr. Farlander and
thank you, Madam Chair, and it
sounds like we're, I'm sorry,
the, the expert, um,
It is, has her hand raised. I,
I'm assuming in in.
Let me let Representative Jones
finish her statement and then
let's allow the expert to speak
because thank you Madam Chair,
this, I think we're having two
different conversations because
I'm looking at my, my patient
who's a little newborn.
And, and I'm asking the parent,
have you ever fainted? So I'm
gonna, I'm gonna test this this
little patient based on whether
the parents fainted, it's not
their diagnostic test to this
degree are not really, it's not
relevant. Now, if the patient,
on the other hand, which your
son was, said, I'm fainting. I'm
having seizures, it would be
relevant and it would be called
for. That's, so I just want to
clarify, we're not talking about
the same patient.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Madam
Chair, just um
It wouldn't just be, have you
ever fainted? It's, oh yes, I
fainted. Were you ill? Were you
drunk? We, I mean, it's not
just, um, and
I, I fainted in my youth, but it
was because I was deathly ill,
so it's not just, oh, they
fainted, you know, I mean some
people faint. So it, it's, we're
not putting every single word in
this bill in terms of how the
the procedure would move along.
Thank you. I will go to your
expert for uh to recognize her
in her statement now.
Hello, can you hear me?
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representatives. Um, I just, I
know that we're not talking
about the amended bill, but I
just wanted to echo that, um,
uh, we have considered all of
these statements in our
revisions, and we're
Um, more reflecting that the
person that's doing the primary
care, it would allow for their
judgment about as appropriate
escalation of care, but the
questions getting obtaining this
really thorough family history
for that child is the objective
of the bill and then they have
some leeway as to when and how
to escalate the care. So our
bill is not trying to force
people to
to do a certain thing against
their judgment, but rather
capture a better history of
patients and um appropriately
escalate care when it should be.
Thank you. I appreciate that and
and I honestly, I forgot that
you were there. I apologize or I
would have been addressing my
questions to you as well. Um,
Madam Chair.
I want to point out that
Our pediatric cardiologist
already know how to assess
patients. I'm
I understand that the intent um
and the passion that's behind
this, but our pediatric
cardiologists already know how
to take a family assessment, and
I think putting that in the
bill, putting that in
legislation, um,
All of those words that I, you
know, um, that I read that were
in the bill such as an
unexplained car accident, making
that law is what is is really a
big part of the problem here,
making that law, uh, increases
the standard of care, changes
the standard of care in a way
that I think doesn't help our
patients. It doesn't help our
families, and it doesn't help
our cardiologists do a better
job. Um, so I'm really
concerned about all of that.
Um,
so there will be no pediatric
cardiologist if there is no um I
mean they will not be involved.
You say that they take care,
they, you know, they, and 100%
they know what they're doing,
but they will not be one
involved with the patient until
there's um some, some, something
that indicates that they need to
be, so we're not asking that uh
pediatric cardiologists are
involved in everything.
newborn and what we're trying to
catch is the 5% that are missed
by the pulse oximetry and, and
there will not, as I said, you
know, it'd be great if every
newborn could have a pediatric
cardiologist to give him the
once over and do the family
history. That's not realistic,
but um as with their son, it's
missed for years and so he
didn't have a pediatric
cardiologist.
Until
Until they, there, there was a
diagnosis of a
CHD. Thank you, Representative
Madam Chair, Representative, my
response that you just responded
to was in response to the
expert, not the bill. She was
the one who said the pediatric
cardiologist needed direction on
how to,
I'm sorry if I was
misunderstood, but I'm coming
from a you go through the chair.
Sure, I'm sorry, Madam Chair,
and representatives.
Um, I'm coming from the
perspective of primary care.
Not anything about a specialist.
So this is just a general in the
community position, um, and, uh,
somebody that's seeing a
newborn, so there's a wide
variety of providers that would
take care of babies,
pediatricians, nurse
practitioners, PAs, um, and
there's a
Vastly different knowledge
between
You know, these type of rare
things that come up. And so,
I'm saying that these people
would be asking just taking a
more thorough history of cardiac
in that family, not um not
telling.
Cardiologists what they should
do because they're way above.
Um, that they, they're the
experts, but this baby would
likely not see.
A cardiologist, most babies
won't need to, but there are
some special circumstances where
families have a higher
propensity for defects and if we
had that knowledge, even if they
didn't want to order an
echocardiogram or an EKG, but it
was in the patient's chart, and
they could keep an eye on it as
that child is developing, um,
keeping that potential diagnosis
in mind if things go wrong. Um,
like in the case of the
Farlanders.
To
Then escalate the care as
appropriate. So I'm sorry if
what I said was mis um if I said
it incorrectly or was
misunderstood.
Um, thank you very much, and
Madam Chair and expert. What is,
what is your profession, what is
your license?
I'm a registered nurse and I'm
training to do family practice
as a nurse practitioner.
OK, thank you for that. Um, the
same thing that I said about
pediatric uh cardiologist would
also apply to a primary care
physician. They know how to do
their assessments. I'm concerned
that we're legislating.
And telling them how to practice
medicine. Um,
A nurse that's in the hospital
should know how to do this
assessment and Madam Chair,
Um
Representative, something that
Mr. Farlander said just a moment
ago, adds to this conversation.
He said we need more education.
We need, we need these people
who are assessing to know that
this is an issue. We need
education. We do, but I have um
my problem here with this piece
of the bill is just Madam Chair,
representative Farlanders that
we are
Um, we're legislating medical
practice, and I don't think
that's, it's not necessary.
I'm gonna, I'm gonna, um,
Leave this part behind and just
move on to um to my other
concerns.
We've talked about.
The electrocardiogram and
echocardiogram not being
screening tests, being
diagnostic tests.
I'd like to address the, um, the
concerns of the cardiologists
that are really valid, you know,
what we deal with Madam Chair
representative in this committee
every day is access to care. We
have 2 locations in New Mexico
where
There is someone who's
proficiently trained in doing
pediatric, these pediatric
tests, uh, these neonatal tests
actually echocardiograms,
electrocardiograms, Las Cruces
and Albuquerque.
And uh
In my district, we have one
hospital. We deliver.
I can't remember the number of
babies, but I'm sure a number of
them would have, would meet this
criteria based on what we've
already read, they're going to
meet this criteria. We have a
high level of poverty, any out
of pocket expense, any expense
to get to Las Cruces or
Albuquerque, have their baby
tested.
And
The $2000 it seems minor to us,
if any of that is out of pocket
for them. It's just
Unattainable. It's simply
unattainable, um.
So
I think I'll say question.
I mean, I don't know, I really
don't know other questions. Um,
I could go on and on. I, I, I'm
just against this, the way it's
written, um, the, the, even if
we changed it, I think based on
what I heard about the amendment
that we're not supposed to
address.
It's, it's uh not even doable.
It's not doable for the money.
It's not doable for for the
people who can't afford it. It's
not doable for New Mexico, but
in addition to that, we have to
find ways to address the
problem. We have to find ways to
Uh, highlight the importance of
this to um educate, educate
nurses and the newborn nursery
and make sure that they're,
they're properly doing the
oximetry exams and that sort of
thing. I think that's valid,
absolutely valid, and there
needs to be an answer to catch
these children. So I appreciate
that the goal we often share the
goal of even the passion for
taking care of people, good care
of people, but we need to pass
legislation that works for, that
works for everyone. So thank you
very much for the discussion.
Thank you, thank you,
Representative Representative
Senator Cortez.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
Um, I want to talk to you
twofold today in the first one
is with my humanity.
I just want to say that it is
the most beautiful thing in the
world to see two parents
advocating for their child.
There is no greater advocate in
the world than a mama and a
daddy, and as you sit there, I
think of my own baby. I, I have
a 2 year old and she had a
cardiac scare.
And the, the fear and the
uncertainty that I felt, um, I'm
sure that was a million times
magnified for you as parents,
and so I just wanna say thank
you for fighting that for just
your child, but for so many
other new New Mexicans. It's
beautiful and I'm sorry if any
way that the tough questions
made you relive traumatic
experiences.
I get that.
And thank you for your advocacy.
So I, I want you to see my, my,
my humanity first.
The second part is.
I'm also torn between what I
believe are best practices as a
legislator and well the spirit
and the heart and the advocacy
is one of the most beautiful
things that I have witnessed. I
do not feel that the bill is
ready yet, and not to say that.
Delay does not always mean
denied. I, I believe in this.
That if it's passed, it will
become a state standard of care
and, and I'm concerned about the
litigation impact of not
providing the mandated service,
um.
I think that the bill could be
worked on, and there's an
amendment and I know we're
talking apples and oranges
because I can't see the
amendment and I want to provide
a very intentional response on
the full bill that I don't have
and so.
I can't support it because I
don't have all of it and I want
to be
And do my part.
As, as best practices as a
legislator, so Madam Chair,
representative, again, thank you
for your advocacy. Nothing more
more beautiful, and I, I hope
you understand both sides that
I'm presenting my, my humanity
and also doing my part as best
practices as a legislator. Thank
you, Madam Chair Representative.
Thank you, Representative
Representative.
Can I make a response real fast.
Yes Madam Chair, and
Representatives, um, all of the
physicians that showed up today.
Not to support our bill. We
actually have worked with all of
them on ChD education. And we
came to them. We were very um
open. We wanted to have open
conversations with how can we do
a better job with screening.
None of them offered their help.
There was one congenital
cardiologist, pediatrics, at the
University of New Mexico, who
came to our side and said, we
can make the bill stronger, and
we can make this where
Not only do we have a family
history or congenital heart
defects, but also sudden cardiac
arrest.
sits and other.
Um, uh, other defects.
that are heart related.
And that is in the amendment.
Madam Cha representative, if I
may, I'm not even going to call
you by your name because I think
mommy and daddy is so much more
powerful. Don't give up. Keep
going, OK?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Do we have any other questions
from the committee?
If not, I will accept an
amendment. I'm sorry, I will
accept a motion on the bill.
I'll move
What are you moving? I'm sorry.
I am moving or do pass.
So we have a motion for a due
pass by Representative Ferrari.
Is there a second?
There's a second by
Representative Eleanor Chavez.
Is there anyone in opposition to
the motion?
Please
I'm sorry, I have opposition?
Oh, not to the motion. I'm sorry
my apologies. Let me go back. My
apologies. All right, all in
favor of the motion indicate we
have to do the roll call. Oh,
I'm sorry. I'll do a roll call.
Will you please do a roll call?
OK. Representative Anaya.
No, and explain my vote.
Mm
Representative Cates.
Yes, we do pass.
Representative E. Chavis.
Representative N Chavis, no and
I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Ferrari.
Yes.
Representative Jones.
No.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Sea Cortez. No,
and thank you for letting me
explain myself earlier.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair Thompson, yes.
By a boat of 5 in the
affirmative and 4 in the
negative, you have a due pass.
Uh, well, we will allow.
Will allow those who want to
explain their vote. First, we'll
start with
Representative Nicole Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you both for coming here
today. Um, I'm sure it's very
emotional testifying on behalf
of this bill, um, and although
I'm a new legislator, it's just
really hard to pass a bill that
isn't the actual bill that's
moving on to the next committee.
And so I would have loved for
the amendment to be here so we
could actually be looking at
that information because that
information is what's rolling
over and that is the reason why
I had to vote no is because
This is what's in front of us is
not the bill that's moving
forward, and I wish you luck,
um, I'm having a grandbaby, God
willing, in April, and I pray to
God that we don't have to look
at any of these tests.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
uh.
And I.
that
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I'm so sorry, this was a really
difficult vote for me for a
number of reasons, not because
of the amendment we actually
regularly pass things out of
committee.
Knowing that an amendment will
be put on in another committee.
Um, for me, one of the biggest
issue was actually about
standards of care.
And putting them into law
themselves, not that they don't
exist, right? I know they all
took them from standards of
care, but when we're working in
the abortion access world in the
gender affirming care world.
We always refer to those
standards of care. And we try
our hardest to not put them into
law and we say, no, these are
just standards of care, this is
best practice. And so it's not
because of the amendment or
anything like that, um, but I do
wanna say, I, you know, I've
been working with.
Victims of medical malpractice
over a handful of years now, I
really think y'all. I'm very
sorry that that happened to your
child, because I do, uh, very
firmly believe, um,
That may be standards of care
were not followed. So I just
want to say that it is not
because I do not want this. It's
because just sort of on
principle with the work that
I've done throughout the past,
we try our damnedest to not put
stuff like this into law,
knowing that standards of care
also change.
Um, and so I just wanted to
explain that to you. Thank you
for giving me the time to do
that.
Have I missed anybody who wanted
to explain their vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. You.
You have a new pass and we'll
move to your next bill. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
It'll be good.
The next bill we'll hear is
House Bill 77, annual federal
snap state outreach plans.
This has been presented by
Mayor Mayor, she's now mayor,
Representative chair, um
Thompson.
Thank you, Madam Chair. House
Bill 77 is a pretty simple bill.
It will require the healthcare
authority to develop an annual
federal SNAP supplemental
nutrition assistance programs
state outreach plan. We know
that New Mexico faces a major
problem with hungry citizens,
hungry folks, um, and so this
would, would just require the
department to come up with the
plans to let people who could
benefit from this. No.
That it's available and it, it's
pretty much as simple as that,
um, and I, I will let my expert
witnesses introduce themselves
and make any statements, um, and
just, and this, just at the, the
last part of the bill. So if
there is not money to do it, the
department will not have to do
it.
But you please introduce
yourself.
Good morning, Madam Chen
representatives. My name is Shae
Satrian and I'm a licensed
clinical social worker and a
healthcare advocate with the New
Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty, an organization that is
dedicated to social and economic
justice through legal
representation and policy
advocacy.
Every New Mexican deserves
access to affordable, high
quality food, yet far too many
of our families continue to
struggle with food insecurity.
Currently 1 in 5 children and 1
in 7 adults face this challenge
in New Mexico. The supplemental
nutrition assistance program,
SNAP, or formerly known as food
stamps is our primary tool for
addressing food insecurity by
providing families with a
federally funded monthly benefit
that can be used to purchase
unprepared food.
Snap is critical in supporting
families, particularly our
families with children, older
adults, and individuals with
disabilities. Despite this, we
know that many New Mexicans
qualify for this assistance, but
do not receive it.
This is especially true for
older adults.
According to a 2022 report from
the ARP just 38% of eligible
adults age 50 or older
participate in Snap in New
Mexico.
House Bill 77 would leverage
federal funding to increase Snap
access for those who qualify
through the snap Outreach plan.
The bill is very simple. It
requires that the HCA submit an
annual plan to the United States
Department of Agriculture,
detailing snap outreach efforts.
In New Mexico and seeking
federal matching funds for
non-profit or other state funds
used for snap outreach.
New Mexico began submitting snap
outreach plans in 2023 and has
matched funds used by Roadrunner
Foodbank or Snap rollment.
Snap outreach plans are a proven
best practice in ensuring that
states are maximizing federal
food assistance. Neighbouring
states of Texas, Colorado, and
others have implemented
legislation requiring submission
of snap outreach plans to make
efficient use of federal funds
for this purpose.
The benefits of Snap are
extensive and very well
documented.
Snap benefits reduce food
insecurity, which improves
health outcomes, especially for
very young children and older
adults.
Snap has been documented to
improve both educational and
economic outcomes for families
by reducing food costs by
alleviating this financial
burden, families are better
positioned to address other
barriers.
Other barriers to employment,
such as housing, childcare, and
transportation costs.
The support enables more
individuals to participate in
workforce and achieve greater
financial stability.
Snap benefits are also spent in
over 1700 of our businesses in
New Mexico, generating $1.50 in
economic activity for every
dollar, SNAP benefits that are
spent.
I want to thank the sponsor for
House Bill 77 as community-based
enrollment and outreach ensures
that more New Mexico families
can access SNAP, including those
that that.
Face language barriers,
transportation challenges,
unlimited internet access. New
Mexico has been operating a snap
outreach plan and has has been
receiving federal funding since
2023.
House Bill 77 merely continues
that process, and does not
require any expansion or
increase to the operating budget
of HCA.
It simply requires that the
agency needs to continue at the
scale that it decides.
I will now turn this over to
Jason Riggs from Road Runner
Foodbank who can share his
successes in operating New
Mexico's first snap outreach
program using federal matching
funds.
Madam Chair, Representatives, I
want to thank everyone for
giving us this opportunity to
talk about something that uh I'm
very passionate about.
Uh, my name is Jason Riggs. I'm
the director of advocacy and
public policy at Roadrunner Food
Bank.
About 12 years ago, Roadrunner,
um, received a grant to start a
small grant to start a Snap
outreach program, uh, at food
banks.
We know that no matter how hard
we're working, Snap can provide
9 times the amount of meals, uh,
as the entire food bank network.
And we know the challenges uh
many of the people we serve face
trying to connect with these
benefits. So, uh, a snap
outreach plan was a no brainer
for us. Um, I was the person in
charge of starting that program.
And uh I was pretty much a
one-man show, showing up at food
pantries, uh, all throughout
Albuquerque, down in Las Cruces,
uh, and the parts in between. It
was hard to be in the two places
at one time, uh, I'd show up
with my clipboard and my rolling
cart full of snap applications
and uh walk the line talking to
people, uh, and, uh, trying to
let people know the process
that, you know, there's many
steps even after you submit your
application, going over income
eligibility
with folks, so they understand
if this program is going to work
out for them. Um,
Thanks to a lot of hard work,
we've, we've built the program
up. Um, we now have a call
center that can help people from
all across the state throughout
all of your districts and uh it
operates every day. There was,
there's so far been about 30
appointments this week, uh,
talking to folks and talking
about Snap.
Um
One of the uh
One of the best things that's
happened was during the
pandemic, we started working
much more closely with HCA, uh,
they became really good
partners. Uh, they were
referring folks to us that
needed extra help that we could
provide, and we had a lot of
communication, so when there
were regulation changes, we
could let people know if there
was a backlog in processing
applications, we could give
people the expectation of how
long this might take. And that
was a very powerful thing. Um,
After about 10 years of kind of
tormenting anybody I could talk
to at HCA, uh, they put forth a
snaps state snap outreach plan
that was submitted to USDA, uh,
that drew down federal funds.
Uh, we received about $59,000
and that has helped us grow our
program even more. Um, we, we
now have a 1.5 full-time staff
members that can communicate
effectively in Spanish, um, in
this fiscal year 24, the first
year,
of this, this joint program with
the state, um, our team.
Has helped, uh, 371 households
complete SNAP applications.
We ran those numbers through the
Feeding America snap Impact
calculator that takes into
account factors like average uh
approval ratings, retail meal
costs, and uh that 371
applications turns into 284,931
meals, um, that's, that's a very
major food bank right there. Um,
the benefits that are coming in,
federal dollars coming into the
state being spent usually within
the first week that they're
received is
This number is a little big for
me, 1,57,00094.
Uh, dollars coming into the
state of New Mexico with that
economic impact that uh my
colleague just spoke of that
translates into about $1.6
million with that money being
spent uh here in New Mexico.
Uh, I think that is testament to
the success of this outreach and
in fiscal year 25, Road Runner
Food Bank is being joined by the
Eco Food Bank, which serves San
Juan County. I think there's a
lot of potential for this to
grow. Uh, it does require a, a
commitment on the part of the
state of New Mexico to connect
people with Snap Outreach. Um,
and it's greatly aided by a
fully staffed and competent,
competitively paid ISD uh team
uh that's gonna be vital to our
success.
turning in these applications,
they need to be processed, they
need to be looked at, approved
or denied, uh, as the case may
be. Uh, I'll leave you with 11
more part of this, um, so many
people.
They, they don't have the means
to get to an income support
division field office. Maybe
they live too far, maybe they
live close enough, but don't
have a car, can't drive, uh, the
mobility is an issue.
Um
And as far as applying online,
not everybody has internet, not
everybody has a computer. Some
people have both of those things
and really don't have the
proficiency uh to fill out a
complicated application, uh, so
I, I met a person that kind of
fits the description I was
doing, uh, this is probably
about 10 years ago, I was at the
VA in Albuquerque.
Uh, doing a little snap clinic
for some of the veterans and a
gentleman came in, uh, he was in
pretty bad shape. He was on
oxygen. He was a Vietnam
veteran, and uh he
Came in to fill out a Snap
application, and as I went
through the questions with him,
his responses were kind of
measured kind of slow. I thought
perhaps he was getting annoyed
with me, you know, they're very
invasive questions, that's the
information that's needed, um.
He, uh, at the end, he told me
something I've never forgotten.
He, he looked at me and he said,
you know, I have never ever had
to ask for help in my life.
Um, I, uh, try to make them feel
better.
I, uh, talked about, you know,
his service to our country, now
our country can serve you, uh,
probably came off way too
Kennedy-esque for his taste, and
it kind of gave me that 1000
mile stare, and he said
something to me I can't repeat
in this uh uh in this uh sacred
chamber, but uh uh it was
basically a brutal way of saying
thank you and uh I, I really
appreciated the insight he gave
me that even when I'm helping
someone fill out an application,
uh, it's their whole life there,
so, uh, thank you.
very much for this time, and I
hope you'll consider passing HB
77. Madam Chair, we stand for
questions.
Thank you very much. We'll first
go to our Zoom. Is there anyone
on Zoom who stands in in support
of this legislation.
A 1st, 1st person is Judy.
Judy, can you unmute, OK.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Judy Messel speaking on behalf
of Lutheran advocacy ministry in
New Mexico and the New Mexico
Conference of Churches. We
strongly support
House Bill 77. We think it's
critical to provide the outreach
and barrier removal for eligible
seniors and families who need
access to this important food
assistance, as has just been
described. Thank you.
Thank you, Judy. Uh, our next
speaker is Monica.
Hello. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Monico
Otero Health policy analyst, and
I represent New Mexico Voices
for Children. As you all know,
food and community is a
centralizing identity of our
great state. Unfortunately, in
New Mexico, children and
families are experiencing food
insecurity. As a program, SNAP
is the largest anti-hunger
program in the nation, and it
also effectively reduces poverty
because house
households are able to purchase
food. Not only do SNAP benefits
alleviate poverty by helping
households buy food. They also
decrease health care costs,
improve household nutrition and
have a broader economic impact
that helps communities as well
as households. The snap state
outreach plan will ensure that
federal SNAP benefits are more
accessible, especially in
communities facing barriers to
the traditional application
process and for the communities
most in need.
Well, also easing the burden on
state workers.
As an advocate for children and
families, New Mexico Voices for
children stands in support of
House Bill 77.
Thank you.
Thank you. Our next speaker is
Shannon.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Shannon Hudson. I'm the
Snap um outreach manager at Road
Runner Food Bank, and um the
state snap outreach plan has
been transformational for our
program. It allows us to reach
um folks in rural communities,
people with technical
difficulties. It allows us to
form relationships with other
organizations in these areas to
um expand everyone's knowledge
on this essential program and
get more eligible.
people hooked up with it. And so
I, um, I know I speak on my, on
behalf of my entire team when we
stand for in support of HB 77.
Thank you. Thank you.
I don't see anyone else in
support. Is there anyone in
opposition to this legislation?
See
Seeing no hands will go to the
uh to the committee, I'm sorry,
to the uh audience. Is there
anyone in the audience who
stands in support of this
legislation, please come
forward.
And you will have 2 minutes to
speak.
Hello, my name is Vilma
Martinez. I'm the navigation
program manager at the Food
Depot.
Who is Northern New Mexico's
food bank, um, as a navigator, I
am responsible to ensure that
food insecure individuals within
our communities have access to
long term, um, food resources
such as Snap.
Um, as well as access to
wraparound services. That's what
we do at the navigation program.
So we want to make sure that
clients come into our program
are assessed and we address our
social determinants of health
vulnerabilities. Um, we are in
support of this bill because we
know that we can replicate this
program across northern New
Mexico, so the more individuals
within uh the state can access
um.
Snaps. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, uh, Madam Vice
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Oamba Umi. I'm the uh
the advocacy director for AARP
in New Mexico. Uh, we thank the
sponsor and the experts for
bringing this bill forward. Um,
we have a strong interest in
food security, uh, especially as
it pertains to seniors in our
state, uh, older New Mexicans
quite often, uh, especially in
rural areas, they have to choose
between whether or not they're
going to pay for food, um, some
other medical uh bills and
also utilities and so we really
appreciate the efforts, uh, to
expand, uh, you know, education
throughout the state and support
uh our older New Mexicans and
their families, uh, when it
comes to to the food security.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee, my name
is Lorenzo Alva. I'm the
executive director of Casa de
Peregrinos in Las Cruces and
Donana County, where I went up
to Mexico's largest food pantry
and where it would be successful
because of our partners Road
Runner Foodbank and some of the
other partnerships that we have
within our county. This is a
very important bill and our
humble opinion, it is what makes
food insecurity go away.
The Snout program, the food
banks and the pantries can only
do so much. Our resources are
limited.
Our resources are limited. The
SNAP programs allows us to allow
the families to make
A better decision financially
for their families.
And this is
Probably the most important
thing I've heard today.
I've heard a lot of really
important legislation today that
you guys are looking at.
But feeding
New Mexicans is of the utmost
importance.
We need to put a lot of
attention to that. There's a lot
of poverty in our
Humble state
That we don't normally address
on a regular basis. There are
parts in our state that have up
to 40% poverty levels.
We're not talking about it that
much.
We need to talk about it. This
is a perfect way to look at
poverty in a very, very
Organic way because now you're
involved. We get the feds
involved, we get the food banks
involved in the outreach. We're
even going after grants to help
us.
Help them with their outreach
program, help the food bank.
And right now we've got a
$10,000 grant from our friends
at Albertson's that allow us to
refer.
Our families in Las Cruces and
County to the roadrunner, Snap
Outreach program. It's gonna be
successful, why? Because they've
been doing it for 12 years.
We're ready to do this, so we
are in support of this important
bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Is there anyone in the audience
who stands in opposition to this
bill.
I see no one will go to the
committee for questions. Thank
you. We have representative
Nicole Chavez first.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for bringing this
forward. Um, I didn't get our
expert witnesses.
full name
Madam Chair, uh, uh,
Representative Chavez. My name
is Jason Riggs.
Thank you, Jason. I just want to
say it's interesting that you
brought up Kennedy as his famous
quote is one person can make a
difference and everyone should
try and I just want to applaud
you, I mean.
$1.6 million 284,931 males
across New Mexico and so um
that's one person making a huge
difference to start this program
and get it running and I just
I'm very thankful for you and
was not aware of that, so I'm so
glad that you're in front of our
committee this morning. Thank
you. Uh, thank you. Thank you,
Representative Travis,
Representative Senna Cortez.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I just have a
couple of simple questions just
so that I understand.
And the logistics, so the food
bank, is it a nonprofit
organization.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
yes, the food bank is a
nonprofit and so you're in
partnership with the state and
SNAP is a department within the
food bank. Is that correct,
Madam Chair Representative.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
so, uh, Snap is a federal
program administered by the
state of New Mexico through the
healthcare Authority and our
outreach program, uh, merely
connects people to that
resource. Oh wonderful. OK, that
was the logistic I wanted to be
clarified. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative. Um, Madam
Chair Representative Jason, were
you the one I spoke to in
November, December regarding the
food bank. That is correct. Uh,
Madam Chair Representative, I,
I, I remember the
I think I was getting my nails
done while we have the
conversation. I said that was, I
had 15 minutes and that was when
we could talk, Madam Chair
Representative, um, and I just
want to say that I grew up in
very humble beginnings and my
brothers and I, my family, we
were the recipients of the food
bank, and it fed my family and I
am so grateful for your services
and I just wanted to say thank
you, uh, representative Madam
Chair for carrying this this
bill. I am beyond great.
and Madam Chair Representative,
I stand in full support.
Thank you so much.
Thank you. Um, next we have
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Riggs and
Representative Thompson, and
Wait, don't tell me.
Shanay, thank you for coming by
yesterday to speak with me. I
appreciate that. And, and so as
far as the outreach program
goes, I'd like to know some
specifics, um, Madam Chair, Mr.
Riggs.
Have you visited the remote
areas of my district Animas, um.
Lordsburg Rodeo, Columbus. Have
you been to those or reached out
to them?
Uh,
Madam Chair, uh, yes, ma'am, um,
so our, our outreach team and
you heard from Shannon earlier
and and really the numbers I've
given are, are, are that team's
success, uh, um, yes, we, um, I,
I would have to look back at
records to get specific uh into
which communities, but, um, yes,
uh, our help center can take
calls and make calls throughout
the entire state. Uh, we do have
Road Runner has food
distributions in the communities
you named in and around, uh, so,
you know, we're
we're able to get word out that
way. Uh, we surprisingly get a
lot of referrals from internet
searches. Uh, we work with a lot
of other organizations. They,
they know what the team at Road
Runner does, um, and they can
make referrals as well.
So yeah, we've, we've, we've
reached the entire state, but
there's so much work, more work
to do, especially in those rural
areas and in a lot of cases, uh,
that's gonna require uh some
outreach team boots on the
ground to do it.
Thank you, Mr. Riggs. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I really appreciate
that. I, I think it's
appropriate that this bill is in
health because
What do we do? How how does this
affect our health, right? I
mean, the very foundation of our
health is, is food security, you
know, in my perfect world,
everyone is thriving
economically and they can
purchase their own food, but
that is not where we're at and
certainly not where we're at in
my district. We do have a a lot
of people who are hungry and uh
I've been fortunate enough to
get involved in in that all over
the district and even
distributing the food, and I
have to say, Roadrunner provides
a lot of healthy food, so I
appreciate.
all of your efforts. It means a
lot to us, a lot to my district,
and I'm a full support of this
outreach effort. Thank you so
much. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
But I'm sure I'd like to make a
motion for a due pass. Thank
you. It's been moved by
Representative Cates for a due
pass as their 2nd.
It's been a second by
Representative Senator Cortez,
um, may you, will you please
roll call.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Keats.
Representative E. Chavis.
Representative N Chavis, yes.
Representative Ferrari.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representativeina Cortez.
Madam Vice Chair Herndon, yes.
Madam Chair Thompson, yes.
By a vote of 8 in the
affirmative and 0 in the
negative, you have a due pass.
Thank you.
So those in the audience, we
have 3 more bills. The next bill
is House Bill 79.
Audiology and speech language
pathology compact.
So Madam Chair while while my
expert is coming forward. Um, I
want to talk just a little bit
about um the next 3 bills. So
these, these are interstate
compacts that will allow the pre
the licensed practitioner to
practice in other states that um
are part of the compact and part
of, part of the impetus, I mean,
there's a lot, we obviously have
a healthcare shortage, while
there's no guarantee it will
bring in people. There's
So no guarantee it will take out
people and it expands the, the
telehealth part of New Mexico
law. Um, the Department of
Defense has warned, I'll use
that word, the state of New
Mexico that some of our military
missions and um
Things like that are
If we do not pass these laws,
they may pull back on some of
our missions and maybe new
missions coming into New Mexico
because they want to ensure that
the significant others of of the
military person has an ability
to get right to work in their
profession. So, so that that
applies to all three,
of, of these bills and more to
come, we'll hear more. I have 3
more coming, so there I believe
there's 10.
this year, um, and, and one
thing to remember is we cannot.
Change the length, we can change
the language in, in that we can
put it in New Mexico's format,
but we have to mirror the
compact because it's a national
compact, so we can't go off and
say, oh, you know, you could,
in, in this state, you can't do
this or you can't do this. It's,
it's a national, um, a national
Work. I don't know what the
right word is, so, so the first
one.
is for audiology and speech and
language pathology, um, and just
I, I have in my work as a
pediatric physical therapist, I
have worked with many, many
wonderful, um,
Speech and language pathologist
and audiologist and my son would
not be where he was without,
without speech and language and
um Doctor Michael Caplan is my
expert witness, and I will let
him and as well as Doctor Adrian
Brecher. So I will let uh Doctor
Kaplan, and then, and then
Doctor Bratcher.
Um
say a few words.
Um, Madam Chair and members of
the committee. Uh, I'm Doctor
Michael Caplan. I'm a speech
language pathologist in New
Mexico. I'm also the vice chair
of the speech language
pathology, audiology, and
hearing aid dispensing practices
board long title. Um, there are
currently 34 other states and
the US Virgin Islands that have
adopted the interstate Compact
for audiology and speech
language.
pathology and um
Currently, New Mexico is trying
to get this passed. There are
also 6 other states that are
concurrently trying to get this
passed, including Arizona, which
is our neighboring state. Um,
speech language pathologists and
audiologists, uh, the interstate
compact would allow us to uh
maintain the continuity of care
throughout New Mexico. We have a
shortage of speech language
pathologists and audiologists
throughout the state, um, in our
profession, we
Not only provide school-based
services, but we also work in uh
with the neonate and NICU, we
also work with patients who have
stroke, um, Parkinson's, head
and neck cancer, um,
developmental disabilities,
brain injury, and so on. And so
this would enable us to be able
to provide uh uh a uh better
services or more services to
that part of the population that
does not have access.
speech pathology and audiology
services at this point. Um, and
with that, I'll, I'll turn it
over to Doctor Bradford. I had
something else.
Good morning. Can you hear me
now?
Great.
I'm Doctor Adrian Bratcher. Good
morning, Madam Chair and
Representatives. I'm a speech
language pathologist, certified
and licensed in the state of New
Mexico. I'm also the current New
Mexico Speech Language Hearing
Association president, and I'm
the department chair and
professor of communicative
disorders at Eastern New Mexico
University. So I represent
multiple organizations and
constitutes in New Mexico.
The first, um, interstate
compact will allow both
audiologists and SLPs to obtain
a privilege to practice across
state lines in other interstate
compact states, as Dr. Kaplan
said, there's 34 states in one
territory with legislation at
this point, and the interstate
compact would increase access to
care by providing services to
underserved and geographically
isolated populations through
telepractice, as well as helping
facilitate.
The continuity of care when
patients, clients, and or
students relocate to travel to
another compact state. It will
also give military personnel and
spouses, a means to maintain
their profession when they
relocate. We'll also decrease
the amount of time that it takes
for professionals to get
licensed when moving or pursuing
practice in New Mexico.
In addition, the interstate
compact will improve consumer
protection by ensuring the
ethical and legal provision of
services and reducing regulatory
barriers. I support the
interstate Compact for multiple
reasons, as I just mentioned,
but also from a faculty
standpoint, I see a lot of
students graduating and our
program has students from all
areas of the United States, and
they face barriers when they um
try to get licensed
between states. The other
barrier I see is I live in
Clovis, New Mexico. We have a
large military population, and
there are uh spouses who move in
and want to practice in New
Mexico, and oftentimes it's uh
large feet for them to become
licensed in New Mexico and I'm
sure that happens around the
state as well. So I would
encourage you to support this,
and I would be happy to answer
any questions you might have.
And sure we stand for questions.
Thank you. So let's go to the
Zoom. Is there anyone on Zoom
who's standing in opposition to
this legislation.
Send no one in opposition. Is
there anyone in support of the
legislation.
Oh no. We're testing our site.
Hi,
can you hear me.
I kinda,
can you hear me?
Can you hear me? Yes, we can
hear you. Please proceed. Good
morning, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. I'm a Peck
speaking for the League of Women
Voters of New Mexico. We
strongly support this bill and
all the health compact bills. We
believe that every New Mexico
resident should have a
comprehensive level of
healthcare, but between the
shortage of medical workers and
the vast distances between towns
in New Mexico, that's become
difficult. Being, uh, we urge
you to pass this bill, and we
thank for.
Representative Thompson for
introducing it in the other
compact dolls. Thank you.
All right, thank you. We next
have Vicente.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Vicente Vargas. I'm the
executive director for the New
Mexico Health Care Association
and New Mexico Center for
Assisted Living. Our membership
includes 64 of the 68 nursing
facilities in New Mexico.
Over 100 assisted living
facilities in New Mexico, and
all 7 intermediate care
providers for individuals with
developmental disabilities.
There is a shortage of, uh,
speech and language pat
pathologists in the state, many
of the uh clients and um
Residents that our members care
for, um.
Benefit and need this type of
healthcare, and many times have
to go without it because of the
shortage of speech and language
pathologists. So for those
reasons, the Mexico Health Care
Association, New Mexico Center
for Assisted Living supports
this legislation and urges its
passage. Thank you.
Thank you. Next we have
Gabrielle.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Um, I,
my name is Gabrielle Dietrich
and I am the executive director
of Nami New Mexico. Nami, New
Mexico is an organization that
uh advocates for individuals
with mental health conditions
and their families to live
better lives, and part of a of a
full life is the ability to hear
and to speak and so we want to
increase the availability of
those services to the people
that we serve. We stand in
support of this bill. Thank you
so much.
Thank you. And next we have, it
just says admin.
No, Nahali is?
No, I, no, I think admin, it's
them
that, uh, thank you, um, Madam
Chair, uh, vice chair, members
of the committee. My name is Nat
Dean and I stand in support of
the of speech language
pathology, it is a very helpful
cognitive rehabilitation
modality, and it improves the
functionality and the ability
for someone to embrace and
participate.
ate in supportive services for
themselves and their ability to
communicate their needs and
their ability to understand how
they engage with having their
needs met. I stand in support.
Thank you.
Nahalihali, you are next.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. Thank you so
much. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you clearly.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I am uh
Naholi Calvis. I am the attorney
for the audiology and speech
language pathology interstate
Compact Commission.
I also represent the OT compact,
the licensed professional
counseling compact, which is not
before you today, and I'm
interim uh attorney for the PA
Compact, which is not for you
today, but I, I say that so that
uh you just have information
with regard to my background.
I'm also legal counsel with the
Council of State governments. I
just wanted to say that
obviously the commission stands
in support. We would very much
like to include New Mexico in
our list of member states and
get New Mexico in at
with a seat at the table helping
us promulgate rules that will be
important to the administration
and implementation of the
compact, and I stand ready to
answer any questions in addition
to my support. Thank you.
All right. Thank you. I think we
have uh heard everyone on Zoom.
Let's go to the audience. Is
there anyone in opposition to
this legislation.
Seeing no one. Is there anyone
in support of the legislation.
OK, uh, please come forward. You
will have 2 minutes.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Richard Romero, I
represent the uh
speech and hearing association
as a registered lobbyist, and we
are in full support of this
bill.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is JD Bollington and I'm
speaking to you today on behalf
of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce. I think
we're all aware we have a
shortage of providers all across
the state. So anything we can do
to make it easier for licensed
providers in other states to
treat New Mexicans, whether it's
in person or in a telehealth
setting is a great way to begin
to get more New Mexicans, the
care that they need and address
the lack of providers here, um,
one of the great things about
this compact procedure.
is that the state gives up no
oversight here at all and
preserves the regulatory
authority to protect public
health and safety through the
current system, a state
licensure, so we just want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this legislation forward, and we
urge it to pass.
Madam Chair, um, committee
members. My name is Danielle
Duran. I'm the intergovernmental
affairs manager for Los Alamos
County, our county council has
passed our state priorities, the
first of which is greater access
to medical care and, and medical
professionals for all New
Mexicans, and we stand in strong
support of all the interstate
compacts, um, for medical
purposes because New Mexicans
are literally suffering and
dying without this medical care.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Hi, um, my name is Fred Nathan.
I'm the executive director of
Think New Mexico. We're a strong
supporter of this bill. Uh, we
sent all of you in the fall a
report on the healthcare worker
shortage in New Mexico, and this
was one of our main
recommendations. In fact, we
said, passing all these uh
healthcare interstate worker
compacts is the single most
impactful thing the legislature
can do this session to reduce
the medical shortage in New
Mexico.
Um,
And I want to emphasize, it's
not just doctors, I hear that a
lot. And this is, this bill is a
great example. Um, it's, it's
them, it's physical therapists,
it's occupational therapists.
And just to put this in context,
New Mexico is only in one of the
10 major interstate healthcare
worker compacts, um, by
contrast, our neighbors to the
North Colorado, they're in all
10. Utah's in 9, Oklahoma
was in 8, Arizona's in 6th, even
Texas is in 5, and we're one of
only 5 states that's in one
compact or less.
Um, and, uh, just a final
observation is, I've been
lobbying for I'm embarrassed to
say about 3 decades, and every
session there are these bills
that are designed, they're
occupational licensing, and
they're designed to keep other
professionals out for
competitive reasons. What's so
remarkable here is this
profession and the next two,
you're gonna hear about want to
welcome other uh professionals
in their sector into the state.
It's, it's testimony against
interest
And the final thing that I want
to say is, since 2016, 34 states
are members of the audiologist
and speech therapist compact,
New Mexico should join them.
Thank you.
Madam Vice Chair, members of the
committee, Oam Boumi, advocacy
director for AARP New Mexico,
um, we know that as older
individuals tend to age and get
up to, you know, in the 70s and
older, a lot of us experience,
um, you know, hearing loss, um,
as the auditory faculties tend
to go, um, this is why we
support this particular bill in
the compacts um as a lot of
older adults, especially in
rural areas in New Mexico have a
hard time getting to their
appointments, maybe, um because
of long wait times.
Um, and, and long distances that
they may have to travel and so
these interstate uh license or
compacts or, or certainly a
solution, um, one of the most
effective solutions to
addressing interstate barriers
to telehealth and, and for those
reasons, we support uh HB 79, HB
81, and House Bill 82. Thank
you. Good morning, Madam Chair
and ladies and no gentlemen,
ladies of the committee, uh, my
name is Chris LeRoy, I am the uh
lobbyist for the Ark of New
Mexico and with our.
New Mexico, we represent
advocate for people with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities. We stand in favor
of all three compact bills, HB
79, 81, and 82 after the super
allocation was able to take
everyone off the DD waiver wait
list a couple of years ago, our
clients started to encounter
another problem, and that was
with service providers, there
was no one to provide uh
audiology services, there was no
one to provide physical therapy
or occupational therapy, um.
Currently many providers are not
accepting new clients and the
ones that are still accepting
new clients have long weight
loss and huge client loss,
people with IDD are desperately
in need of good audiologists,
speech language pathologists,
occupational therapists, and
physical therapy. The only real
way that we can see a um a
resolution of this in the short
term is by adopting a compact
law provision such as this.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Now we'll go to the committee.
Are there any questions?
Yes.
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
have a quick comment. I, I think
that most people don't realize
how important uh speech
pathologists and therapists are
to a person's health. We think
of them as helping with speech.
We think of audiology helping
with hearing, but in the
hospital, speech therapists um
are and speech pathologists are,
are really important in helping
diagnose and treat things like
pneumonias that are caused from
aspiration. Um, anytime you have
a patient who has swallow
problems, you order a swallow
study from a speech therapist or
a speech pathologist who can
Test, you know, diagnose and
help treat so that this person
can
Maybe hopefully not have those
problems with aspirating and so
forth. They're just, they're
just really important to a
person's health, so I'm really
excited to finally get this
done, voting for it. Thank you
very much.
I don't see any other um hands
up.
Would you like to make a motion?
Madam Chair, I'll make a motion
for due past second. We have a
most for do pass by
representativeate a second by
Representative Eleanor Chavez,
please take the road.
Representative Anaya. Yes.
Representative Cates.
Representative E. Chavis.
Representative N Chavis.
Represented Ferrari,
Representative Jones.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez?
Madam Vice Chair Herndon, yes.
Madam Chair Thompson.
By a vote of 8 in the
affirmative and 0 in the
negative, you have a due pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'm
gonna take this opportunity to
express my gratitude for the
teamwork in reading I saw it
kind of going down. Was it this?
Was it that? So I much
appreciate everyone pitching in.
Our next bill is House Bill 81,
Occupational therapy licensure
Compact.
Uh, representative, uh, chair
Thompson, you may proceed. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So I, I
already gave you the, the
lowdown, um, just, I'll just
tell you a quick story when I
was working as a PT at um in one
of the schools, we had a young
man who basically had paralysis
of all of its facial nerves. He
couldn't blink, he couldn't
swallow, he couldn't smile, um,
and one of, one of our goals was
for him to to.
be able to blow a bubble.
And it took us years with the
OT, the PT, and the SLP.
And the day that he blew a
bubble, we were just all besides
ourselves. So those are the kind
of, I mean, it doesn't seem like
a lot, you know, whoopee, he can
blow a bubble, but it was the
first time he was ever really
able to
Do something that kids do, so,
so all these professions are
close to my heart, and so the
um.
I thought I had a an expert.
Linda Siegel is out, um, so
basically the same thing, um, we
need to pass this, there's a
shortage of, of OTs, um, and
they work in hospitals and
clinics and schools and early
intervention and they do things
like uh working on activities of
daily living, dressing, um,
bathing, those kind of things.
So I think with that I will just
stand for questions.
Thank you. So go to our Zoom. Is
there anyone in opposition to
House Bill 81. Is there anyone
in support of the bill.
Oh.
Right, Jerry?
Yes, that's correct. Uh, thank
you for recognizing me, chair
and committee members. My name
is Jerry Gran and I'm an
occupational therapist, um, over
my 40 plus year career and
occupational therapy. I
practiced throughout New Mexico,
um, but today I do speak with
you um as a representative of
the occupational therapist. The
occupational therapy assistants
and students from the state
programs who are members of
The Nexo occupational therapy
association.
I thank you for the opportunity
to provide my supporting
testimony for House Bill 81.
And um this um pardon me, this
bill, um, for, let me backtrack.
I am very aware of my
two-minute.
Time limit, so I will move right
to my statement, and that is
that currently occupational
therapists and occupational
therapy assistants must obtain
an individual license in every
state in which they wish to
practice. Obtaining a license in
multiple states can take several
months, likely requires the
retrieval of all transscripts
can possibly require discovering
past course descriptions and
could even require contacting
supervisors who are no longer
available.
to respond to correspondence. In
addition, in addition, pardon
me, occupational therapy
practitioners must maintain
differing continuing education
requirements from each state in
which they are licensed. This
can be incredibly expensive and
it's a time-consuming process.
So before you today is New
Mexico occupational therapy
licensure compact, and this
would serve as a way to mitigate
those issues that I just
referenced.
The compact allows licensees to
obtain a privilege to practice
in other compact member states
based on primary source
verification of the license and
a criminal background check.
This is a more widely organized
and uniform process than the
current patchwork of reciprocity
agreements that can exist
between individual
jurisdictions.
When occupational therapists and
occupational therapy assistants
have to spend weeks or even
months waiting on a license.
They cannot spend that valuable
time working in their chosen
field of occupational therapy,
thank you.
We appreciate your comments
today.
We're moving to Kelly Douglas.
Kelly, if you will unmute, you
have 2 minutes. Yes. Good
morning. I chaired Thompson,
vice chair Herndon, and members
of the committee on behalf of
the US Department of Defense and
Military Families in New Mexico.
I mix writing or I'm, I'm here
to to express strong support for
the policy addressed in House
Bill 81. I also wanted to um
provide the same, um, I have the
same comments for HB 79 and HB
82. Sorry, I couldn't uh raise
my hand for uh HB 79.
Um, DOD has advocated for
improved licensure and career
portability for military service
members and their spouses for
several years. Military spouses
are disproportionately affected
by state-specific professional
licensing requirements that can
cause delays and gaps in
employment.
With 36% of those spouses
requiring a state license to
practice in their professions in
an annual cross-state relocation
rate 10 times higher than their
civilian counterparts.
Accordingly, military spouses
experience unemployment and
underemployment at significantly
higher rates than their civilian
peers. State policies enacting
interstate licensure compacts
such as the occupational therapy
licensure compact relieved many
of these stressors of frequent
military moves by enabling
military spouses to transfer
their license more quickly
across state lines.
And obtain employment as soon as
they relocate to a new state.
These policies facilitate
greater career sustainability
for military spouses, improving
their family's financial
security and overall resilience.
Finally, Interstate compacts um
benefit not only military
spouses but also apply to all
eligible professionals to
include active duty service
members, members of the reserve
components, veterans and
civilians by enacting the OTLC
policy New Mexico would have the
opportunity to increase its
healthcare force available to
serve the local community while
supporting military families.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next we have Nat
Dean.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Madam Vice Chair sponsor
Thompson, um, and Miss Siegel.
Uh, my name is Natine. I am a
disability advocate. I am also a
survivor of multiple
disabilities, including
traumatic brain injury,
occupational therapy is not just
about occupation or work. It's
also very much about activities
of daily living and instrumental
activities of daily living. When
we begin to be able to harness
re-engaging in those activities,
we begin
to be able to re-engage in our
recovery. Thank you very much. I
stand in support of this bill.
Thank you. Next we have Gabriel
Dietrich.
Good morning again, Matt and
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, uh, again, I am the
executive director of Nami New
Mexico, uh, the constituents
that we serve are also in need
of occupational therapy services
and we want there to be as many
practitioners available to them
as possible across the state. We
stand in support of this bill.
Thank you so much.
Thank you. Next we have Aana
Peck.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'mma
Cone speaking for the League of
Women Voters of New Mexico. We
strongly support this bill for
the same reason as the previous
bill. It will help get New
Mexicans the care they need. We
urge you to pass HB 81. Thank
you.
Thank you. Next we have Nahali
Kalfus.
Thank you, ma'am Chair. Madam
Vice Chair, members of the
committee, uh, much, much the
same and with regard to this
compact commission, we would
very much like to have New
Mexico in this uh compact for
the same reasons this compact
works, uh, is substantively the
same in form and function. It's
a mutual recognition compact. So
we urge your passage and I'm
available for questions.
Thank you, Daniel Marcus
Marques.
Yes, hello. This is Daniel
Markels, and I'm with the
American Occupational Therapy
Association, where a national
association that's affiliated
with uh their 50 state
associations, including New
Mexico that we work with
closely, including on
occupational therapy compact
legislation. Currently, the
profession has 31 states that
have joined the compact and in
terms of geography to your
neighbors, we have Arizona,
Utah, and Colorado.
that are all members of the
compact. Um, we also, in
addition to those 31 have what
we're expecting to be about 13
states to introduce legislation
in the current year and that
includes Texas that is currently
uh considering legislation. Um,
I won't, uh, repeat the many
other benefits of the compact,
but just to give you also a
status update, um, the OT
compact, uh, in terms of status,
we are in the process of
developing and standing up our
data system and, uh, we expect
that to be done in the 2nd half
of 2025 and are hopeful that we
will start issuing compact
privileges to occupational
therapists and occupational
therapy assistance.
In states that have joined the
compact, we would very much
welcome New Mexico to be a a a
very important part of this
initiative.
Thank you.
So now we'll go to the uh
committee. Are there any
questions? Saying none. Do I
have a motion?
I'll make a motion to do pass,
but pass motion from
Representative Eleanor Chavez is
their 2nd.
We have a 2, we have 2 seconds.
We have a second from Ellen
representative Senna Cortez and
Representative uh um Anaya.
All right. Will you please call
the roll.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Cates, yes.
Representative E. Chavis.
Representative N Chavis. Yes.
Representative Ferrari,
Representative Jones.
Representative Martinez,
Representative.
Sienna Cortis.
Madam Vice Chair Herndon, yes.
Madam Chair Thompson, yes.
By a vote of 8 in the
affirmative and 0 in the
negative, you have a due pass.
Thank you,
madam.
Thank you. We are ready to go to
our last bill for the day. We're
looking at House Bill 82,
physical therapy licensure
compact.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
rather than uh
Go through the whole spiel. I'll
just say ditto to everything we
did before, but I'm even more.
Connected to the PTs being one,
so, um, and my expert is Karen
Browning, Karen Browning, um,
You want to make a statement? I
can't, I mean, I don't.
It's
Yeah like that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you, Thompson. Um, my name is
Karen Browning. I am a first and
foremost, I I'm a native 4th
generation native New Mexican.
Um, I am a licensed physical
therapist and a practicing
physical therapist. I'm an
educator. I'm the founder of the
Central New Mexico Community
College physical therapist
assistant program. I am an
adjunct faculty member at the
University of New Mexico
Doctoral Physical therapy
program.
Um, physical therapy is my
passion for sure, um, and I
don't want to take any more of
your time. Obviously we all have
things prepared and have um
things, the only difference I
would say between physical
therapy and our counterparts of
OTN speeches that we currently
have one of our surrounding
states, um, already in the
compact, so we like to kind of
we look a little bit like the
hole in the doughnut, um, when
you see New Mexico, so New
Mexico, um, physical therapy
compacts we currently have 34
other
dates are already passed and we
currently have 8 other states,
uh, that have passed their
legislation. They're just
working on there the formalities
like uh Rep Thompson talked
about becomes the legal
jarnigan, Jarnigan that we have
to talk about and do that, and I
think another uh bonus that we
have is that we already have our
licensing board on board. So we
have worked really hard with our
licensing board. We have a
letter of support from them as
well that we have.
gone through all what we need to
do for the FBI background
checks, and we are really ready
to jump through our hoops as far
as physical therapists. So, um,
I'm obviously here for any other
questions, if there was
anything.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We stand
for questions. Thank you. We'll
go to our Zoom. Is there anyone
in opposition of House Bill 82.
Sit down
Oh, I'm
I
up your mind.
Seeing that will, is there
anyone in support of the, of
House Bill 82 on Zoom.
Let me
We've discovered a piece of
technology. I take a picture of
the screen so they don't have
to.
strange
stranger.
If I'm looking like I'm doing
weird things, I am, but for a
good cause.
We do what we have to do to
survive.
Madam Chair, let's get the
optometrist back in here.
I've had a suggestion from the
crowd for binoculars.
TGIF at this point.
OK, uh first speaker is Kelly
Douglas.
Where?
Good afternoon, Madam Chair.
Vice Chair Herndon and members
of the committee. Again, I'm
Kelly May Douglas on behalf of
US Department of Defense and
Military Families and providing
comments and strong support for
the policy addressed in House
Bill 82. Um, I won't repeat what
I said, uh, the, the, uh,
impacts are the same as, as um
the previous two compacts on
military families, but I will
say that the Department of
Defense is very appreciative of
New Mexico's ongoing commitment
and efforts to support members
of the military and their
families who sacrifice much.
service to our country, enacting
this and other licensure
compacts, has the potential to
greatly improve the quality of
life for our families. Thank
you, Chair Thompson for
providing me the opportunity to
provide comments in support of
this policy proposal.
Thank you. Next we'll have Matt
Dean.
Thank you. My name is Nadine.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair sponsor, I stand
ditto in support of House Bill
82. Thank you. And I would
change it from admin to Natine,
but the system is not allowing
me to do that. Thank you very
much.
OK. Next we have Karen.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Karen Lucero. I am uh a physical
therapist. I've practiced in New
Mexico for almost 50 years, and
I work in the early intervention
setting and even in Albuquerque
we have difficulty attracting
enough physical therapists and
other professions, including the
OTs and speech therapists to
work in service to our clients.
Uh, we, uh, are also
an entry point into the
healthcare system, so physical
therapists can directly evaluate
patients and uh uh assess their
neuromuscular conditions and
then refer on to other members
of the healthcare workforce. Um,
physical therapists are, are
among the most needed in the
state. We need about 500 more
physical therapists in the state
based on the national
benchmarks. So, um, I
I am, uh, on the New Mexico
APTA, uh, legislative committee,
and we strongly support this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Next we have Akana
Pack.
Uh, good,
good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico strongly supports 82 for
the same reason as the other two
compacts, and we echo everything
that everybody has already said.
Thank you.
And next we have Kathleen
Mosley.
Thank you, Chair Thompson and
the rest of the committee. Um,
I'd like to take this
opportunity to say and support
uh OTPT and audiology and speech
language because I had a son who
used all of those in his
development. He was deaf, um, he
was visually impaired and had
physical needs because of uh a
golden heart syndrome. So I
wanna express support and also
for compact.
I'd like to emphasize 3 things.
One, it's public safety for all
of us, um, so that we know the
backgrounds of professionals
coming in and out. Secondly,
it's mobility in crisis with
disasters, and as a Project Echo
employee here in New Mexico. It
helps with licensing in
telehealth and also equity for
access in rural areas. Thank you
very much.
Thank you. And now we'll go to
the committee. Are there any
questions from the committee? No
questions from the committee.
I'll accept a motion. I'd like
to make a motion for a due pass.
We have a motion by
representative Senator Cortez is
their second by Representative
uh Anaya. I felt very strongly
about this, working with the PT
shout out to the PTs. I'd like
to second Madam Chair.
A roll call boy, please.
Representative Anaya.
Representative Cates.
Representative E. Chavis.
Representative N Chavis. Yes.
Representative Ferrari,
Representative Jones. Yes.
Representative Martinez,
Representative Senna Cortis.
Madam Vice Chair Herndon, yes.
Madam Chair Thompson, yes.
And can I do a shout out?
To Karen, who, um, and I'm
blanking on
was my clinical instructor and
so.
Shout out to all the PTs.
by a vote of 8 in the
affirmative and 0 in the
negative, you have a due pass on
House Bill 82.
I'd like to thank you all for
joining us. That's all for
