Representing
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez.
Representative, I mean, uh,
Madam Vice Chair Herndon.
Here, Madame Chair Thompson,
here.
So we do have a quorum and for
those of you who have to um go
to another committee, you can go
and get back as soon as you can.
So we will start with House Bill
119, with Representative Cates.
Thank you Madam Chair and thank
you committee members. Um, today
I am presenting House Bill 119.
As we've heard in this committee
and other committees, uh, when,
when the state legislature, uh,
decides to change either the
minimum wage or the minimum
benefits such as we're
considering this session for
paid family medical leave or in
previous years for uh our uh
mandatory sick time. Um, for
private businesses, they have
the option to, I would say if
you sell cookies and you have
to.
raise the price of your cookies
to adjust for that minimum wage
hike, you're able to do that.
What you, who is not able to do
that is if you have a state
contract where you're in
Medicaid provider. They are
locked into a rate for the life
of their contract. The contract
can be for 2 years to 5 years, I
have personal experience as I
ran a nonprofit and was a
Medicaid provider, if I, um, had
a contract.
With the state for 2 years based
on a minimum wage that in the
middle of the contract that
minimum wage increased, he would
not allow me to change my rate.
To be, to reflect that increase
until the end of the contract
year. When you are a Medicaid
provider, especially, but even
our state contractors, the
margins are so tiny that this
can really be devastating. Um
the federal government of uh,
Addresses this sort of situation
because the federal government,
you have contracts for 5 years
at a time. They have what they
call a far in their contract,
which allows the contractee to
request a rate adjustment in the
middle of the contract year.
Based on the prevailing wage or
benefit changes to the federal
government is requiring. The
federal government always has
the right to refuse if for some
reason, the federal government
I don't know, raise the
The prevailing wage, but yet.
Went bankrupt and can't pay for
the prevailing wage, they could
say no, but you create a
documentation of requests and,
and, and because um it it is not
a foolproof perfect system, as
in a lot of times the rate
increase approved, doesn't
include things like FICA and and
overhead, but it takes the sting
out of the prevailing wage
changing.
So I took that idea and created
this bill. This is for state
contractors and Medicaid
providers. It says that once uh
a benefit has changed through
the legislature and signed by
the governor within 45 days, the
contractee is able to make a
written request to the state
agency that they have their
contract with to make a contract
adjustment, and that state
agency must reply.
Um, as we know nowadays that if
for some reason we as a
legislature or if a bill is
signed to change in
Was he signed by the governor's
office the end of March.
Um, many times that change does
not implement the following
July. It's the July the
following year, so that agencies
have time to adjust their
budgets and be able to to
adequately fund their budgets.
Um, so they have 45 days of
state contractor does to make
that request for a benefit
change, the Medicaid.
Uh, portion of this bill says
that the state agency is
required to make a rate change
request to from to CMS for
Medicaid providers that reflect
the benefit changes that the
legislature has made.
Um, so we are requiring that our
state agencies ask CMS for that
rate change cause that needs to
be approved for it to occur, um,
we cannot
We cannot legislate when CMS
will answer, um, but we can
legislate when we ask and so I'm
asking that we make that request
45 days from uh implementation
from the signature of the
benefit change, and I rest for
question.
Thank you. First, we will go to
opposition if you are online in
opposition, raise your hand and
I'll come back to you if you are
in opposition in the room,
please raise your hand.
Oh, we have an amendment.
So we're gonna back up a little
bit.
Oh
Do you have it replicates?
OK.
Sorry.
Madam, I move the amendment for
discussion.
Any any objection?
Go ahead.
Would you like the number of
men, Madam Chair.
We're good? OK.
Representative Kates, if you
could just kind of do, I mean,
it looks like a lot of them are
the same and so if you just
briefly explain it.
Um, the amendment is mostly uh a
language amendment to
clarifying, yeah, uh, the
statues, rules and statutory and
law, that's what, um, that's
what it was a cleanup for that
consistency to make sure that.
Um, that it complied.
So do I have a motion to adopt
the amendment?
So
Yeah your morning stretching.
So we have a motion from
Representative Anaya in the
second from Representative
Ferrari. Is there any
opposition?
then you have an amended bill.
And we'll go back to um
So folks in support online,
please raise your hand, and
people in support in the
audience. Please raise your hand
and if you'd like to speak, you
can come forward.
Madam, Madam Chair, I request,
uh, before we go to public
comment. Could, could you just
say maybe a a short statement
about how the amendment does
affect the bill. I know you.
I don't fully understand that,
and I know that you could
explain it quickly.
Thank you. The amendment is just
to clarify the language to make
sure that it stays consistent
using the correct vocabulary,
the, the, the correct, that's
what it says law statutory
statute to make sure that that
there's consistency there. It is
basically the same.
Um, bill that is in the
original. It's just a, it's a
clarification.
OK, thank you very much. Thank
you, Madam Chair. OK, so public,
can you please come forward?
Mm
And you'll have 2 minutes.
do
No problem. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
I'm Jim Copeland, executive
director of the Association of
Developmental Disabilities
Community providers.
And while we haven't seen the
amendment uh currently we
appreciate the efforts of the
sponsor to change this situation
with our Medicaid provider
agencies who were locked into
rate structures most contractors
with the state, most if not all
contractors with the state of
New Mexico get to respond to a
request for proposal.
To tell the state what they're
going to charge to provide a
certain service, our
developmental disability waiver
providers don't get that luxury.
Those rates are set by CMS in
the state of New Mexico and when
you apply to become a a
developmental disability waiver
provider, you know on the front
end what you're going to be
reimbursed for those services,
and sometimes those services
don't cover the total cost of
providing the service, so this
effort uh to to change state law
to sort of mirror federal law
will it.
least give providers an
opportunity to try to remedy
those statutory requirements
that come up that increase the
cost with no increase in the
reimbursement rates, so we would
request a due pass this bill.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Vicente Vargas. I'm with
the New Mexico Health Care
Association in New Mexico Center
for Assisted Living, we
represent long term care
facilities in the state of New
Mexico, um, much to what Mr.
Copeland has has said, I won't
repeat, um.
We support this bill because as
I, as I like to tell folks and
uh in the in the long term care
world and Medicaid providers,
we're price takers, not price
makers.
As Mr. Copeland said, when a
Medicaid rate is set, that is
the Medicaid rate that providers
have to
under. Um, and so for example,
nursing facilities, they're.
The rates have not been um
re-based since 2007. They have,
they have received increases on
their rates, but rebates seem to
um come up to what it costs to
operate, have not been done
since 2007. So therefore, when
you get policy changes every
year, whether it's minimum wage,
um, PFMLA.
That is not built in to that
rate, and so we, they have to
operate on, you know, make those
margins work with that
established rate, so for, for
that reason and many others, we
appreciate the sponsor and we
support this legislation. Thank
you. Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Dan
Najar representing Amberare. We
provide home health, hospice,
and personal care to a large
portion of the Medicaid
population. This bill is long
overdue. Our our providers are
among the lowest reimbursed
under Medicare program and I
would point out that the the.
Bill doesn't mandate that the
state give us an increase, but
for the first time it gives us
an opportunity to request one,
and we strongly.
It will go online to Mega
Lorino.
Hello, my name is, can you hear
me?
Yes.
Great, thank you, sorry. My name
is Megan Lorino. I'm the
executive director for the New
Mexico Association for Home and
Hospice Care. I think I would
just echo all of the comments,
my colleagues there have made.
We fully support the intent of
this bill, because
community-based personal care
service providers contract with
managed care organizations and
not the state. It is not clear
that this bill will apply to our
providers, um, you know, in the
past decade, our providers have
been passed on the cost of a
rudimentary visit verification
system with huge administrative
burdens on providers and a lot
of expansions of worker
benefits, but without our rates
ever being adequately adjusted
and we just have been left
behind, so we just want to take
this opportunity to remind this
body that ultimately it is up to
the Mexico legislature, and of
course the healthcare authority
to ensure that our providers
have an adequate reimbursement
rate, but we do fully support
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. We will go to the
committee, uh do you have any
closing remarks and before I
forget, we are rolling House
Bill 133 and 173.
So if you're here for either of
those bills, um.
You can, we'd love you to stay,
but if you don't want to, you
can mosey along.
So questions from the committee.
Questions?
Representative Jones. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Kates. I really
appreciate this bill. And as you
know, some of us who haven't
been involved with all of this
reimbursement business. We, we
still like to have a a clearer
picture of what's happening.
Could you give us some examples
of how this will benefit.
Patience and providers.
Um, yes, so this bill will uh uh
help state contractors as well
as Medicaid providers. So let's
say the gentleman who's mowing
the grass or the person is
mowing the grass at the
roundhouse.
He, he or she may be locked into
a rate for 2 years, and it might
be based on, let's say, a
minimum wage of what kind of
character, what kind of
groundskeeping services that
they're providing.
If we as a legislature in the
middle of that contract year
require them to pay a higher
minimum wage. They don't have an
avenue to request a rate change
in the middle of their contract.
Um, this is especially hardship
for Medicaid providers because
they are locked into a minimum
of 5 years. And as you heard
today in public comment,
sometimes that rebates is a lot
longer than that.
Um, where they
The state has decided not to be
able to raise that rate. So if
you, your rate study which is
required by CMS every 5 years is
based on the costs of the
services.
Not a perfect system, but that's
what it is. It's based on the
cost of the services. And so if
those services are based on a
certain benefit package. That is
what informs the state to what
requests the Medicaid rate is to
CMS.
If we as legislators change that
benefit package.
The Medicaid providers are still
locked into that rate for 5
years until they can make that
adjustment, and their margins
are too small to absorb it.
Thank you, Representative Kates
and Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Kates, I hear
this phrase often and, and I
have to let it soak in and that
these providers are rate takers,
not rate makers, and that that's
like the bottom line from how
the way I understand it, and I'm
hoping that our new members are
getting a feel for this, that
we, what we're doing here, and
correct me if I'm wrong, what
we're doing here is allowing
them the opportunity to request
an increase in reimbursement.
Absolutely. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you,
Representative. Correct, it does
not mean date that the state
must pay this request. Um, but
we will be creating a paper
trail of requests and showing
the, you know, the viability of
the request for that.
It's a system that has worked
well within the federal
government for decades, and I've
often wondered why we don't have
it at the state and so I welcome
this opportunity to bring it.
Thank you, Representative Kates.
Madam Chair, Representative
Cates, I know one thing we
discussed before committee was
the, the 10 and I would just
want you to address this, um,
was the potential for um when
we're making rules, um, that are
not approved by the legislature
that is there a potential for
Abusing this.
What this creates what this bill
creates any potential for abuse.
I, I can see by your face that
you're just confused by that,
but
It's a question and I, I'd like
for you to address it.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I, I.
Um, there's, it's a very simple,
it's a request, not a mandate,
um, a request that uh providers
that make it will most likely
have documentation on that backs
up their request, such as
there's a minimum wage increase
requirement starting on the
state and then this is the rate
adjustment we would like to ask
CMS for CMS will pay the rate.
Um, it seems as will need to
approve the rate, but they won't
approve anything that we don't
request and so our state this
law does mandate the state
requests it from CMS.
Thank you very much. And I just
want to say this, Madam Chair,
that, you know, this, this
conversation right here helps us
solidify our opinions to support
this kind of thing. I don't know
how my other members are going
to vote, but, but I know that at
least for me, when we get to the
floor,
Everyone on our side is trying
to um trying to, they're looking
to us to explain why we should
vote for this bill. And so I
appreciate the conversation so
that we can really understand it
fully and support it fully.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Thank you, Representative
Martinez.
Thank you for allowing me to
disappear for a little bit to
another committee.
Um, and thank you Representative
Cates for bringing this forward.
Um
Uh, I have, I have a question on
Why we're leaving so much up to
the healthcare authority to make
the rules on this because
Seems to me like the rules can
change.
From administration to
administration, why not?
solidify that in statute.
Um, men to represent I'm not,
I'm not sure exactly what
you're.
Referring to
Um, it, it seems
Let me get the exact language in
the bill.
But it seems that we're allowing
the healthcare authority that to
set the the rule, and I, I just,
I'm always concerned.
Unnamed people making all the
rules.
Um, because those rules, I, I
mean, I've been in state
government.
One way or another for the past
30 years, and I see, I've seen
rules change constantly.
Um, so it just seems like
We would want
Look a little bit more formal,
maybe.
Instead of allowing the
healthcare.
representative, I'm, I'm still
not clear what rule is the
healthcare authority making this
this bill will require that
there is a reformal rewritten
request to CMS on a rate change.
Um, and that will be through the
HCA and it's a requirement that
they make the request now we
can't legislate what CMS win or
or how CMS replies, um, because
it's a federal agency, um, and
so that's, that's the rule, uh
within HCA, the other part of
the spill is for state
contractors, so it's usually the
general service department.
apartment, but not always,
sometimes your state contract
might be with the cultural
affairs department. Maybe, maybe
you're doing something in the, I
don't know the custodial
contracts for cultural affairs
department. So that, so that's
why it's a state agency. It
doesn't say GST because it can
be a different one and then that
gives you the right to request
for that rate, uh, increase or
rate change within the middle of
your contract.
So it is, it is a bill that.
Um, allows.
Contracees to make the request
to state agencies that they have
a contract with and it requires
our state agency to make the
request to CMS, but it does not
mandate the answer.
Thank you for the time, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Kate, for that answer.
Representative um Senate Cortez
and then Representative Herndon.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. You're doing a
really great job and as you can
tell with me and my colleagues,
I'm torn and I want to
understand, um, I want 1000%
believe that they should be able
to have increased rates, um, but
Is there a way to do it?
through statute setting the rate
and not through the rules and
regulatory bodies.
A man chair representative.
So we are not allowed to, we as
a legislator or not allowed to
obligate.
Our state agencies.
Uh, for, for future.
Obligations.
And so that's why this bill is
written.
That it requires that it allows
the request, but does not
obligate and that makes sense,
madam.
Let me add something here. So if
we put it in statute that
they're paid $9 an hour, um,
then if there's another minimum
wage increase or something else
we don't, we generally don't put
pay rates in statutes because
they're hopefully they're going
up. Right, and that makes sense,
Madam Chair Representative, and
thank you.
for indulging me. I'm sincerely
trying to understand, um, so you
couldn't set a rate and have it
be reviewed with some frequency
semi-annually annually, no?
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative, you
couldn't put a rate in there and
also um we always want to give,
um,
Even if we don't want to. We
have to give the option for our
government to say no, what if?
What I don't, I don't know the
scenario that we would pass a
benefit increase while our state
government was going bankrupt,
right, but what if?
They have to be able to have the
option.
And so that is why it's written
the way it's written.
Um, Madam Chair representative,
um, so how would passing this
bill like supersede the
five-year rate by the feds.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative.
I, I don't know if I'd use that
super, I don't know if I'd use
that verbiage. So the rate is
established through the state
paid for rate study based on
The year they took the rate
studies benefit package and in
they're locked in for 5 years.
If we as a legislator,
Cha
The benefit package by raising
minimum wage or passing paid
family medical leave or whatever
it is we decide to do.
This bill allows for the
Medicaid providers to make uh
well, this bill, sorry, a uh
requires that the state agency.
Make the the state agency is not
allowed to adjust the rate
without CMS's approval. So it
requires the state agency to
make their formal written
requests to CMS for the rate
change that would reflect the
benefit change in the middle of
the contract year.
No, you're doing a great job
explaining it. Thank you, thank
you. Um, I, I, your feedback is
very important, uh,
representative, and if I need
charts for the next committee,
please let me know and I'll be
glad to work on this, so thank
you and as you can see, I'm torn
and I'm open to the debate and
hearing other people's questions
to help clarify even more
further if anyone else has
questions. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair Representative.
Presentative Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So,
Representative, uh, one of the
things that I'm, I'm having
trouble with with respect to
this bill, is that if I'm a
lawyer and I'm negotiating a
contract and you sign it, then
I'm expecting you to abide by
the contract. If I want to put
in
A different section that says if
the rates go up, then we will
come back and renegotiate the
contract. Why do I need a
statute to do that?
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. I
think that's a great question.
So I don't get to negotiate my
contract. When you're Medicaid
provider or you're a state
contractor, you don't get to
negotiate your contract. It is
based on data in which the state
collects under the state person
they've hired, so I don't even
get to control how they
interpret that, um, that.
Uh
Information. So you're
absolutely right in your
scenario, if I was, as we'll go
back, if I sold cookies for a
living and the benefits have
changed, I can decide to raise
the price of my cookies to
offset that.
But when you are locked in to a
contract that is based on
previous benefits, so the
government is telling you have
to raise the benefits and then
the government is telling you
they're not going to pay for the
benefits, and if the federal
government, that's illegal. You
are not allowed to get something
for nothing. So our state needs
to reap, I believe, needs to
reflect with the federal
government already has.
in their boilerplate fires for
federal contracts.
Madameier, uh, senator, I mean,
uh Representative.
Let me just make sure I
understand, so the, the Medicaid
uh contract is negotiated before
the individuals even get a
chance to utilize it. I mean in
the individual organizations. I
mean, that's what's not clear. I
think that's what's causing the
confusion here.
And for me too.
Thank you, Madam Chair. It's so,
it is not negotiated.
First thing, the federal
government mandates our state to
provide disability services, a
mandates, it is an entitlement.
Now each state gets to decide
how they're going to provide
those services in our state
hires a third party, uh, data
collector or surveyor who
creates, um, and gathers the
data up and says this is how
much that's these services cost,
and so that becomes
the rate, then they request that
rate from CMS and then CMS
approves it, and then people are
locked into that rate. So I as a
I'm not a business owner, but I
as an executive of a nonprofit,
or maybe even a business owner
because some are businesses are
locked in a Medicaid rate, it is
not a negotiable rate. It is, it
is a mandated program.
So Madam Chair and
Representative, you're saying if
in the middle of this, this rate
that has been determined. If we
have an increase in the amount
that should be paid or
reimbursement that you want to
now say that.
Uh, we must
That must be included in a new
I don't know, it has to be a
contract. It doesn't, um, you
have to help me. So, so, um,
let's let's continue to talk
about DD waiver providers on
Medicaid. You are a deep a
residential services provider.
You get $175. I'm making up
numbers, so don't, don't yell at
me. I, I could be way off. $175
a day to take care of my son.
And, and the, the um
Either we pass paid family
medical leave or
The minimum wage goes up.
They're stuck
For 5 years paying 5 years ago
wages, and we know that um you
could make more money at
McDonald's than you can doing a
lot of these jobs taking care of
our people, so all she's asking
is that this the con the
contractors.
When, when costs go up.
And it could be, I mean, it's
not necessarily this, but it
could be that Google brings in
a, you know, a factory that has
10,000 jobs paying $30 an hour
and then all of a sudden all of
our people are gone and there's
no one to take care of those, so
this doesn't say that the state
will have to increase rates. It
says that the state must
Ask Medicare, CMS.
About raising the rates to try
and keep these folks up with
whatever infla inflation or, um,
you know, a tighter job market
or whatever.
Just one last clarifying
question, but why do we need a
statute to do that? Why can't
they just do it anyway?
Madam Chair Representative, I've
been asking that for 18 years,
um, so I just to clarify what
our chair Thompson said is that
this bill only requires
The request or gives the ability
to request a rate change in the
middle of your contract year. If
a state statute is changed.
So if the cost of lumber goes
up.
This does not give you the
right. I don't know what you're
building with lumber for these
services, but if it, if, if, if
for some reason you're making
eggs every day or whatever, um,
they.
This does not cover that. This
covers when our legislative
body.
changes the benefit structure.
For either through minimum wage,
uh, hike or other kinds of
benefits a requirement upon
employment, the people who are
locked into state contracts
should have the right to request
an adjustment to the rate.
So I, I understand the concept
completely. Uh, it just doesn't,
I just don't know why we have to
have a statue uh past to do it,
but my question to you is, is
this process that you're
describing been utilized in
other states, they, we have to,
they have to pass the statute to
have their state agencies to
make a request to increase uh
these benefits if they are
changed so that you're not
locked into 5 years of bad
rates.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. Um, we have
done some research on other
states and other states have
different procurement codes that
can address this, but I this
idea of my came from how federal
contracts are put together, so
federal contracts have
standardized boilerplate
paragraphs, they're called fars,
and there's a far that allows,
it only gives you 15 days, but
in 15.
days from the prevailing wage
change, you're allowed to make a
request. Now they can deny it.
You can make a request and that
request may be with the Air
Force, if your contracts with
the Air Force or with Department
of Energy, but you're allowed to
make contract in the middle of
your 5 year contract.
And and just because someone, an
agency can do it? Does it mean
that they will. And that's why
this law is there too, so that
depending on who the
administration is, who the
secretary is, they can't say,
well, I don't believe in that,
you know, let's let it go. We'll
put it in the statute so they
don't have a choice but to
consider it.
just one last clarifying
question. So the procurement
code that you're trying to amend
is written by the General
Services Department, so the
procurement section.
So, uh, if you just, and the,
and the procurement code is
written pursuant to a statue. So
help me, what statue are we
amending so that when they're
going to write the procurement
code, which you're asking for,
it has to be put in there.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative, I
will have uh my drafter stand
next to me next time I come
here, but I will say that this
does have two parts in this
bill. One is the procurement
code, but the other is through
HCA through a request to CMS.
OK. Thank you, ma'am, too.
As I've repeatedly said, health
care is
billions of layers and
I don't think there's any person
on this earth that understands
all. So any more questions?
So I will entertain emotion. I'd
like to move for due pass on
house bill one back up. We, we
didn't adopt the amendment.
OK,
we did for discussion, did we we
adopted? OK, OK. Friday. I
thought it was Thursday, so I
thought I was gonna be late.
It's like, oh, I don't have
anything till 10:30. 0, I have
8:30. So bear with me, OK, so we
have a a motion for do pass on
House Bill 119 as amended. OK,
do I have a second? OK. Um, is
there any, is there any
opposition? OK, we'll take the
role.
Representative Anaya.
Yes.
Representative Cates, yes.
Representative E. Chavis.
Representative in Chavis.
Representative Ferrari.
Yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez.
No, and I'd like to explain my
vote. OK.
Madam Vice Chair Herndon, yes.
Madam Chair Thompson, yes.
By a vote of 7 in the
affirmative, 2 in the negative,
you have a due pass as amended.
And then
Oh.
Go ahead.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative. I 1,000%
agree with they should be able
to have increases in pay, um,
I'm still just struggling with
the implementation process, but
my heart is open for more
conversation if it makes it to
the house floor for my mind to
change. So thank you for your
patience, Madam Chair and
Representative, and explaining
it to me. And I'm open to future
conversations. Thank you so
much, Madam Chair
Representative. Thank you. And
the next bill is mine, so I
will.
go down there, but just a
reminder that we are rolling 133
and 173.
Next on our agenda is House Bill
131 caregiver background checks
and our presenter is
Chair Thompson.
And her experts.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This is
a.
A fairly simple bill, I think.
Um, so it's shifting
responsibility from overseeing
caregiver background checks from
the Department of Health to the
Healthcare Authority, and adding
to the list of disqualifying
convictions.
caregivers. So just a a few
minor changes in the law, so
changing the Department of
Health to healthcare Authority
on page one.
Um, and doing that throughout.
In several places, um, and then
the, the main changes are on
page 3.
lying 15.
So these are, these are the
following felony convictions
disqualify an applicant,
caregiver or hospital caregiver
from employment as a caregiver,
it's got homicide trafficking
controlled substance, and it's
including adding to the
definition in line 15, including
battery of a household member.
Would, would, um, disqualify you
from, from qualifying for these
jobs and then on page 4.
We, we added some more sex
trafficking, assault of a police
officer identity theft or
cruelty to animals.
And then line 7, the healthcare
authority may promulgate rules
to add additional types of
convictions to the list of
convictions that disqualify an
applicant.
And then again, it's just
changes to the name and then um
So it gives the healthcare
authority.
A little leeway to determine if
there if there are other crimes
that that should be considered
when we're um when we are
Looking at folks to be
caregivers. And so I will let my
expert introduce himself and
make a few remarks.
Good morning, uh, Madam Vice
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Dan Lunari. I am the
director of the division of
Health Improvement with the
Healthcare Authority, uh, DHI is
the regulatory licensing
oversight body for healthcare
facilities in New Mexico. Uh, we
also have oversight over the DD
waiver program, uh, the employee
abuse registry and the
caregiver uh criminal history,
um, first, I want to thank, um,
Madam Chair for, for her
sponsorship of this bill. I also
like to thank Senator Sailla
Lopez, uh,
of Hockman B. Hill and
Representative Cates for your
sponsorship of this important
bill.
I'm here today because I need
your help with protecting
vulnerable. We are seeing an
increase in severe cases of
abuse, neglect, and exploitation
in our state.
You have a two-page fact sheet
that that shows some data as it
relates to that.
FY 24, um, when we compare those
number of cases uh back to FY20,
we have seen 117% increase.
In cases for individuals
receiving DD waiver services and
the 76% increase in severe ANE
cases and healthcare facilities
to include hospitals, nursing
homes, and assisted living
facilities.
ANE is abuse, neglect, and
exploitation.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And
These cases, when I say
highlight severe abuse, neglect,
and exploitation. Examples of
these are medical neglect
resulting in death, medical
neglect resulting in a broken
jaw of individuals.
Exploitation exceeding $10,000
of individuals.
These cases resulted in
employees being referred to the
employee abuse registry.
However, these employees passed
our screening program that we're
meeting with you here today
about.
So our safeguard to this.
In many ways is the background
checks that are performed prior
to employment.
And on the 2nd page of your fact
sheet, you will see how New
Mexico ranks.
Compared to other states as far
as our number of disqualifying
convictions, and you will see
that New Mexico has around 10%
the amount of disqualifying
convictions as other states.
So we see that as a need to
close the gap to ensure the
safety of individuals receiving
healthcare in our state.
And I look forward to your
questions and comments on this
bill and um we'll stand for
comments and questions.
Any closing remarks, madam? No,
madam, we're we're ready to
answer the hard question.
OK. Thank you very much. So
we'll go to the zoom. Is there
anyone on Zoom who stands in
opposition to this legislation.
I see no hands, so is there
anyone on Zoom who stands in
support of this legislation.
Please raise your hand.
I don't see any hands, so I'm
going to the audience. Is there
anyone in the audience who
stands in opposition to this
legislation.
Please stand and come forth.
Introduce yourself and you have
2 minutes to make your comment.
Good morning, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, Jim
Copeland with the Association of
Developmental Disabilities
Community providers.
Uh, we, we don't necessarily
oppose the intent of this
legislation we do have some
concerns the section E that's
new language in the law.
That allows the health care
authority to add disqualifying
convictions to the list.
We're not sure that that means
felony convictions or it says
disqual types of
Disqualifying convictions.
The whole statute prior to that
talks about specifically
felonies.
So we're concerned while we have
full faith and support in the
current cast of characters at
the Healthcare Authority this
bill if it's passes, we'll move
forward into the future when we
may or may not have full faith
and support.
Of the cast of characters making
those decisions. It also moves
the lawmaking process to the
rulemaking process. Uh, so we,
until we can, we haven't seen
the fact sheet that you folks
were provided with, uh, but
we'll stand in opposition
currently will follow this bill
to the judiciary Committee
because we think it's more of a
judicial problem than
In an actual problem problem. uh
I will say that as late as last
week, there is no place in
Valencia County to get
fingerprints done.
So that's gonna back up, you
know, if you're, if you're
wanting to work for a provider
agency in Valencia County, you
either have to come to
Albuquerque or go to Socorro I
think is the nearest place to
get fingerprints taken, so
there's some issues that I think
we can work with the sponsor and
with the, the healthcare
authority folks to try to
Smooth this out. Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam by his chair and it was my
name is Mark Scheer. I'm CEO of
CARC in Carlsbad. He served a
development mentally disabled in
Carlsbad. I'm opposed to the
language in that section E.
Because they're being
disingenuous about what their
intent is.
Their intent is to add
misdemeanor convictions to the
list.
I get
The whole discussion, and I'm
not here saying I want criminals
or bad people in my facility.
I was on the original committee
along with the Department of
Health staff that wrote this
original statute way back when
and we discussed this very
And decided not to include
misdemeanor convictions due to
their wide-ranging category in
use.
So here's a true example, a
nursing home administrator.
Identified a housekeeping staff
who was stealing from the
residents.
Took
Terminated her, upset her, of
course, as they walked out of
the building, he placed his hand
on her shoulder to console her
cause that's the guy he is. He's
kind, compassionate man.
When he got when she got home
and attorneys got involved, they
asked her, did you give him
permission to touch you? She
said, Well, no, and so he was
charged with misdemeanor
battery.
He went to court. He admitted to
what he did.
And he was convicted of
misdemeanor battery, a licensed
nursing home administrator who
it under what they want to do,
might prevent him from working
in his chosen profession.
When attorneys get in, let's see
what's, so why should this kind
of act of compassion used by
aggressive prosecutors result in
him not being able to work in
that profession just because a
felony charge also is pled down
to a misdemeanor.
May have more to say about
overzealous prosecutors than it
does about the nature of the
incident.
I am concerned about folks who
work in our facilities and
provide services, we don't need
bad people, but the unintended
consequence of further limiting
valuable workers and or delaying
their approval while waiting on
an appeal review will put
additional stress on an already
fragile workforce that we
struggle with every single day.
Thank you very much.
All right. Is there anyone in
the audience who stands in
support of this legislation,
please come forward, introduce
yourself, you have 2 minutes.
Good day, Madam Chair and
committee. Jacob Smith, Sandoval
with the Govern to Change
project, and I support HB 131
with strong words of caution to
all healthcare heroes across the
state of New Mexico as the
process was compromised under
the New Mexico Department of
Health, leaving all healthcare
professionals exposed to
identity theft. I'd also like to
note that the transfer to the
New Mexico Healthcare Authority
has already occurred.
Back in July with no reason
given, the process was
immediately changed. Though
that's great for the future, I
urge all health care
professionals to protect their
identity. I discovered this
while working at the University
of New Mexico College of
Nursing. When I brought this to
light, Mr. Padilla from the
Department of Health, it was
concealed immediately due to the
New Mexico health.
New Mexico Department of Health,
not imposing proper sanctions on
the University of New Mexico.
This practice was then moved to
the entire University of New
Mexico database, compromising
all students, staff, and faculty
to identity theft. I reported
this to the University of New
Mexico leadership, Governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham, former
university, or sorry, former New
Mexico Department of Health
cabinet Secretary Patrick Ellen,
state legislatures, and the
Attorney General's office all
have refused to protect our
healthcare heroes, equating to a
RICO level case of conspiracy to
defraud the United States.
States
I will be asking the United
States Attorney General to
investigate this and more crimes
that were committed by the
executive, judicial and
legislative branches, along with
the University of New Mexico.
Make no mistake about it,
corruption is not taught on the
streets, it's taught in the
classrooms. As the next elected
governor of the great state of
New Mexico, I give you my word
as a man of God that corruption
will end in New Mexico. Thank
you, Madam Chair and committee
for this time and I hope you all
have a wonderful weekend.
OK, thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name's Jody McGuinness Porter. I
have an autistic son who's on
the DD waiver. He lives in a
group home and in his home, um,
it was videotaped, uh, his
caregiver was abusing his uh
housemate, banging his head on
the table in his home, and the
attorney general's office is
investigating this case. This is
an individual.
Who was my son's primary
caregiver, who was also
discharged from employment at a
school where he was an aid
working uh and
Uh, was fired because he washed
at kindergarteners mouth out
with soap, the kindergartner had
autism. My son has autism, um, I
Deal with this on a regular
basis, caregivers who are not,
uh.
Necessarily uh performing the
care or I, I just want
reassurance that the people who
are taking care of my autistic
son and his housemates, um,
Will provide the love and
support and caregiving that I
would my own son. I don't if I,
I, I
If they have a criminal
background, uh, they shouldn't
be in this business. Thank you.
Madam dear Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Jim
Jackson, uh, disability rights
in New Mexico.
Uh, and I do stand in support of
the uh the general provisions of
this bill, um, adding the kinds
of crimes that are specifically
uh enumerated in this statute,
make a lot of sense in terms of
protecting, uh, vulnerable
people who are receiving these
services.
Um, but I have to say I do share
some of the concern about giving
the authority to the department
by rule to just add additional
uh uh crimes that would
disqualify people, um, I, and,
and so I, I tend to agree with a
few of my colleagues here, but
I'd like to put that in a
slightly different context that
for some um uh for a lot of the
uh personal care, uh, services.
We do have some self-directed
options in New Mexico, and
And we tend to think that it
ought to be up to for,
particularly for adults or
parents who are making these
decisions to give them the
flexibility to say, well, yes, I
know this person did this crime
5 years ago, but I know them and
I trust them and so on to allow
people with disabilities to kind
of make their own choice about
who's their attending uh person
is gonna be and so on, so I'm, I
have to say I'm a little bit um
troubled by the provision that
just gives the authority, um,
essentially carte blanche.
To the department to add
additional crimes, but the
intent of this to make sure that
People who have committed these
enumerated crimes are not um
allowed to care for people with,
uh, we think that's a good idea,
so it's kind of a mixed
blessing, I guess you'd say, but
we do support the concept behind
the bill. Thanks.
Thank you. I see no other uh
individuals wishing to make a
comment, I'll go to the
committee now.
OK.
All right.
Our first a person
representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for
bringing this forward. Uh, I, I,
we endorse the concept.
And I'm probably gonna vote for
the bill.
I have two issues that I'd like
to.
up.
Uh, page 2 starting on
Line 12.
I, I have fundamental issues
with
Department rulemaking.
Um, like I mentioned before.
Um, and
Allowing the, the HCA to
Just randomly add.
disqualifying convictions, um.
I'm not sure I'm
White comfortable with that, and
Like I said, I'm gonna probably
vote for this, but when it gets
down to the floor, it's gonna,
can you, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair, explain to me why.
You felt it was important to
include this.
Art in the bill.
Will allow HCA to choose the
disqualifying convictions.
I will start and then my expert
witness can continue so we we
all hear about um
Serious felonies being pled down
to a misdemeanor. Um, and so
that's part of the, part of what
we're looking at here and, and
different new new.
Classes I guess of crimes.
10 may occur, um, and, and what
all we're looking for is for
folks who.
would have a tendency to abuse.
Neglect or exploit, you know,
what.
The, the folks involved in this,
and we're trying to weed them
out as much as we can, and we
know that finding them in the
first place is an issue, but
there was a, a comment about
fingerprinting. I don't think we
should put.
People at risk because
fingerprints are too far away.
And I will let my expert.
Madam Vice Chair Representative
Martinez, members of the
committee.
I think those are, I think those
are fair concerns that you're
sharing. Um,
And and I'm sensitive to that,
to that language in the bill,
you know, I've had conversations
with the provider, uh community
and the provider associations,
you know, my background is as a
provider, as a physical
therapist working in hospitals
and representing hospitals on
matters like this. So I am
sensitive to, to how that could
create some discomfort.
I think what I would add to that
is and why we chose this route
is
Going back to that graph and you
see Georgia has 175
disqualifying convictions.
I would be worried about
bringing a bill forward to you
all that has 175 disqualifying
convictions.
In the event that, what if that
statute now goes too far, and
what if it negatively impacts
the workforce.
I think we lose flexibility.
In that route.
And so that is why we wanted to
choose adding a handful of what
we believe were high risk
disqualifying convictions, and
then the intent is working with
the provider community, um, of
course, a variety of legal
counsels along the way and the
general public and you all on
Being thoughtful about future
disqualifying convictions that
we would add to that list.
chair
Excuse me, thank you, Madam
Chair, Madam Chair.
Uh, I, uh
The concept is a great concept.
I understand your concern. I
just think this.
Might not be the
best
Way to accomplish that. I, I
agree with you coming with a
bill that lists.
50.
convictions, it's tied up and
start going one line by one. I
can understand the concept of
it. I, I'm just having
Difficulty handling that.
Over to rulemaking.
Um
Next, next issue on page 3.
Starting in line 9.
The following felony skipping
down to 15, including battery of
a household member.
In New Mexico, as far as I'm
aware.
Battery of a household me.
It even charged, you cannot
charge it.
Uh, a simple battery on a
household member, you can't
charge it.
As a felony.
It's, it's stipulated in statute
that it is misdemeanor. Is that?
I, I don't think this person
should be taking care of these
patients.
But is that gonna be an issue.
I think we have
One attorney on the panel maybe.
The vice chair could help me out
with that, but is that, is that
gonna cause problems?
Um
Being that it's not a felony,
and it's listed under this
section.
Madam,
Madam chair, you know, as I look
at your, your bill.
One of the things I was just
thinking that could work if you
would consider an amendment is
to take out the felony word
altogether and which you could
most concerned about as I hear
the conversation of what if a
felony is put down to a
misdemeanor. It's the act of the
charge that is here that I would
be most concerned about if
someone was charged with uh sex
trafficking, whether they were
convicted as a felony or a
misdemeanor. I don't want them
taking care of my relatives, so
I'm just, I'm just wondering.
That's something you might
consider. I think that might be
helpful, and then you don't
leave these um, you don't leave
this up to a rule-making body to
try to determine what should go
in the statute. That's one
thing, and, and, uh.
I'm just, I'm just suggesting
that might be a good alternative
and only for you to consider.
Mad, Madam Vice Chair and
members of the committee, thank
you for that. Uh, I agree, uh,
you know, it's, it is something
that we want to continue to talk
about and evaluate, um, we did
go back and forth on that
because this, the statute is
written that it it is only
felony convictions for that
list. Um, and that has been a
problem for those, the other
ones on that list, um, in the
past. And so, um, like you had
said, um, that is a, that is an
option. Um, our, our intent was
to um
Resolve some of those, um,
misdemeanors uh through the
rulemaking process. We were
cautious around including the
word misdemeanor in the statute,
um, and, and we were worried
about it being too broad and
including then too many
disqualifying convictions. And
so our intent was to be very
specific of those misdemeanors
in the rulemaking process.
So, um, let me just add one
other thing on this point. One
of the things that you all have
the ability to do, which
One of the things that you have
the ability to do, uh, and it
happens in the regulation
licensing department all the
time, although I don't think you
all are given licenses, is that
you have something called a a
criminal offender rehabilitation
Act. If you're looking at
wondering if somebody was
charged with something whether
or not it should be considered.
I mean that act gives you cover
for looking at what has been
happening in a person's life in
terms of allowing a position to
come through and just in
clarification on the 10
75
Things that were listed in the
Georgia Act, the questions are
all 175 in the statue, or is
there language that is presented
that would embrace all 175.
So I'm just thinking what you
don't want to do is you want to
make sure that anything that is
gonna harm somebody. You don't
want them to be taking care of
your relatives because we've had
too many cases like that come
before this, this body, but also
I, I really, I'm, I'm just
suggesting to you, madam Chair,
I mean, madam sponsor that you
could actually cure this by an
amendment, and you will cover
all of the things that we're
talking about and not have it
left to rulemaking.
And our next committee is
judiciary, which is
Full of of lawyers, so, and, and
I believe it was pointed out
that um abuse on a household
member can be charged as a
felony.
Madam Chair, according to
Uh, section 30-3-15.
Uh
Part B, whoever commits battery
against a household member is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
Language is pretty clear.
Um, there may be extenuating
circumstances and other charges
that it might be.
Risen to a felony.
Madam uh asked your expert to
come forth and explain what
you're looking at
a representative. My name's
My name is Mark Reynolds. I'm
the general counsel for the
Healthcare Authority under uh
3316 aggravated battery of a
household member. If you go to
section C, if that crime is
committed with extenuating
circumstances, it can be
charged, Madam Chair.
Um, expert, it's 30-3-16
correct.
In what section C? Thank you,
madam chair. Uh, I'm sure this
discussion is gonna be
Interesting in the judiciary,
and I look forward to it.
So I'll, I'll represented
Martinez, you have more
questions? No, ma'am. OK, I
think next we have uh
representative Senator Cortes.
Um, thank you so much, Madam
Vice Chair, Madam Chair, um, I
echo the same, um, perspective
that representative Martinez
does, so I won't regurgitate
that. Um, I do want to express
that I want this bill to pass.
I, I believe in this bill, but I
do want to get those pieces.
Worked out, um, and I obviously,
I will always have a hard time
with the expansion of of
rulemaking, but I believe in the
heart of this bill, and like I
said, I want it to pass. I, I, I
hope that you're open to those
friendly amendments in judiciary
to work it out, Madam Vice
Chair, Madam Chair. I also just
want to say this, I believe the
things that we experience in our
in our lives, and I've said this
before, um, changes the lens at
which we view situations and the
most vulnerable.
of our population should be,
should have the best caregivers,
the top of the line caregivers
and if you've had the most
vulnerable of the population,
which is somebody you love, been
abused, it changes your scope,
and I've been there with my
grandparents and um the best of
the best, they should have the
highest standard if they're
taking care of our most
vulnerable population. So thank
you for bringing this this bill
and for sponsoring it, um.
I hope it gets worked out in
judiciary, so that it can pass.
Um, I'm open to, to more
conversation moving forward.
Thank you so much, Madam Vice
Chair and Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Next we have Representative
Nicole Chavis. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I had the same question as
Representative Martinez, and so
I know I'm in judiciary as well
as Representative Martinez. So
when it comes there next, I was
just gonna suggest that, um,
maybe on page 3 line 15, where
you put including battery of a
household member.
Take that out there and on page
4, line two where it says
involving any of the felonies
and or convictions of the
subsection and then I see that
it includes those new charges
you're adding, um, sex
trafficking adult of assault of
a peace officer identity theft,
cruelty to animals, and then
also add in, including battery
of a household member, maybe
that would be a great area and
wording to add.
Before we get to judiciary, and
then, you know, they can ask the
questions there, but I think
that would be a great place to
add these new charges that
you're adding in to the bill.
I'm sure we will take those
suggestions, but if you look at
um line 15 on page well, line 14
on page 3,
it, it already talks about
battery there, including battery
of a household member, so that
may be why the draft up there
just because the confusion of it
could be a felony, it could not
maybe just move that.
Because
It may or may not be a felony,
but you can add or convictions
and then add, add it to the new
language with the other.
Convictions that you're Madam
Chair and Representative. So,
um, uh,
the lid um line 9 says felony
convictions, so that's already
covered in the heading.
The felony part of it.
You said there was some
discretion or some.
Some issue with it.
Whether it can be charged as a
felony or not, but that does say
felony.
I mean, not that we're opposed,
I'm just saying I'm trying to
trying to get into the drafter's
mind and, and figure out why
they put what, where, what they
put, right, but I'm just saying
it, you, it doesn't have to be a
felony if somebody had a
conviction, regardless of
felony, battery of a household
member.
If it wasn't a felony and they
were still convicted, I probably
wouldn't want them taking care
of my grandma, is what I'm
saying, so just add it to
Balanies or convictions and add
these cause cruelty to animals,
it that doesn't have to be a
felony charge either, correct?
Madame Chair and Representative,
it doesn't have to be in the
law, but in this bill, it does
have to be. OK.
OK.
Next we have Representative,
thank you, Representative
Jennifer Do.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and a
Representative Thompson and Mr.
Linari. We can't got it. Oh, you
can't hear me. Get closer.
Thank you all. I thought they
had covered it, but I feel like
there was a little confusion
with um representative uh
Chavez's comments.
I understood because I this is
really key to helping me be OK
with moving forward, that we
would, because battery of a
household member could be a
felony or it could be a
misdemeanor, that removing it
from page 3, line 15 and adding
it to the following page with a
list.
would take care of that problem.
Is that what you understood,
Madam Chair Representative
Thompson, Madam Chair, no,
because all of these are under
section D, so it's a list that
starts on page 3 and continues
on page 4, and at the top of
that under D, the following
felony convictions, so we're not
taking into account um
Misdemeanors. I, I understand
now it was, that was my my um
misunderstanding.
I guess the heart of what I'm
saying is if there's, if there's
a way to fix this, you know,
let's do it cause I'm in full
support of the, the bill, you
know, um, without restricting,
um,
Those who can uh can actually
Take care of others. So thank
you so much, Madam. It is a fine
line we want to catch all the
bad folks, but we don't wanna
make so many people ineligible
that we can, we already can't
fill the position. So it're
we're trying to thread the
needle in and get it keeping the
bad people out without, as I
said, uh, uh, really damaging
our workforce. I hope you can
fix that in judiciary, and I
think we all agree on that.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
It's nice when we have someone
to help us stay organized.
Next we have Representative
Kathleen Jones, uh, Kate.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you very much. Um, so I
also, so as a former provider of
individuals with disabilities,
some individuals with
disabilities are individuals
who've gone through corrections
that can qualify them as well.
So, um, I, I obviously, I've,
I've, I'm co-sponsoring this
bill. I believe in this bill,
but I know you're considering an
amendment, and one of the things
I brought up to you is there's
no timeline here or ask of the
HCA to make a timeline. So I'm
old enough to remember back in
the day when we disqualified
anyone with a DUI couldn't work
in the waiver program.
Um, and, uh, having a timeline
as in the mistakes we make when
we were 19.
Um, may not, do we want them to
follow us on certain crimes when
they're 39.
Certain crimes maybe we do,
certain crimes we may not. So I
would want, if you are
considering amendment, I would
like to have some kind of
timeline in there such as if the
conviction is 10 years or
longer, and they don't fall into
these, you know,
Abuse, neglect, and exploitation
crimes, then they could be
considered. This would also
allow for some of the
self-direction that Mr. Jackson
was referring to. Would you
consider that?
Madam Vice Chair Representative
Gates, uh, yes, I absolutely
would look forward to more
conversation on that. Um, I will
outline how we currently manage
those cases is, is through our
appeals process. Um, so if an
individual is disqualified, they
have 14 days to submit an
appeal.
Um, as soon as they submitted an
appeal, that that appeals
committee meets weekly. So if
you submit an appeal today, you
will be on that committee for
review next week. Uh, we don't
have a backlog with those
appeals and they're managed
very, very timely. And the
majority of our appeals are
exactly those cases of cases to
where they had a disqualifying
conviction that was quote, old,
um, so whatever that time frame
may be, uh, and they make their
case that they have been
rehabilitated or just making the
case of
This happened 30 years ago and
nothing has happened since, so
please reconsider. And so that
is how we manage it currently.
Um.
The timeline piece, uh, we, we
have kept it as not having a
timeline uh much of that is, is,
is just comparing to other
states, um, in other states we
haven't seen a timeline utilized
for their uh caregiver criminal
background check program, but uh
definitely open for discussion
on that. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for that answer. So that is
an excellent answer. There's not
a magical timeline. There is an
appeals process. So this may or
may not be true. Maybe I made
bad decisions when I was 19
years old, and a group of us,
um, uh, got caught robbing a
home. So if I'm 39 years old and
I, which we know that's not
true, um, and, um, and I applied
for this job. I would have an
opportunity to appeal, saying
there's.
hasn't been no new charges since
this 19 year old conviction when
I was 19 years old and that that
may or may not be considered as
long as I was most likely like a
an act of violence towards the
vulnerable, the disabled or the
elderly, would that be an
accurate appeal process.
Madam Vice Chair Representative
Kates, that's correct. Thank
you. I'm finished with my
questions.
Thank you. Next, we have
Representative uh Ferrari.
Thank you, madam chair, if
there's no one else on the list,
I'd like to move.
Make motion.
We have 2 more people on the
list. OK, I'll come back to you.
Thank you.
Representative um Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
I was doing some quick Googling
because I am no legal scholar.
Um, and one of the things that
I'm also concerned about is
Section E, um, for perhaps maybe
different reasons as well, um.
One of the things that I am most
afraid of, especially as bills
come to this committee and
otherwise onto the floor is
what's happening at the federal
level right now. Um, and, um,
Our new administration, as well
as our Congress, um,
The ability to add.
Any sort of crime.
Um, based on who somebody is, I
think about the LGBTQ community
in particular, we've been
persecuted in the past, I
believe it is uh very much on
the forefront right now. And so
leaving the ability for the
healthcare department to say,
Yes, these types of convictions
would also disqualify somebody
if at any point in time,
unfortunately, scarily in the
near future, if it is some kind
of misdemeanor to
Be a part of the LGBTQ
community.
Something like this could be
misinterpreted if we have the
wrong um
Sorts of values who are in our
administrative office. And I
hope you are able to follow
that. It's just a fear of mine,
um, as removing bills through
and as we're seeing these
changes at the federal level,
what could be considered a
misdemeanor at the federal
level. Therefore, what could be
added to this list eventually.
And so I just wanted to bring
that up, Madam Chair, and
representative as something that
you may hope to consider.
striking or amending as you move
to judiciary as well.
Thank you, madam chair.
listening to you all. I feel
like we need some sort of
oversight over the department,
and I have no idea what that
would look like, but before you
can add uh um you know, a, a
different crime, there has to be
someone to look over it and make
sure that it's reasonable. Um,
again, I don't know what that
would look like. I'm not an
attorney, but um the
I will work with the department
and perhaps with judiciary um on
figuring out a way so that
because I do have a little bit
of oo myself there, so
Having more eyes on it before it
becomes part of policy or rule
would be uh would be my goal.
And like I said, I have no idea
what that would look like. Who
would be the overseeing body,
but um someone.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. So next on our list
is uh representative uh Chavez,
Eleanor.
OK, she doesn't have any
questions. Representative
Ferrari, we're going back to
you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I'd
like to make a motion, um, that
we have a due pass for um House
Bill 131.
As amended,
and no, this has not been
amended. Thank you.
I would like to second that
motion.
Would you,
would you consider a due pass
with no recommendation, so that
there would be time to make
amendments to the bill before it
goes before its next committee,
Madam Chair, I feel that um
The um concerns will be taken up
in judiciary.
Where you're going to next,
correct?
So I only present that because
I, I.
You can make the recommendation,
the, the uh bill that you have,
it's a 2nd, so it's discussion
right now.
So what I'm saying is I'm
hearing a majority of the people
concerned about some provisions
in the bill.
So rather than and so they
wouldn't pass the bill as it is,
but what they would do is they
say, we think this bill needs to
continue to move forward. So
this, uh, the, the presenter
would have time to amend the
bill before it's heard in
judiciary, even if you pass it
without a recommendation.
But it's up to you what you want
to present, madam. OK, I will
reconsider and make the motion,
um.
Uh, for a due pass without
recommendation.
Is there a second to that?
I'll second Madam Chair.
All right, uh,
Uh, we have a motion with the
second for do pass with no
recommendation. Would you please
take the role?
Representative Anaya.
Yes.
Representative Cates, yes.
Representative E. Chavis.
Yes. Representative N Chavez.
Representative Ferrari.
Yes.
Representative Jones. Yes.
Representative Martinez, yes.
Representative Senna Cortez.
Vice Chair Herndon, yes.
Madam Chair Thompson, yes.
Thank you, by a vote of 10 of
the.
in the affirmative and 0 in the
negative, you have a due pass
with no recommendation, and
thank you.
OK, I think.
Yeah,
Um, I was gonna say thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, it's hard to
switch roles, uh, representative
Chavez, whenever you're ready.
Thank you, we are, I'm sorry, we
are on House Bill 152 prevent
certain treatment restrictions,
so go ahead. Thank you, Madam
Chair, that's exactly right.
What this bill seeks to do is
prevent um
The restriction of medication
assisted treatment for juveniles
who are in outpatient or
inpatient facilities, um, and
also facilities that um include
juvenile detention centers, and
that house or treat adolescents
with uh substance use disorder.
Um, and with that, Madam Chair,
I would like for my expert
witness to introduce himself and
expand a little bit more on the
bill and why it's necessary.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Representatives. My name is
Nathan Birnbaum. I'm a family
physician in Albuquerque, New
Mexico.
I think we can all agree that we
want our kids to be healthy and
safe and you substance use
disorder and death is a crisis
both in New Mexico and across
the United States, uh, and
overdose deaths among
adolescents have significantly
increased, including especially
during the pandemic, and one of
the fastest groups where this is
happening are individuals who
are aged 15 to 25, and since the
majority of overdose deaths
occurs after that period.
In order to make a significant
dent in overdose rates as well.
As obtained remission from
substance use disorder, you need
to treat it at an early time
period.
New Mexico is currently
subsidizing treatment that is
not evidence-based, uh, in some
programs and facilities that
have policies that impact some
of the patients that we have
seen may in fact violate the
Americans with disabilities Act.
So medication for addiction
treatment is the established
standard of care for treating
substance use disorder in
adolescence, and that's not just
me saying that that is the
American Academy of Pediatrics,
the American Society of
Addiction Medicine, as well as
the head of the
National Institutes of drug, uh,
abuse.
And the reason why this is the
case is because medication for
addiction treatment is
associated with improved
retention and care in
adolescence and as we look at
broader studies, we also see
that it drives down rates of
incarceration decreases rates of
overdose and death, and also
stems the spread of infectious
diseases such as HIV and
hepatitis C.
Importantly, medication for
addiction treatment in
adolescence has been found to be
more effective than behavioral
health and psychosocial
treatments alone. And so, thus
we need to be expanding the use
of evidence-based treatment for
substance use disorder by making
sure that our taxpayer dollars
are actually going towards the
most effective programs and
providers, and specifically
those who provide treatments
known to improve chances of
recovery. And with that, Madam
chair, we stand for questions.
OK, thank you.
So first we will, if you are on
Zoom in opposition, please raise
your hand, and we'll come back
to you. Anyone in the room in
opposition.
OK, seeing none, we will go to
support if you are online on on
Google, on Zoom in support,
please raise your hand and we'll
come back to you in the room and
support.
If you would like to speak,
please come forward.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jim Jackson for
disability rights in New Mexico.
It is well established that this
is the professionally um
supported treatment modality for
uh kids with uh yeah for kids,
young adults with this, uh,
issue, um, and we think that
it's important for a state
government to set this as a
policy that we wanna make sure
that uh youth who have these uh
issues are receiving the most
appropriate kinds of services,
and so it doesn't make sense to.
institutionalized people into
facilities that won't allow that
to happen. So, uh, we support
the bill and we appreciate the
sponsor bringing it forward.
Thank you.
Good morning, uh, chair and
Representatives. Kat Sanchez
with Bold Futures, plus one with
the comments that were
previously made. We do support
this bill. Thank you.
Can't seeing no one on Zoom.
Um, I will take questions from
the committee.
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Chavez and
Doctor.
Bernum
Yeah, I'm trying to get better
with that remembering names, but
and I do remember your um, your
presentation to us in the
interim, I think it was 2
summers ago, appreciated it very
much, sort of opened my eyes to
some issues that I, I didn't
know much about with the
treatment of juveniles, um, or
young people.
Um, I do have some questions
about this. I'm 100% on board
with the having um matte
treatment available and
Uh, and, you know, uh,
evidence-based treatments
available for our young people.
Um,
Let me see if I can. I hope I
can word my questions in a way
that
Uh, this understandable. If we
go to page 3.
And um we look at
A under section 2.
Um, I want to look at that kind
of carefully because I have
questions about this. It says,
that the Department of Health
and healthcare authority and the
Children, Youth and Families
department shall not operate or
contract with an inpatient
substance use treatment
facility.
An outpatient substance use
treatment program, a program,
I'm sorry,
ancient lineage. OK,
and like the very top it's
section 2, but if you go down to
a, it's line 5 where where it
starts. It's.
That whole thought is important,
but it, it says that, you know,
CYFD, um,
shall not operate or contract
with.
Uh, the, the inpatient facility
or the outpatient substance use
treatment program.
juvenile correction facility or
juvenile detention facility that
has policies or procedures that
restrict
Um, if you go down to the mat
treatment or for substance use
disorder. Oh, I have several
questions that I can pull out of
that one, a section under 2,
section 2.
The substance use disorder.
I think when someone is
diagnosed with substance use
disorder.
Wouldn't you agree that there is
a range.
That you could, that somebody
may need mat treatment, may not
need that treatment when that
diagnosis is given, is that
correct?
Madam Chair Representative.
That is the case, and let's be
very clear what this statute
does not do under no
circumstances does this state
that a provider has to use MAT
in a patient, all decisions
about treatment should be made
between a patient, their
provider, and their family. But
this is saying is that these
facilities should not be able to
place arbitrary barriers in
place of the use of
evidence-based treatment.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Doctor Birnbaum, I
appreciate that. And
I agree with that. I think.
Let me ask you a couple of other
questions. OK, let me reword
that and make sure that that's
understandable. Um.
Because we discussed this before
committee. It was, it was a big
discussion that um
We want to make sure that
That a provider
It's not saying you can't have
mat treatment, correct?
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
that's the case, and, uh, to do
that for a patient, for example,
who's coming into a facility or
in court mandated to come in
would violate the ADA.
OK, very important.
Mike, I'm curious about.
If you go back to line 9 there.
You have our line 8 and 9, you
have an outpatient substance use
treatment program.
Couldn't that be?
A program that doesn't include
Matt.
That doesn't offer mat that
offers instead of behavioral
approach.
Um, the for, for young people
who don't need Matt who are on
that in that um continuum of
that diagnosis where they really
don't need the mat, but
They do need a program.
Does that make sense?
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
and let me perhaps give an
analogy. Let's say that we had a
program for adolescents with
diabetes, OK? Which is certainly
something I see more of in my
practice now than we wouldn't
have seen in the past. You might
have some adolescents who need
medications, metformin, insulin.
You might have some.
Adolescents who are doing fairly
well, they're working on their
diet, they're working on their
exercise.
Just because somebody's on
insulin doesn't corrupt.
For example, a recovery or the
treatment of this other group of
people. And just because
somebody needs medication to
treat their substance use
disorder should not exclude them
from the treatment services that
might also be offered at that
outpatient treatment that could
also be beneficial to them.
As you would see in the
definitions in this statute, we
use the definition that is
provided by SAMSA, which is to
say that medication assisted
treatment.
is part of a whole person
approach, which also does
include not always, but does
include behavioral health
treatment sites or psychosocial
treatments.
I, I understand that. Thank you
very much for that. Um.
I guess my concern, Madam Chair,
uh, Doctor Birnbaum, is that I
don't have an, I don't have an
example of a program. I just
have a concept because of
various other treatments that
are available um for patients,
you know, for people in need,
that we are not um
Considering that there may be a
program that would address
behavior and so forth.
And if a patient or a young
person needed further treatment
that they could be transferred
to another program that involved
giving Matt if needed.
I feel like there might be a
place or do you, I should ask
questions, Madam Chair. I should
make this a question. Do you
Do you think this bill prevents
Um
Or maybe restricts a program
that would just, um,
Address behavioral needs, uh,
social needs.
Restricts them from getting
Support from state, you know, a
reimbursement from the state
where um they could fit into
like a
A bigger picture where if that
person needs mat treatment, they
could.
Move into another program.
I don't know if that's
understandable or not. Are you
getting my the feel for what I'm
saying? OK, thank you. Can you
answer that for me, please?
Madam Chair representative.
I think I'm of two minds for
this. If you are looking at the
data.
About the effectiveness of
treatment for substance use
disorder in adolescence. You
have to come to accept that
behavioral health treatments
alone, which can be very helpful
for other social determinants of
health, other adverse childhood
experiences, helping people out
with their other mental health
issues that that doesn't, that
doesn't mean that those things
aren't important, but if you are
saying I am a outpatient or
I'm an impatient substance use
treatment facility and I am
effectively treating substance
use disorder.
Why can you say?
The American Society of
Addiction Medicine is wrong. The
American Academy of Pediatrics
is wrong. We're going to exclude
the use of these medications for
arbitrary reasons which are
often based in long-standing
stigma and are not based in
data. I understand perhaps the
concern.
Because this bill is talking
about the funding of these
programs that these programs
will have to change their
approach, and again, nothing in
the statute is saying these
medications have to be used with
anybody.
But it is saying that are you,
are you going to say to a family
and a child. Sorry, we just
don't have anything for you. You
want these medications go
elsewhere.
It, it represented I mean look
if you look at the first page
that the the act and it says,
you know, detention facilities
and programs that house or treat
adolescents with substance use
disorders and are operated or
funded by the state, so you
can't restrict it if you're
private, you don't get any
money, you can do whatever you
want, um, but this is for state
funds that were asking what what
the bill is asking is that if
state funds are being
News there that the number, the,
the accepted treatment of
medication assisted treatment.
Must be at least a possibility
for the, the youth who you who
need it.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I appreciate that too. I'm
trying to word these concerns so
that they can be understood. I
have a comparison.
And that would be
Um,
has to do with Lifehouse, one of
our bills that we are going to
present on Monday, has to do
with the facility here in New
Mexico. I do believe they have
received state funding, it may
just be um capital outlay. I, I
don't know the, this, all of the
sources of their funding, but
it's a, a facility, um, it began
as a sober living facility.
And then became, you know, did a
wonderful job at treating
people, um, giving them a place
to become sober became a rehab
facility, and now we are, we're
going to make an attempt to
Have them, um, we're gonna
change a law, hopefully, that
allows them to keep detox drugs
so that they can treat people
who are actually in detox. So
there's been this progression,
um, moving toward being able to
treat the full spectrum of
people who have substance use
disorder.
They started as a sober living
facility, and they received
state funding, and so what I
would like to see.
Is
I um
No restriction
Um
In in programs, uh, no
restricting of state funds and
support of programs that only
provide maybe one aspect of
needed care and that would fit
into a model where if you need
Matt, we've got this place over
here where you don't have to
have.
Everything available before you
can have help from the state to
help people. Does that make
sense?
Uh, I'm, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, I'm gonna, uh,
take a stab at it and then you
can help me. I, I think that
what we're trying to accomplish
here is to provide the
opportunity for the full
spectrum of um medication, medi
um
Medicaid-assisted treatment.
So that in your example, you,
you, your example that you're
giving, well, if we don't have
it here, then you can go
somewhere else, but I think that
that might be very disruptive or
the therapy that's already
started for this individual, um,
and the other piece too is that,
um, you know, again, we need to
be able to offer the full
spectrum.
Of Medicaid assistant treatment,
um, for especially juveniles.
Um, we've already done that in
the correctional system. I
don't, I think they've already
started. I hope they have, um,
but we need to move that over to
juveniles because juveniles are
also it depends on what they
need, right? Everybody's
treatment is different,
everybody's needs are different.
And so that's what we're
attempting to do here is provide
the full spectrum, um, and we're
we're targeting it to to
facilities that are state run
or.
funded by the state because we
need again, we need to provide
those services to all, um,
Individuals who are
participating in those programs.
Thank you, Representative, and
thank you, Madam Chair. So with
this bill,
Prevent
Say for instance, a program that
was just being developed, like,
In comparison to Lihouse, and
that is wanting to treat young
people that only has a
behavioral approach at that
time, would it prevent them from
receiving capital outlay.
Madam Chair Representative.
If a program was starting now.
We would hope that the state
would be subsidizing the
approach that is shown to be the
most evidence-based. So for
example, uh, in the program that
you are mentioning that moved
was initially a sober living
that now does detox, that would
convey that that place has now
understood that, for example,
medication for addiction
treatment is the standard of
care for detox. So that shows
sort of a learning curve that is
going in the right.
direction, but if you are
starting a program now and
you're saying we only want a
behavioral health approach, one
that is not supported by
evidence, I think again, if
you're a private organization
that doesn't want to take state
funding, that may be fine, but
if you are asking taxpayers to
foot the bill for treatment, it
should be evidence-based
treatment. And again,
This is not saying that that
treatment has to be used only
that it needs to be a tool in
the toolbox that a provider, a
family, and the patient can
discuss together and use if they
find it appropriate for their
circumstances.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I, I think there's just so much
more here. I, I really want to
support this. I wanna, I mean,
I'm 100% on board with having
Matt available.
For our young people when they
need it.
Um
I just don't want, I want to be
very careful to not restrict,
you know, in law restrict the
assistance that we can give.
Programs that they can't start
out with everything. I know in
my community, for instance, um,
we have a lot of behavioral
health programs.
And, and I just, I know there's
a lot more room for conversation
and I don't know how much we can
go into it, but there are
programs that would need capital
outlay, for instance, um, other
kinds of support from the state
that are really beneficial.
But may not be able to include
Matt at this time.
Um, so unless do you have
anything else to add that can
make it clearer?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
there is an appropriation that
would help with that, Madam
Chair, Representative, could
you, I mean, explain that a
little bit further. Sure, um,
there is behavioral health
money, um, that we will be
targeting um to be able to
support these kinds of. OK,
thank you.
I think I'm OK, thank you. Res
representative, go ahead. May I
offer on your point that you
ask, what the bill is, is doing
it it doesn't say this is the
only treatment that
You have, but what it says, if
you're gonna get state dollars,
then you have to have met as an
option. So for example, if I
want, if I'm a family and I
don't want Matt to be given to
my child as a treatment, they
don't have to, but if I use that
facility, that facility must
make Matt an option. So I think
that your concerns are actually
covered. It's just that
There are too many uh facilities
that don't make matt available
and so if you're gonna be a
state supported facility, then
you have to make it at least
available. It's not required,
but just to make it available if
you're gonna get state dollars.
Yes, thank you, and I appreciate
that. I understood all of that.
My concern is that that offering
that is is is another level
beyond behavioral health and it
involves having a nurse on site.
It involves medications that are
controlled substances and so
forth. It's like, if you want to
start, you know, a program
that's geared toward young
people who need behavioral
health that that starting from,
yes, you have to have that.
Ma
Ma, um
Prohibit, I guess access really
when it comes right down to it,
access maybe even in in uh rural
areas to, to any kind, any kind
of behavioral health treatment.
Does that make sense? I'm not
opposed to this at all. I hope
you understand that.
Chair representative, I think
this really expounds the options
of treatment that are available,
especially in rural areas. It's
not restricting anything. It's
really expanding. And as the
doctor said previously, um, this
is evidence-based, and we really
need um Madam Chair
representative to begin to use
evidence-based, um,
Therapies and, and treatments
for, for our for our youth
especially.
that representative in the
United States, a parent would
have to call 29 facilities to
find burenorphine available to
an adolescent who has substance
use disorder, who is 16 years or
younger, if we had programming
in the United States that showed
that there was an interest in
these treatment facilities and
actually providing this
treatment and not uh.
Staying with the status quo,
that would be a different
circumstance. I do not believe
based off of what we have seen
that there are enough.
Providers in this state who are
Going to make that leap.
Furthermore,
Um, as the financial analysis
also pointed out there is
As a result.
With some of the changes that
were made during the pandemic a
lot more flexibility in terms of
how this treatment is provided.
You don't necessarily need to
have a doctor on site, unlike
some of the notes that were in
there that suggested that you
needed a clinical staff 24 hours
a day. That is just simply not
true.
Yes, you need people to be able
to distribute medications, but
much in the same way that
prisons and jails too. There are
ways that these, there can be
contracting with, for example,
mobile services that are given
by a substance use treatment
facility that comes and actually
provides this treatment. These
are things that these
facilities, if they're taking
state money, you need to think
about what ways can they get
creative if they can't do it on
site themselves.
individuals who need this
therapy and want this therapy
can access it.
Thank you, Doctor, Madam Chair,
as we're discussing this.
I, I realize this is becoming
more and more um
It's becoming more of a rural
urban issue.
And that's where my concern is.
I love the mobile services that
would be possible, you know, to,
that's a possibility to bridge
that gap, and I
And that we need to do
How do we, I guess what I would
say is how do we make that
happen along with this bill, uh,
I can't, I can't fully support
the bill the way it's ordered
that, but my question would be
how can we make that happen,
that available.
The mat available.
I might maybe mobile services in
an area like mine where
Really all we can do.
Because of, we don't have the
providers necessarily, we don't
have.
The resources to start a clinic
with math.
How do we make that possible?
And, and that, that's a
conversation I think that we'll
have to continue this bill
doesn't really
Why
To rural New Mexico or to my
district.
At this point in time because of
other, other issues, so pleased
to address that. Um, Madam
Chairs representative, there is
an appropriation that will be
Uh, attached to this, we're not
expecting, you know, the next or
whoever to do it.
Um, without that support, um,
And I would think that we would
want to do everything that we
need to do to make it available.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all. It's an ongoing
conversation and I really do
appreciate we need to fix this.
Thank you.
Representative Vinaya.
Thank you
Um, I'm really glad I got to go
right after you, Representative
Jones, cause I think I'm
understanding the question that
you're asking.
Maybe I'm not fit. I'm gonna
try. Um, I'm sorry,
representative in Chavis, I
thought you were on that point.
I am on that point, but she said
she is too so she was so
go for it.
Thank you. On that point, so
I've been trying to ask her and
I didn't want to interrupt her
with her questions cause I think
we're all on the same page. We
want this to be able to be
offered for our children for
these young people that need
assistance, and I know that
there are programs.
That do both. So,
And you talked about 29
facilities if you had to make
phone calls to 29 different
facilities. I know there's
programs now operating there
sounds like there's gonna be a
big impact in programming that's
gonna be going away. So I guess
in the most simplest forms, can
you name what programs are now
available, maybe at least just
5. It don't offer map currently
that would go away if they
didn't currently offer that.
I think that would answer our
question a little more.
And I think that's kind of
fortune telling, um.
I don't know. Well, there are a
lot that that
Don't offer that medication and,
and aren't they don't have
medical staff available and
maybe they are not interested in
offering
Medical
prescriptions versus behavioral
but asking them who who what
they like, you have to have.
Some that you know, off of the
top.
chair representative, what I'm
going to say to that is, it is
the job of CYFD who is charged
with protecting vulnerable
children as well as the
Department of Health to provide
that answer to you, which of
their facilities are
Providing evidence-based
treatment if they're not, why
not? And if they're not, can
they tell you what is the rate
of retention in uh adolescent
substance use disorder when
those adolescents are no longer
under their care. What is the
rate of overdose. They should be
able to provide that to you. So
I'm not going to name the
facilities here because they're
not in the room, and I think
that that's the fair thing to do
when people are not able to give
an answer themselves.
But it is the job of state
agencies to be able to provide
you those answers, but you know
that there are several
facilities that contract with
CYFD now that do not offer these
services, correct?
care representative, yes.
OK.
So what happens when those
through the chair. Oh, sorry,
madam Chair. So I know that
there are several facilities
like you were stating, we don't
have to name how many, but what
happens when these behavioral
health programs go away. Are we
then just limited?
To be small number that
currently do offer maths.
representative. That's the point
in attaching an appropriation to
this, it's not, the idea is not
to create an unfunded mandate
where you then have a facility
that previously been unable or
unwilling to provide this
treatment will all of a sudden
not be able to do that and
automatically fold. The idea is
that by having money available.
Bacon and begin to expand these
treatments. Why would they not
do that if the funding is
available to do that.
So
If the funding is available,
they could then potentially
develop programs which takes
time and with the shortage of
workforce across the state, and
especially rural communities.
If the funds are available with
the appropriation you're
attaching.
This could happen, but it may
take a long time. So when I'm
understanding is if we vote on
this bill and this passes, those
facilities that currently do
not.
this time or will not be able to
within
the next
year time frame because I
Effective date going into effect
for this bill, those facilities
would need to shut down
currently that are contracted
with CYFD if they don't have a
program within a certain amount
of time, is that correct?
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
if you look on page 3, there's a
series of uh time.
Um, that are contained in the
bill and.
Madam Chair Representative, I
believe that the time frames
give ample time for the um
entities, the agencies, um, to
ramp up and provide the service.
OK, and thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. So,
and this is because I'm a
newbie, this says beginning July
1st, so thank you for pointing
that out, 2026. If we get an
appropriation, it is.
Built into this. How soon are
those funds available?
Madam Chair representative, um.
That's a
Good question. I maybe our
representative on House of of
appropriation can answer that.
So, uh, Madam Chair, and uh
Madam presenter, if the bill
calls for an appropriation, and
the bill itself is not
considered to be uh
Immediate. It doesn't ask for an
immediate uh implement uh
implementation, it will go into
effect 30 days after it's signed
by the governor, which is.
90 days or.
So, right,
so it would be, it would become
effective on July 26, 2025. So
they would have a year
to build out this program.
Manage your representative
correct.
And, and I know we don't wanna
go through this. I'm just really
concerned with the timeline and
the funding. How many programs.
would have to completely
Oh, emergency. Thank you, madam
chair, um, how many programs
would have to be redeveloped and
I'm just really worried about um
our, our juveniles, both.
The juvenile detention
facilities and just our youth in
general, how many would go away
and have to redevelop a program
within that timeline.
Madam Chair Representative, I
don't think it requires
redeveloping. This is another
additional.
Um
what we're doing.
This is an additional um piece
that
Can be provided with those for
for those juveniles who, who
really need it. And right now I
think what we need to worry
about is the kids that aren't
getting it, that should be
getting it, that would make
their um
Uh, rehabilitation.
Um, easier and smoother.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I, I
understand purpose of our bill
and we especially to really
address, you know, juvenile
crime and in our facilities. So
thank you for answering my
question.
Thank you, Representative Anaya.
Uh, Madam Chair, I will.
We're off the point. It's OK,
um, let's move on. Thank you,
Madam Chair. OK, so, so just to
sum it up.
Basically, we're saying if you
want state dollars, you have to
do the standard of care. That's
all we're saying that, you know,
we as let's take a school, for
example, if the school is only
going to teach outdoorsmanship
and hunting and um skydiving,
they're not gonna get state
money and unless they, they also
follow the standard of care for
education, so it's basically the
same thing you can offer
whatever you want to offer, but
you must offer math.
if that is the appropriate
treatment for, said Juvenal.
That's correct, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I will entertain a
motion.
To move
a second, OK, so we have a
motion from Representative
Ferrari and the second from
Representative Knight on House
Bill 152.
Thank you. Representative Anaya.
Yes.
Representative Keats, yes.
Representative E. Chavis.
Yes.
Representative N Chavis.
No.
Representative Ferrari.
Yes.
Representative Jones.
No, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez.
Madam Vice Chair Herndon, yes.
Madam Chair Thompson. Yes.
By a vote of 6 Sydney
affirmative and 4 in the
negative, you have a due pass.
And Representative Jones to
explain her vote. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I'll try to be
quick, but I, like I said, I'm
100% on board with providing
that for juveniles. I think it's
absolutely necessary. I just
want to make very sure that
we're not actually decreasing
access to necessary treatments,
especially in rural areas that
may not, because of the way the
bill is worded, may not be able
to grow, um, even with an
appropriation based on
Limited workforce and other
restrictions that are that are
um that exist in urban and in
rural areas, not so much in
urban. Um, I'd like to continue
to working on that to to work on
that in future so that we can
get our young people what they
need.
Everywhere in New Mexico. Thank
you so much. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. And with that we are
