representative each. Chavez.
Representative An Chavez here.
Representative Ferrari.
Representative Jones.
Here.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez
here.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair,
we have a corum.
Representative of Beta whenever
you're ready to go.
Thank you, Madam Chariot, a good
morning committee. My name is
Michelle Pauline Bea, and I
represent District 6, and I'm
here today with Miss Samont, and
we will be presenting House Bill
5, which is titled Office of the
Child Advocate Act.
Committee respectfully, New
Mexico children are dying in
CYFD custody. New Mexico needs
an independent, impartial means
to gather, investigate and
proactively address the
well-being of children in state
custody, and that's what HB 5
does. New Mexico is among the
last, one of the last states to
create this critical service and
as a result, we are missing
significant opportunities to
support children, parents, and
keep our legislators and
governor proactively informed
and improved child well-being.
I'd like to give a little bit of
time for introductions and
overview to Miss Simon also
assist, and she will be my
expert witness today. Good
morning, Madam Chair,
Representatives, committee
members. Thank you for having
me. Um, my name's Anna Salmon. I
serve as director of Civil
Rights and Deputy counsel for
Impact litigation at the
Department of Justice.
Um, for the past 20 years, I've
been a civil rights litigator
from the perspective of
nonprofit advocacy
organizations, as well as state
government enforcement agencies
prior to my current position, I
focused specifically on
improving due process
protections and the well-being
of children and families
involved in the child welfare
system in different
jurisdictions across the
country.
Um, uh,
I think we all know as um uh
representative Abeda pointed
out, um, we have a serious
problem when it comes to the
care of children in state
custody. Um, the incidents that
we know of, the deaths, the, um,
Stories of children sleeping in
CYFD offices. These are not
one-offs, but these are
expressions of systemic
failures.
The existing mechanisms within
CYFD are simply insufficient to
provide accountability for or
transparency around the
department's actions.
Um, LFC has noted that the CYFD,
uh, I inspector general does not
publish a work plan or public
report, um, and I'd add that
it's always a challenge when you
have a, uh, individual who is
responsible for um auditing or
accountability when they're
actually housed within and
employed by the agency.
CYFD's Office of Children's
rights or Office of Child
Advocacy was unstaffed for
several years, and we don't have
any assessment of its work,
whether anything that it did
was, um, effective or
successful.
Um, and then lastly, I'll say,
point out that CYFD's Office of
Constituent Affairs, only looks
into allegations of harassment,
discrimination, or retaliation
by a CF CYFD employee or into
grievances by parents or
resource parents.
We see um the office of the
Child Advocate as a potential
step towards a solution for the
larger systemic problems. HP5
would create an independent
office that would improve
accountability when the
government takes legal or
physical custody of children and
is designed to promote the
safety of young people who are
in our care.
Um, the OCA first of all would
be independent and competent.
The structure of the office as
set forth in the bill and the
process for selecting the head
of the office are specifically
designed to ensure that the
office is not beholden to any
other individual agency or
department and free to carry out
its mandate without influence or
favor.
First, while the agency would be
housed within the Department of
Justice administratively, the
bill makes clear that the office
would have autonomy over any
decisions, the office would
make.
Second, candidates for the head
of the office would be selected
by a nine-person state child
advocate selection Committee,
whose members are selected by
individuals in the state
legislature, the governor, the
attorney general, and uh the New
York uh New Mexico Supreme Court
Chief Justice. The committee
would forward its
recommendations of qualified
individuals to the governor and
Attorney general, uh, the
governor and Attorney general
can also have one have one
opportunity to make a request
for additional candidates.
And finally, the, the HP 5 calls
for specialized training of its
staff to the extent that it has
any, to ensure that they are
equipped to carry out the
office's mission and ensuring
that they have no conflicts of
interest with CYFD or any entity
that provides services pursuant
to CYFD funding.
The other piece that's really
important about the OCA pursuant
to the bill, is that, um, the,
the bill empowers the entity or
the agency to promote
accountability.
So broadly speaking, the Office
of Child Advocate would be
responsible for reviewing CYFD
provisions of services and
working with stakeholders to
improve such services.
To monitor the development and
implementation of federal,
state, and local laws,
regulations and policies
concerning child and family
welfare, making any
recommendations if appropriate.
They also would be uh uh
responsible for obtaining
testimony in the specific
instances of child fatalities,
um, and also while in state
custody, they're also
responsible for hearing
complaints about CYFD or any of
the service providers to which
the agency refers families in
need.
Finally, they'd also be
responsible for uh receiving
complaints and deciding whether
to investigate themselves or
referring them to another agency
for investigation.
Um, in cases where it retains
the complaint.
OCA would actually connect with
the child, um, who, about whom
the, who is either submitted the
complaint or on behalf of whom
the complaint has been submitted
um to speak with them directly.
They would then also investigate
or at least and also attempt to
resolve complaints, um, by or on
behalf of children with the
agency itself.
Um, and also they would also be
responsible for in the course of
an investigation, making their
assessment about whether CYFD
may have violated a child's
constitutional rights or acted
with reckless disregard to a
child's health and safety, uh,
or engaged in a pattern.
Um, and then finally the uh
office would be able to refer
cases where it does find such
violations to have occurred to
the Attorney general and the
attorney General's office
retains discretion, uh, about
how best to proceed, whether
with a prosecution or other
action.
Finally, I'd say the OC is
designed to enhance
transparency.
It provides reports upon request
to the governor and the
legislature, but also has a
mandatory annual report
requirement that would go to the
legislative Finance Committee
laying out information about its
work, its findings with respect
to overall CYFD provision of
services, the treatment of
condition and conditions
surrounding children placed in
the state's care, uh number and
demographics of children removed
by CFD returned to their
families, kids who may have run
away from C8YF.
see whether they were in fact
found or remain missing. Um, and
then finally, the annual report
would include findings on the
implementation of the Indian
Child Welfare Act and the Indian
Family Protection Act.
Last thing about the OCA uh as
designed in this bill. It's,
it's designed to mitigate risk,
risk both to the obviously child
well-being and safety as well as
to the state, um, and make sure
that going forward, uh,
complaints aren't resolved
through confidential private
settlement processes that are
really designed to address, um,
the violations or injustice with
respect to an individual
situation.
Um, so I'll stop there. Uh,
that's my overview of of thank,
thank you. Um, so we will go to,
if you are on Zoom in
opposition, I will take 5 and I
will take 5 in opposition in the
room, so anyone in the room in
opposition.
OK, if you'd like to come over,
you get one minute and just a
reminder that I'm gonna really
push things today because we
only have 2 hours.
Nobody online. OK, good morning,
um, everybody, I'm Teresa
Quezados. I'm the cabinet
secretary at Children, Youth and
Families Department, um, I'm
appearing this morning with
concerns that I have about HB 5.
CYFD welcomes accountability,
oversight and partnership in
improving CYFD to better serve
New Mexicans, but an Office of
Child Advocate attached to the
Department of Justice just
doesn't achieve this.
Linking the Office of Child
Advocate administratively to the
AG's office could lead to
jurisdictional disputes and or
potential conflicts of interest.
The Department of Justice
represents the state in
litigation, including cases
involving CYFD. If the child
advocate investigates and finds
issues that lead to lawsuits
against CYFD or the state, the
AG's office could find itself in
a conflicted role. Also, if
there is a complaint related to
personnel misconduct, state
personnel guidelines for
investigation and due process
must be followed and all matters
related to personnel
investigations are confidential.
The bill's requirement to notify
the complainant of the outcome
of the investigation could
potentially violate.
latest CYFD employees' rights to
confidentiality in their
personnel matters. The Kevinist
settlement requires CYFD to have
a grievance process and produce
certain data metrics which are
in place. And in August of 23,
the Office of Performance and
Accountability was established
to provide CYFD with quality
assurance review and data
collection process to support
continuous quality improvement
and data-driven decision making.
The Office of Child Advocate as
contemplated in this bill will
not help CYFD better serve the
children, youth and families of
New Mexico. There are other
bills proposed this legislative
session that do this that we're
in support of. Thank you. I
don't see anyone online in
October, but we've got a clock
on the screen, aren't we fancy?
Um
so in support, so if you are on
Zoom in support, raise your
hands.
I will take the 1st 5.
But if you just want to show
support and don't want to speak,
you can raise your hand
temporarily and then put it
down.
OK. Anyone in the room in
support.
Hey, if you can come to the
center.
Do you want to speak?
Thank you, madam Chair and
members. My name is Marilyn
Beck. I'm the founder and
executive director of New Mexico
Child First Network. Um, we
stand strongly in support of HB
5 creating the Office of the
Child Advocate, the Office of
the Child Advocate would be a
public official whose role it is
to be a problem solver and a
watchdog, not a guard dog, not
an attack dog, simply a
watchdog. States have recognized
that an Office of the Child
Advocate can help protect the
rights of vulnerable
populations, specifically our
children impacted by foster
care.
This is especially true for our
complex child welfare system.
Child protection services
compromise a complex arrangement
of agency systems and
stakeholders, even with existing
advocacy and oversight, the
child protection system contains
blindspot. It is our hope that
the office of the child advocate
can solve this issue, and we are
standing in strong support.
Thank you.
Thank you, and next we have
We did have
If she's lowered her hand, so I
guess she doesn't want to speak,
so we will go, uh, is there
anything you wanna?
quickly follow up with.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, committee
members and representatives, I
guess I would just quickly
respond to um the.
Secreta's concerns about the HP
5 bill with respect to potential
conflicts, DOJ does have a
process in place that has worked
successfully to date. Um, we,
uh, appoint um lawyers as a
pursuant to a special commission
process when there might be a, a
conflict, so that system is
those safeguards are already
there with respect to employees,
um, nothing in HB 5 is designed
to constitute any kind of
employee investigation or
um,
that kind of process that's
totally separate, um, and then,
uh, uh,
I think
Those were the only two points
that I really want to see. OK,
thank you. So for questions from
the committee I have um
Representative Kates Martinez.
Um
And I'm gonna ask, I'm gonna
make you all be quick in your
questions and answers. So go
ahead, Representative Kates,
then Martinez, then Ferrari.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you very much for bringing
this forward. Um, I know that
we've had legislation in the
past to um provide that advocate
in the AG's office and so I, I
very much appreciate the
continuing that development. Um,
I have a couple of questions
about this specific bill. You
did talk about how um this
advocate is able to review and
determine whether or not they
refer to the AG's office for
further ro, and he said, and
refer out to other agent.
Agencies, what other agencies
are they referring out to, Madam
Chair, uh, representatives, I, I
apologize. I think I misspoke
there for purposes of receipt of
a complaint and the, the bill
actually only has a provision
that would allow it to either
investigate it itself or refer
it to the Department of Justice.
So thank you, man. So thank you
representative. So it sounds
like these are only legal
matters.
It is not a social services
review of quality, it is when we
go into um a possibility of
litigation, correct? Um, Medi
Chair and representatives, it's,
it is, it is not a personnel,
uh, complaint process at all. It
is absolutely about a complaint
about any of the services, so
yes, uh, in, in that sense, it
is something that could
potentially lead to um
litigation or a legal matter,
but again, I would note that
The OCA is empowered to also
attempt to resolve, um, any
complaint that it conducts an
investigation into through by
reaching out to the agency
itself. It doesn't necessarily
need to result in litigation.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your answer. Um,
what
Um, what is the, what, how does
the bill, um, communicate and
what is the relationship and
their obligation for our tribal
collaboration.
Thank you, chair. Thank you,
Representative for that
question. We do have a section
in the bill that specifically
says that the child advocate
must have knowledge and
understanding of the Indian
Child Welfare Act and understand
those parameters, and we believe
that that is one area that helps
with accountability of knowing
that any type of issue that may
arise with a child who is in
CYFD custody who
I named under the Indian Child
Welfare Act would have an
advocate that could, that
understands that step that law
and also can work with tribal
communities. Thank you.
Thank you, ma'am. One last
question. So I do appreciate I I
very much appreciate because I
do feel there's a.
Systematic flaw in our laws, a
lot of times where we're not
following up on what this is
supposed to do. So I appreciate
your annual report that's in
here. My concern is that it is
only being provided to the LFC.
This is the Health and Human
Services Committee, and I think
that we should be receiving that
report as well. So thank you
very much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, minority whip
Martinez.
Madam Chair, um.
Representative Beta, um.
What questions can you explain
to me again?
Uh, have a possible conflict
will be worked out.
Um, if it's administratively
attached to the Attorney
General's office.
Can you explain to me
again, how that's gonna be
worked out.
Um, Madam Chair Representatives,
thank you again for the
question. Um, so the way, so
administratively, this would
mean, right, so.
Um, operations of the OC or what
would be really housed in DOJ in
terms of substance of whether
the OCA decides to investigate a
complaint, whether it decides to
actually not investigate
complaint at all and just close
it at intake, whether to refer
it to uh the Department of
Justice for, for their action.
That is all independent.
The DOJ has no involvement in
that process.
With respect to the specter of a
um possible conflict should uh
litigation arise, I think, um,
the secretary's concern was if
to the extent that the
Department of Justice does
represent state agencies if
they're also being named as a
defendant, the way the process
works now is the Department of
Justice can actually determine
um situations in which a
conflict exists.
retain counsel that are
specially appointed through a
special commission process for
the purpose of that litigation,
and then they would be
representing the agency in the
matter.
Thank you, Madam Chair. uh
representative.
Um, and on page 2.
Line 8.
Talks about the initial term.
Shall begin on July 1st, 2025.
And she'll end on December 31st,
2025. So,
I mean page
Um
This the 6 month term, is that,
is that?
Purpose, purposeful.
Cause it's, it's should be a
5-year term.
Why is the initial?
Madam Chair Representative
Martinez, thank you so much for
that question, and yes, we do
understand that it's a little
confusing, excuse me, and the
reason why it's written like
that is it gives us 6 months
probationary period for that
person who's coming in before
their full 6-year appointment.
We do understand that there are
a lot of qualifications that
we're asking for, but we do
believe that the background and
knowledge that this advocate has
to have is extensive and so that
is the 6.
Month probationary section, and
I do apologize if that was
confusing, but yes, you are
correct that it is uh the, the
advocate shall have at a
minimum, um.
I believe it's 6 years. Yes, a
term of 6 years. OK, the usual
probationary period for a state
employees.
One year is, is that not
correct?
Madam Chair Representative
Martinez, I'm sorry, I can't
confirm that.
Time frame right now, but I
could ask and confirm.
Get back to you.
Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative.
Uh, just a reminder, we're on a
tight timeline represented
Ferrari.
Thank you, Madam Chair and um
thank you. I was just wondering
are is this going to create
overlaps in jurisdictional
authority.
Um, that uh might cause problems
and are you perceiving a trend,
you know, the problems with
transitioning from the current.
Um,
way things are done.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Ferrari for that
question. Um, no, we don't
anticipate any conflicts um in,
in terms of overlapping
jurisdiction. Um, there's also
clear provisions in HB 5 about
the authority that the office
would have to take testimony and
things like that that are, so
there's no conflict with other
existing um rules or regulations
as well.
Thank you, Representative
Herndon. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and presenters.
Did you have a conversation with
the attorney General's office
and why couldn't this be a
division of the office of the
Department of Justice.
Thank you chair and thank you
Representative Herndon for that
question. At this time, we're
only proposing, um, or at least
the bill also proposes that it
be, uh, in, in OCA, uh, not an
agency, um, and I think one of
the concerns we're obviously
trying to address is the
independence, um.
Whether some other structure
makes sense is, is a question
for another day, but this is
something that we're comfortable
with and think, um, is
appropriate for the situation in
the state right now.
Thank you and Madam Chair, um,
uh, presenters with respect to
this office, how much money will
it uh will it cost to create
this office?
Um, Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you for that question.
Right now, um, uh, no money, uh,
uh, because it will be
administratively housed within
the DOJ, um, costs would be
covered at that point uh from
from within, but there's no
appropriation set aside for this
and no anticipated costs.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
just have one quick clarifying
question. I know we talked about
um the interaction with this
bill in ICWA, but I was
wondering if you might be able
to uh describe the interaction
of this bill with IFA, which is,
of course, our New Mexico Indian
family uh Protection Act. I know
there are a little bit more
provisions to notifying tribes,
nations, and pueblos. And if you
wouldn't mind just, um,
describing that for a quick
moment.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Anaya. Um,
so again, the way it's very
similar to the interaction with
ICA in that, um, number one,
both obviously the head of the
agency as well as staff as well
as staff would be required to
have specialized knowledge in
the requirements of ICA and
EFPA, um, to the extent that,
uh, the agency is also charged
with making sure or looking into
how implementation and
enforcement of states that up.
federal and state statutes
apply. Um, this would be a
mechanism to make sure that the
provisions of IFPA are being
complied with and also being
implemented properly. Um, so
yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
That's the question. Thank you.
I will entertain emotion so
moved.
Uh, I'm sorry, who?
OK.
I'd like to make a motion for a
do pass, please, madam chair.
Representative Senator Cortez
with the 2nd by Representative N
Chavez. Is there any opposition?
OK, take the roll, please.
Representative Anaya.
Yes.
Representative Kate.
Yes.
Representative E. Chavez, yes.
Representative in Chavez, yes.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Senna Cortez.
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair? No.
Madam Chair, yes.
921 by a vote of 9 by a vote of
9 to 1, you have it to pass.
OK, and we just, just a little
bit, so we are going to hear HJR
5 next, and then we are going to
357, and I'm gonna remind folks
we have a per a time limit of 10
o'clock, so as, as fast as you
can explain the bill and ask
your questions, etc. We'd like
to get, and there is an
amendment on HJR 5. No.
I hear there is no amendment.
OK, that's correct, Madam Chair.
OK, so no amendment on HJR 5. I
think that makes it a little bit
easier.
So Representative, did you have
an amendment that you've decided
not to use or, OK, OK, all
right, just making sure we're
not missing something. So
whenever you're ready, go ahead.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
HP HJR 5.
Proposes to create a um
independent children, Youth and
Families Commission with an
executive director.
The commission would be
appointed by, uh, there's, it's
a 5 member commission would be
appointed by the governor.
Um, there would also be
appointments made by the Speaker
of the House, the minority
leader, and the same in the
Senate. The president pro tem
and the minority leader in the
Senate.
We all know that, um,
CYFD is not doing well, as a
matter of fact, if anyone read
the arbitrator's report, CYFD is
in a worse state than ever
before.
If you watched the news last
night, that that's further
evidence in terms of CYFD's
inability to care for children
in the proper way. Um, that
story was heartbreaking.
Children run away.
They use drugs.
Um, and I recently learned that
there are also not um attending
school. If they are 14 and make
a decision that they don't want
to go to school, they don't have
to, they can hang out in the
office all day.
We need to do something now. We
cannot continue to wait to put
this off.
HDR 5 will go to the voters, the
voters will decide.
The other piece that the other
reason that this is so important
is that the commission that
we're
Proposed to create under HDR 5
would remove
The um remove CYFD from under
the governor.
As I've been here since 2023.
Um, and there have been two
secretaries just in that short
period of time.
There have been more secretaries
um before, and the constant
turnover is not helping um our
kids in, in New Mexico. We need
a um secretary actually under
the commission, it would be an
executive director. We need
someone who has knowledge and
experience of child welfare, so
that we're not going through
this constant change, so that we
can create some stability in the
workforce so that we can create
some stability.
For the kids, and so that we can
regain the public's confidence
in the children, youth and
Families department. I have with
me an expert witness, Elvis Lee,
and I would like for him to make
just some really very short
comments, um, in terms of why
this proposal is so important.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
and thank you, Madam Chair and
co-chair. It's good to see you
all again. Um, just I've had the
opportunity to present to you at
least 3 times in the past few
years, but for those of you who
are new to the committee, I'll
very briefly give you a little
bit of my background. Um, my
wife and I are adoptive parents.
We've been foster parents. I
have, uh, worked in child
welfare now for 51 years, most
of it in my home state of New
Mexico.
Um, professor emeritus from New
Mexico State University, where I
would
directed the social work program
there for 18 years and for 15
years ran the family
preservation Institute, and I
had
consulted with 30 states and
universities across the country
and for.
Um, other countries.
Um
In the 1990s, New Mexico is
doing a very good job in child
welfare. I've shared with you
the last time I presented, I
believe, quotes from national
leaders saying they came to New
Mexico to find out what we were
doing in the 1990s.
And one of the things that went
wrong is that we failed to put
in place a structure where we
could sustain that quality, and
over the years, of course, we've
had a number of governors, each
governor appoints a new
secretary, and have we seen
recently in the past two
administrations, the number of
secretaries have come and gone,
and at each time about 11 top
staff come and go as well.
Um, so what we need to do is
critical is to sustain the when
we are doing a good job in this
bill will do that. This
resolution will do that.
Um
The three main things I found in
studying social work and child
welfare
organizations is
Throughout the country is number
one leadership.
You need to have sustained
qualified leaders,
non-politicized
professional and stable in
addition, uh, as senator or TC
Pino emphasizes transparent.
The second thing you have to
have in place as a professional
workforce in New Mexico, as I've
shared with you, the social work
Practice Act requires anyone
using the title social work or
any anyone practicing social
work to be licensed in the state
and with that comes a code of
ethics and oversight by a
licensing board.
We need to have 3rd and
organizational culture.
That is open to communities and
working with others
non-defensive and has the
ability to attract qualified
workers.
And until we have that.
We're gonna continue to come
back time and time again with
problems, I believe in CYFD.
That's been the history in this
state and in other states as
well.
I'm happy to answer any
question, Madam Chair. Thank
you. So we will go to Zoom if
you are in opposition, please
raise your hand, I'll go to the
room and come back to you.
Anyone in the room in
opposition.
Oh, OK, I will take 5 people for
1 minute each, if you would like
to speak.
Good morning, Chair Thompson and
committee members. I'm speaking
on behalf of Secretary Casados,
who just stepped out to another
hearing, she had to go to, uh,
my name is Valerie Sandoval. I'm
the deputy secretary with CYFD
and I'm appearing this morning
to express how damaging HJR 5
will be on our child welfare
system and the negative impact
it will have on the children and
youth in our care, removing CYFD
as a cabinet-level agency would
hinder collaboration with key
state agencies essential to
child welfare.
education and health. Recently,
the Kevees co-neutrals, Judith
Meltzer and Kevin Ryan
highlighted the serious harm
that HJR-5 would cause to the
children and youth of our state
and the progress we're making
addressing the Keveness
settlement, as nationally
recognized court-appointed
experts who work with child
welfare agencies across the
country, their assessment
carries significant weight, they
do not believe this solution we
need.
I welcome accountability
oversight and partnership to
improve CYFD and several
legislative proposals will help
us achieve this.
Thank you. Good morning, um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Mariana
Padilla. I'm the secretary
designate of the Public
Education department.
Um, I've personally experienced
CYFD um from many angles.
As a foster parent, as the
children's cabinet director as
an interim cabinet secretary for
the agency, and now as the
secretary designate of the
public education department.
What I can say is without
question, is the cross-agency
collaboration that happens is
critical for supporting our
children in care.
I've seen this partnership with
the early childhood education
and care department in their
home visiting program supporting
our families that need support,
um, connection to services and
uh and guidance. I've seen it
with the Department of Health
who has worked with families
that are experiencing.
Addiction and I've seen it
within the public education
department as we support.
The academic needs of students.
Uh,
good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Carrie Armi who. I'm the
cabinet secretary of the
Healthcare Authority. Uh, I
respectfully oppose, uh, House
Joint Resolution 5, I believe
that there are some serious
unintended consequences that
need to be considered, the first
of which is the diluted
accountability structure, uh,
I'm very dependent on the uh
secretary to make a very quick
decisions sometimes life and
death decisions we make those
decisions sometimes in the
middle of the night, uh, really
would need for that uh
to continue and I'm concerned
about that diluted uh role of
the secretary, uh, and under a
new proposed structure.
Secondly, I'm very concerned
about anything that would
destabilize the structure, uh,
and organizational culture of
CYFD right now, um, I think that
they are working really hard to
rebuild that structure and
culture, uh, would hate to see
that progress upended uh right
now, and thirdly, um, I am a
party to the Kevinness
settlement agreement,
co-neutrals have strongly
advised against taking this
approach in New Mexico.
because it has not worked in
other states.
you.
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
I'm Elizabeth Kraginski,
secretary of the Early Childhood
Education and Care Department
similar to my colleagues, I
respectfully and strongly oppose
this resolution because of the
importance of the work that we
are doing across the cabinet to
improve outcomes for young
children. We know that many of
the children in come into
custody and CYFD are children
under the age of 5 and working
closely with secretaries and the
executive for strategies that
support that is absolutely
critical.
Having a 5 member appointed
board with an executive
director. I don't know that that
structure answers our questions.
I think fully funding the CYFD
budget and making sure they have
the resources to sustain and
attract the talent that they
need is very important and the
work that we do together with
the early intervention program,
we are linked together through
federal law, and we want to be
uh a strong state for children
and families. CYFD needs to
remain inside the executive
branch. Thank you.
Hi, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
Sarita Neer, the workforce
secretary. I understand your
frustration with the pace of
change at CYFD. I adopted my
daughter over 20 years ago after
being a treatment foster parent
in the system.
Um, but as a cabinet member, I
also understand that CYFD is the
hardest secretary position. They
have the administrative and HR
and policy challenges that we
all have and on top of that they
have trauma, significant primary
and secondary trauma. It's a
life and death job, and that's
why there's so much turnover and
as such, this position needs to
be part of the cabinet. We are
each other's peer support
network collaborators,
brainstormers, and family. I
urge you to vote against this
resolution, to not put this
agency out on an island and to
continue
to pursue those changes that
build accountability and get
better results, while also
supporting whoever is crazy
enough to take on this job.
Thank you.
maturer words were never spoken.
It's a tough job. Um, so on Zoom
we have Jeremy in opposition.
Um, I'm actually not in
opposition. I'm actually in
support. I'm sorry about that.
OK, OK, well, um, why don't you
go why don't you go ahead,
Artie.
OK. Um, I, Jeremy Martinez and I
am a guardian slash um resource
parrot. I am in support of this
bill, um, just because I feel
like there's been no follow
through with the care of plants,
there's a lot of policies and
procedures that are being
violated. There's a lot of um
violations and parental rights
being violated. There's so many
shuffle and placement workers
who are very uneducated when it
comes to the care plan and see
why.
F D continues to ignore family
relatives who step up for kids
in the foster care system, and
they adopt out to um
CYFD workers, which is not
following policies and
procedures and making sure that
these kids reunite with their
families or with their parents,
so I do strongly support this
bill because we need change now,
not later, not 5 years from now,
but now.
Thank you. So if you are on Zoom
in support, I will take 4 more,
um, you can raise your hand. I
will go to the room and then I
will come back to you. So in the
room in support, please raise
your hand.
OK, seeing none and seeing no
more on Zoom, um, I will go to
the committee for questions.
Nicole
Yeah, I got her.
Jones, I'm sorry, did you have
questions?
OK, I'm just trying to make a
list. Over on the other side,
questions.
OK, so we have um minority whip
Martinez, represented Senator
Cortez and Representative Jones.
So a reminder to keep everything
as brief as possible. Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I, I will
admit I was, uh,
dead set against this bill.
Until I saw that the only ones
that uh stood up were other um
it, it, it says a lot about
Circling the wagons and trying
to protect the status quo.
So it moved the needle.
Seeing nothing but cabinet
secretary staff.
It was kind of concerning to me,
but I do, I do have a question.
Uh, how is
changing to a commission gonna
guarantee.
The continuity of leadership,
stopping the problems of infant
death, runaway.
Uh, juvenile crime, juvenile
violence, how
I was going to a commission
gonna solve the problems that
The current form of governance.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Martinez, it's a very good
question. I appreciate it. If
you go back when you do research
across the country and the
history I've had in New Mexico,
the key is leadership qualified
leadership. This commission, the
commissioners will have to be
qualified and to draw a little
bit of a parallel, you have the
public um regulation commission,
and as you know, when those
commissioners are nominated,
they have to meet.
certain criteria. So that's the
first thing. So you'll have
people in there who have a
background experience.
Then they will hire an executive
director will also have to meet
criteria of, of that experience.
And then you will
When you do, when the, if this
passes this, the citizens vote
for it, then it will come back
to the legislature, and you all
will do the enabling legislation
to get into the details there. I
continue to argue that if you're
doing child welfare work, you
have to be licensed as a social
worker. And there's a lot of
things built into that. And a
licensed social worker is the
bare minimum.
In terms of qualification, there
would have to be other
qualifications there too. So you
improve leadership, you assure
us that that person as executive
director just like we had in the
old days was superintendent of
education that could stay on
state engineer, stayed on that
institutional knowledge and
experience we continue to ensure
the quality services are
provided to protect children and
families.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative, um.
Uh, I, I agree with the
qualifications, but changing it
to commission does
That's not the only way to do
this if we would require.
Those same qualifications of a
cabinet secretary.
I don't
I guess I don't understand how
just.
Switching governments. I'm an
old agency guy. I was the only
civilian to rise to leadership
in the Department of Veteran
Services, so
Um
I'm not sure that.
This will guarantee.
The commitment, and I, and I
will say that.
In in defense, uh, surprisingly
of, uh,
The current cabinet secretary.
I've
She's one of the only cabinet
secretaries that has been
willing to sit down and have
Frank conversations with me.
Answer the hard questions. Uh,
so, so I think there's a
commitment there.
That maybe just cause you have a
license.
Uh, does not guarantee the
commitment to the.
To the
Process, um.
But I, I will listen to the rest
of the debate, but I'm telling
you that the needle has kind of
moved for me.
Just, just seeing what
What happened with the line of
cabinet secretaries standing up.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you. Next, we have
Representative Senna Cortez.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative. Um, I don't
have too many questions. I'm a
lot like Representative
Martinez. I, I really want to
understand, um, the heart behind
this bill. The first question,
Madam Chan representative is
what uh other stakeholders were
consulted on this bill.
Mm.
Um, Madam Chair, um, this is a
bill that was um has been in
conversation since 2023. Um, it
came to my attention. I, I used
to work as a child protective
services social worker from I
was um
In the department from 1981 to
1991, almost 10 years.
A few months short of that.
Um, when I came back to um the
legislature. I was shocked and
surprised that CYFD was in such
chaos.
Um, it was in a crisis mode when
I worked there, I worked during
the time that that Mr. Sali
mentioned when we were under a
federal consent decree, um, and
during that time, the department
was much more stabilized. There
were licensed social workers who
were working there. Uh, people
retired from the department
then. I would dare you to find a
worker that's there now has, has
been there for maybe even 5
years.
Um, so my conversations were
with some of the workers.
Um, there were some, uh,
management people that I spoke
to, and then there were also
agencies um who provide um
Foster care, uh, treatment.
Holmes
Um, and they were all of the
opinion that we needed to
change.
We needed something that would
create some stability.
We needed a situation where the
secretary didn't change every 2
or 3 years were a secretary
understood child welfare had
experience in child welfare.
Um, and understood the
importance of creating a stable
workforce as well. Um, I think I
failed to say that I also spoke
with foster parents.
And I continue to get emails
from uh foster parents who are
concerned about the way the
system functions who are
concerned about the turnover and
who are concerned about the lack
of consistency. So those are um
some of the folks that I spoke
with, um, I also obviously spoke
with my um expert witness here,
who has had um
Many years, as he said, um,
experience in child welfare.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and those of you
that serve on committee with me,
you know I'm not against the
status quo or shaking things up,
um, but I definitely do wanna
understand a little bit more,
um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, what have you identified as
the perceived failure of CYFD,
like, was there a specific
incident that led up to this
change for the commission.
Madam Chair, uh, uh,
Representative Cortez, um, it's
not, it's just continually, uh,
you see the problems and I, I
didn't mention it, but we've
been monitoring, there have been
lawsuits, um, there have been
task forces, none of those have
provided sustained improvement
over time and to answer um
representing Martinez concerned
about what
Is this different. What's
different is that every time you
get a new governor, the
secretary's not replaced, and
it's similar to, again, the PRC
where the commissioners are, are
appointed for 6 years at a time.
In this case, it would be where
if you had an executive director
who was doing a good job, they
could stay as long as they're
doing a good job, and it
wouldn't be subject to to
politics or the change in
administration.
That's the critical thing. The
other thing is that um the point
was made that this has been
tried in other states and failed
that to my knowledge, that's not
true. There are commissions, but
they're not what the
representative and the speaker
proposing here, that this is a
totally new. We've done new
things in New Mexico and child
welfare, and we've been
successful.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative and expert and
saying it's a hard job. I know
that's an understatement, um, if
you have this commission that
now appointed people. Are you
concerned at all about the
inconsistency of maybe them
leaving and they're being turned
over because, because it is a
hard job.
Madam Chair, Representative, it
is a difficult job, um, but it,
again, we have other difficult
jobs, maybe not as difficult as
making life and death decisions
and families, um, where you have
seen sustained leadership. There
are other states where they have
had leaders come in, they've
turned the system around the
next time there's a new
governor, they're replaced and
things fall apart again. That's
what's different about this.
is that you do have that
opportunity. It's not a
guarantee, but if someone's
doing a good job.
And they have done good jobs in
other states, they would have
the opportunity to stay, and it
would take as much as possible
the politics out of it and
changing philosophies and so
forth, if they're protecting
children and families, then they
would be able to stay.
Madam Chair represented an
expert. Thank you for that
response. I do have one more
question, Madam Chair
Representative and expert, do
you know of any other measures
taken to improve CYFD before
branching out for a whole other
commission.
Yes, over the last 50 years,
Madam Chair, Representative,
there have been a number of them
and like I said, this
monitoring, there was the Joseph
A consent decree, which the
first in the country occurred
here in New Mexico over foster
care, and also it was the first
federal court order that was
resolved in any state.
Unfortunately, at the
celebration party when that
ended, I heard managers saying,
great, we don't have to do that
stuff anymore. Well, under a
commission.
that would continue the, the
quality service would continue.
So none of the other things that
have been tried, and I think
we've tried just about
everything has worked. The
arbitrator and the Kevins, I
understand it right, and I'm not
an attorney, but he said if
things don't improve, that he
would consider putting the
department under receivership.
So that would take it out from
under the governor's control and
my understanding, and you would
have a judge instead of someone
with the expertise in child
welfare running CYFD. So I think
that's a real possibility. The
other thing that is, uh, an
issue, is that what's happening
at the federal level.
I've been through that before
too, and a lot of these federal
laws or blocked granted the
funding, and that comes back to
the state and you need the
expertise to understand how to
spend that money. You're not
gonna have guidance from the
federal level.
Um, thank you so much, Madam
Chair Representative and expert.
I know when we're coming up with
solutions, we, we want to
understand the root problem and
and I don't know if you know the
answer to this, but is it, Madam
Chair, representative and expert
is it personnel? Is it pay? Are
they not doing exit interviews
to promote organizational, you
know, positive organizational
culture. Do you have any
specific things that you can
nail down with the issues are.
Madam Chair, representative,
yes, we would be here a long
time. I tried to present when I
presented to the, this committee
before and less than a half
hour.
And as a retired professor,
that's difficult. But yeah, it's
across the board. Again,
leadership, qualified workforce
policies that are preventative
in nature. One of the things we
did so well in New Mexico in the
90s as we had family
preservation programs that
prevented placement in foster
care, foster care should be a
last resort. And what I'm
hearing now is it's like a first
resort. And when you have a
worker,
who doesn't have the depth of
knowledge and experience
confronted with do I
Remove this child or do I leave
them here and risk further
abuse, you're gonna opt for
removing the child. That's not
necessarily and often that's
detrimental to the child,
because as a foster parent, one
child ran away in the, and I
called and told the social
worker, and she said, well,
where do you think he went? I
said he went home.
And she said, no, he was being
whipped with a belt. He wouldn't
have gone home. He went home.
That was his mother. That's what
he knew. And so you have to have
that level of expertise and
prevent a lot of the placement
and the expense that we're
seeing now. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair, Representative and
expert. I know this is a really
complex issue, and I just, I'll
conclude with this. Thank you
everyone who got up to stand up,
whether it was for it or an
opposition of it. I know that
we're all here because we care
about kids and we have
different approaches to make
that better, but we're here
because we care about the kids.
So thank you so much.
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, um, Representative Mr.
Sali. I must admit I'm really
troubled about the letter from
the co neutrals and how I, I'm
having trouble resolving, um,
That they, they rarely weigh in
on legislative matters, but they
felt it was necessary to do
that, um, and that federally
they have seen better outcomes
with the cabinet level.
Um
direction of CYFD and they, they
say they've seen it eliminate
barriers and advancing
accountability, which is what
I'm hearing the other cabinet
secretaries say as well that
they feel like they can move
that direction. It's just a, who
do I believe at this point? You
know, I think that it's gonna
require a lot more um
information for me. Um, do you
have anything to add to that
right now?
Madam Chair representative John
Jess, uh, I was puzzled by that
because right now,
Uh, the legislature is
considering legislation where
there are substance abuse, uh,
mothers.
And there are, and I've been on
the fringe of that discussion.
There are 5 or 6 departments
involved, and no one seems to
step up and take responsibility.
All these cabinet secretaries
that just spoke, they're all
taking a piece of that action
and that, and so even with
The
CYFD as a cabinet, that doesn't
guarantee coordination. When we
first put CYFD together with um
First Lady Mrs. Alice King, it
was a much larger umbrella, so
you had things under one cabinet
secretary over the years, pieces
of that have been taken out, and
now we have multiple cabinet
secretaries. So I would submit,
and I don't know if the, if the
um
Well, I, I don't know if other
people have the experience that
we've had the center TCeno would
originally um recommended this
legislation, um, but that the
the fact that they're, it's in
the cabinet does not guarantee
coordination, believe me, and on
that one point that you all are
dealing with now, you can see
there's
No one's stepping up and saying,
we'll take responsibility for
these newborns whose parents are
substant addicted to substance
abuse. I don't see that it would
be an issue if this was a
commission or not, uh, right
now, when you build a bridge in
the state, you have to have a
license, civil engineer do it.
Why do we not require that kind
of credential and qualification
when we're trying to protect
children and families.
We regulate electricity with
people who know what they're
doing. Why don't we have a
commission that step that
ensures that you have that kind
of qualified leadership. And
again, this is just the first
step.
And it's up to the voters.
If they pass this, then all the
details, the coordination, so
forth, will be worked out by
you, the legislature.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Sali, could you say
just a little bit about
receivership that you referenced
um concerning the con neutrals.
Yes, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, that's what I
read in the arbitrator's report
is that he was very close to
putting it in receivership. The
other thing he pointed out is
that he was not basing his
decision on CYFD, the state's
data, but was basing it more on
people, the, the co-neutrals
data.
So even that right now is a
difficult
Challenge is when you have the
arbitrator saying we can't trust
this data from the state.
And at that community level, you
every day you hear these issues
raised, the lack of
coordination, um, the other
thing is that I noticed that uh
the um CYFD's public relations,
I guess, person put out all
their contract agencies and
opposition of this.
Um, resolution.
is that they coordinate with
private agencies all the time.
That's who makes up the bulk of
the service delivery,
particularly in prevention. So I
don't see where there would be a
problem with this commission
coordinating with state
government.
And it would be funded through
the legislature.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you very
much. Thank.
Thank you, I will entertain
emotion.
Madam Chair, I'll move a do
pass. All right, so we have a
due pass on HJR 5 in a
secondpresentative Herndon with
the 2nd.
Will you take the role?
Representative Anaya.
Yes, and explain my vote.
Representative Kate, yes, and
explain my book.
Representative E. Chavez.
Yes.
Representative in Chavez? No.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Senna Cortez.
You are the end.
Struggling, madam chair.
Yeah
the membrane and final members
vote for a leadership votes.
Yes, and may I explain my vote.
I'm vice chair. Yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
921.
a vote of 9 to 1, you have a due
pass on HDR 5.
Representative Anaya Keats and
Santa Cortez to very briefly
explain their votes.
Very briefly, Madam Chair. Um,
Thank you. Uh, thank you,
Representative, for bringing
this forward. Um, I am under no
delusion that one thing will
help CYFD. I am commending
everybody who is bringing
legislation forward that helps
maybe think of different ideas
that we.
I would also hope, Madam Chair
Representative, that this
commission, um, would also aid
in the selection of someone who
can also, um, help think about
stuff.
In a very different way. I have
seen folks like the uh New
Mexico Coalition of Sexual
Assault Programs, who also deal
with very traumatic issues
retain their staff. And so,
thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Representative, um, Kate. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and thank you
very much for bringing this
forward, Representative. Um, I,
I very much 100% believe in your
needs to have qualified
operational experience
consistent and long-term
leadership and leadership
matters. I very much and that is
why I support this bill. I would
want you to consider that the
role of a cabinet secretary.
is one of of the bridge between
the executive goals and the
agencies and the communicator of
that, and much like a CEO and a
COO I don't think that one needs
to be excluded from the other.
And thank you very much. Thank
you, Representative Senator
Cortez.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative. I believe
insanity is doing the same thing
day in and day out and expecting
different results and I don't
know if this is the answer, but
I, I believe we've got to do
something and so as you can
tell, I'm still working this out
in my heart, but, um, that's
just where I stand right now.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next, we will go to
um HB 357.
And we really need to pick up
the pace, hopefully these um
Next bills will be um quicker.
were down to less than an hour.
And still have 5 bills to do.
So whenever you're ready, go
ahead. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you very much
committee. I'm, I'm here to
present HPE 5357. Sorry for my
speedy, but I would just want to
make sure that we understand
what the bill is. So is a
service within our DD waiver
system and um it's a very great
uh service and it's an important
service, understand that in our
DD waiver system, the service is
a fixed amount that the state
provides.
And if you choose, if you are a
person who chooses a media
service, and if you choose it
from a nonprofit, it is.
Um, the full amount of the
state's budget, and if you
choose to get your media service
from a privately owned business,
they take GRT out of it.
So that means you are not
getting the full amount of all
your services. This is a fix in
the inequitable distribution of
our services. Today I'm sitting
with two expert witnesses. I'll
have them introduce themselves
in a very brief statement. Thank
you.
Is your
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Joel Davis.
Uh, I'm vice president of
Elevate the Spectrum, uh, all
volunteer, nonprofit that works
in the autism community. I
I'm also a registered lobbyist,
uh.
For the consortium that the CEO
Tracy Perry works with, uh, I
represent them legally. I came
at this from a different realm,
but I registered just to make
sure things were on the up and
up on that realm. Uh, we are
volunteering on this, um, and
with that, I'll
this case. Do you want me to do
this?
No, have Tracy.
And please only move the, the
microphones if they're turned
off.
OK
Hi, my name is Tracy Perry.
And I work with a provider down
in Las Cruces and I also um sit
on the advisory council for
quality as well.
And I also sit on the
stakeholder vendor committee.
Tracy, don't be nervous.
So thank you, Madam chair,
again, once again, me be that
budgets are $85,000 if you
choose to get your services
through Media, you will get
$85,000 worth of services if you
choose to have them delivered by
a nonprofit, if you choose to
have them and sometimes you have
limited choices, especially in
rural areas. If you choose to
get your services from a
privately owned organization,
you will get less services.
because a portion of that
$85,000 is going back to GRT.
For our state, and I stand for
questions.
OK, thank you. So we will go to,
if you are on Zoom in
opposition, raise your hand and
I'll come back to you in the
room in opposition.
OK, seeing no hands, either
place, OK, on Zoom, if you are
in support, please raise your
hand and I'll come back to you
in the room and support.
If you would like to speak,
please come to the center.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jim Jackson for
disability rights, New Mexico
and the disability coalition, we
strongly support this bill. It
makes those dollars go a little
bit further if you need to, if
you want or need to choose a a
private, uh, provider, uh, it's
just gonna be important to make
sure that the healthcare
authority and your colleagues, I
guess on the House
Appropriations Committee make
sure that the uh healthcare
authority has enough little
extra money to pay that
additional gross receipts tax,
but this will, this will.
will help make those, uh, funds
go a little bit further, uh, for
some of our media participants
and we encourage you to support
it. Thank you.
Thank you. On Zoom, we have
Cassandra.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Cassandra Decamp. I am a
general advocate for folks with
developmental disabilities. I
support House Bill 357. I think
this is a great opportunity for
folks who are receiving services
through media, which is the
self-directed waiver to truly
embrace the idea of
self-direction where they can
spend their entire individual
budgetary allotment on the
services and supports that they
need versus making
considerations about what
percentage may have to be paid
in that gross receipts tax. So
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Before we go on, I
look at the 2nd referral of this
bill, which is transportation,
public works and capital
improvements?
So, thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
looked at it with the same face.
Um, we will be uh talking to the
tax committee and and making
sure that we get a re-referral
on this.
OK, it's not tax. It's, it's, I
know it's not tax. It shouldn't
be taxed, not transportation.
OK, OK, so with that, I will
take questions from the
committee.
See,
oh,
OK, so we have a due pass from
Representative E Chavez, the 2nd
from Vice Chair Herndon. Is
there any opposition?
Seeing none, you have a due
pass.
That's the kind of bill we need.
So
I, I do, I know you do, and I'm
gonna call you up now. So we're
going to the last bill because
this is a very simple bill that
should not take much time, so
we're going to house bill 366.
It was each other in.
Yeah.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for having
me with me. I have Doctor
Christopher Anderson, uh, house
Bill 366 would allow
veterinarians, the same
employment benefits, other New
Mexico healthcare practitioners
enjoy today, a phase out of the
non-compete clause in future
employment contracts. The
elimination of non-compete
clauses.
Is pro-business,
pro-competition, and
pro-consumer to further
veterinarian services throughout
New Mexico. I'll Bill 366 simply
does this, and nothing more. New
Mexico is vet deficit across the
our state and enacting new vets
and recruiting and retention is
key. And with that, uh, Madam
Chair, we stand for questions.
OK, Zoom on Zoom, if you are in
opposition, raise your hand in
the room, anyone in opposition?
Seeing no hands either place if
you are in support, please raise
your hand on Zoom in the room in
support.
If you would like to speak,
please come to the center.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, committee members, and
sponsors of this bill. My name
is Grace Montano Irwin with
Animal Protection V voters. We
stand in support of this bill
for years, New Mexico has
experienced a shortage of
veterinarians in all sectors of
the field, including uh
That's in uh shelter medicine.
Uh,
24 hour emergency and urgent
care general practice and
service in rural areas and
tribal land for both companion
animals and farm animals. Any
effort to bring and keep
veterinary professionals working
in their communities in New
Mexico will result in greater
welfare for animals who find
themselves in need of medical
care. Thank you guys for your
time and consideration. Thank
you. Seeing no no hands on Zoom,
um, question of representative
Ferrari. Thank you, Madam Chair,
um, and thank you, um,
represented for I'm sorry,
leader
of minority leader, um
Armstrong. This, um, I've
carried um a bill, I think
similar to this, and I was
wondering, will this also make
it so that um the non-compete
clause, which has taken effect
at the federal level will now be
sure to be done at the state
level and um in our community,
Las Cruces, we have um had a
problem with.
um, veterinarians being able to
volunteer to do emergency
clinics. So will this bill help
that?
I'm gonna, Madam Chair, I'm
gonna let my expert witness,
since he took the time out of
his busy day to come.
Representative Ferrari, thank
you for sponsoring the Madam
Chair members Committee, uh,
representatives, uh,
Thank you for sponsoring a
similar bill in the past. I, I
know you did that and.
To answer your questions.
The, at the federal level,
Non-competes have been ruled by
the FTC to be
Unlawful and unfair, um, and
employment practice, but it's
been appealed and so a state
protection is important, um,
because it would, it's not so
much, uh,
That this those clauses get
enforced, it's the fear that
veterinarians have of
moonlighting to work at an
emergency hospital or providing
services that, that they want to
provide to
To increase their income and
provide for their families
because it we're not a
profession that has a real high
income level and so
It would allow for more care to
be given by the veterinarians
who are working in the state,
um, including at those
facilities like the, the
emergency facility.
That's great. Thank you very
much.
OK, seeing no further questions,
I will entertain emotions and
second, who was, who I didn't,
OK, representative Senator
Cortez and Representative Cates
with the 2nd. Is there any
opposition? Seeing none, you
have a due pass.
Thank you, Madams 357.
And Representative Lujan, your
timing is perfect.
Yeah, but
And just a reminder to all we
have 45 minutes left and still
have 3 bills, so if we can be
brief.
Whenever you're ready.
We're doing um 354.
Community criminal justice
division project.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
before we begin, I'd like, um,
um, Simon.
To introduce himself in his, he
has, um, madam chair, um, I'm
Simon Suzuki, a staff attorney
and drafter with Legislative
council Service. Um, I am here
for the sole purpose of
providing technical assistance
on the matter before this
committee, and I do not appear
in support of or opposition to
any matter before the committee.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, the
bill, uh, and then I'll
introduce my other um witness,
um, expert witness to the left,
Madam Chair Committee, I'm
Doctor Bronwyn Neeser. I'm a
forensic psychologist and have
also worked with uh mental
health public policy for the
last 4 years.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee.
want to be brief with you today.
Um, and I'm jumping from
committee to committee, yeah,
um, so today we have HP 394.
Um, what this bill would do
would bring together excerpts
from the no, this is not my
synopsis.
354. Thank you. I got them.
Anyway, it was relating to
mental health, creating the
community criminal justice
diversion project as a six-year
pilot project in the behavioral
Health Services Division of the
Healthcare Authority, providing
for project requirements
authorizing financial assistance
for participants assigning
duties, creating the community
criminal justice diversion.
Project fund. And I'm sure what
this is essentially would create
is a pilot project for 6 years,
and we'd be looking at um
different areas of the state uh
to uh start these pilot
projects.
Uh, part of the reason of doing
this, as you know, um, I've been
working across the board with
many of us in regard to the
behavioral health in the cross
sections with um.
The justice system.
Before we get into the justice
system into the, the, the what
we hope now will, will lead to a
new uh competency bill. We have
an intercepted zero intercept
where we're looking at diversion
uh type um initiatives across
the state.
And having worked with AOC and
with um Samsa, uh as a.
As part of an academy along with
Doctor Neer and with Justice
Brianna Zora and others.
We've had these long discussions
and what is really well intended
and needed across our state. And
with that, man, um, we've, I've
put together this piece of
legislation to really adapt and
work through those issues, uh,
Doctor Neer here can give more
of her expertise and more of her
inputs as we've come to this
point, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. I wrote so that I
could be brief.
Um,
so many of the bills that I've
worked on in the past, um, have
had a lot of really aspirational
components because New Mexico is
still developing. I think we can
all agree on that. Uh, we're
still building. So what's
special about this piece of
legislation specifically, is
that it's a complete and
achievable goal, um, which I
personally appreciate. Um, it
designates responsibilities,
provides appropriations, and
clearly states the goals, and
those goals are one, a community
referral process for all
stakeholders.
From the courts to law
enforcement, the DA's office, to
the community providers to
development of mobile crisis
response teams. Uh, we've seen
this work in some of our
communities and the numbers of
calls being taken by the crisis
team versus Officer time is only
increasing. National research
has been done and the Council of
State Government CSG, which the
state has worked with um over
the years, has developed a
one-pager on how to successfully
implement mobile crisis teams.
This bill follows those
recommendations when outlining
DHS.
as the responsible managerial
party. Some cities in the US are
seeing 56% of these calls being
resolved at the scene with 3%
resulting in arrests in 13%
resulting in transfers to
hospitals, which is pretty
incredible.
APD stated that they have, they
saved 2,494 officer hours with
their mobile crisis team in
Albuquerque Community Safety in
the 1st 2 years of their, uh,
activity.
And then number 3, creation and
agreement of the pre-arrest
diversion policy. This needs
attention and support. This
process requires all the court
stakeholders to gather, meet,
and agree on the process and
procedures they will take.
There's a blueprint out there
for the current diversion
program started in the 12th,
4th, 3rd, and the 1st judicial
district soon coming, um, but
these pilots have also
demonstrated that this portion
needs time, attention, and a lot
of support. Some people have
asked me, isn't this better
served under Senate Bill 2.
and what I would say to that is
that while uh Senate Bill 2
covers a lot of similar ground,
uh, this.
The this bill, uh, HB 354 has
that specificity. Um, and so,
while SB 2 lacks that, it makes
them really complimentary pieces
of legislation. Just just to
follow up, I think you said HSD.
BHS.
Oh, OK, OK. All right. Thank you
with the name change people are
including me. I know they're
they're a lot of these things.
I'm sure with that we would
stand for questions. OK, so on
Zoom, if you are in opposition,
please raise your hand, and I
will come back to you in the
room in opposition.
Seeing none either place in
support on Zoom if you.
If you are in support, please
raise your hand. I will take 5
for 1 minute in the room in
support.
If you would like to speak, I
will take 5.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
committee members. My name is
Hutchie Miller. I'm the
intergovernmental outreach
coordinator for Santa Fe County,
I just wanted to share um Santa
Fe County's, uh, working with
such a related program, Santa Fe
County has been operating a
diversion program in the county
called Engage, which has been
operating for almost 6 years.
This is the voluntary
participation program while
still limited program is
providing to be a beneficial
program for participants.
We urge your support for House
Bill 354, as we see the benefits
of such a program.
Thank you.
Good morning, committee. My name
is Denali Wilson. I'm a staff
attorney at the ACLU, but today
I am addressing the committee on
behalf of the Public Safety
Coalition, which is made up of
11 member organizations who have
joined forces to advance
community-centered public safety
policies in New Mexico during
this legislative session. The
coalition stands in strong
support of HB 354, the six-year
pilot project aims to address
New Mexico's behavioral health
crisis by implementing diversion
and community care strategies.
which have proven to be the most
effective approaches for
individuals experiencing mental
health needs and at risk of
entering the criminal justice
system by diverting individuals
with mental health and substance
use disorders away from
incarceration and into
community-based services, we can
reduce crime, homelessness, and
recidivism while improving
public health outcomes and
breaking the cycle of criminal
justice involvement. These
proposals that the bill proposes
a comprehensive approach, uh,
that includes mobile.
Crisis teams. Thank you so much.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jim Jackson, for
disability rights in New Mexico
and the disability coalition. I
want to explain why it's so
important to pass this bill.
You've had a lot of discussion
in this year's legislature about
House Bill 8, and the competency
provisions in that, and you've
talked about Senate Bill 2, and
3 and 1 about uh reforming the
system, but none of these bills
actually create new pathways to
divert people out of the
criminal justices.
and into treatment. There's some
stuff about commitment. There's
some stuff about community
planning and so on, but what we
need to do is make sure that the
courts are authorized and
encouraged to look for these new
paths to get people out of the
criminal justice system and into
a community-based treatment, uh,
and so it's important to
establish these continue to
support these kind of pilot
projects and allow the courts to
do that. Thank you.
Thank you, Jim. So we will go to
Zoom. I have Mcerna followed by
Adam John Griego, so go ahead
and
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, can
you all hear me? Yes.
Uh, thank you, and I'd like to
thank Representative Lujan, uh,
for.
Oh, I apologize. Marco Serna,
former judic uh district
attorney for the first judicial
district career prosecutor, and
I just want to uh echo what
everybody uh before spoke about
with the need for these types of
programs and this pilot program,
I had the opportunity, uh, to
help work with Representative
Lujan and, and uh Simon the
drafter, uh, and I believe this
is great legislation, uh, that
would help.
the criminal justice system and
help divert individuals who
suffer from mental health, but
also who self-medicate quite uh
quite often with drugs and in
other, other substances. So I,
I, uh, urged the committee to um
pass this bill. Thank you for
your time.
I'm Madam Char we have Adam John
Briego.
Good morning. My name is Adam
John Griego, um, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, thank
you so much for having me this
morning. I'm a member of the
Justice Advisory and
Accountability Board to the
American Civil Liberties Union
here in New Mexico.
And the small business owner,
I'm here in support of a very
thoughtful bill centered on
creating a positive outcome for
low level offenses that quite
frankly don't require
incarceration.
Incarceration is never the
answer.
This bill has created
outstanding diversion
opportunities away from an
already saturated carceral
system.
When you are intentional with
the system that also follows up
with long-term social support.
It is an answer that deserves to
be looked at and taken very
seriously. I am grateful to
Representative Tara Lujan.
For the conversations around how
do we address criminal justice
reform and allow the community
to intervene with the diversion.
When we create opportunities for
our most vulnerable citizens
centered in love, honor and
respect. The outcomes, uh, we
can expect back from the
individuals are always positive.
Consider 30, 35.
OK, so do you have any follow
up? It was all positive.
Thank you, Madam Chair, we would
stand for, so, so far I have
representatives in Cortez
followed. No,
I'm
OK, I'm sorry, Representative N
Chavez and then Jones.
And then we will move from
there. Oh, Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives. Um, I
guess I have a few questions or
I, or concerns depending on your
response, um, as you know, we
have a huge problem with violent
juvenile crime, violent crime
versus nonviolent crime, and I
don't see where in this bill,
you differentiate what kind of
offender, um,
What would happen with repeat
offenders, how you prioritize
diversion versus incarceration.
So where, where does this kick
in, I guess, and and what kind
of offenders are we looking at
first? Thank you for the
question, Representative Chaz,
uh, Madam Chas.
Simon to answer.
Yes, Madam Chair, so the, um, on
page 3 subsection D, uh,
provides for the mandatory
components of any program.
And the way that this bill is
drafted is to provide um
Discretion, you know, to local
control. So it's up to the
municipality, the county, etc.
to decide um uh how their
program looks, but at minimum,
they need a pre-arrest diversion
policy for at least petty
misdemeanor offenses or
violations of municipal
ordinances.
And if only if approved by the
local district attorney, um,
because the district attorney
has the prosecutorial authority
and discretion, um, uh, a post
arrest aversion policy for at
least some full misdemeanor
offenses.
It's OK. So the district
attorney, I already know they
already, they already have to
develop diversion programs
within all of the different
district attorneys across the
state, but where here, does it
show that they can go towards
this diversion, depending on, on
the risk factor or violent
versus nonviolent, I guess. I
don't see that here.
Um, and, uh, Madam Chair
Representatives. So this the the
the bill.
is not specific on this. Um, so
it would be up to the city, the
county, um, and the, the local
stakeholders to decide how they
want their program to look. So
if they want it to.
To to to follow this exactly,
um, or it could go a little bit
further and be more expansive,
but that would be up to them.
Madam Chair, and the, and the
reason for for that language
and, and that the flexibility.
is to for local government
control is one of the issues we
frequently talk about. One of
the things that we, we have
discovered through the process
in these conversations is to
understand each community is
different. Each of our, uh, as
we're gonna be looking at a
scope of regionality, but
actually each um
County is different and it needs
some flexibility in how they
developed this. And if you would
go to um page 3, subsection 3
under subsection D.
Uh, a pre-arrest diversion
policy for at least a petty
misdemeanor offense or
violations of municipal
ordinances, so that is a
language I think you may want to
focus on as, as we're having
this discussion. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I mean, we do
need these kind of diversion
programs, and I know, um, the
second judicial district has
been very good, especially if it
comes to behavioral health,
mental health, um, or just um
Our, our juveniles are
individuals that have substance
abuse issues, but I guess
because this is an expansive for
me, um.
I, I really have a problem with
people continuing to make
excuses just because we have
youth or young juveniles, um,
and making excuses because maybe
they're committing violent
crimes because they have
substance abuse or mental health
disorders, but they're still um
truly not being held
accountable, so I guess without
making this more expansive for
me to truly say violent versus
nonviolent offenses.
Um, I just, I just have a
problem with this bill, but
thank you for bringing this.
Thank you Madam Chair, and I, I
do appreciate you, uh,
mentioning that again this
doesn't address the violent
crimes, um, in this section of
law, this is, this is to create
the diversion programs for those
that are experiencing substance
use disorders or behavioral
health, mental health um issues
and I don't think that we've
done enough for that and and
through this these provisions we
um, we
would hope and I believe through
the research and everything that
we're showing and working with
Samsa and the models that this
would address those issues.
Thank you. So I will go to
Representative Jones. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. It's interesting
or different take on this
because I was going to ask you
about local control, cause I
think that's so so important. I
know that with the current um
People in place we have in my
district that.
Being too, being too soft on
crime is not going to be an
issue, but recognizing the need
for um nonviolent offenders to
have mental health resources is
really, is really an issue right
now. So, so I'm, I was more
concerned with you showing me
that we will be able to maintain
local control in the bill.
Is there a place in the bill
where you can, can, um, that you
can point to that shows me that
we will have local control or is
it just the absence of saying
there isn't. Does that make
sense? Madam Chair, yes, I think
you're right on point there and
this we did our best to to
really make sure that that would
be represented in this bill
after talking to so many, um,
Stakeholders, yourself included,
Madam Charro and throughout
these years and understanding
where those needs are. We don't
have any really structurally
developed programs that we see
are um that have the full
components, so at this point,
that local control is very
important.
Did you and we can add,
Madam Chair Representative, so
the, the bill and kind of going
back to um subsection D, um, on
page 3.
It says that the participant,
which is defined as the county
municipality, etc. shall design
and implement the diversion
program. They're, um,
The, the healthcare authority
will have some rulemaking
authority, um, which is inherent
to, to its position in
administering this program. Um,
Uh, and that's all I have to say
about.
Madam Chair and
Could you show me where the
healthcare authority is. I don't
see a reference to that right
offhand.
Great.
So
Um
Page 4, Madam Chair.
We're going to look at line 17
subsection B, page 2. I'm sorry,
I was looking at the wrong page.
We start the under the uh
definition of the community
criminal justice diversion
project is created as a six-year
pilot project in the diversion
to demonstrate that diverting
certain offenders from the
criminal justice system to
services. I'm sorry, I don't see
it.
Um, Madam Chair, representative,
so it's in on page 2, line 17.
It's created in the division and
it we're referencing the
behavioral health services
division of the Healthcare
Authority.
Yes, that's correct.
All right, thank you. That's all
my questions. Thank you. Thank
you. minority whip Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
following up on that last
question.
Uh, I understand that it says um
in section B.
This
um 6-year pilot project in the
division.
But it doesn't
Is there a definition somewhere
in the bill of what that
division is and Man chair page
one, division is defined on line
22, division means the
behavioral health service
Services Division of the
Healthcare Authority.
That's what I was looking for
previously. That's where it
defines it where the division
is. Thank you, Man.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I, I
right over that and didn't catch
that.
Um, go with me to page 2.
Mm
Line 23.
The project shall be located in
at least 5 counties.
Who's gonna make the decision on
Which counties are chosen?
Yeah. Thank you. That would go
back to the the the the division
and making those decisions, and
they would have to at least uh
choose one class A county, one
Class B county, with an assessed
uh intermediate uh valuation in
one class B counting with an
assessed high valuation.
Madam Chair Representative for
the county's gonna
Put in a bid for it. How, how is
that gonna, how is that process?
yes,
what we would see that the the
input from the from those local
governments would come in to ask
and be part of this evaluation
and, and be assessed and decided
upon, Adam Chen.
Madam Chair Representatives, so
would, would it be?
From the district attorney's
office, the sheriff's office,
the courts.
The county manager
Who's gonna, who's gonna be in
charge of
Submitting that bid.
I'm sure I, it would be from any
of those entities, I believe
that are working on this issue
that would come together and if
they are already working on um
How to assess these into to
qualify for this, this pilot
program, then they would all
have a say, I would, I would
like to thank Mr. uh, Madam
Chair.
OK, uh thank you for that, Madam
Chair Representative, go with me
to page 3 line 9.
Who talks about a pre-arrest
diversion policy for at least
petty misdemeanor offenses.
So the way I read that, that's
the, that's the
bottom.
What's the top?
Um, and, and this is a follow-up
question to the
Some of the more violent
offenders. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Again, we're not, we're not um.
This bill does not interface
with violent crime, um.
Yeah, with violent crime, um.
Policy or law, this is just for
nonviolence. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative. The way I
read it.
It sits, it sets the the bottom
of it.
But it doesn't set the top of
it.
Um, and that's, that's what I'm
concerned about.
Are we gonna have
violent offenders.
I know it doesn't say it in
this, but it doesn't say that
they can't either.
Madam Chair, we have a process
and we have uh through through
the court and judicial process
if it is a violent crime, then
it has to go through the
through.
The system in that manner.
However, this bill doesn't
reflect that as you're saying,
and this is would only deal with
a nonviolent.
OK, thanks for that, Madam Chair
Representative, so I'm gonna go
to page 5.
Start on this section 8 starting
in line.
Or
The community criminal justice
diversion Project fund is
created.
In the state treasury as a
non-reverting fund for the
duration of the project.
So this is a 6-year project,
Madam Chair Representative, is
that correct? Yes, sir, Madam
Chair, and representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, so we're.
We encumbering money.
From where
Is the general fund gonna pay
for this,
Madam Chair, representative,
yes.
Madam Chair, how much, how much
are we gonna put into this
determined on how this is going
to what the need is and how this
will be allocated, um, through
the budget process and the
allocations of our current um
um.
allocations to the the need to
behavioral health. It, it would
be reflected in in our budget,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, so
this would come out of
Whose budget
The state's budget, Madam Chair.
So would it, Madam Chair, come
out of VHSD's budget?
Madam Chair, we have, um.
We have delineated uh through
our appropriation through the
HB2 through recurring and
non-recurring funding to
represent what is needed um to
through this legislation, Madam
Chair, Representative.
Madam Chair Representative, the
way I read this bill, it's kind
of an
Open-ended
Expenditure because it's not.
It doesn't state in this bill.
It's gonna cost a million or
we're gonna encumber.
$3 billion.
Can you tell me what has been
encumbered in House Bill 2 for
this project, Madam Chair, I
could.
Talk with you offline and we
will be reviewing HB 2 either
today or tomorrow, from my
understanding on the floor, and
I'd be happy to, um, follow up
with you on that, but if you go
to page 4, line 12, subsection
G, the division shall establish
a budget, so that's where this,
the budget would be established
if there is any um unused
funding, it would revert back to
the general phone after the 6
year pilot program. Thank you,
Madam Chair, representative.
I'm even more confused than when
I started asking questions, uh,
but I leave it at that, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, um, I'll listen
to the rest of the debate.
OK, so seeing no further
questions, I will entertain
emotion,
and like to make motion for to
pass.
OK, so a motion by
Representative Kates and a
second by representative
Ferrari.
on House Bill 354, will you take
the roll, please?
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative in Chavez. No,
and I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones. Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Uh
Representative Senator Cortez
pass.
Representative Martinez.
No. Representative Senator
Cortez.
It's been a tough morning, um.
No, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes
Madam Chair, yes.
6 to 3.
By a vote of 6 to 3, you have a
due pass.
Bill 354, and we will go back to
uh Representative N Chavez and
Representative Senator Cortez.
Yes, Madam Chair Representative,
well, I love the intentions of
this. I would love to visit with
you on some of my questions just
because this is so vaguely
written, I think it doesn't
establish.
Several
concerns that I have. Thank you.
Representative Senator Cortez,
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I think the heart and the spirit
behind this bill is absolutely
beautiful, and I really
seriously would love to chat
with you one on one just so that
I can understand it more and the
fiscal impact is a concern for
me, but Madam Chair
Representative, if we could chat
later, I'd love that. Thank you
so much. Thank you.
So we will next go to
Representative Luhans 355, and
we have 15 minutes.
So I'm hoping we can get through
this quickly. If not, we will
roll it and start where we left
off.
I'm sorry, Madam Chair, point of
order. What was the vote tally
on that 6 to 3, I believe.
Let me, let me make sure.
At 6 to 3.
each other this. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, we'll get
started quickly. Um, briefly in
2023, Madam Chair, committee
members.
948, 948. I'm looking, I'm
thinking of 988 cause I was just
looking at something, man,
excuse me, 948 New Mexicans died
as a result of drug overdoses.
During the 60-day session, over
100 people across the state will
likely fatally overdose. These
are our friends.
Our neighbors
And our family members overdose
overdose deaths are preventable,
and we owe it to our communities
to take every step we can to
prevent them. HB 355 would
provide our communities with an
important tool that can help
save lives and improve public
health and safety. This bill
amends the harm reduction Act to
create an overdose prevention
program, overseeing and
administered by the Department
of Health alongside existing
harm reduction services.
would also limit criminal and
civil liability so that staff,
volunteers and participants of
harm reduction and overdose
prevention programs do not have
a fear of being arrested or sued
when they are operating in good
faith and in accordance with
rules of the program.
Overdose prevention centers
provide safe, hygienic spaces
for people to use substances
they can already obtain. They
have already obtained.
We trained staff can intervene,
prevent, reduce, or treat
overdoses, Madam Chair, this is
an important piece of
legislation. I've carried and we
have revived and have a lot of
inputs and a lot of
stakeholders, and many of them
are here with us today. Um, I
just like to acknowledge the
experts that are with me today,
Doctor David.
Lay executive director of New
Mexico Solutions, Denali Wilson,
our staff attorney at the ACLUNM
and online we have Helen.
Is it Calen, excuse me.
Um, a policy council, uh, from
the Policy council.
We have Naomi Valdez, our
advocate and lobbyist for TGRL.
Madam Chair, with that, we would
stand for questions. OK, we will
go to Zoom if you are in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
In the room in opposition.
A sing none and singing no hands
on Zoom and if you are in
support, raise your hand, and I
will come back to you if, um, in
the room and support.
OK, I will take 5.
Very brief comments.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Nathan
Savara, and I'm addressing the
committee today on behalf of the
Public Safety Coalition, which
is made up of 11 member
organizations who have joined
forces to advance
community-centered public safety
policies in New Mexico during
the 2025 legislative session.
The coalition strongly supports
HB 355. This legislation is a
vital step in addressing our
state's overdose crisis through
a compassionate and
evidence-based public health
approach. Every year, nearly
1000 New Mexicans lose their
lives to preventable drug
overdoses. Overdose prevention
centers, OPCs provide a proven
life-saving solution. Decades of
research show that OPCs reduce
overdose deaths, prevent the
spread of infectious diseases
and increased access to
treatment, all while improving
public safety by reducing public
drug use and related litter. New
Mexico has long been a leader in
harm.
production, and HB 355 continues
this tradition by ensuring that
people struggling with
substances can access a safe,
supervised space where trained
professionals can intervene in
the event of an overdose. This
program would also ease the
burden on emergency response
services, ultimately saving
lives and resources. We urge the
committee to support HB 355.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I'm Marshall
Martinez, executive director of
Equality New Mexico. New Mexico
is a long history of approaching
public health issues from the
perspective of harm reduction.
We've led the nation, in fact,
from the peak of the HIV
epidemic through the height of
COVID. By allowing the
Department of Health to expand
this program, we recognize the
reality. New Mexicans
experiencing addiction deserve
compassion and safety. We
deserve non-judgmental, warm
hands leading us to treatment,
especially LGBTQ New Mexicans
who because of systemic trauma
and
discrimination, experience
addiction at significantly
higher rates.
Equality New Mexico supports
House Bill 355 because our queer
and trans siblings are queer and
trans New Mexicans deserve at
the very least, not to die on
the streets from our illnesses.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Adrian
Lawyer. I'm the director of
education at the Transgender
Resource Center of New Mexico
and TGRC operates a harm
reduction site as part of our
services for the community. So
up close and personal, we see
how access to these services,
um, and improves public health
and improves the lives of the
people who are struggling with
these issues here in our state,
who again are our family,
friends and loved ones. Um, this
amendment to the bill will
absolutely provide.
more life saving services to
people who are deeply struggling
and will also help the harm
reduction contractors around the
state to continue to provide
these life-saving services.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Quentin Ampersand. I'm a
law student working uh intern
working with registered lobbyist
Juliana Kub, who represents the
behavioral Health Providers
Association.
Uh, the behavioral health
Providers Association represents
over 60 providers in communities
throughout New Mexico.
Um, and based on their expertise
in this area, they strongly
support overdose prevention
programs. Research has shown
that these centers reduce
overdose overdose deaths by as
much as 35% in their immediate
vicinity, and every one of those
lives saved matters. People who
frequently participate in
overdose, um, prevention
centers, um, access detox and
addiction treatment services far
more often than people who don't
have access to these types of
centers. So not only does the do
the overdose prevention
programs address the immediate
crisis of overdoses, they also
provide people a path away from,
um, substance use. So on behalf
of the behavioral health
Providers Association, please
support this bill. Thank you.
Perfect timing. OK, we'll go to
Adam John, followed by Rifka and
Annami, so go ahead, Adam John.
Oh yes, good morning. Uh, once
again, thank you so much for
having me this morning. uh,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. I I'm urging you to
support House Bill 355, um 948
overdoses is absolutely
unacceptable in the state of New
Mexico and safe spaces are
critical to monitor, um,
substance use, collect data and
administer reversal or treat an
overdose. And again, I'd like to
thank Representative Tara Lujan
for taking a stance on the harm
created by addiction in our
communities, we need increased
access to
treatment. Thank you.
Rifka stern.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
and members of the community.
I'm Doctor Ria Stern. I'm a
family physician here in
Albuquerque, and I've worked in
the field of addiction for over
15 years. I am also chairperson
of the Bernaleo County Addiction
Treatment Advisory Board, and
I'm speaking on behalf of the
New Mexico Society of addiction
medicine we do strongly support
House Bill 355, um.
Notably, uh, the National
American Society of Addiction
Medicine also supports overdose,
uh, prevention sites. This bill
will help save lives by
providing a safe space for
people who are using drugs, or
else prevention um sites are
typically staffed by health
professionals, case managers,
and peer counseling. Overdose
prevention sites are not new.
There are over 100 sites
worldwide and in the United
States, there are two official
sites.
in New York City and one in
Rhode Island. There are also
many other um unofficial sites.
A recent article in the New
England Journal.
Thank you.
And finally, Anami, and I'm
sorry if I pronounced your name
wrong.
No worries, you pronounced my
name correctly, um.
Uh, so I'm speaking in support.
Oh yes, my apologies. Uh, my
name is Anami Das. I have worked
in harm reduction for the better
part of the last 8 years.
Um, and today I'm actually
speaking as a person who uses
drugs. Um,
Currently what we have without
overdose prevention centers is a
system where people who use
drugs are forced to congregate
in trap houses and uh friends
houses that might be unsanitary,
uh, at the very least, they're
poorly lit, and that's where the
majority of overdoses are
happening, uh,
It would be much better for the
state if we were able to not,
uh,
rely on trap houses to keep
people safe, but instead rely on
trained professionals, as was
mentioned before.
Uh, I strongly support this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you. OK. So, we have 5
minutes. Um, other questions
Adam, I'd like to move a do
pass.
OK.
OK, so we have a motion by
Representative Anaya in a second
by Representative Ferrari, and
we, uh, yeah, I, I
since that came, we'll put that
on hold. So Representative
Martinez and then Jones.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll
be real quick about this. Um,
there was a lot of talk about
treatment.
And I agree that treatment and
treatment programs need a lot
more attention.
But I don't see in this bill.
And he talked about treatment.
It's so, it talks about on page.
6
Providing us a safe space.
For them to take drugs, but I
don't
I don't understand how that is
treatment.
Treatment to me is helping
somebody get off drugs, not
Provide a place where they can
take drugs.
Um, to me it seems like
More enablement and, and not
treatment. Can you explain?
I mean, how, how is this bill
gonna deal with the treatment of
drug addiction.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, um, representative for that
question.
The treatment is a choice.
And through this, the process of
setting up these safe use sites.
Would provide the expertise.
And uh
The ability and the access
really to those who choose.
To seek the treatment to have
available to them.
And that is part of the
What individuals who um.
Have a substance use disorder go
through?
They need a choice. They need to
save space, and they need the
expertise and the accessibility
to make those decisions, and
this bill would provide that and
we would like to add.
Madam Chair, uh, Mr.
Representative, um, I operate a
harm reduction programs, um, in
Albuquerque and Santa Fe, um,
including on the street where we
give out these naloxone packs,
uh, to people, including
businesses. What we find is that
the more we engage people in
harm reduction strategies where
we're not shaming them or trying
to coerce them into ceasing use,
they become more accessible and
willing to come into treatment
because of that relationship.
Um, what we find is that harm
reduction is a door into
treatment, um, and, and, and,
and accessing those existing
services that may be that may be
provided at the site, but are
not necessarily um uh the focus
of the bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, but this bill
Does nothing for treatment. This
bill simply provides a safe
space.
I would like to see something in
the bill that actually did
something.
To treat that person who was in
the throes of addiction. I've
seen veterans.
Self-medicating for 30 years.
I worked hard to make sure that
there were
Processes and
Uh, facilities that would treat
that addiction.
I don't see how
Giving them a safe space and and
calling that treatment.
I don't, I don't, I don't see
how that happens. My last
question, how is this gonna be
paid for?
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I'll just address the first
question. So what this bill
deals with is allowing the
Department of Health to create a
program that allows entities and
some are already operating harm
reduction programs to opt in to
an overdose prevention program,
making their site an overdose
prevention site. So, um, this is
not a treatment bill. There are
many bills addressing the
treatment need, um, passing
through the legisla
this session that you all will
have an opportunity to support.
Um, this is evidence-based, and
that's the goal here. So right
now, if you refer to be a FIR by
the by the Department of Health.
It says that about 40% of folks
that regularly use overdose
prevention sites eventually seek
treatment. We also know that
treatment is effective when it
is a choice and not forced. Um,
do you wanna answer this? Thank
you. Thank you. Um, again, this
is the framework of this is the
the harm reduction model and the
harm reduction programs that we
have in place, that this will be
functioning under and through
that through those programs that
gives the accessibility and
gives the choice, as mentioned,
as far as the funding again, the
DOH, we have the harm reduction
program, a harm reduction, um,
In place and that's where the
funding would be received.
I chair.
Representative Thank you Madam
Chair. Representatives, so the
Department of Health is already
doing this.
Madam Char representative, they
already uh have the harm
reduction programs in place,
this would amend the harm
reduction Act that we have in
law to provide for the
functionality of what, um, the
evidence based um programs that
this would provide.
Thank you, Madam chair. So the,
the money's in the budget
already, they're already doing
this.
I don't see the need for
another.
piece of legislation. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. So to, to give
you some clarification, we have
a harm reduction act.
Which we, we enable a lot of the
programmings to reach out to
communities who are seeking or
needing help, um, do those, do
those, uh, community based
programs what under the harm
reduction Act, they have to
participate with the state to
access uh access um with those
with the program has this amends
the act to add that they would
give these provisions which they
currently do not have.
Thank you, man.
Jones.
Big subject, Madam Chair. I'm
just gonna really cut to what I
think is most important for me
as representing my district, um,
and also as a nurse, I didn't, I
saw trained professionals
referred to uh but I, I always
heard in past discussions that
it was actually a nurse there.
Is it not a nurse? Is it a, a
tech, somebody who's just
trained.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
those rules would be um.
Made at the Department of
Health.
But that, that those would be
the, they would be um working
under um.
If you look at page 6,
subsection B on line 18, the
overdose prevention program
shall provide participants with
a safe and hygienic space to
administer and consume
previously obtained controlled
substances or personnel trained
in um overdose reversal she
monitor for signs of an overdose
and intervene to prevent reverse
or treat an overdose.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I'm trying
to imagine as healthcare person
who
I'm trying to imagine me.
Monitoring someone who's
injecting something into their
body that, and I don't even know
what it is.
You know, of course, I want to
save them, but I just can't. I
can't bridge that gap right
there, being a nurse, and, and
not even knowing that this with
the street drug is that this
person's injecting. So that is a
huge thing for me. The other
thing is, if there, if it really
is evidence based and I see the
stats, uh, you can look at them
two ways, a lot of the time,
Marshall and I've had some
conversations about that. I want
to avoid knee jerk reactions
against anything that we talk
about, that's why I'm always
open for the conversation.
conversations, but uh we're
gonna have to go a long way in
my district before I could
actually vote for this. I'm
still, I'm still really
concerned about the um
The, the nursing aspect or the
trained professional aspect,
regardless.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I'll be brief.
Um, so this is an opt-in
program, which means that nobody
is mandated to participate in
the program, including
healthcare providers. Um, so if
that, if that was not a type of
care that um you were if you
weren't working for an entity
that provided that service, you
wouldn't have to provide it as
a, as a nurse.
OK, thank you. That wasn't
exactly my question, but that
was a good, I'm glad you
answered it anyway. Anyway, I'm,
I'm open to continuing the
conversation, looking at
statistics and so forth, but I
can't support it at this time.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Seeing no further questions, we
have a motion on the table of a
due pass for House Bill 355.
Karen, can you take the roll,
please?
Represented Benaya.
Yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative N Chavez? No.
Representative Ferrari? Yes.
Representative Jones.
No.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Representative Senna Cortez? No.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair. Yes.
5 to 4 by a vote of 5 to 4, you
have a due pass on House Bill
355, and we are 5 minutes over,
so I'm gonna ask everyone to
clear the room as quickly as
possible, and we will roll the
final bill and get to it soon.
Thank you.
