Representative funding at.
I.
Here okay we do have.
We have a quorum in
Representative Sarinana are you
you're participating by zoom
correct.
It and please this project so
okay members we're gonna jump
into our agenda today
on house bill one seventy five
are two members there are are
unable to be with us today so
we're gonna go ahead and
re scheduled house bill one
seventy five.
So we'll note that
Representative Allison can we go
to you please for house bill one
one four.
Yes.
Okay Representative Allison
whenever you're ready please.
Thank you Mr.
What were present today is house
bill one oh four.
A just a quick synopsis says S.
bill one oh four would
appropriate three point one
million from the general fund to
the Human Services department to
provide clinical supervision for
behavioral health mental health
and counseling professionals.
And so I they missed me.
Okay.
Thank you very much get my
expert witness Karen can enable
with the national association of
social workers.
Then we'll take your questions
okay thank you very much
Representative Allison thank you
care thank you this candidate
is there any anyone who wishes
to speak briefly in support of
this bill okay we're we've got
our sergeant here.
If you couldn't come on up
please.
Mr chair committee members my
name is Brian Sir nominated New
Mexicans and educator and
trainer of behavior health
professionals and the owner of a
behavior health organization
called service solutions with
offices in Santa Fe and
Albuquerque.
Are rather organizations and
it's mall business and industry
with the very slim margins.
And part of the expense of doing
business in behavioral health is
providing supervision to interns
and non independently licensed
professionals and our
organization provides that
supervision at a very high level
they're very invested in the
overall quality of of
professional behavioral
treatment in the state of New
Mexico.
but again that's a that's a cost
of doing business that many
other industries just to not
have to have to contend with
there's actual laws in place
that require us to provide that
supervision on a ratio of about
one hour to every ten hours a
direct client contact to an
organization like ours where we
typically have about three to
five interns and probably that
many non independently licensed
our clinical supervisors are
constantly providing supervision
with no reimbursement
for that for that time that they
spent in.
Couple of that clinical
supervisors are are the most
expensive positions in an
organization like mine and so
it's for this reason I am in
full support of Senate bill two
sixty two with the following
provision since providers or
provider organizations
themselves are providing
supervision to their interns and
staff members and are therefore
confronted with the cost of
insuring high quality unethical
work these funds are being met
of made available directly to
provide organizations and be HSD
also already has systems in
place that allow provide
organizations to contract in
summer submits a provision
called.
Thank you very much.
Okay
I don't see any other comment I
know we're working through
Is there any on COVID online.
Okay we're gonna limited to to
three folks online if you could.
Okay David late go ahead when
you're ready for one minute.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Dr
David lay in the executive
director New Mexico solutions
and the president of the New
Mexico behavioural health
providers association we stand
in full support of this bill as
Mr Sarna said we do have some
concerns that the costs in this
issue with providing supervision
are incurred exclusively by the
providers who are providing us
relations services in the
community without me
reimbursement we respectfully
request that the bill be amended
to require seventy five percent
of the allocated funds to be
disbursed directly to community
mental health providers to
offset those costs and the
losses that they incur as they
provide the initiatives services
thank you thank you very much.
Okay we're gonna go to Ellen
pines Ellen whenever you're
ready for one minute please.
Thank you Mr chair Helen hunt's
representing the disability
coalition I know that all of you
share our concern that we need
to build our network of
behavioral health providers part
of that is getting trained and
this is supervision is required
as part of that getting them
trained so it's important that
we support that training I
paying for this is all of those
who are doing.
Asian so we are just part of
this measure thank you thank you
very much mistimes.
Students and a and and and okay
we're gonna go this is comes up
on our screen whomever is and
and and A. M. I am.
To go ahead for one minute
please and please introduce
yourself.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is
Gabrielle Dietrich and I am the
executive director of nami New
Mexico hi ninety six for the
National Alliance on mental
illness we are the nation's
largest nonprofit agency after
the next stances on support for
because of the efforts of the
making point leading provider
shortage in New Mexico thank you
very much thank you very much.
that that concludes online
portion of support is there any
anybody who wishes to speak in
opposition.
And see anybody wishing to speak
in opposition okay I'm in a.
Representative we'll go to the
committee for questions we're
