structure health insurance it's
just kind of it's it's it's
something over there it doesn't
really matter it's this is a
little underlying thing when in
fact it matters more than
anything else in the data
definitely shows that if you
take care of the mind and any
issues that are there substance
of mental health you're going to
save so much money on the body
it more than pays for itself to
invest in this type of activity
this bill grew out of my a bill
in twenty one the no cost
sharing for behavioral health
which turned into actually as a
business tool for us because we
were able to reduce so much
chronic disease by increasing
access to behavioral health
folks but I got the feedback
from people it's great that I
don't have this forty dollar
copay just to do intensive
outpatient therapy every two
days but there's no one there to
see me and and they're not here
and we all know what happened in
the previous administration and
we have never recovered from
that not only have we never
recovered I'll show something
else that that basically in the
US for almost the same services
we are paying behavior health
providers almost twenty twenty
five percent less just on
standard and then again that's
where the country countries had
is that so
when.
I begin to realize that I died
last year through the through
the Senate back in high House
Bill to I got three hundred
thousand dollars to get experts
because I knew this is very
complicated and we have to
parallel federal law federal law
started with the Domenici what's
called the mid pee Act mental
health parity equity
addiction equity act and it's
kind of a backwards it basically
said you cannot put any more
barriers in front of getting
access to mental health and
substance use services than you
normally do for some medical
surgical after that the ACA said
almost everybody has to cover
behavior health and then the
cares Act and the cares Act and
then every appropriation bill
since nineteen twenty has had
pieces of it so mental health
parity is scattered over a
number of federal bills and just
not consolidated so it's at you
know we need to consolidate this
for New Mexico is I'll point out
a little more detail later the
problem with federal Health
parity I mean it's a law that
they're supposed to be having
this open access but they put no
money in for enforcement they
gave no money to offices the
superintendents are insurance
throughout the country and this
bill puts the money in to put
the staff in to help the health
plans with policies and and then
enforce it and actually make it
work so that's why we're we're
doing this the other stuff I can
go through you know the data you
know thirty four per I'm sorry
we leave the country in alcohol
related mortality in L. cost
kind of at the base of the
fentanyl the opioid what have
you the
at one of the things you'll see
in here it's not in federal
legislation we require health
plans to pay for family and
couples therapy and why is that
because they won't pay for it
now in this or is.
Hey a significant behavioral
health diagnosis in one of the
individuals well we're to ace to
start.
They start in infancy and data
now shows that an infant the
grows up in a family with
parental conflict even before
they can talk and that alone
here the secretary of the and
they have more aces and other
people do so that is a very
significant part that we feel is
absolutely critical and nipping
at a lot of this in the bud and
then of course I mean the
depression so you may have read
the New York times articles
particularly for young that
women in in their early teens
the difficulties are having with
social media the impacts on
COVID social media itself all
over the place.
Depression in in us in adults
and then unfortunately none of
this covers chair the depression
in in that population that
isolation is getting worse and
that's the federal government's
going to have to do do that but
what the federal government did
in these laws it requires self
insured a reciprocal tactic
health plans they must follow
all these no we can't and for
some but we have a deal with the
department of labor whenever we
find that we report it Medicaid
has to enforce it we don't have
that authority except to ride in
the contracts but you know we
have worked out of an agreement
with CMS that wherever we find
it we can send it up the line
they are required by Congress to
investigate every complaint and
report on it every year so as we
begin to move forward I said you
know I'm yeah I'm a doctor I've
got a lot of experience you've
heard me talk about my own lived
experience of my two children
which I learned so much about
addiction and how to get through
addiction and get to sobriety
but we knew we needed help and
so we brought in the public
policy group at Georgetown who's
been doing more surveys
And up thinking and working with
Congress and than just about
anyone else and and I also just
want to mention before I hit a
few key points up Senator.
But we I just found out you have
a sub so are you discussing the
sub I'm sorry that page I'm just
trying to I'm not still learning
okay no it's okay so do I have a
motion to discuss this that okay
okay thank you go ahead thank
you madam chair
on Monday I have maybe the
experience to do I hope I get
there
the thank you for that madam
chair so what are the key
actions that there are several
in here and having worked in
health plans for a great deal my
life having run and having run a
five billion dollar Medicaid
program Medicare programs
general I started New Mexico
health connections I know all
the ways that we can work our
way around regulation and and
art
and and and not implement it and
basically knowing all that
really helped me but I knew that
I had to have help we have it
from Georgetown and then I'd
have to experts here this
morning date page do Hamel whose
head of compliance medical
compliance at the office of the
superintendent and professor
emeritus of one of the nation's
top experts in the health law
rob Schwartz and we spent the
summer working with Georgetown
doing our research going into
seven states finding out what
does what doesn't work and
basically came together to put
together this bill I also did
stakeholders both providers but
also health plans because I've
lived down that side and to
basically understand where they
were going to have difficulties
to see if we could find some
agreement because at the end of
the day the health plans are
going to have to write the
extensive policy member when I
said you can't have not non
quantitative treatment to
limitations that's basically
that you can't put barriers in
daycare they have to write
policies for almost every.
Behavioral health condition it
is a huge that that's we've got
to have this staff the mistakes
that the other states made is
that they did staff this up is
because another thing that could
put in their department of
insurance and they've gotten
no where and also this these
laws have been on the books in
one way or another since two
thousand and eight and because
there hasn't been staff and
money to staff it up in states
from the federal government we
are not seeing the parity take
hold in the country so what are
a few key things that this does
not generally in health and
utilization review the medical
directors of just kind of the
they they they work office
some manuals but they're very
few manuals in behavioral health
and you'll see in the second
page of the bill we list all the
major behavioral health
organizations their standards of
care and are what we use and
what the health plans have to
use in writing their utilization
review policies which basically
say you can get to.
That care.
We have a provision in here and
I found out yesterday after
presenting a a patient called me
who had been watching when I
presented in the.
Tax and business committee and
because one of the provisions
was that
it debt that you cannot put a
barrier in front of someone
seeking direct mental health
care from any kind of mental
health care professionals you
can go is just like primary care
it is a matter of fact in almost
all help and you can go to a
specialist in behavioural health
care specialist well there's one
health plan here who you can't
get in the services to you call
their one eight hundred number
and get referred and so you're
missing the what we call the
golden moment those of you and
and you know rare is the family
that doesn't have some
experience with addiction and it
is just is so widespread and and
if you know your friends you
know that the individuals having
a rough time is sinking lower
and then one day goes you know
what I gotta do something about
this and and it's their
voluntary desire to do it you
into that window lasts for if
you look at twelve hours because
pretty soon they're so stressed
they go back to self medicating
with whatever it is they're
doing for for addiction so this
says instant access family and
marriage therapy to reduce aces
the the health plans
traditionally and and this is a
huge problem all over the
country they say oh yeah you can
go for a few acute services but
I will only give before I
services you're done there are
pieces in the bill you cannot
use number limits you cannot use
time limits therapy only comes
to an end when there's an
agreement between the provider
that the patient's needs have
been met and if that's a year or
so in many of you've heard me
say you want sobriety you have
to have a year of sobriety and
you have to have access for for
all of that
The probably the the substance
use drugs you know no prior off
I mean when you need them you
need them and and they have to
be there the.
other key thing is that if you
look at page four and I and I
really one point staff because
this this is the power in the
bill of one of the main reasons
I wrote it because people told
me they couldn't get access and
that in the bottom it says
developing provider
reimbursement rates insurance of
demonstrates that it has
performed a comparative bility
analysis reimbursement and
surrounding states surrounding
states are paying and I can
document it for you thirty to
forty percent more for
behavioral health and we are in
New Mexico.
The the Medicare bill is going
to help keep some people here
but it's such a low level
compared to what they're paying
that we have to have this so the
OSI having the state having the
staff can go in and say what
have you done to raise your
rates to compare with the states
around us that's what's can
attract and retain behavior
health professionals to New
Mexico the reimbursement rate.
Can you move it along yes I'm
sorry seven bills so just give
us the high point okay that that
this is the this is the high
point this gets a staff that we
otherwise they're not going to
be able to get the other key
high point and thank you madam
chair for doing that as you know
I get carried away and passed it
around this
the the other key point is we're
asking for a million dollars and
we're working that out through
the finance and Appropriations
Committee to get the staff
without the staff you can't get
the policies bills we told the
health plans they get a year to
build the policies we do it with
them and then a year we started
forcing and there are penalties
in in Illinois that help thank
god provide five hundred
thousand dollars for one
instance that we don't have that
in here but it's a hundred
dollars and in the federal
government so I I could go on
and on and I just it's page if
you have two seconds and and
doctor Schwartz two seconds
anything else that I left out
and I stand for questions.
Madam chair representative.
My name is Paige to Hamel I am
an attorney in the health care
policy manager with the office
of the superintendent of
insurance hi Ted I would like to
call it a team but it's you know
one person who does not
regulatory compliance for that
health insurance plans network
adequacy utilization management
provider credentialing provider
member grievances ensuring
operational compliance of the
plans
and so I am here to provide
technical assistance for any
questions you have about that
one key aspects of insurance
regulation so if you have any
questions feel free to.
Correct my way.
Representative fortune America's
professor of law from UNM I was
lucky enough to spend forty
years as health helpful
professor at UNM for the last
four years I've been one of the
region's the University of New
Mexico and that's what actually
brought me to this issue in my
role as region I look at it
students coming through the
university and this is the
greatest single problem they
face they have no access to
mental health care and I think
it's the single greatest
impediment to getting
intellectually qualified
students through their own
college years that they don't
have access to this kind of care
you for you for the data and you
see the data of this is
extraordinarily important and
it's a beautifully drafted bill
I think and I'm I'm here to be
able to answer questions that
might be useful to you.
Very much we will go to the
audience anyone in opposition.
If you want to come up and
Monica has the the Mike.
On.
But well madam chair I was
hoping we did that we didn't
want to hear you.
Managers one minute one minute.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore
I'm a registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance plans
and we've had multiple
discussions with the sponsor
regarding this bill and we
appreciate the dialogue that
we've had with the sponsor the
bill continues to be a piece of
legislation that a half opposes
and I need to set the landscape
as much as I can in one minute
the bill is very very difficult
for us to implement and the
reason why it's difficult for us
to implement is something that
you all know how the prior
administration took some actions
that essentially destroyed the
behavioral health provider
networks it is really really
hard to try to build networks to
provide this type of care in New
Mexico and you face that
challenge as you're approaching
this the other thing that I
would point out to the committee
and I don't know if I had the
chance to explain this to the
committee the bill bills with
the health care purchasing Act
which is the state employees and
it deals with the commercial
market but the commercial market
in New Mexico is really only
about fifteen percent of the two
million people that are in New
Mexico so you're controlling or
trying to regulate a very small
portion of the population here
in New Mexico we put a lot of
pressure on the commercial
market makes it very difficult
for us to implement these
provisions for.
Thank you that one minute goes
way too fast.
Maybe you should go to
auctioneer school.
Right now okay okay madam chair
members of the committee.
Go ahead more live shows
registered lobbyist BlueCross
BlueShield New Mexico and I will
try to finish what Brandt was
trying to say but we stand in
opposition for the same reasons
as a hip we have been working
with the sponsor we feel that
will be able to make some
changes in the bill are hopeful
that will make it easier to
administer we absolutely support
stronger access however we are
concerned that the bill is
written well it tends to improve
access to those benefits to all
it is likely at the cost of our
small commercial insurance
market and in addition limits
our ability to negotiate fair
reimbursement rates to providers
on behalf of our membership Blue
Cross supports mental health
parity and increased access to
services but we are still
concerned with several
provisions and will continue to
work with the sponsor thank you.
Yes please come for.
Madam chair of my name is Larry
Martinez I'm a registered
lobbyist for per year in medical
services I wish to speak in
favor of the bill
it is excuse the the committee
substitute one moment please.
So we're still in a position and
that I will call for speaking in
favor is there anyone else in
opposition to the bill.
So if you'll excuse me we're
gonna go to June first and then
we'll come back to you so is
there anyone on zoom who is in
opposition to this bill if so
please raise your hand.
All rights in the hands please
drive you may proceed all those
in favor of in support of the
bill thank you madam chair and
up members of the committee
again my name is Larry Martinez
I'm a registered lobbyist for
Presbyterian medical services
we're probably we are the
largest behavioral health
outpatient provider in the state
the only organization that
really survive the two thousand
thirteen audit and we understand
and recognize the need to get
people into behavioral health as
soon as possible without any
obstacles we're a federally
qualified health center we turn
no one away due to inability to
pay but we cannot indoor and the
patients come out and do were a
delayed through prior
authorizations or any other
restrictions in terms of
securing behavioral health care
when you got suicidal
individuals in addicted people
they need immediate relief and
immediate treatment so we stand
in very strong support of the
committee substitute for Senate
bill two seventy three thank
you.
is this house bill.
It's it's good to see him madam
chair it's house bill two sixty
in the Senate it's two seventy
three thank you for this and
more bill.
Yes you may thank you.
So I don't have to hold
anything.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and members of the committee
Ellen pods representing the
disability coalition I made a
bit of a disadvantage because I
haven't seen the so but I have
seeing the original bill and
earlier versions before it
became the original bill and
work with Dr Hickey Senator
Hickey on this we at the
disability coalition recognized.
Excuse me recognize the
difficulties people have with
accessing behavioral health care
we really applaud the senator
for his.
Commitment and ongoing efforts
and we are to support this
measure thank you.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee Jim Jackson here
for disability rights New Mexico
and in the interest of time I'll
just note that increasing access
to mental health services is
really critical issue that this
bill addresses and we encourage
your support of the bill thank
you thank you is there anyone
else in the audience to speak in
support.
Of this bill.
Okay if not we're going to the
zoom if there's anyone on zoom
who's here to speak in support
of the bill please raise your
hand and you will have one
minute to speak we're first
going to Santa Maria Alva Rado.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Kathy Romero I am representing
the National Alliance on mental
illness it this morning and on
the stand in full support of
this legislation we are not
concerned with the fact that
some of the insurance companies
are worried about access to
implement anything that we can
do to increase access for those
with mental illness in the
interest of time Madam chairman
members of the committee I stand
behind all of the individuals
Martínez Ellen by Jim Jackson
for expressing their support
legislation and express my
appreciation to Senator Katie
for being in the sport thank you
madam chair members of the
committee.
Thank you very much we're going
to.
Oscar Simpson.
Thank you.
In a numbers.
Many offices three making
individual Albuquerque New
Mexico.
Of health care.
New Mexico is in dire need of
health care services and I urge
you to support this thank you
very much.
All right thank you very much
we're going to Barbara Webber.
Good morning members of the
committee of Adams chair of
licensure
my name is Barbara Webber
executive director Health Action
New Mexico where a health
advocacy organization five years
ago we work for the website in a
public education campaign that
someone awarded after awhile
that we were able to reach
people so the library system
across the state with meetings I
have never seen so many people
turned out for a meeting and it
was on health parity most people
had no idea what mental health
parity was they were very
excited about it but we do know
that our state and have the
means to enforce the parity
under the federal legislation
we're excited to see this
legislation coming forward I
have a son who is as a mental
health issues and addiction
issues he signed up for a new
plan on the exchange that member
services manager not offer one
Montoya health referral on its
website for the members when you
called the call when he called
for service he was referred to
the person abilities she gave me
two referrals to psychologists
one only treated timers and one
only treated HIV these are the
very first of people ace
everyday so we really appreciate
this is a real going forward
because we think it was T. as in
policy in eliminating the
barriers to people with federal
assistance to some people up
issues facing New Mexico we
stand against strong support as
well.
Thank you.
We're never going to Dianne
****.
Yes morning Mr chairman members
of the committee and I am costs
and representative that will can
we talk because of the New
Mexico we strongly strongly
supported this L. and my
apologies I have not looked at
as the two seventy three
however we support activity
I want to also talk to you about
my experience with this
we just got access to any kind
of my son
my son is in college for that so
experiences so very mental
health issues that arose during
that we cannot.
There simply isn't already there
and what we're going through
what insurance just access to
good mental health care and
treatment at there just aren't
enough providers and whether
there are.
We are authorizations and we had
to get out of it.
Cater to this I I really
personally for this or this and
and I know that my office us
thank you.
Thank you.
We are in very strong.
The sale is huge in order to
help us attract new providers to
New Mexico thank you.
Thank you.
The the further hands on this
I'm going to the committee
Representative Kate.
Thank you madam chair ready and
and thank you a doctor Senator
Hickey and so you're you're
you're it insouciance some for
the solution is a is the
wonderful and I appreciate you
understand as a doctor what is
needed but also somebody who has
put together insurance plans I
wanted to think Representative
doing the pop from the hill as
well for bringing this the the
the the bringing this bill to
this house I'm the only question
I have to ask is.
I believe the the the the ask
was for one point five million
and now it's one million why.
madam chair and Representative
Kate
As you'll learn in your tenure
here
Being able to to get money to
support bills is often very
difficult
and
this is kind of a a bare bones
start it's a start it will grow
but I agree that we could
Representative we've got six
person ideally above maybe to
have nine or ten because in when
this really gets crime it's a
huge paradigm change but we want
to get the start going over one
to get the support of the
appropriations and finance folks
which we do now.
Thank you very much madam chair
and and Representative I I do
appreciate I I remember when our
behavioral health programs
across the state were devastated
and it's nearly a decade later
and we're still reaping the
outcomes of that and so thank
you for your app to see.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair that's a
very good question adequate is
me means that is going to meet
the needs of the community and
right now virtually no insurers
meeting the needs of the
community so you know there are
several motivators for an
individual would go to the
community but when you can make
almost twice as much money in
Texas Colorado Arizona there's
no good reason necessarily to
come to New Mexico and this bill
through its requirements and
reimbursement will raise that up
so that we are more than
competitive with those other
states I know there's some help
coming in Medicaid but it's
nowhere near the impact of
financial reimbursement that
this bill will have and then we
will have the OSI working with
insurers saying okay we see that
you don't have providers there
what are you doing to get them
their let me see your rates they
have that authority and they and
then they'll compared to other
places and they say well no
one's going to come here you
have to raise your rates so it's
going to be a process over a few
years to be able to get to that
adequacy but that is one of the
main tools to get to network
adequacy.
Thank you very much Madam chair
of the yes that would be really
important this of course is not
the only way to address these
problems of the problems I've
seen are with people who've
shown up at UNM of course I
would hope that we would be able
to deal with many of those
problems if there were adequate
wellness programs before that
you want to see those programs
in high school you want to see
them in middle school you want
to see them in elementary school
as far as that goes that is
really important that oh oh by
and large the treatment will be
available to people of all age
groups if in fact into when they
have insurance they can be
assured that treatment will be
available for them so this is
one step toward solving this
problem it is the only it isn't
the only thing that can be done
it is the only thing that should
be done but it is really
urgently need.
Thank you madam chair
Representative experts I I
appreciate everyone who's worked
on this because it's.
We're all in agreement that we
have such needs here in New
Mexico but I have a couple of
questions I hope there's a quick
and easy answer for
How can we make this easier to
implement I mean that seems to
be their resistance or the the
the issue how how can we make it
easier to implement very simply
the failings in other states as
they did not appropriate
sufficient staff to implement
the bill to work with the health
plans oversee and once the
plants get their documentation
in place and we're giving them
that grace period
then comparing complaint that
comes in has to be investigated
and so as that gets investigated
as we find these barriers either
they eliminated or they will be
facing funds.
Another thing how will Madam
chair representative how will.
How will this bill make it
access easier for those who are
a danger to themselves those who
are at risk of suicide that for
the urgent care that they would
need I'm I'm so glad you brought
that up and I know I'm trying to
be sure here we had a compelling
family story about a suicide and
I talked to the family and they
said that that that their son
who had suicidal ideations
frequently had that's number of
visits and they ran out of the
visits any had more ideation and
they tried to get the prior
authorization couldn't in that
individual unfortunately took
his own life and so this
basically when the family knows
there's that there I mean knows
that there's an ideation they
mediate they can go to the
emergency room if they have to
there is the what nine eight
eight line there are various
groups who have opened no call
us and we'll get you help so yes
it needs to be instantaneous.
So thank you for that thank you
madam chair and representative
so if we if we pass this
legislation how likely is it
that we continue to work with
insurance companies to fix any
issues that are in in the way of
implementing properly we have
been interested time page would
love to answer but I'm going to
answer for she is an expert she
is one of the leading experts
now in the country she knows to
kind of staff to hire we are
going to hire those staff we're
going to put in place we will we
will keep moving towards it the
health plans have a huge lift to
write these policies and adapt
to it so basically we will have
the staff there that enforces it
and and once you start enforcing
it the other insurance companies
go there serious I have lived I
I have run insurance companies
at different points in my life
and if I know regulation can't
be enforced we pretty much
ignored it if I know I'm going
to get hit on it with the
complaints and the it's in
federal law about the complaints
but we're doing that here in New
Mexico they're going to get
they're gonna get hit on it and
pretty soon they're going to go
okay we have to make this
paradigm shift and actually
create the access and the irony
is I don't have time here I'd
love to show you the papers from
element you actually is ensure
and I know this I run these
businesses you make more money
by getting access to behavioral
health because when you have a
behavioral health condition and
a chronic condition or two or
three on top of that with the
behavior health condition
unstable the cost of the chronic
disease goes up three to four
fold you stabilized it comes
back down you do the net net
they're going to make money.
I I you know I can relate to
that from a nursing perspective
the you can't you can't peace
out an individual there's not a
mind and body you know you know
the special season and that
people are are one unit that you
can't you can't separate so I do
understand that what is the
chance Madam chair
representative
I'm not an insurance expert by
by far but I'm learning and so
I'm just concerned about that
small number of people who are
in private insurance are they
going to be paying our huge
premiums to to pay for these
services no the services are
mandated they're already being
paid for their covered so
there's no extra payment.
And and there are to do we have
any individual insurance
policies left in the state
individual single person.
What in the end of it.
Yeah I mean most everyone's
under a plan.
And L. or they're in the market
place.
It is it possible for me to ask
somebody in the audience who.
For their opinion about that
because I see I see people who
are disagreeing with that.
Okay well I'm not even sure how
to say it but I our expert our
insurance experts
Read more could it could you
could you just talk about your
perspective of that question.
Don't know Madam chair
representative Jones.
I'll try to project yes there's
is still an individual market
market coverage and that those
policies can be purchased on the
insurance exchange the insurance
exchange offers individual
coverage it also offers small
group coverage so there is it is
a very small market and and my
point to the committee and just
emphasized the pressure that's
being put on the commercial
market by bills like this it's
extreme and there's not a lot of
folks in that area and with this
bill another bills you just
increase the pressure that is
borne by private pay by those
commercial market so there is it
is a very small market and built
like this just make it more
challenging I hope that answers
your question I think it does
thank you and yeah it there has
to be solutions I just know that
and I I don't I think as long as
we keep working together and
There has to be this is one of
the issues that was came up over
and over again during my
campaign and I know how
important it is to address
mental health so I appreciate
all the work.
Toward that.
And so thank you very much okay.
Madam chair and and Mr as I know
now exactly which talk about I
will give you my phone number
I've done this because of some
people.
It in self insured that don't
get coverage but actually this
bill federally require self
insured to be covered so out of
that I was sent to the office
okay great thank you I'm glad to
finally meet you to and I I.
Any other questions all right
we'll go to Representative
Ferrary thank you madam chair
I'd like for it do not pass on
house bill's two sixty and I do
pass Committee substitute first
two six HB to sixty thank you
just a second yes Representative
thank you is there any
opposition to the to the motion.
All rights in opposition you
have a do pass madam chair thank
you committee.
We are now on house bill two
sixty seven restricted license
experts.
Do we have a presenter here.
For.
Welcome representative Garcia
would you please introduce your
bill under experts.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee first of all I
would like to introduce my extra
windows to my left the secretary
of transportation Schardin
Clarke.
Of.
Madam chair I'm hopeful to sixty
seven.
Related to driver's license
providing for report by experts.
Used by the more representative
Garcia do you have to experts.
Okay I'm sorry I'm sorry madam
chair as a representative Garcia
mention good morning madam chair
members the committee and
Stephanie Schardin Clarke and
the secretary shin at the
secretariat Tax and
Representative and with me this
morning is tech Gonzales is the
acting director of MVD all right
thank you please proceed
Representative manager apologize
for that how do to sixty I mean
to sixty seven danger driver's
license providing for report by
experts to be used by the motor
vehicle division of the taxation
and revenue department in
addition restricted license
Madam chair of total to sixty
seven streamlines the way motor
vehicle division is able to
evaluate medical and vision
medical and vision record to
determine whether a driver
should be granted licence with
or without restrictions with
that madam chair alternatives to
my experts.
Madam chair members if I can
just a few more of points about
this bill current law provides
for MVD to receive advice from
this obsolete health standards
advisory board that this board
was intended I think at a point
where there was a lot of flux
flux in restricted licenses and
denied license due to health
various health and vision issues
but the board is is not
currently in place and VDS not
been successful in finding
members willing to serve on that
board and the medical envision
standards that MVD uses are well
established in our regulations
so that the board is no longer
necessary in this bill would
just repeal that section the
current law also provides that
MVD can hire medical experts to
review the driver medical
records but limits us to pay
them fifty dollars per hour and
for not more than twenty hours
of work per month we also could
not find any medical experts
were willing to do these reviews
for fifty dollars an hour so
what this bill would do would
allow us to simply rely on the
medical records submitted by the
driver's own doctor who has
reviewed their medical status
and knows their status better
than anyone and and then MVD
will just in a streamlined
manner proceed to approve or
deny the license based on what
is in those medical records
would stand for questions.
We're going to the audience is
there anyone in opposition to
this bill.
Saying that we're going to zoom
is there anyone in opposition to
the bill please raise your hand.
Opposition is there anyone in
the audience who is in support
of this bill.
All rights and all hands I'm
going to the soon is there
anyone on zoom in support of
this bill.
Senator Hemphill we're going to
the audience are the any
questions Representative Kate.
Thank you madam chair at and
representatives I I would like
to make a motion for two packs
that are.
I do have a motion for do passes
there any opposition you have a
two passed congratulations
representative madam chair
committee I apologize for not
recognizing the the witnesses
apologize for that.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you.
We will be with veterans.
We're on house bill two eighty
eight close captioning Act.
That this.
Representative right would you
please introduce your experts
and tells about this chair good
afternoon members
I'm excited to be here on house
bill two eighty eight and I
would like to introduce Johnny
Hooper who is with of the New
Mexico deaf and hearing impaired
Association I think it's called
well I'm on the hearing loss
association America Fenway
captor also on the provision of
the New Mexico commission for
that party here.
Thank you so much Johnny for
being here today
Madam chair and members
house bill two eighty eight is a
bill designed to assist people
who are deaf and hearing
impaired and basically what it
does is it requires that places
of public accommodation or
public
Places of public.
No the word here sorry
of places of public
accommodation display television
programming to provide closed
captioning and basically what
this bill does is it creates
and enforcement through the
attorney general's office we did
do a similar they'll in
Albuquerque and we had code
enforcement the office of the
zoning code enforcement was the
enforcer so basically what this
does is it it makes it a
statewide
Requirement that if there is a
public place and it lists all of
our public places that we could
think of
and what it does it's really a
simple bill what it does is it
requires that they change their
remote on a television screen to
include closed captioning and
there is an enforcement if
people do not or or public
places do not
applied by the bill
people can call and complain
and the attorney general's
office will look into it they
will give them the opportunity
to
to comply and if they don't
comply then there is a fine.
Time would you like to sing
Alexei if you were up you know
it's very beneficial street of
testing it got the jam you know
it's so noisy up you know you go
to a restaurant bars you know
you can't hear but it does not
budget adapter hard of hearing
that that people a budget budget
what every once in a.
You know that goes to put public
places up it's more like a
natural disaster happens
everybody wants to hear what's
happening but let's see yeah you
sometime this can happen the
volume on but thank C. the
captioning what's happening in
oil wealth.
We're going to go to the
audience is there anyone who
stands in opposition to this
bill.
Sen no one I'm going to the.
I'm going to the zoom is there
anyone else stands in opposition
to this bill.
If so please raise your hand.
It's in our hands and opposition
I'm going back to the audience
is there anyone who stands in
support of this bill please come
forward.
And use the microphone and you
have one minute.
Thank you but share and not
members of the committee my name
is Nate thing work with the New
Mexico commission for deaf and
hearing and I hear from
individuals all car state about
this need.
Since about nineteen ninety
three really all TV's have the
ability to enable captions
it's just been a lack of falter
on individuals on their behalf
to actually turn them on
when asked more often people
don't do and the issue is that
individuals like Mr Hooper when
they go and say can I have the
captions turned on they don't
term on they have no Avenue to
address a.
And you can go through the
federal process but that's a on
average three year process.
So Mister Hooper goes to the gym
goes can I have the captions on
they say no no yes to wait three
years to get somebody to help
them we're trying to expedite
that process but it's also
really simple things captions on
TV's have been around since
nineteen ninety three
in my lifetime and I was in DC
during nine eleven and I was act
out at university and I was not
on campus now we all know what
happened on nine eleven there is
a awful tech in the Pentagon.
CNN is on there talking about it
I'm trying to figure out what's
going on I do have a hearing
loss I don't know really what's
going on until I get to my
university where they have the
captions on and I have people
who side to me.
The idea of driving with
military vehicles going to DC.
Is scary.
Captions are essential for a lot
of banks especially for
individuals with a hearing loss
for we don't know what's going
on we turn the TV we can
understand what's going on.
That's not really a fair thing
is not really an equitable
thing.
So for individuals like us just
something as simple as enjoyment
two or late breaking news thank
you very much we appreciate your
comments.
Well.
If.
And madam chair members of the
committee Jim Jackson for
disability rights New Mexico
this really is a simple bill
about providing equal access to
people who are have a hearing
impairment or who are deaf we've
all you know we've all had the
experience of being in the gym
or at the airport or whatever
and the TV is on and it's
typically not closed captioning
and so some segments of our
community don't have access to
that I'd also just point out
this is another really good
example to me of accommodations
for people with disabilities
that turned out to be really
helpful for people who don't
have disabilities you know we we
the ADA provides for equal
access into buildings and that
turns out to really be helpful
not only for people who are in
wheelchairs but your update a
parent with a kid in a stroller
you got your hands full of
groceries or whatever these
kinds of excess things are
helpful actually we will be on a
just people but with
disabilities but this does
provide that opportunity for
equal access I think it's
important and it's just and it's
straightforward it doesn't cost
anything as Mr Gomes pointed out
all TV's have the at capacity
for this captioning we just want
to make sure that it's available
to everybody thank you thank you
Mr Jackson.
One speaking.
Anyone else speaking in support
of this legislation.
If not we're going to the system
anyone speaking in support of
the legislation please raise
your hand.
I see that I am a cash.
There needs I don't have a lot
of the data that I really
support this bill it would help
me and I'm in a public cater the
people I talk about like you
know are they you can you can't
hear and I can do to that
agreement after or anything like
at four in New rating is
important for people to be able
to hear yeah I thank you for
reading it.
Representative right now.
Thank you.
We'll go to the committee of any
questions Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this forward in your great
expert I think this is a great
Thing to do but I was wondering
if you had seen the suggestion
by the office of the Attorney
General
suggesting that instead of the
well to amend the definition of
place of public accommodation.
I mean any establishment that
provides our offers its services
facilities accommodations or
goods to the public but does not
include a bonafide private club
or other place for staff
Leishman that is by its nature
and use distinctly private.
Have you considered that
Madam chair and Representative
Ferrary I did see that and I am
happy to add that as a friendly
amendment to you know if we need
to I think we try to list
everything.
That we could possibly think of
that was a public place but if
we need to add that as a
friendly amendment we can if
that's your choice.
would you mind doing that in
your next committee or is are we
are second
no you're my first actually I
think if you would consider
doing that for years and be
happy to add that as a.
After all of these are that are
listed I would be happy to add
that madam chair.
Thank you.
That's.
Thank you Representative Kate
Upton.
Thank you madam chair and
Committee I I would like to make
most for do pass usually the
program over there we go to
Representative Jones.
Thank you madam chair
representative and experts say
all of you being here and I
certainly understand what you're
trying to do here and I'm very
supportive of it I mean I've
been busy loud places where I
could hear what was going on
either and I think they're in
some ways we would all benefit
from that I I do have some
questions though about the way
the way this is worded
you have on a page three line
sixteen television program means
any recorded media that has
audio and visual components and
is displayed on a television
receiver so I'm on the one hand
it looks like you're focusing in
on television which would be
fairly easy to do because like
you said that they all have that
ability to have captions now is
just hitting a button but
there's other wording in here.
That makes it sound like okay on
the next page any other
technology capable of displaying
coat closed captioning.
For a television program
That there I don't know where
I've lost it now but but it
expands it out a little further
than that and I'm I'm not
zeroing in on it right now but I
go I'm concerned that it would
it would apply to any media that
is on the screen even if it's
not television and it might
require the owner to to add
invest in some kind of either
software or and that sort of
thing in order to comply and not
be
violating this legislation and
madam chair representative Jones
the intent is for televisions so
if there's wording that is
unclear we can
eliminate that now because that
is really the intent is only
for televisions.
okay if I have and I think if
it's in the record that it's
only televisions I think that
that is really the intent of
this.
And I could I'm gonna give you
an example madam chair and
representative a couple of
nights ago I was watching the
news with my mom at ten o'clock
my mom is ninety six years old
and she couldn't hear she does
she has a hearing problem and so
all I did is said mom give me
your remote I changed it to
closed captioning and she was
like oh I can see what they're
saying now so it was really that
simple okay I did find that you
have an exception and so he had
to say except when the
television receiver is not
technologically able to display
closed captioning so there are
some exceptions I do appreciate
that
but I will say I'm also not in
favor of legislating this at
with a
with a fine
I would much moral I would like
to see it promoted big time so
that everyone just does it you
know like there is promotion to
wear seat belts I mean eat even
though yeah we do get fines now
but even in the beginning it was
just something that we socially
we wanted to be a movie I would
love that because I think we all
would benefit from it so I don't
like the fines and madam chair
and and Representative may
address that in Albuquerque we
give them
time to change that they're
given a notice and this is a
similar bill people are given a
notice but if but there are some
people who do not follow the
rules and we know that those bad
players unfortunately there's
got to be something that
requires that they do this and
so that is why we're doing that
we are doing a similar thing
with this bill is we're giving
them the opportunity and it
could be up to really the AG's
office to give them several
chances but there.
Has to be some sort of
enforcement for.
And there are other states in
the country we are actually
following some other states in
the country that are are doing
the similar
a similar thing.
Thank you madam chair and
representative do you know how
many other states I'm just
curious.
I counted three.
Thank you very much thank you
were going to Representative
veterans thank you madam chair.
And just as a full disclosure
after twenty five years of
sirens and ambulances and fire
trucks I keep closed caption on
in my house because I'm.
My hearings okay but not real
good and sometimes I need to
follow follow up with some
closed captioning.
I guess what troubles me is
people wouldn't do it.
If you ask them to do it.
And the reason I don't like it
is because I don't like I don't
like the regulation side and I
was just sitting here listening
to the testimony and I'm
thinking of all the businesses
in my district that wouldn't do
it if you asked and I can't
think of one.
And if there was one.
And I knew of one that you asked
and they didn't do it I would
spend my money there ever again.
So I'm empathetic with your with
your legislation here I just
don't like it to have punitive
to punitive damages as far as as
of the regulations side of the
bills and I had a couple of
questions have there been
multiple repeat instances where
he somebody told you know.
madam chair and representative
Vincent I can only speak to you
about when we enforce this in
Albuquerque New most people are
very compliant there are not
many instances that I can say
people did not comply so I think
when when they are
you know asked repeatedly then
as I mentioned earlier to
Representative Jones I think
that there does have to be some
kind of sort of slap on the hand
that this needs to happen
because everybody deserves equal
and fair
accommodation across the board
whether it be hearing impaired
or some other form of
compliance.
Thank you madam chair
Representative the last thing
that I had was.
I wish we could do something.
Where we as a group could put
something forward to if somebody
did deny you that.
We should shame them into doing
it and because I would be
shameful if you come to my
business.
And you couldn't hear the TV and
I and I denied you access to
closed captioning that should be
shameful.
And hopefully everybody hears
and listens to that because that
is troubling to me.
thank you madam chair members of
and and Representative and since
I think what's important is that
there is a process for actually
if people have been
discriminated against there is a
a process both statewide and
federal.
Thank you madam chair thank you
we're going to Representative
Ferrary again thank you madam
chair on that point people
shouldn't have to ask for ADA
accommodations there's a stigma
attached to that and if people
already have that no matter who
the person is they shouldn't
have to ask madam chair and
representative and I also just
on the point I made before about
you know the
Definition.
That was suggested by the
attorney general's office that
would replace all of the.
different listings not added to
it because that way if you don't
list something then they can
come back and say we don't have
to do it we're not included so
that statement they the Attorney
General and I was suggesting you
amend to would be all inclusive
and then you wouldn't miss
anyone so if we could work on
that that would be great thank
you madam chair thank you thank
you Representative Ferrary.
That.
This that that.
Providence detention would be
excluded anyway so it would be
great for you to put that in the
field.
All right is there any anyone
else.
I that will accept the motion I
was gonna ask you to repeat what
you just said what institution
would be I just said that a
private club a private
institution would be excluded.
Is that too I have a lot of move
to the to pass.
A second motion for is there any
opposition.
All right in opposition you have
a due process.
Thank you Representative.
With more on house bill two
ninety three analyze health care
costs drivers.
Which.
It
morning madam chair members of
the committee.
Happy to bring to the federal
took place here.
I'm happy to bring to you House
Bill to ninety three which is
simply asking for an
appropriation thanks to a
representative to do so so
people who may not know who you
are well thank you very much I
thought everybody knew who it
was I just I knew they had my
number.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is a state
representative Christine
Trujillo out of house district
twenty five.
May twentieth yes I am bringing
a simple appropriations bill to
study the Legislative Council
Service.
We tried to get.
I lost my train left without me.
I'm making a point that we're
trying to make an appropriation
to the Legislative Council
Service to hire a contractor to
analyze health care costs
drivers analyze the feasibility
of applying for the New Mexico
health care system methods for
managing those drivers and
report findings and
recommendations of my co sponsor
is Rep the chairwoman Elizabeth
Thompson who is not here to save
my life.
But.
madam chair if I if I may I'd
like to share with you some of
the issues that I believe are.
And you've heard of the zillion
times and this committee that
health care is through the roof
the cost of health care is
through the roof and there isn't
anything that man is helping to.
Currently to mitigate all those
costs so what we're trying to do
is trying to figure out where
the problem is is that is that
the hospitals is that the
provider of health care
providers
What what is the what's the
issue with the the current state
of affairs in which we have.
People who cannot afford health
care why not and we'd like to
study that madam chair.
And that questions.
Is there anyone who is in
opposition to this bill.
Right I'm going to film is there
anyone on zoom who stands in
opposition to this bill.
I see Oscar Simpson after the
lower your hands right I'm going
back to the.
After your hand up in
opposition.
Yes also can you are muted and.
Tribal.
This
spans.
Or the sales are Sir O. okay so
I'm going back to the audience
is there anyone in support of
this bill please come forward
and you have one minute to
speak.
I see for three people.
Good morning members of the
committee my name is Mary
Feldblum I'm a social scientist
I also in the executive director
Health Security for New Mexicans
Campaign and as Representative
Trujillo says we really have to
get our arms around rising
health care costs if we don't
we're going to see all these
wonderful programs as some of
you are have built to see happen
will continue to increase in
their costs so I urge you to
allow this bill to be passed so
you can figure out some
solutions thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair committee Steve said
I'm a lobbyist for the New
Mexico Academy of Family
positions and they do fully
support this bill and they thank
the sponsors for bringing it.
Madam chair members the
committee I'm Dale tanker I
represent New Mexico pharmacists
Association and.
I I know that we have a lot of
conversations about
pharmaceutical costs it's and it
permeates the health care system
but I don't think many people
understand what drives those
costs it is very complex I think
most people don't understand the
rebates and how those affect
what what medicines are on
formularies what is driving the
health care system so I think
this is bill is critical we need
to understand what the costs are
so we can address how to fix
that thank you.
Thank you.
And madam chair if you'll
indulge me to have an expert
witness on line drive page who
is an economics.
Master.
That would maybe be able to say
a few words if you if you would
like for him to yes I will go to
the doctor P. two now.
DrPH.
What do you want me you've.
And I will go back to those who
hit your hands raised in support
of the bill so you will get you
will have an opportunity to
speak semester fee to go ahead.
I'm.
The.
This is an economics in New
Mexico State University I've
been involved in health care
legislation a long time.
And.
I think this is a very good
details
A small costs you're likely to
save millions in the future
there's little hope of trying to
contain costs without knowing
which driving those costs.
And to prevent a possible
question I have no interest
in conducting the dissenting.
What is it that.
Thank you.
Thank you doctor Pete.
All right I'm going back to this
if there were those who would
like to speak in support of the
legislation please raise your
hand again okay Oscar Census.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee also
has earned.
C. operator connection hello.
In.
Problems we need to figure out
what the problems are everybody
is yes I I hope because you
really support this because
thank you will never change
unless we get to the root of the
problem thank you very much
thank you.
And we're going to I cannot pet.
That's correct are you able to
you.
Can you hear me now.
Yes we can hear you.
Chair members of the committee.
Act making for the.
We strongly support this bill.
We.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr.
I'm going to the committee now
committee members are there any
courses Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this forward we do need this
kind of support in are interim
health and Human Services
Committee
we do try to do deep dive
research but with this kind of
funding I think it will help a
lot so thank you for bringing
this for.
Thank you Representative John
thank you madam chair
Representative Trujillo so do
you know how the LESC will
conduct the study with a higher
out to enter another
organization.
Madam chair and members of the
committee and Representative
Jones the the goal is to have
them contact out.
And the try to conduct the study
I have been at that we've been
working on this since the summer
in the health and Human Services
Committee and of the issue of
concern was simply to try to
ensure that we had.
That that we were able to do a
deep dive into what those cost
drivers were and the I have a
text to RubyAnn.
is given who is one of the LFC
analysts that's helped with many
of these things and that she
hasn't responded back but I but
the the intent was to try to
contract out to to do that thank
you madam chair representative
have you have do you know of
other states that have done
similar studies and and that.
Looked in the house how that's.
I believe that.
Where is.
May I invite Mary Feldblum to
speak to that
Madam chair of.
Representative Jones different
states have done different
pieces of this puzzle.
some of them have on authorities
and commissions that have
contracted out to look at
alternative systems and then
others have looked at more
specifically of specific issues
that are driving health care
costs and there are lots of
examples that I think that the
consultants could present to the
health and Human Services
Committee to look at
alternatives that's the ideas to
speak out of the box it's good
to know yes we do I may I add
something to that just I didn't
do it during the preceding
comments that I made but but
there are five issues that have
been already I I don't know if
you've read the statements about
health care cost drivers and
there were five things rising
hospital costs complex health
professional payment and cost
administrative systems creating
stress and burn out of control
drug prices I T. systems that
don't talk to each other and
then different insurance
policies offering different
services and using different
tools those are just some of the
issues of concern and what we
wanna do is.
Gather as much information as
possible to see how we can start
mitigating this.
Yes that that's good information
where did you find that list it
was that in here in all it was a
it was information that I got
from some of my advocate friends
who helped me.
Discuss it we.
I would like to have but I mean
I I don't need it right now.
But thank you I'd like to see at
the
thank you.
Representative thank you madam
chair.
I love those drivers that you
just talked about because I'm
right on board the one of the
drivers that I think was left
out and hopefully through
through this study will pick out
that the the high malpractice
caps is another thing this drive
in in my opinion driving up
health care and and
Fund this study will this if if
the study when the studies
conducted will we get a report
on that yes the goal is to make
sure that the.
That the health and Human
Services Committee as well as
LFC will receive all of the
information that was gathered
and then of course we'll report
it to the committee thank you
madam chair representative how
long does a study last I'm we're
hoping a short term but it could
you know it would have to happen
during the interim and so I
really can't anticipate I'm sure
not more than a year thank you
and Madam chair representative
where once if we.
If we want to know about the
report where would we go to find
it.
Miss madam chair and the
Representative Vincent I'm
assuming that once the.
Both the the LFC and the the H.
H. K. S. committee of complete
and make a determination about
the outcomes of the bill it
would be posted thank you and
one last question madam chair
representative what a what a
study like this pay for itself
no we are seeking a four hundred
thousand dollars appropriation
and I that's why you said
earlier madam chair that I had
double checked with RubyAnn us
better I believe we during the
summer we asked for that
appropriation and she C. trying
to find out if you still have it
in the budget I think it's still
in there.
Madam chair representative let
me rephrase that what a study
like this be a benefit and in a
round about way come back in
even if it paid for itself could
pay for itself through our
customers.
I believe so Mister chair thank
miss madam chair Mister
Representative Vince's thank
you.
That's a lot of money to anyone
else.
Representative Kate.
I'd like to make a motion for to
pass a second from
Representative Travis is there
anyone in opposition.
K. state line you have a two
passed thank you and I didn't
smother you have kids might be.
With one eye open.
Okay I'm I guess we are I guess
I am going to go sit with
Representative former
representative Armstrong and
present the next bill is.
Okay.
I'm sorry what's important but
hold on.
That that's me I a one.
Representative the pandemic
Texas.
Hey.
Distribution to two members of
the committee that they were not
distributions to the entire
committee and I'm trying to make
sure that that's taken care of.
Thank you very much for your
patience we are on of house bill
five oh one end of life options
exchanges and representative
would you please proceed in
introduce your of your expert
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I came
back just in time Representative
the pants P. as in another
committee but this is former
representative Gabby Armstrong
who was a wonderful chair of
this very committee in the tiny
room and she was the original
sponsor of of that end of life
options bill and something has
come up that is and and I just
have to tell you that you are
lucky that we have passed this
bill because we went through
boxes and boxes of tissues with
the hearing from people about
their end of life story so I
with that I will let my expert
take it away.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and I was just telling madam
chair
kudos for scoring a big room.
This week we're always crammed
in a tiny room.
thank you.
House Bill five oh one make some
slight amendments to the end of
life options act it over it
opens up just one section on
On the immunities and conscious
face decisions to make it really
clear that our no one has to
participate in and of life in
medical aid in dying.
Of if they have reasons of
conscience they don't have to
participate in any way
whatsoever
this so
a
A court cases come up the state
is being sued by national
organization of that thought
that the language wasn't quite
clear enough and that the
provision about our right to
know of we're of the provider is
suppose just tell their
terminally ill patients about
all options and if they don't
want to participate than to
refer them to someone who will
help thing that the information
and and so forth and so those
provisions they they thought
stood out from the the no harm
no disciplinary action or any
other on negative action could
be taken if you're if you did
not want to participate so work
simply clarifying
that.
on page two.
That refusing for reasons of
conscience to participate in
medical aid in dying in anyway
which includes free views and
provide information on medical
aid in dying to a patient and
refusing to refer a patient to
any entity or individual who is
able and willing to assist the
patient in obtaining medical aid
in dying is part of the
shall not be subject to criminal
liability licensing sanctions or
other professional disciplinary
action.
we also made another change that
came up a couple other changes
that came up in the in the
complaint and in paragraph be.
this was no health care entity
professional organization and
health insurance etcetera
etcetera
but they they for professional
organization or association I
thought they should be able to
decide who is or is not can be a
member of that organization and
so all of the things all the
others stay in place that they
can't
take any negative action but a
professional organization or
association could potentially
set up their own criteria for
who is a member
for not.
And then one one more place on
page four at the bottom.
What we simply forgot the or not
participating so participating
or not participating in medical
aid in dying shall not be the
basis of a report of
unprofessional conduct.
and with that I stand for
questions.
Thank you.
At the clarification
Representative.
This is not an amended bill is
that correct.
you madam chair.
Bill this this bill has not been
amended this is an amendment to
existing law all right thank you
very.
Basis we're going to the
audience is there anyone and
stands in opposition to this
bill.
By the nose hands and going to
the zoom is there anyone else
who would listen offices into
the.
Sen no hands there were going
back to the audience is there
anyone who stands in support of
the bill please come forward.
And use the microphone is it
still there.
Where is.
Freddie has.
Hi everyone wanted dances I am
the Medicaid medical director
and Human Services department
supports this bill just a little
background about me I've been a
nurse for fifteen years a nurse
practitioner for nine and I was
a hospice nurse and have worked
in geriatrics and home based
primary care for my whole career
as a primary care providers with
a lot of experience with end of
life care
we want the service to be
available and so we once any
clarifications that need to
happen for the service to be
available for patients thanks
thank you.
Anyone else speaking in support.
Of the legislation.
All right we're going to assume
anyone speaking in support of
the legislation please raise
your hand.
Thus the Diane my cat.
good morning Representative
David
Actually I don't want anymore of
your that
Representative Armstrong
Representative in order for this
at all I.
We we we did it is very easy to
require providers and help your
under the direction towards the
help we need
if you should ever need out here
provided that you kind of
disappointed other the new way
to do that there what I do we
support what are you doing here
and making sure that the and I
like that option that remains in
place thank you.
Thank you there anyone else to
speak in support of the
legislation what we're going to
the committee committee members
if you have any questions
Representative Jones.
Yes thank you madam chair
Representative Representative
Really appreciate this because
there are so many of us and
health care who would never want
to be involved in end of life
care on this level I think we
need a lot of other guard rails
to this bill that I hope that we
see in the future I to have
anyone tell you how many years
I've been a nurse it's been with
a whole decades but I've done
hospice care and so forth and I
a lot of oncology seen a lot of
suffering you know the the the
tears you mention the boxes of
Kleenex it happens in health
care
it's awful and yeah.
Make makes you ask yourself why
you know why these things happen
and I I am so I I really
understand that but I I had one
of the big problems I had with
this bill was it two years two
years ago right when pass was
that there were no guard rails
on and there was no option for
me to
not be involved in it so I
really do appreciate it I think
the problem I had with it then
to was that it I feel like it
changed the relationship a
potential relationship with the
provider and the patient in a
bad way.
Really really appreciate that so
I really don't have any
questions thank you thank you
thank you thank you
Representative Representative
Benson thank you madam chair
representative did you say that
there was an organization that
was suing me.
claim that yes so the the case
is
lacing of the bald Harris and
it's a suit brought on behalf of
a doctor mark Lacey and the
Christian medical and dental
associations the
and
The
Looking for the alliance for
defending freedom is our
representing those on that
provider and that organization
on these issues and it was never
the intent to force anyone to
participate and to protect them
from from
from any adverse actions and and
quite honestly
we thought more about adverse
actions for having participated
but we really didn't intend for
people to have to participate if
they didn't want to so I I'm
comfortable clarifying that in
here that that's that was the
intent thank you and I believe I
hope this addresses all their
their concerns the these were
the specific areas that they
brought forward in their claims
thank you and the request for an
injunction Madam chair
representative.
Does this legislation here does
it
Is it going to prevent that
lawsuit will continue
madam chair and representative I
don't know it hasn't gone to any
hearings yet it's in the very
preliminary stages I'm hoping
that it will just stop it but I
don't know if that will be up to
the up to the court and and if
they change you know as they go
along bring forth more issues or
so forth but I I hope that this
clarifies it the the original
intent thank you Madam chair
representative I read through
this I'm not familiar with.
This kind of legislation.
However could you could you give
me an example of what in life is
is it does it go off of of.
I don't would you just explain
that to your I'm sure this will
the bill was end of life options
act and the intent was for
providers who are dealing with
terminally ill two X. to
to explain and help an
individual decide on what those
what they wanted all the way
from a continuing treatment to
stopping treatment and doing
hospice or palliative care
stopping eating and drinking for
medical aid in dying and and the
the most of the bill was around
allowing medical aid in dying
which allows an individual who
is terminally ill and competent
to make the decision they have
to make that decision for
themselves can be given out
a compounded prescription.
Medications to
to die peacefully at the time
place of their choosing when
they've got
the death is imminent anyways so
they've got control
of their of the end of their
days and can die peacefully with
their loved ones around them
that's what this bill allows
everything else is already
allowing
that and so this makes it really
clear that if you don't want to
do that.
You don't have to do that and
many people don't we have
Madam chair representative
hospices and hospice providers
to do and are there and
supportive and those are not
doctors at our and doctors that
are in that's okay
so but this particular
protection is about the medical
aid in dying and madam chair it
it goes with the hospice
definition so with when you have
six months or fewer to live.
And Madam chair representative
is it it doesn't really have an
age limit could be if somebody's
turtle just terminal adult over
eighteen adult eighteen or over
yes so it has to be an adult
it's not something you can give
to your healthcare power of
attorney to decide for you you
have to be competent to make the
decision for yourself and
yourself administer so it's not
something that you get in an IV
that the doctor gives you you
have to self administer
you have to ingest it.
which could be or early but it
also could be through a feeding
tube for our even rectally like
an animal but
that you have to self administer
and be competent on the to do
that thank you madam chair just
to add on so you get the
prescription you don't have to
use that some people get it
because they don't know how much
worse the pain is going to get
in if they're going to be able
to tolerate it so frequently
people get the prescription and
then end up not using it
depending on how the disease
progresses can and madam chair
and and Representative I would
say that brings a lot of people
comfort just knowing that they
have that potential to use it
if if it becomes too bad.
and so they don't necessarily
even though they may be talking
about and planning if they need
to and don't alternately do it
probably in New Mexico ninety
eight ninety nine percent of the
people who have used it are on
hospice they're getting a
palliative care and and comfort
care through hospice and this is
just one more
a tool for them to control
how they and their days.
Thank you.
Madam chair representative the
the only thing I want to say is
I I appreciate I do appreciate
the legislation.
And I'm glad that there's people
out there that my conscience and
my my conscience and my belief
system I just would be able to
do it but I'm glad there's
people that are out there that
can give folks the option
because of put a lot of I was
put a lot of my pants which is
our family.
And never thought I'd cry over
dogs and and I have to get off
by myself because it's so sad
you know because it makes you
feel better knowing that they
don't have to be in pain but
when it comes to humans it's
just a different side and I'm
glad that you guys can give that
option so I know it'll probably
pass here but I want to give my
explanation of why I can't do it
thank you.
But back to Representative John.
Yes I because you mentioned it I
wanted to address the six months
to live.
And that that has a lot to do
with I think what in the future
we need to put more guardrails
on this because.
As a hospice nurse.
I had people graduate from six
months to six months to six
months and finally they just
could even qualify for the
program anymore they actually
better which does happen with
hospice patients and so I just
think you know that we just
really need to be careful with
it but I I I understand that's
that's what we're doing
addressing today I'm just saying
I also appreciate your very
careful expo.
The original bill was and this
this fix for for conscientious.
With I'm not.
Being involved so thank you so
much.
thank you at the end of the
questions that we want to
Representative Ferrary for the
motion thank you madam chair and
thank you nice to see you thank
you.
I just would like to move for it
to pass.
On house bill five oh one.
Thank you is there any
opposition.
But to call the roll please.
Representative Kate.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Jones.
Representative offensive.
Respectfully no.
vice chairman yes.
And your Thomson yes.
I.
Vote of seven in the affirmative
and wanted the bacon if you have
a new password Representative
jobs to explain her vote yes
thank you madam chair I just
wanted to do to be clear that I
wouldn't have voted for the
original bill but I do vote for
this so thank you so much thank
you.
Should that congratulations
thank you.
Representative Thompson are you
in the next few.
It's a House Bill five thirty
nine what's the title the title
is public peace health state and
local okay actually I'll get up
there and explained.
Instead of the.
See YA.
I know so so I will just quickly
explain kind since we have so
many freshmen you've probably
heard the term dummy bill which
is a bill that has that gets
introduced in case something
emergency comes up so this is my
dummy bills that representative
Chavis requests to use and so we
will have a committee substitute
and so with that I will
entertain a motion to discuss
the committee substitute.
Okay second.
Okay any opposition okay go
ahead thank you madam chair
members of the committee
this committee substitute
addresses the issue of case the
founders at of children youth
and families department as we
all know New Mexico was
consistently among the poorest
performing states in the nation
with regard to child
maltreatment.
New Mexico K. those are also
among the highest in the nation
hi K. those contribute to high
turn to high worker turnover
resulting in a failure to
provide quality services to
abuse and neglect of children
this bill proposes to analyze
caseloads taking into
consideration our New Mexico's
urban and rural settings time
spent with children and families
and it will include frontline
workers community stakeholders
and others who are vested in
positive outcomes for kids this
bill strived strived to create a
model standard of care for New
Mexico which I believe will lead
New Mexico to begin to do what
we all want to protect our
children I do have an expert
witness with me who will also
speak about more details about
the bill Catherine Courtney and
I'll pass could introduce
yourself and talk a little bit
about who she is and why she's
here thank you good morning
Madam chair representative I'm
doctor Catherine or Kate
Courtney with the NMAG institute
at New Mexico State University
for the prevention of.
I was I'm also a former CYFD
employee and this bill is
important for several reasons.
One of the largest is that
caseload is absolutely one of
the root causes of worker
turnover at CYFD overwhelming
caseloads and burn out is very
related to turnover and we.
Two point K. outcomes so this is
absolutely vital
it is absolutely important to
not just look at caseload as a
generic term caseload and Juan
County can mean something very
significantly different in
another county so if you have
twelve cases where the needs are
pretty low and you're just
referring people to services
that looks different than
caseloads where there's intense
needs for services that are
available in the community
intense oversight of the case
and that nature of things so K.
loan means different things in
different counties it's
important to look at what the
specific needs are in each
community as well as what the
needs of the types of worker are
so in some states actually they
have teams that was that support
permanency planning basis versus
just having one worker that's in
charge of meeting all the needs
of all the cases of this bill
will look at specific needs as
well as specific case loads and
that is absolutely vital the
other piece that is important in
this bill is that this is done
by an external agency other than
CYFD so this funding will go to
I'm sorry First funding
provided Legislative Council
services to be provided to of
either university or an external
entity with expertise in case
load analysis and social work as
well as being able to provide an
unbiased report so that the
needs can be stated truly from
the communities from the focus
groups from the workers they can
speak Freeling and get their
actual needs reported back to
both the LFC as well as CYFD so
this bill is a great first step
towards actually addressing some
of the root causes of problems
at CYFD.
And with that manager was sent.
Okay we will go to the audience
anyone here in opposition.
Okay anyone on zoom in
opposition.
Okay seeing line back to the
room in support if you want to
come up and now Monica has the
microphone so
Please try to limit it I want to
look at it time unless you start
getting all I won't take too
long Madam chair of Josh
Anderson with asked me Council
eighteen we represent CYFD
workers here in the state of New
Mexico both in the facilities
and the case workers and social
workers with CYFD and I can say
that when we speak to our
members of caseloads is is
pretty much the number one issue
that comes up that we have so
many folks that are literally
just a kind of treading water
it's just so hard to get ahead
because they keep the cases keep
coming in and a lot of that has
to do with the short staffing so
we want to thank the sponsor for
bringing this forward and also
want to thank other members the
legislature on both sides of the
aisle there's been a lot of
bills introduced this session to
look at how we can make sure
CYFD is functioning of not just
for the children but of course
for the workers and of course I
want to recognize and thank the
governor for the executive order
that came out last third
Thursday on and the cabinet
secretary on how we can tackle
this problem as well so I think
there's a lot of good ideas
going around but this is a good
first step on how we can manage
the caseload so we can make this
department work better again for
the workers and for the children
and we urge your support thank
you madam chair.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
Representative my name is
Maryland back I'm the executive
director of New Mexico child
first network we stand strongly
in support of this bill it's
become one of our endorsed
priority bills
we've been before you on
everything Committee session I'm
talking about take a cue crisis
going on with faster Karen C.
lefty we thank the sponsors for
bringing this forward we know
how many hours have gone into
working to create this bill
before you I'm this is a real
solution oriented bill but is
looking at root causes and
coming to you with immediate
relief we we really we know how
many hours they spent how many
reversions it's gone back and
forth but again this is a true
solution but will bring forth
licensed social workers who are
trauma informed and really help
provide immediate relief to our
car art type of assistance and
crisis so we thank the sponsors
and and thank you.
On soon we have Karen candidate.
Members of the committee and a
with the national association of
social workers and we stand and
strong support of this
legislation we really believe
that looking at this from an
outside entity with objective
and trauma and with an objective
and trauma informed plans will
be able to help CYFD and it is
truly helps right after the
because of those two
interactions
with their issues with K. was
under such orders are just
overwhelmed and they really need
is an account that you get thank
you very much thank you Karen C.
no one else we will go to the
committee for questions.
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this forward and thank you
doctor Courtney I think you
forgot to mention how you are
that it would be an eight eight
institute at NMSU so we're so
glad to see you
my question is about the two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
is this
already in the budget I don't or
is it coming out of the
governor's support for CYFD
Madam chair representative it is
not in the budget no we are
working on the Senate side to
get this.
The money include.
Okay thank you and good luck
with that I think it's something
that I didn't mean that
sarcastically but you know I
really truly help we can do that
so okay thank you very much.
That's all Madam chair
representative thank you madam
chair.
And representative.
Is CYFD supporting this madam
chair representative I did reach
out to see with the to let them
know that the bill would be a on
our agenda today I
sent I called and I sent an
email and I did not hear back.
So madam chair representative in
your in your opinion do you
think they would support
something like this for now
Madam chair representative I
don't want to speak for them but
I certainly hope that they would
I think that this bill is again
beneficial to CYFD we've got to
get a better sense of what a
caseload should look like and we
need to spend the turnover at
CYFD we just have got to build a
better foundation.
Thank you in.
Madam chair representative you
think that the department could
commit to reducing caseloads.
Madam chair representative there
they have to.
Understand.
And Madam chair representative
what what are the qualifications
to work in the field CYFD.
Madam chair representative
while.
That is
that's a huge question and
something that I've actually
been concerned about I don't
know if if the if you know
Representative Matt madam chair
that I I do have a and S. W.
from the university of
Washington I did spend almost
ten years as a CPS worker both
in investigations and back back
then it was called treatment now
I think it's called permanency
planning so I have a you know
very good sense of you know what
the agency is about
and I think you forgot your
question all right that's all
right madam chair out and I'm
not trying to stumble you the
only thing I'm trying to do is
get my my head wrapped around
CYFD hello
okay requests are you yes about
the qualifications I was I I
went on the on the website my.
I was informed
by a niece of mine who's also
holds an MSW from hi this
university that she received
of some information via social
media that you don't need to
have a degree anymore if you
just were interested and have
some experience working with
people come on down so I I
looked at the website and I was
appalled to learn that you don't
need to have a social work
degree so work at at CYFD and
there were some areas if I'm
remembering correctly where you
could have a high school degree
and and experience I want to go
back and look at that again
because like really couldn't
believe what I was seeing so it
is you know when I left
it was a bit different you did
have to have a degree and at
that point in time the state was
under a consent decree of the
ACLU consent decree and they
were able to state was able to
complete all of what they needed
to do they came out from under
and as I understand you know a
few years later things begin to
backslide so I think we do need
Madam chair representative to
look we look at those
qualifications but for now we
have what we have a we need to
address the work force that is
there.
Thank you and madam chair
representative in your opinion.
You think that we that there
they should have a degree.
In that sort of work
representative madam chair I do
okay thank you and I appreciate
that because.
Some of the work that I used to
do on an ambulance you know
they're always like you know the
poor fire guys an ambulance
people what what about the C.
will have the people they have
to see some really bad stuff and
When they put me on this
committee.
I am no expert in CYFD but in
the last thirty days my I think
I'm starting to get a pretty
good feel for CYFD and the
workload that they do have so
one of my other questions that I
wrote down was what degree must
someone have to work
investigations.
Representative I mean Madam
chair representative it go back
to I I at this point in time
it's any degree I believe it's
an experience I you know it's
really I think that CYFD has had
to.
Higher however my opinion right
and I'm I'm not saying that
chair just Representative we
just say that I don't want to
insult any of the workers who
are currently there because I
know they're hard workers and
their heart is in this but we do
need to professionalizing
The profession again thank you
madam chair representative I
don't I don't take that as a bad
thing at all I I think they are
skilled workers but it takes a
like the skill can be here and
skill can be up here and when
you're dealing with things like
that maybe need that skill level
that's up here and we can move
people that direction.
What is the turnover.
Currently you know.
You if you don't have an exact
is a lot it is it is pretty high
and why.
You know we go back to I think
there's a number of reasons one
case loads are the number one
reason Madam chair
representative and it's you know
from what I hear it's a toxic
Environment.
so with the working conditions
are difficult and I think the
other piece madam chair
Representative is we need to
look at pay the cap rate but the
someone who is going to be
working with kids the twenty one
dollars an hour to start in it
and you know they have a degree
so we really need to look at
raising the wages so that we can
attract more people thank you
Representative are thank you
madam chair representative I
appreciate very and transparent
like that because people just
want direction and if the if you
if you have good direction and
you're being paid good.
That will maybe offset a little
bit of what you're having to see
out there in the field and and
that's that would be hard to
tolerate and my hats are off to
people like that and just you
know for me in licking county we
have such a small County
how do we find CYFD people
because we have those problems
as well and you know we want to
support and and get those
frontline workers of all we want
to get on licensed and we want
to get him out there in front of
of the problem so that you know
they're they're helping our kids
so that's all I've got madam
chair thank you thank you I
have.
Representative permitted.
Thank you madam chair just two
quick questions for you with
respect to this bill it was
promulgated after the governor
announced her we organizations
CYFD is that correct
Madam chair representative we
started working on this bill
before.
But is intended to complement
what is happening now that a
reorganization has been
announced Madam chair
representative I believe so yes.
So one of the clarification with
respect to the study what
happens of CYFD doesn't follow
the recommendations is there any
penalty that occurs are any
consequences for not doing so.
Madam chair representative other
than reporting back to you all
we don't have any penalties in
the bill.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative parmi.
Adam chair representative Chavis
thank you so much for bringing
this bill forward it is a piece
of of legislation that working
as a whole because I know there
are many more pieces of
legislation to come forward your
insight given to me from the
social worker background has
really added to my knowledge of
of what reforms need to happen
with CYFD so this is mostly a
statement thank you for your
service and your knowledge in
this area.
Representative Kate.
Thank you madam chair and and
committee I to want to applaud
you for bringing this forward
and that you do you will find
this legislature at data driven
for us to make decisions in the
for a in in the future about the
re organization of CYFD I know
that personally and
professionally K. workers at
CYFD nurses direct care staff
for people with disabilities
have special personalities they
love what they do they get such
satisfaction with what they do
and most business studies even
back to the thirties show that
job satisfaction is the reason
why people stay and I know I've
run programs in the past where
I've hired at CYFD case workers
and I'd never gave them better
benefits I couldn't
and often you know I paid the
same but it was the.
Role in the satisfaction they
had in in their work and I hope
that we can build that and why
this bill provided some data to
be able to set those standards
and so thank you very much.
Thank you seeing no further
questions I need a motion to do
not pass on house bill five
thirty nine but it do pass for
table on
Health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill five thirty nine.
Representative for I do have a
second okay is there any
opposition.
Thank you have a do pass.
And no longer a dummy bills.
The is that.
I'm not exactly sure.
And I have texted Senator
o'neill and let me see how long
ago and have not heard back from
him so.
See we're we're going on the
floor at ten thirty from nine
eleven okay thank you he's
responded.
Okay.
Okay perfect thank you.
So.
Breasts are you freezing at
called also.
Yes.
It's called perspective is for.
Of.
Since the end.
From the back behind the house.
we don't start in levels of.
So I just got a text from.
The senator he said can someone
present if they feel comfortable
I didn't realize I was a very
familiar bill no opposition from
victims or dust my expert
Douglas carvers there is someone
willing to go out there and
started in but let Douglas take
over so we can get it off get it
off are focusing on the on the
way back to okay thank you the
only one Representative Ferrary.
Why madam chair Representative.
We got to keep things moving in
here.
I.
One of.
Twenty.
Thank you.
And just that and.
Reminder for freshman sometimes
if you cannot make it to
somewhere to get a bill you
could just have someone sit in
for you and let the experts do
all the talking so you don't
have to because we cannot be
eight places at one time like
we're supposed to be.
Thank you Representative Ferrary
go ahead thank you madam chair
and this is Senate bill twenty
nine the medical interior after
parole and the bill is to amend
the probation and parole at two
and parole procedures for the
following individuals with
specific definitions and I think
I will go ahead and pass it off
to our expert so that I don't
repeat anything he might want to
say.
thank you Representative thank
you madam chair members of the
committee my name is Douglas
carver and the deputy director
of the New Mexico's sentencing
commission this is a bill that
came out of the sentencing
commissions
process the second year that
we've been running additional
the commission because I'm new
to this committee so you all
might be due to the commission
is made up of twenty seven
members across the criminal
justice system it's a
as appointees from the district
attorney's public defenders
victims advocates the governor
appoints the chair and some
other members the courts have a
couple appointees those judges
who sit on the commission some
public members who sit on the
commissions the department of
corrections sits on the
commission the Attorney General
so it's a broad cross section
plus there's provided
representatives as well our
members are appointed by both
chambers both parties.
this bill was also endorsed by
the courts corrections and
justice committee and what this
bill does is make some changes
to input to the law actually the
procedures that we have in place
at our corrections facility for
inmates who are seriously ill
and critically ill or terminally
ill it update some of the
procedures update some of the
law it makes a statutes conform
with policies that corrections
has put into place already
and sits in the office standard
procedure under which inmates
can apply for a parole early
parole if they are seriously
chronically injured and that is
critical of the some discussion
and some concern has been
expressed in past years
about this bill that we just
we'd.
Right now anyone who has a bad
cough or something like that you
have to be chronically ill and
critically you cannot pose a
danger to the society to society
or yourself before release when
you're released you will still
remain on parole so you will
still be under the observation
of the department of corrections
and also critically is if you've
committed first degree murder
you are not eligible for this
program that's a statute that's
an existing law and that's been
carried over into this updated
law I'm I know that you are
looking to get on the floor
madam chair and I'm happy to
stand for any questions that you
might have on the details of how
this process works thank you
madam chair thank you so we'll
go to the audience is there
anyone in opposition.
Okay on zoom with anyone in
opposition.
The thing no hands in the room
anyone in support.
And come on up.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Alicia to foil the Cerro and
I am the cabinet secretary for
the New Mexico corrections
department and I just want to
stand here in support I think
very much to Senator o'neill for
carrying this bill and of course
to Representative Ferrary for
ares to make sure that we were
able to hear it today and not
see it get rolled over we have
been working on this effort for
a little while and I just want
to emphasize the extreme
collaboration that took place in
creating this bill every area of
the criminal justice system has
been involved in its development
we are very much in support of
it and we're hoping that it will
give families a chance to spend
those last days with their loved
ones who are incarcerated in the
event that they are approved and
meet the criteria for this bill
for many reasons I stand in
support of the bill and and
thank the sentencing commission
for being the the folks that
really championed a so thanks
very much madam chair thank you
okay anyone on zoom in support.
Okay yes Lucille the compost.
Members of the committee it was
a political futures we don't
support this.
And your thank you thank you.
seeing no more hands the did you
want to follow up on anything
that was said in public comment
are you ready for questions
madam chair members of the
committee the only thing I'll
mention I was reminded by
something the secretary said is
it was a collaborative process
to draft this bill and I
actually sat with one of our
public members the department
and the then head of the parole
board to come up with the
language of this bill so that's
where it started went to our
reform committee went to the
full commission and now madam
chair it's before you.
Thank you questions from
Representative Kate's thank you
madam chair and committee is
thank you very much for this
bill and I appreciate that it
was done in a collaborative
manner it is a very complex bill
so just for clarification if of
the person in corrections
qualifies meets the criteria
but doesn't want to be released
is is it requires that this
person to of to apply for early
release.
Madam chair representative
that's a great question it does
not it provides the process for
an application there's a
proactive duties put on the
department to let people know
who might be eligible for the
program that they can apply but
the process is started with an
application from someone who's
incarcerated so if that person
did not want to.
Participate in a program that
they're happy to live out their
final weeks or months or time in
custody that is their
prerogative they don't have to
put in an application so it
starts with the inmate not with
the department Madam chair
representative thank you very
much any other questions
Representative Jones and then
Vincent.
Thank you madam chair
representative
I.
I have a problem with geriatric
I mean I've never thought of a
fifty five year old as a
geriatric patient I mean what do
I I would qualify under the
under this criteria I mean I
have arthritis in my right knee
that I can't I can't run anymore
and I can't hike like I used to
and I'm well over fifty five so
I I just can't imagine that this
really is accurate and I even
looked it up on online
can't find that fifty five is
even close to the were geriatric
it's either sixty five or even
seventy five
there's no specific age but most
patients who have a Jerry
geriatrician as their primary
care physician or seventy five
years or older.
so.
I.
Do we come up with that that we
desk that we ask a doctor.
if I may madam chair
Representative thank you for
that question that's usually the
question that
comes up that's the one change
in these definitions that are
your definition section from
existing all all the other
language this reflected in
existing law we drop the age the
present age of sixty five to
fifty five of for number of
reasons one and importantly
of people in prison a faster and
harder the people are so there
is a no correlation between
because I'd be Jerry after madam
chair representative under this
bill as well
and get a little creaky but I
would say have geriatric
but in prison you just a faster
that's been well documented in
the literature on the effects of
incarceration on people
that's part of the reason this
shift also is consistent with
almost every other state that
has this some kind of program
there is thirty some states at
six thirty six thirty seven that
have some kind of geriatric
program most have been at fifty
five or fifty New Mexico as an
out liar by having the first
eight under which you
potentially qualify at at being
sixty five and it's also
important to note that's only
one criteria so that kind of get
you in the geriatric door but
you have to hit it's on page two
of the bill the definition
sections between nine to twelve
and twenty you have to get all
those other markers as well
that you can find fifty five you
have to suffer from a
debilitating and chronic
infirmity illness or disease
related to aging so it's not
just fifty five and even have
arthritis or fifty five and
maybe a hard.
Full schedule.
No wake us up if we were to
write chair
or you know just having a couple
issues with your heart you have
to have that debilitating
debilitating chronic injury for
infirmity illness or disease in
order to get in the door so it's
not fifty five and you can put
in an application it's fifty
five plus everything else plus
you're not a danger to society
before you get your application
would be move forward Madam
chair representative well thank
you I appreciate that Madam
chair representative I still
think it is so vague even that
if the
debilitating and chronic
infirmity
Phillis of disease related to
aging I mean it that's just it's
really brought it from my view
as health care professionals so.
I have a hard time with this
morning I just have to say that.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
So I've got quite a few
questions in the a lot of the
come from the law enforcement
side of of my areas so.
I tried to.
As I was getting these questions
together I'm gonna try to give
you two part question if I if I
may.
The legislation says an
individual does not constitute a
danger to society but the bill
doesn't define what that means
exactly or how to determine it
so it essentially what is left
up to the discretion of
political employ in a appointees
at the department of corrections
corrections correct
madam chair Representative the
only political appointee would
be the secretary.
And then again it goes to
a couple staff review
checkpoints and then it has to
be forwarded to the parole board
and madam chair representative
that's a common when you're
considering someone for parole
whether they constitute a danger
to society is it's a common
metric also use in our
constitution on the bail
provision and argument has to be
made whether someone is or isn't
a dangerous to society so that's
a familiar rubric that was not
defined here it's a familiar
rubric and this area of law
madam chair thank you madam
chair representative.
If one of the inmates.
Molest a child and commits
criminal sexual penetration.
Could they be eligible for
release under this at.
madam chair Representative they
would be eligible to apply
under the act because the only
people explicitly excluded are
first degree
people committed first degree
murder that is the case under
current law as well but as we
all know madam chair
representative if you have are
someone who is has molested a
child.
The bar you're gonna have to
reach to prove you're not a
dangerous to society on madam
chair representative to go back
to us question is very high so
those twelve none of the
qualifications madam chair
representative have change from
existing practice that's been in
place since I believe it was in
nineteen ninety set this wall
was initially passed the only
thing of the qualifications that
change madam chair
Representative was that age
dropped from sixty five to fifty
five so all of the hoops and the
checkpoints and the precautions
on that we've had for the last
thirty some years so we've had
this program madam chair for
still involved the only change
has been the H..
Thank you madam chair
Representative someone is
serving time for a home invasion
and they violently raped a woman
and beats her but doesn't
killer.
Could he or she be eligible for
release under this act on Madam
chair representative they answer
the same
as my last question and madam
chair representative that's the
case now those people will be
eligible to apply but again if
you commit such such a horrible
crime
you're going to have to do a lot
before you can prove an outdated
to society.
And if I may I'm sorry
Representative just to give you
a sense of contacts Madam chair
representative there's only a
handful of these applications
that come through
every year
and I notice in the F. I. R.
when they look back they only
found a handful to were for
people who have passed away I
guess by the time they handle
them so this isn't something
it's not any kind of get out of
jail free program it's not not
something that's triggered or
used very often at all of what
we wanted to do was get the
process that's use now put into
law said the statute clarify it
a little bit and
exit the big change is the
change that Representative Jones
flag which was the dropping of
the age but everything else
madam chair representative is in
current law.
Thank you madam chair
representative of of got quite a
few more questions but in the
second time they they all have
to do with what I've just
already asked you there was a
lot of people that wanted to
know those those types of
questions I think you've
answered those pretty good and
closing.
I'm not a geriatric.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair representative just to
give you one a sense of the
context of how this was
developed as I mentioned in this
press it here on that point we
have actually sheriff who sits
on the commission we have a
district attorney Representative
representative of the district
attorney's association on the
commission and the attorney
general's office on the
commission this was unanimously
supported this year and two
years ago by the commission on
madam chair Representative to
dust two years ago had a quibble
with the age that Representative
Jones flag but they recognized a
compromise and keeping the bar
on on first degree murder felons
there some people wanted that
releases moved as well as part
of the nature of the compromise
on the commission was
dropping the H. keeping that are
but there's plenty
representatives from if you will
the prosecutorial side of things
who are comfortable with how the
system works and how it would
work under the new law madam
chair.
Thank you I just I know Jared
through the years we've heard
about
How much recidivism goes down
with age do you have any quick
data about that.
Madam chair representative I
don't have numbers on to hand
but it.
Comments I can tell you after
age thirty really after age
twenty five and something to
bring science has shown is that
by twenty five H. your brain to
kind of fully formed a lot of
those impulses and sort of
irrational acts particularly for
then
tend to fall away so as a rule
from age thirty the recidivism
just kind of starts dropping off
the charts it's not negligible
we hear about those thank
there's a horrible case out of I
think it's Alabama or somewhere
the other day the some seventy
year old man went shot is like
his ex wife and someone else
that you know it happens doesn't
mean it's not going to happen
but it's it's very very rare
madam chair thank you I will
entertain a motion.
All up okay.
And Representative K. will
second
can you call the roll please
scores
medicate.
Yes.
Representative Joe rose.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative for.
Representative Jones New.
Representative Lord.
Representative fancy.
Representative Vincent no.
Chairman yes.
And chair Dr yes.
Six by six to to have a new path
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and if you could
let the senator know everybody
know Texas right away okay thank
you thank you.
And he owes the whole committee
something.
Okay with that we are in recess
until Monday morning.
