Each of your chance to introduce
yourself and your you know tell
us about yourself for
why
this Committee may interest you
know and you don't have to tell
us if you were just put here
because so what's your last
choice I assume everyone wants
to be here I hope is a great
committee we do a lot of stuff
then I want to talk about
particularly for new members and
the listening audience what this
committee does some general kind
of ground rules and and then we
should talk about some process
under zoom
then we have a couple
presentations this morning Karen
wells who's our lead committee
analyst is going to do an
overview really briefly not a
deep dive an overview to give
everyone a sense of all the
kinds of of programs or
departments that have have that
initiatives related to them that
would come to this committee.
to give you a sense of the
breadth of what the work that
will do and then we'll have the
Medicaid director Nicole Comeaux
I'll give us a briefing on
Medicaid since that so a
significant poured portion of
health care in New Mexico and a
little more complicated to
understand so
with that I'm going to
call on you
I'll just go an elf order to
introduce yourselves and and
tell your fellow committee
members and the public a little
bit about about yourself and
I'll start with Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam chair
I'm Representative.
Anderson Phelps Anderson from
districts sixty six and that of
course is the counties of
Roosevelt Lee and Chavis I live
in Ross will I'm in Roswell
today headed back to Santa Fe
over the weekend and the I'm
interested in serving on this
committee as.
I've been a a rather the summer
interim on health was difficult
for me but I'm looking forward
to catching up I suppose why of
specific interest is behavioral
health but I wouldn't want to
suggest that physical health is
not.
equally important as well in the
look forward to working with all
of you thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Gail Armstrong.
House district forty nine
Representative Sapporo bullets
in catching County so a lot of
the times I'll be jumping up and
holding my breath and stomping
my feet for rural and frontier
New Mexico
honor to be on the committee
with the Armstrong caucus year
and I've been on this committee
since I was a freshman so I'm
going on my fifth year and I had
the opportunity to lead the
committee but I I really think
it's a vital part to New Mexico
and what is happening in the
world today and then very
important part of what we do in
the legislature and honor to
have so many members our new
members are on on my team and
the excited to get to know
everyone so thank you madam
chair.
Thank you thank you
representative Armstrong and
I'll say at you not only
represent the all rural New
Mexico but frontier went and and
health care there is of federal
classification for rural and
frontier and so you are you are
in the front here
her is of the state so I
appreciate your perspective.
Representative Barreras.
Thank you madam chair I'm pretty
but it us and I represent
district twelve which is in the
south valley of Albuquerque
it's Bernalillo county I am
incredibly honored to be part of
this committee my and my whole
goal is to help people I I care
a lot about everybody and said
this committee is incredibly
important and vital we see some
really really important bills
and I'm just stoked to be here
and and to work with all of you
so thank you so much for having
me.
Thank you representative
Representative bash.
Hi good to see everyone and
welcome to all of our new
members I'm Karen bash and I'm
from district sixty eight which
is northwest Albuquerque almost
Rio Rancho but not quite.
And I have a background in
working with individuals with
developmental disabilities I
also
have had the lay person's
interest and health care and
this is my second term on the
committee and I am glad to be
back and look forward to working
with you all.
Thank you and Representative
Lord welcome.
Thank you madam chair putting
stuff in order in the east
mountains that's district twenty
two and even though we are in
Berlin county we're very we're
all out in this district my
initial degree was medical
assisting and have a degree in
psychology and I have run a
medical clinic for some time so
I have a history of
understanding health disorders
and working with insurance which
can be quite frustrating I'm
going to be here and I'm hoping
to help the people of my
district and people from Mexico
thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Matthews.
Madam chair and members of the
committee
I'm just beginning my second
year on this committee last year
I was appointed on January sixth
two replace Dr William Pratt who
had died and and I was just
sliding into his committees at
the time and I found myself on
the health committee and I kind
of felt like a landed in heaven.
it say are incredibly that the
committee has incredibly broad
scope I'm very interested in
behavior health as a lawyer I
litigated on behalf of
exceptional children
and I've been involved in
various kinds of activities over
my career various careers and
this is just truly one of the.
most interesting committees I
don't think I've ever been bored
in this committee because we
always are doing really
interesting things and it mixes
from physical health kinds of
issues to behavioral health to
basically some social problems
and how those impact and.
Physical and and mental health
so it's great to be back and
looking forward to a great
session thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Montoya.
You have your there you go okay.
Good morning madam chair and
members of this committee it is
such an honor to be here my name
is Roger Montoya and I represent
district forty which includes a
big chunk of Rio Arriba County
more a.
Colfax in San Miguel.
It is decidedly a rural and
frontier communities and largely
my focus my choice of living
here first and foremost is that
it is.
At once a resilient and
beautiful place but mired in
serious challenges some of my
work over the years has been in
the HIV aids world in the
nineties I did extensive work in
creating the first ever place
we're about a hundred ten
clients in six counties could
access traditional met
medications and also alternative
medicine.
I moved on to public education
most recently established the
first homeless shelter in our
county and recovery services
that are.
Complete and continue of care we
worked with jail diversion
something we call up here the re
route program so it's a very
strong interest food insecurity
is been a major thrust for about
a decade in fact they coalesced
ten nonprofits throughout rural
Rio Arriba most recently with
the COVID pandemic and we made
massive work happen.
Last year I brought into our mid
school communities in schools
because I saw the the vital need
for wraparound services in the
school based setting.
Home visiting early childhood I
sit on a committee with the
Landel foundation and I am
deeply committed to the zero to
three.
You know we must must must focus
on that early aspect I think
it's disproportionately focused
in the public hi on.
Pre K. but we must start much
earlier and then last and and
and most notably the work with
moving arts Espanola as an after
care center that used the arts
as a form of medicine.
As an intervention to children
and young people from a place of
trauma to one of trust I'm sorry
for the long introduction but I
am deeply honored to serve with
each of you this is going to be.
A humble time moving from a
place of community activism to
policy making is admittedly New.
But I'm hungry humble and I will
learn thank you so much.
Thank you representative we're
glad to really glad to have you
join this committee
next representative to Ross's.
I hope I said that right.
Here.
How do we go from M. all the way
to Thiel's waiting for like some
R. S..
And it's nice we last because I
get to hear everybody in a and
and then put in my two cents but
anyway.
I'm glad to be here good morning
members and and of course madam
chair in staff yeah I look
forward to to serving in working
with you
my background is.
Is in the funeral business I've
been in the funeral business for
thirty three years and started
at age fifteen
actually the gentleman that gave
me my first opportunity just
passed away and I'm gonna go.
They might districts today and
he was is my competitor but we
we got along well and and and
but anyway I'm very passionate
of course about serving the
state of New Mexico my of.
My district which is thirty nine
is part of Los crucis.
We're Dona Ana grant and Sierra
counties so I have anything from
of it's a big district it takes
me five hours a driver I'm not
as big as is a.
Every Armstrong I think she's
she's got the biggest one and
then it's I think I might be
second but the we so what I have
anything you know like
Rural and urban issues and so
it's gonna be interesting to see
how we can
make policy that will help both
both the both ideas and stuff
but I look forward to working
with you and may god bless all
our work in this concession
thank you thank by the way yeah
I have five kids.
I kids married five kids one of
the airforce ones in the Marjory
Business one of them's and is is
and and L. biologist and then
the two last winter and and and
not in the in school still there
now the entry their little ones
thank god bless you and thank
you so much thank you it's our
it's families that we do with
this work for so thank you
Representative Thomson.
You madam chair I I was thinking
that too we have to a is in the
B. were heavily loaded in the
front end of the alphabet in
this committee and it it's nice
to see you all again this I'm
Representative Liz Thomson house
district twenty four which is
the northeast heights of
Albuquerque.
And I have been on this
committee before was this
committee I can't remember what
it used to be called that was
our.
State government health an
Indian Affairs I think when I
first started on it I'm so as as
we as we learning grow we we
have we have different committee
so I have been a pediatric
physical therapists working with
kids with disabilities or over
thirty six years and I started
when I was to of course
and I also have a son who was
almost thirty he'll be thirty
next month to have severe autism
and not so obviously
disabilities are are
are at most in my life working
with people with disabilities
Let's see I'm I'm a mom and a
grandmother I what else can I
say I I do have that page when I
heard Representative Montoya
talk about my babies infants and
toddlers I've been screaming
that I keep think three years
too late we got to get him
before their three and I have a
granddaughter who is that twenty
months so and it's it's brought
back to me I I usually practice
our pediatric physical therapist
therapy with infants and
toddlers
at this point in my life but
I've found that doing PT within
eighteen month old over soon
somehow loses something in the
translation so so I kind of put
my practice on hold until we can
until I can get my hands on them
again because PED's are very
much and I and madam chair is
also a P. T. M..
A former recovering P. T. I
don't know what the word is but.
But I'm I I I really look
forward to distribute excuse me
committee we we do all kinds of
amazing and we hear all kinds of
staff welcome to the new members
and let me just throw it out
there I'm kind of a I guess I'm
along with madam chair we are
the most veteran on the
committee I believe so I I'm
more than happy to I'm answer
questions or assist you if I can
because and and I cheered that
consumer and public affairs
committee and I think our work
our motto this year we may all
get baseball caps that they be
gentle and not so our model
yesterday would be gentle on
yourselves and be gentle on each
other because we're we're
building the plane as we're
flying at and we're going to
crash a lot so let's all be
patient but let's have fun thank
you madam chair.
Thank you representative and our
vice chair Representative
Ferrary.
You need to on mute.
Thank you.
thank you madam chair and I I
agree with many of you that we
do this for the children and I
think
After of.
The madam chair and Liz that a
deal and I hit this will be our
fifty year on this committee and
I really am proud to be the vice
chair this will be my third year
for that but my concerns have
been I'm from Los crucis the
northeast kind of like the
northeast heights of Albuquerque
we're in the northeast part of
Los crucis and
I've really been concerned about
Disabilities concerns and I
chair the interim committee on
that if any of you new members
are interested that to really
important committee for a lot of
people not only those with
disabilities but also for
seniors as
we all accrued different
disability sometime in our life
also I've been really concerned
about the intersections of
health care with the environment
and how the environment affects
the help the people in different
areas of our state and also food
insecurity.
I and part of the Legislative
hunger caucus that has been
working to provide food
security throughout our state
working with farmers and their
produce getting food to table a
farm to table I should say and
In our schools and also our
senior centers and then also a
supporting the food banks
because food is central to our
health also I've been really
active with women's health care
issues and
I think these are all things
that you know will be working on
for our our state so thank you.
Thank you Representative and I'm
here chair I am honored to be
chairing this of this the fifty
year offer me to chair this
committee and I'm representative
Debbie Armstrong I represent
districts seventeen which is on
in the north valley of
Albuquerque I've actually lived
all over the state from tiles to
Silvercity about a fan and in
Albuquerque for the last ten
years.
it has Representative Thompson
said
I'm former physical therapist I
practice for
directly practiced on clinical
care for twenty five years and
that's been almost twenty five
years ago I stopped doing that
so I I've been in health care
for at least forty five years
and every state practice setting
I and every age group I started
out in pediatrics did a lot of
early intervention like
Representative Thomson through
geriatrics worked in schools
hospitals clinics home health
hospice long term care community
clinics both as a direct
practitioner as well as in an
administrative role
and
I'd like to say it was a
recovering attorney but how
about a not never practiced
Attorney
a graduate of a law school here
at UNM our focus on health law
and within intend never to
practice practice but to pursue
health policy which I have been
doing and I'm also the former
cabinet secretary of aging long
term Services Department
served under governor Richardson
was in that department for seven
years as secretary for for.
And in my day job for the last
ten years I am the executive
director of a nonprofit program
was created by the legislature
but it's not a state agency it's
a nonprofit program that
provides subsidized health
insurance for people with high
risk or
pre existing conditions and so
I'm have been a clinician a
policy maker and a pair
in health care so pretty broad
and I'm happy particularly for
all of you at new folks offline
any time don't understand some
component want to talk about a
bill want to talk about how
something works in a certain
kind of.
setting or or pair or whatever
on I'm happy to talk about it
and
if I have don't know I I know
who to ask if I if I don't fully
understand the particular issue.
So
We do have a really broad
amount of topics that it's
health and Human Services so
all I thank all everything that
everyone is mentioned as an area
of interest is something that
that hits this committee.
But let's inner here for next
from our staff on the committee
and we can start with our
Committee assistant on to
Lawrence.
She is that she's the one who
keeps the minutes and does our
committee reports and also
serves as my
assistant.
Good morning again welcome to
the new
people on our committee the
representative
I'm here to assist
the I love working program so to
Armstrong she is awesome and you
know it's a learning curve I
love Representative Thomson
analogy we are flying in a plane
that we're building absolutely
and I'll do the best I can and
welcome.
Be patient with me and I'll do
my best thank you.
Thank you our Torrez is so our
chief Committee analyst Karen
wells.
Good morning everybody I know I
greeted a bunch of you but
greetings to all of you I'm
happy to be here I think this is
my fifth year as committee
analyst I am listening to
representative Armstrong I'm
reminded that she and I have
crossed professional paths.
At least six or seven times in
the course of our careers so I
worked in a lot of the same
setting she's and I'm a nurse by
training I work and I see you
for four years I worked in home
health care and hospice for
fifteen years I worked for the
Legislative Council Service as a
policy analyst and researcher
for almost twenty five years and
work with Debbie at the my
excuse me representative
Armstrong at the department of
aging and also at Presbyterian
medical services in both
instances I believe she was my
boss and here she is again my
boss and also my good friend.
So I'm very happy to be here
with you once again I really
like the job of doing the
analyses I like the fact that
the committee and now analyst is
non partisan.
I will tell you that my basic
approach.
My basic approach to writing and
analysis is to never exceed more
than two sides of one piece of
paper if I can get on one side
of one piece of paper that's a
better goal so that you all can
read my analysis well the bill
is being presented if you
haven't had a chance to look at
it in advance the FIR is as you
probably know are very detailed
and I'm not inclined to cut and
paste from the FIR unless it's
really really relevant to what I
have to say because you have the
FIR but this way I think you can
get the cliff notes and I hope
that those analyses are helpful
I will be directly emailing them
this year that's no so you'll be
getting my analyses for the
Monday meeting very very shin.
Anyway thank you again for
allowing me to serve you in this
way it's a great honor.
Thank you Karen and I should
mention we have one other
Committee Annalise's works part
time so probably won't be on
that Committee are present at
the committee are very often but
Christy works with Keren and is
also returning
analyst and very experienced and
let's see major analyst
Kathleen.
Good morning everybody happy new
year I'm honored to be here I am
actually.
The back of analyst for a new
our new major analyst amber so
she will introduce yourself next
but this is
my fifth year as major analyst I
primarily work with the labor
and economic development side of
things but I do have a
background working with project
echo and other health related
things that U. and M. as a
program evaluator and analysts
so I'm.
Really important wonderful staff
here in line thank you all for
letting me be here.
Thank you and amber.
Everyone my name is Dr amber
Duke's I am very excited to be
here this is my first time
working as an analyst for one of
these committees I completed my
PhD in health psychology at UNM
back in twenty nineteen and the
semester often as my master's in
public health also UNM I work as
an adjunct professor at the
college population health that
UNM and that yeah.
Identity of service do also I
hope I can be helpful thanks.
Thank you very much and do we
have a minority analyst.
Here this morning.
Madam chair I'm not sure that he
received at the our enlighten
his name is Kurt signs and I
believe that everyone I'm all
the past members probably know
in as affects
brother okay.
We had trouble finding him or
finding contact information form
yesterday we will we will fix
that and make sure that he's in
the loop and and gets notified
about about what coming up I
have his cell phone and email if
anyone would like to contact me
offline I can share that with
them thank you madam.
Thank you representative I
appreciate that.
okay and so I think that's it
for introductions
So a couple of things this
committee is one we get a lot of
bills so we probably get
twenty five percent of the bills
they get introduced in the house
come to this committee.
that's that's a lot and we are
committee that is they are first
kind of a first line committee
so we are generally on any bill
that comes to us it's the first
hearing it's getting in the
house
sometimes that is not true it's
gone to another committee first
but not very often so
At one thing to know is is my
our preference
because of that and it's the
first big hearing that that a
bill has is that we hear from
everyone and do as much of a
hearing as we need in here from
as many people in the public as
want to speak if we have a ton
of people you know we have to
control maybe the time but I
want to hear from everyone and
and give it whatever bill it is
a fair
a fair hearing but that at
another it and we also I think
focus on
the primary focus of our
committee so we may get a bill
that is next going to tax and I
don't think we need to weigh in
particularly with any tax
expertise and make a judgment
about whether it fits into our
tax code and other things unless
there's something glaring what
we're talking about is the
health policy or the Human
Services policy same with
something that then goes to
appropriations appropriations
name isn't going to have a
hearing on the substantive
merits and policy of the of the
bill they're going to have a
hearing on the money and so it's
our job to do our area of
expertise and then as and saying
that the goes to Judiciary next
we don't have to parse out the
the legal questions again it's
if there's something glaring or
this but we're we're really
focused on the policy of of
what's being presented so
I don't feel like you you have
to be an expert in all those
areas when it comes to us were
were who gives the thorough
hearing on on the on the policy
related to health.
in Human Services.
I'm.
couple of things about how I
operate the committee and for
many of the new members may not
know how this goes but
bills are generally heard in the
in the order that they common
which is because when the first
committee is generally
chronological order until we get
later in the session we're we're
getting bills over from the
Senate or or bills that have
gone to other committees first
and then it's as they come in
there are some exceptions to
that
the most common being at the
request of the sponsor who is
not ready to
to hear the bill yet or or is
working on an amendment or
doesn't have their experts
available on the day it was
scheduled or is still
negotiating something whatever
the reason may be of the bill
may get delayed to another
another date
Based on that conversation and
request of the of the sponsor.
So you'll see some out of order
it also I make an effort when
it's appropriate to groups like
built together
and this is particularly
at advantageous I think for some
applicants and and people who
are testifying if they if we
have multiple bills on the same
general subject our area we're
we're gonna have the same people
testifying in the same people in
the audience interested it's it
it's helpful maybe to hear them
together or if they relate in
some way to one another or even
are competing bills and you
wanna you wanna understand the
difference between one and
another so there may be some
shuffling around for that.
and then I try
are very hard to manage our time
and to not put too many on the
same agenda that would take out
a lot of time because I know
they're going to get a lot of
testimony so some days you'll
see a lot of bills on the agenda
and some days less so
so to try and and manage our at
our time and then the the
biggest it and then as we get
towards the end of the session.
I also will look at
where a bill is in the end it's
pathway so for instance were in
the second half of the session
and we just get a house bill
that has just been introduced
and it still has to go to
another committee plus the four
plus over to the Senate and
we're in the last two weeks of
the session
I am probably not going to hear
that one before I hear Senate
bill that's on its way to the
floor after it gets through the
committee
most bills run out of time to
major bills run out of time and
I don't wanna
stop or impede a of a likely
pathway.
But that being said I try and
give every bill hearing.
And so even if there's shifted
around because what you may
still get a hearing if you
wanted even if there's no time
left for you to go anywhere else
but our committee I will I won't
deny a hearing if we can we can
get a hearing done because for
many Sanchez and advocates this
is the this is the way to start
the conversation start to
educate the legislature and the
public about what the issue is
and it's really important to get
a to be heard and get that
hearing on knowing that you're
going to be back with that in a
in a subsequent session but it's
the this is us it's a starting
point and many many pieces of
legislation take multiple times
are trying them to get the
answer so
I try very hard it's very seldom
that we get through the session
without having heard every bill
that comes comes to the
committee whether it has a
chance of getting through or not
will will get it we'll get it
heard so we stay busy the whole
session even though were that
first line Committee it would
seem like it would slow down
then after we've gotten the.
Built to us but it it doesn't
and we keep going and keep
giving everyone a
a hearing.
But any
questions on
when something is likely to be
scheduled or why something is
scheduled now and not later or
whatever it is I'm happy to talk
about it and
again the general rule is taking
them as they come but with those
kind of cabbie outs that there
may be some adjustments for some
of those reasons particularly
and most commonly at as the
result of the requested the
sponsor.
and any bill that is on our
agenda that we don't get through
would roll over to the next
committee meeting as a kind of
top of the agenda of the next
committee meeting.
One big thing and this is this
was the the rule before and it
becomes even more
important when were confined to
zoom and that is any sponsor of
that is going to propose an
amendment.
But we need it I have a time we
need it the at least and try for
twenty four hours and and the
primary reason is the analyst
need an opportunity to be able
to review that amendment and
what the impact would be and so
we needed to have a time but
because of zoom we also need
everything whether it's an
amendment whether it's hand outs
that the sponsor is providing or
its handouts that advocates are
asking the chair to be
distributed to committee members
we're gonna need it the day
before so that we can
distributed by email to the to
the members of the committee we
can't
When we were in person we had
committee attendees who could be
distributing those papers while
we are
are conducting our meeting now
all the staff we have is right
here on the meeting and we
really can't stop to be starting
to send emails around so it'll
be really important to
To get those to us at a time
that does not mean that members
can't request or discussed in
the meeting L. M. an amendment
or minor amendment
But sponsor Sanchez amendments
need need ahead of time but
sometimes we do some tweaking
and Canadian based on.
questions and suggestions of the
of committee members and
sometimes we have those
conversations and some the
sponsor away to go work with
Legislative Council services to
get the the amendment in writing
and come back to us before we
have adjourned the meeting to to
take that out.
Representative Matthews if you
have a question.
I just.
One because I'm gonna be
presenting on Monday this
question come up who do we send
the handouts to to be
circulated.
So let's talk about that right
now it so because of zoom and I
I I do have a suggestion also
about this the sending the
invitations.
Torrez is the key so those
handouts and
so forth need to come to Torrez.
And I suggested that we do all
invitations and distribution of
materials to your assistance.
it and then that what you're
assistance send it to you and
and this is why and you guys can
can weigh in and and tell me
that that's not going to work
for you.
But if you don't it I don't know
how about you guys but one night
there's a million zoom meetings
going on and I'm looking for my
invitation and the first thing I
have to do is remember who sent
it.
And so at and while I think you
should all remember don't horses
name you might not you know if
particularly if you've got
multiple committees and multiple
entities you gotta figure out
who but your assistant you'll
know your assistant's name and
you'll know to look for
if you're trying to track it
down the one your system will
have it and can help you but to
you'll know what to be looking
for your something from your
assistant.
And so I propose that unless
unless someone has another idea
or objection to that that all
distribution of invitations and
materials would go to your
system and then let them get it
to you.
Anyone have any comments or
reactions to the
representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair I would
hope that you would share that
with the speaker so that it's
the same in every committee
because I don't that is my
biggest concern is trying to
remember of course I will
remember Dolores I love to
course but there's others if
we're presenting another
committee
it would be best if they all
came to our assistance but I
would really appreciate it if
you would recommend that to the
speaker and for other committee
committees to do the same so
that we always know where to go
and find it thank you madam
chair thank you I intend to do
so it something that occurred to
me yesterday as I was going
crazy trying to find an
invitation and I know the
several people who could have
sent that invitation and I
couldn't find the right one this
well it's just it's overwhelming
it's very overwhelming madam
chair and I want to thank the
lower us because she did send
the way she sent it to me I
could add it to my calendar very
easily but I'm concerned about
everything else that we just
talked about so thank you madam
chair yeah thank you and so I I
am going to suggest that and I
assume we've got some of our
zoom gurus are listening in but
I think that makes the most
sense because you'll always know
to look for your assistant at an
email from your assistant but if
you have to also remember who
else sent you stuff that's a
little harder.
Representative Terrazas.
I'm just real quick I understand
that will be presenting on
Monday if I heard that correctly
and so are we can receive
what's going to be of presented
to us today over the weekend
how's it gonna work yes calendar
will go out today so you'll
you'll get a list of that today
and and the analyst will we'll
get that list and
I just thought it might even be
already be on the calendar but
I'm not a hundred percent
positive but it will come to you
today.
It's on the NM Legislative chair
yeah it it's posted now
this so what we
there you go it's
we have to posted to twenty at
least twenty four hours so on
any
Generally we've already support
Mondays out
Monday after committee will make
any additional tweaks based on
on Monday and put the calendar
out that should be posted on
Tuesday but we will keep
everyone as informed as we can
about what's coming including
the analyst if we know what's
coming up
or what's likely to come up
we will keep all the analysts
Are in the loop on that so
you've got a a chance to do it
again or get a getting
you're an animal analysis done.
and again you should probably
the analyst probably assumes
that roughly in chronological
order of number is how we're at
least starting so will
There are Representative
Matthews.
It just it another suggestion I
love your idea about the links
and it would be great again just
a suggestion that they always
put link or imitation and great
big letters to top of it because
I was going through it you know
a lot of times will get multiple
messages from the same person
and year you're going to trying
to figure out where the link is
so if we could just do that is a
standard course would make it
easier for me personally.
Thank you
That great great suggestion
Percent Thompson thank you madam
chair
yeah I feel like I spend more
time searching for them links
than zoning which is really yes
get bad they and and of course I
panic give now with thank okay
I'm gonna be you know an hour
before the meeting I'm gonna
find it and then something
happened I would also like to
suggest that that we have not
just in this committee but House
wide that there be a standard
subject line you know whether it
be zoom invitation or Committee
link or what so that if worse
comes to worse I can put that in
the search and all of them will
come up and then I can sort
through I think any way we can
standardize it but I think it's
a good idea to have have it come
to our assistance and and and.
So thanks for the that the
suggestion and now hopefully
will will standardize this but
we won't spend as much time
panic with their hair on fire
there was a lot of hair on fire
this morning this morning yeah
and just to
let the public know and as a
back up for
Of for committee members a
hyperlink is in the calendar
that is posted on the website
under what's happening and then
there's the committee calendar
that's got all the committees
listed in their bills and
there's a hyperlink for that
committee.
That is how the of public gets
on in and it when it's time for
public comment can be brought in
one of the time but it is also
that it's all else fails you all
should be able to link on that
as well and we can bring you in
at the panelists from the that
attendee group so there's two
different groups on zoom once
panelists which is all of us and
ones attendees which is the
public attendees is also the
other the sponsors and their
experts as kind of services
they're waiting room set of
sitting along the wall in
committee room there in
attendees and when it's time
that we brought in
and maybe panelists and the for
the public when it's time for
public comment we will bring of
people in wanted time from that
attendee list to make a public
comment
so that's
we'll move people back and forth
in their as as appropriate.
I'm I'm
Representative Ferrary madam
chair I don't know if you can
see my raised hand because it's
over the a state symbol
but I was wondering did you talk
already about the chat being
closed and we just always raise
our hands.
yeah that was my understanding
that that was going to happen
that that chat would be a
disabled but it's going of this
morning but it's
Probably best that we don't get
distracted by a lot of chat but
it's
the information this morning
just on contact information is
useful so thank you
and I will try my best to watch
as hands are raised in the order
that there raise but I I
apologize if I may take somebody
out of order.
I was told yesterday I don't
know whether it's true or not
that that that that they get
sorted by the the order that
raised but I don't know if
that's true but I think I think
that that's true that in my list
of panelists that it when you
raise your hand your bumped to
the top and then you're you're
in order so I know how to take
you in order and don't have to
track it so I'm hoping that that
works I think that as well
But to a lesser just to
wanted to see to say and and
make sure everyone everyone can
see there where they raised
their hands should be on the
bottom of your screen if you
wanna speak we're going to try
and do the committee as if we
were there in person.
which it's a little bit
hard to kind of imagine but that
means regular decorum.
going through the chair raising
your hands to speak
being professional in your
presentation and
and
as if you were there in person
we will do the regular process
of presenting the bill the
sponsor and whatever experts
they have presenting the bill
then going to public comment and
I'm hoping we can manage of
public I I'm not quite sure how
we manage just raising your
hands and then taking hands down
and then raising again for if
you want to speak so what but
we'll see what we can do but we
will get and and I'll take them
in one group and asked people to
raise their hands if there
a supporter of the bill or raise
their hand and then raise their
hands of their opposition to the
bill and take it everyone who
wants to speak they'll be
brought in one of the time when
it is their turn to speak and as
I said if it looks like we have
a high number of people are
wanting to speak then
Are we will at may as we have in
the in when we're there in
person limit the time that
someone gets to speak to a
minute or two
but I don't always most the time
don't time folks there are
pretty good about making their
Madam down some are shorter and
Steinborn longer but it's not
out of control and as I said
this is the first opportunity
for most to be heard and so I
like to hear from
from members.
and then after public comment
will go to member questions and
that's just that that's the
normal
sequence and
So I you know I'm I'm hoping we
can this will all work
Hi as if we were there one one
thing we don't do
we work from handouts when we're
in front we don't do big
screen sharing power point
presentations and even though we
probably have an easier way to
do that on zoom of sharing your
screen I'm not going to do that
we're going to work from
handouts I just have visions of
every person are brought in to
share their screen having
technical difficulty and so
we're not going to do
Formal presentations that are
shared screens power points if
someone has a power point
presentation it's a handout that
they should have gotten to us
the day before and we will just
distributed to the committee so
that they can can follow along.
Think that will save some of our
frustration
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair I was
curious on if the our expert
witnesses would be just in the
normal Lincoln and lead and when
it's time to present and then I
was also curious I know in the
past you
you know it's the people raise
their hand whether they're for
or against the bill so are you
there's no way to know that so
how are you is it just going to
be
At your discretion on yeah I
mean you're not going to know
who's for and who's really
against if they want to speak so
I would go I was just wondering
how you were going to handle
that thank you madam chair and
thank you I do think that
everyone will use the general
link from the calendar including
Sanchez and experts and then
when when it's time to hear a
bill will bring the sponsor in
the sponsor can tell us who
their experts are that need to
be brought in as panelists so
then we'll bring them in and we
will
I'm hoping we can just it may be
a little tricky to do just a
show of hands but we can do all
right everyone raised their hand
who is in opposition and so we
can see and then keep your hand
up if you want to speak you can
take your hand down if you don't
want to speak and then and then
and then left speak to well
wanted it will bring the men
wanted to time to speak so I
think it will be quite the same
as raising I'm in the big in the
room but I think we can do it I
think we can raise hands and
then have people take their
hands down as they don't
actually want to speak I just
want to raise their hand chair
it was brought up in a meeting
that there is a polling feature
on zoom and we don't know if we
can use that where it would
where people would be able to
vote that we could see you know
the public not vote but you know
are you in favor or against this
measure and I'm happy that
question was asked to the
speaker and I'm not sure where
that where that landed but I'm
that is something that we're
looking at.
Yeah so I haven't heard about
whether that figured out or not
so if that happens that'll be
all another way to do it
yeah
I could jump in yes.
We are looking into pulling it
is possible to do on the back
and there to be able to the poll
for attendees if they like at.
The other cell will be helping
the train committee assistance
on how to build those in the
back in and do this.
Thank you Deborah it is so we're
going to try the very best we
can to get as much public input
and and and Ms sense of the of
the attendees as we as we can
there was also a suggestion
of that
Of the that we have a timer that
two people could see so they
know how much time they have
left
in speaking as if for limiting
it to a minute or two but as I
understand it that does not work
well and so will just have to
do the best we can and timing
and letting people know where we
where we are.
Okay
Okay any other yeah.
At asked to please put the
losses email up for people who
may want to send in M. some sort
of a document or in a letter to
the committee so if if you could
I I don't know but that was a
request that was texted to me
okay we'll let Torrez type per
email and on the chat.
And any other questions or
Comments.
Okay.
All right
And we're gonna start with Karen
doing a little bit of an
overview we're going to
interrupt her when
the Medicaid director Nicole
Comeaux has got a limited time
frame and will switch to
Medicaid and then come back to
care and
to finish up after
after and director Comeaux is
has done her part and
again this is meant to be just a
high level overview to give you
a sense of the of the
kind of the jurisdiction of the
committee and areas in doing so
areas that you may
want to learn more about and in
particular should.
Want to know that the Medicaid
LFC is planning a Medicaid
briefings for particularly for
new members but anyone is
allowed is are welcome to join I
think
I don't remember exactly when it
is you should have gotten an
invitation it's one of the early
morning seven to eight thirty
kind of thing like around the
twenty seventh or something
sometime next week I believe so
and even more in depth or
ability ask even more questions
so
So without Karen I'm of this
sorry we went on so long and cut
into yours but I again you have
you'll have the handout and if
we need to of follow up in a
further time we can do that but
will get started and then we'll
we'll break when director
Comeaux is available.
You are muted I thought I did
that can you hear me now.
Yes you do have you do have the
power point you can connect with
me later if you want the
intention of this as
representative Armstrong is
already set is sort of a fire
hose presentation targeted
mostly towards the new members
who don't then necessarily
haven't sat in on this committee
just to give you an idea of the
complexity of health care in New
Mexico I am not covering Human
Services in this presentation
I'm just covering health care is
complicated enough so what I'll
try to do now because I know
that on this can Comeaux is
scheduled to be here around ten
I'm gonna see if I can go
quickly through the Medicaid
questions so if you have your
own hand out in front of you
it's and I didn't number the
pages I'm sorry but the title of
this slide is Medicare is not
Medicaid and I just wanted to
emphasize that point because the
names are so similar a lot of
times people get confused about
that so Medicare is a federal
program and we don't have
anything to do with it except
there's lots of people in the
state who have it including me
it's largely for elderly and
disabled individuals it's
divided up into parts part a is
hospitalization coverage part B.
is outpatient and physician
coverage that's normally covered
in supplemental policy to
Medicare part C. is Medicare
managed care and part do it
again that's usually separate
coverage is prescription drugs
so it's very comprehensive is
very important for your elderly
members who are you're all
elderly constituents but it is
not Medicaid.
Medicaid is a hybrid program
that is both the federal and the
state program states have to opt
in to Medicaid and agreed to
following the federal rules
although as you'll see in just a
minute there are waivers that
allow you to waive some of those
rules and do things your own way
but it's a formal process it's
funded by the state federal
match you'll be hearing a lot
about that in discussion about
the budget because even though
in our state the federal
government pays are close to
seventy percent of the bill the
thirty percent that we have to
pay comes out of our general
fund and it's a huge number I'm
sure Nicole cover that Medicaid
provides physical health
services behavioral health long
term care disability supports
and services I'll tell you a
little bit more about how that
happens and most of Medicaid is
provided through a particular
very broad based waiver called
centennial Care I'm gonna talk
about waivers in just a slider
to.
there's all kind of a wide array
of different eligibility
categories for Medicaid it's not
straight forward you can't just
say these are all the people who
have it it's it's much more
complex than that there's a lot
of different sort of smaller
categories within the big
category but as I said it's
largely for people who are who
we would consider poor who need
some income eligibility
that's the main target and
And so I wanted to cover first I
don't know why I put this slide
first but there is a small
program that's very very
important to moms with young
children and families with with
babies and young children it's
called ecstatic which stands for
early and periodic screening
diagnostic diagnosis and
treatment.
it's required federally required
health screens for Medicaid
recipients under the age of
twenty one the services are
listed there for you there they
must be screened for those
things say if it results in the
diagnosis then the state is
obligated to provide treatment
for those conditions that are
surfaced in in terms of that
screening so
so extent is a really important
program that I think is not as
widely known about and.
I wanted to be sure you knew
about it.
So I then I want to talk a
little bit about Medicaid waiver
programs as I said a waiver
program.
allows the state to either do
something because they want to
demonstrate a certain new
approach or because they'd like
to operate the whole program in
a different way and it's very
complex the applications for
waivers are very very long and
technical and when the Human
Services department wants to
amend an existing waiver or they
have a lot of time they have to
take up for consulting with the
variety of different people
doing public comment it's a
great big deal it's nothing they
can just sort of do on their own
there's three basic different
categories of waivers the eleven
fifteen waiver are called
research and demonstration
waivers centennial Care is
eleven fifteen waiver and it
presumes that you are going to
be demonstrating that this way
of doing Medicare Medicaid is
going to be effective and and
positive and have a good outcome
allows the federal government to
study that and do research on
it.
A nineteen fifteen the waiver
allows Medicaid to provide
services under managed care
programs and so we have a
nineteen fifteen be waiver as
well.
you probably heard about that is
Medicare advantage well yeah
it's not called Medicare
advantage forget that Medicare
is not Medicaid it's a little
bit like Medicare advantage
programs but within the Medicaid
program nineteen fifteen C.
waivers are really really
important in New Mexico and have
a long history of these allow
Medicaid to provide services in
alternative settings rather than
institutions and I'm going to go
through those three that are
listed on the bottom I'm sorry
to be racing but I know that
the call in I spoke yesterday
and I wanted her to know that I
was going to set the stage for
her conversation and she'll give
you more detail and you can ask
questions of hers.
So the first the first nineteen
fifteen C. waiver is the deep
once frequently called the DD
waiver that about developmental
disabilities waiver there's many
many many issues about this but
you will learn about.
But what I want you to just know
is that even though it's a
Medicaid waiver it is
administrated by the department
of health and Human Services
department is the fiscal agent
for the DD waiver so they have
to coordinate and cooperate with
the department of health is the
go to HSD.
For if one of your constituents
is not happy about the way DD is
being implemented it provides in
very general terms it provides
in home or and or community
support services for adults who
have either intellectual or
developmental disabilities or
both.
it has been
a very important program in New
Mexico it it doesn't even come
close it does not come close to
serving all the people who would
qualify there are lots and lots
of people who are waiting to get
in to the DD program so that's
something I'm sure Nicole cover.
The services in that waiver are
separate from in addition to
health care medical services so
they still get Medicaid they can
go to their doctor they can be
in the hospital all of those
things are are not part of the
G. D. waiver.
in the main over arching goal of
the DD waiver is to allow people
to leave and what's known as the
least restrictive environment so
a lot of people who qualify for
the DD wavering get sort of
maybe get a and earlier path
into the DD waiver are people
who have been in a nursing home
but who would do better at home
on their own and most people
would prefer to be at home so
so there there's a transfer
process from nursing home care
to the DD waiver that may
expedite access to it a little.
Other home and community based
waivers include the medically
fragile waiver the medically
fragile waivers small I think it
has a small enrollment it's for
adults again with intellectual
or it's for adults not for under
twenty one but it's for adults
with intellectual or
developmental disability who
also have some kind of complex
medical condition.
that requires a bit more high
level care.
And it provides case management
services private duty nursing
and lots of other supports so
it's important for that smaller
population of people who are
combined with being
developmentally and
intellectually disabled but also
have a complex medical condition
at the same time.
To me via waiver is a really
unique waiver it is it's a
waiver that allows the
recipients themselves to direct
their care self directed care
and the the it's an alternative
to the DD wherever it may be an
alternative to the medically
fragile waiver I'm not exactly
sure but the recipients receive
they purchase centrally
purchased the services and
supports that they need within
an agreed upon budget and they
have consultants they're called
consultants who help them
develop a care plan and
prioritize what the services are
that they need to develop a
budget that they don't just have
an open ended budget the budget
is going to be limited based on
the budget for the entire
program but they don't they have
help in developing that budget
and identifying the priorities
for their care and then helping
to them to to spend those
dollars efficiently and
effectively so that maybe a
waiver allows people the
greatest amount of of of control
over their own situation and
care
And it probably involves a
little bit more.
Of the capability to do such.
On the next page of the handout
describes Medicaid long term
care services which I think now
is called community benefit it
used to be for many many years
called the personal care
services program you may have
heard it called PCS and this is
where family members can either
hire another family member or
get a care giver for grandma or
whoever needs to care to go to
their home it's it's it's home
care services providing not
skilled care not physical
therapy nothing like nursing
visits but they get assistance
with activities of daily living
like eating and bathing and
dressing and light housekeeping
duties are listed there on the
bottom this is a very very
popular program in New Mexico
off and allows people to stay at
home rather than be
institutionalized they have a
choice about whether they're
going to essentially hire their
own family member or somebody
they know to be their care giver
or how and the other choices to
have their care giver provided
for them through an institution
such as a home health care
agency or a personal care
services provider agency.
that there's lots of nuances
about that program there's hick
ups like there are in every
single Medicaid program
But it's also a very very
popular program New Mexico
actually has has totally taken
advantage of almost every single
Avenue that's available to have
an array of services that are
very different and meet
individual needs for four of the
recipients of Medicaid and so
we.
However difficult challenging it
is and I know it is for many of
those recipients we also should.
We also should be very grateful
for many many years of pursuing
such waivers of such programs
and developing them.
Well let's see I think I'm
looking at my watch do we know
if we call this year.
I'll just keep going if she's
not.
But.
Jump in for one second and just
a slight correction both the DD
waiver and met fragile medically
fragile waiver that development
disabilities waiver and
medically fragile waiver are not
limited to adult although with
the waiting list of thirteen
years on the development
disabilities waiver it may you
may not get in at the trial but
they are they can they do not
limit it to over twenty one
thank you madam chair.
Thank you for that clarification
did you say Representative that
the call is here.
I'm at yes she's trying to get
and so as soon as she's
On the
public attendees side will over
over I'll do what I'll do one
more slide because it's kind of
a crossover slide and then that
will be a good breaking point
because after that I talk about
the different departments of
state government she's here to
talk about Medicaid and so the
next slide and I may have some
of these things wrong I got a
lot of this information off the
website and I know this is in a
period of flux but the
interagency behavioral health
collaborative is a collaborative
that involves by statute at
least fifteen state agencies and
the governor's office and it is
a single statewide health
delivery system so the the
collaborative has lots of arms
and tentacles to reach out and
coordinate with various
different entities but and with
with the public but it allows
state agencies to work together
all across there across their
own.
Mission and what they're
supposed to do to address
behavioral health prevention
treatment and recovery and so
they come up with sure brought.
Policy initiatives recognizing
the different missions of the
different agencies and where
there are opportunities to
collaborate it this is the
vehicle in which they can talk
about that there is an
institution called falling
colors they have a contract for
filing claims in providing
administrative services.
And I wanted to mention that
state funded behavioral health
services and substance abuse
services are funded both by
Medicaid and by state funds
those are separate but they
they're all kind of largely
overseen by the behavioral
health collaborative and I think
that HSD is probably the most
central agency to address
behavioral health needs because
they management a Kate and they
have the behavioral health
services.
Department within the HSD to up
to work on mental health issues
and shut and substance abuse
issues so it's a very big and
growing issue and I see our next
speaker I now call.
Good timing I just finished the
interagency behavioral health
collaborative which means I
cover all the Medicaid slides in
a world wind so it's you I'm
going to miss all and it's it
and and I committee members as
kind of initiation by of fire
hose and this was not intended
to help you fully understand how
each and everyone of those
programs work but just to kind
of set the framework and give
you an idea
Of the complexity and as we go
forward and when we hear bills
if we need to take a little bit
of a side bar to explain how it
works in the context of of the
whole will do that so that you
I have some understanding of of
what we're.
What we're talking about so and
I'll just mention before I
relinquish the the Mike to
Nicole that the rest of my
presentation if we have time to
get to it covers the other
department of state government
decides Human Services so I'll
be talking about department of
health and CYFD in aging and
various others very very briefly
so just so that you get a sense
of how inter inter connected all
of these different programs are
so I'm signing off.
Okay well welcome director
Comeaux and glad you made.
Mated and we're all trying to
figure out how this works but we
are going to turn it over to you
for briefing on Medicaid.
Thanks madam chair and it's
great to be here with you all
today hi Representative Thomson
good to see you guys
so I just a fair warning I have
a seventeen month old and that
almost four year olds in the
background and my mother in law
kindly is here to help and my
husband but some meat some human
dolls is not having a good
morning so we may have a visitor
in a moment here
but I'm gonna go ahead and close
my slides care and I did not get
my eight year my fact sheet I
really apologize yesterday got
away from me with a number of
things so I'm in addition to the
presentation that I'll give you
all today I'm the Medicaid team
has updated ascent of factsheets
I'm I know that you all will
have your hands full anyways
during the session but if there
is any program that you want to
deep dive on we've kind of
updated each of the sections of
the program into a fact sheet
that you guys and what services
that folder that I sent over to
you all and you can look through
and and pull up anything that
you want to go deeper into I'm
going to leave you guys some
time for questions so I'll
probably just talk for
madam chair about half of the
hour maybe forty five minutes
because they will long winded
sometimes and then make sure you
guys have time to ask me
anything that I didn't include
it it sounds like Karen was
going to cover some of the the
really really big aspects like
benefits between Medicare and
Medicaid so I pull that out of
my presentation for when I spoke
with you all last year but if
there's anything that needs
further explanation let me now
and at in addition to kind of
just giving some more of the.
No high level but New Mexico
Medicaid nuance in the
presentation I also tried to
just give you all a little bit
of an update on kind of where
things are program medically so
still a Medicaid on a one but
kind of just with the New Mexico
lands and what we've got going
on here in the state there is
our I'm only gonna present the
first set of slides and then
there's a really long appendix
as well this program is massive
and I feel I this is my third
year here now unbelievably and I
feel like I learned something
about the program every day
And
you know I feel that I try to
cram this all into such a short
period of time for you also it's
there for you to look out later
if you want to get into anything
further and we're always happy
to take time with you guys my
cell phone numbers in the
presentation my inbox is a bit
of a black hole these days so if
you need something more urgently
please feel free to shoot me
attacks and I'll get right back
to you guys and I'm make sure
that we answer any questions
that you have especially during
session
but all is okay I'm gonna try
that we use teams on that on the
administration side so what we
try to put my Dick here.
So I think that is working can
you all see the slide deck yes
we can I'm very impressed I can
never get it to work for me so.
Thank you the lucky day.
Billy ray so okay all right let
me go ahead and get going here
so again the over arching agency
that Medicaid and is part of is
the Human Services Department
and I we try to really operate
as one department rather than
each of the divisions so are
throughout session you'll see
our presentations and they are
all formatted very much the same
dependent let you all know
what's groups with white and and
that cohesive nature of of the
department
so the mission for the Human
Services department is to
transform lives working with our
partners we design and deliver
innovative high quality health
and Human Services that improve
their security and promote
independence for New Mexicans in
their communities.
I'm many of you I'm sure have
seen these four goals you've
seen them and that that enter
I'm I'm certain for folks who've
been around and
we really take them seriously
it's how we develop our
strategic plan so we basically
take each of these four goals
the first of which is to improve
the value range of services that
we provide to ensure that every
qualified New Mexican receives
timely and accurate budget and
from there we build out all of
the programmatic efforts that
will engage in and then we take
what you all present us with
during session and make sure
they either it fits within one
of our existing goals or
determine if we need to adjust
those goals to be responsive to
to what we hear out of you all
from session so
Our strategic plans also online
so that you can see what we're
up to the Department over all in
all the links to the agency
information at the end of the
power point as well.
So Medicaid on its own has its
own vision and goals I'm and
that is to become the the
future.
To become the Medicaid agency of
the future that we really
believe that there is a lot of
work to be done to make Medicaid
more easily accessible I'm
really at a push towards making
everything as automated as
possible allowing folks to use
mobile devices wherever possible
to upload documents but also
making sure that we recognize
the ongoing issues of broadband
access in New Mexico so figuring
out how we strike a balance
between those two desires and
needs so I'm the pandemic has.
Certainly challenge at in our
delivery but has created some
some great new opportunities as
well and has I think for a lot
of things but particularly in
Medicaid has really forced us to
really quickly do things that we
never would have thought we
could have achieved and and you
know a year's time normally and
and a state government
requirements so I think you
ought scenes and things like
that in regard to expansion
telehealth capabilities that
happens overnight that normally
I would have taken years to get
through so I'm we're excited to
build up high and the moment to
and I and hope that it is you
know kind of a bright spot that
comes out of this incredibly
challenging time.
Medicaid guiding principles that
you guys will see also in all of
our presentations I'm there is a
lot of federal revenue to be
drawn down through the Medicaid
program particularly in the
states with as high a poverty
level as we have here in New
Mexico and I'll talk about the
funding a little bit more in a
minute and how that works
but one of the things that we
always I want to reiterate make
sure that folks understand is
that while we always in top
optimally leverage those federal
funds to improve the health of
New Mexicans were also very
intent on doing so within strict
compliance with the law and so
there's a tendency for folks to
get creative sometimes and so
we've stuck this in there to to
let folks know it's it's a
really strong stance that we
want to hold here and so you'll
see that and all the
presentations this I'm image to
the right I is also in our data
back which I am excited to show
you guys a couple of images from
I for those of you who were here
last year you saw the data back
that we produced volume one and
this is volume two and at it is
available for you all to look at
now online and they believe
actually day
they are dropping them into the
boxes your mailboxes at the
capitol as well for if you are
up here and one hard copy
And at.
There is just a wealth of
information so this graph image
in particular shows.
The Medicaid and chip recipients
as a percentage of population up
by states as of July twenty
twenty so you can see that New
Mexico as a percentage of our
population actually has the
highest number of Medicaid
enrollees in the country we did
not use to be in that what we
were about third but through
that.
Public health emergency we have
really seen unprecedented growth
in the program that moved us up
to that what.
Okay.
And I'm sorry one more note on
that basis just that.
For that reason as an agency we
feel at an immense
responsibility to make sure that
not only are we providing
adequate benefits and ensuring
ease of access to care but that
we're also looking to make sure
that we provide adequate
reimbursement to our provider
network right now certainly the
largest payer in the state and
therefore need to make sure that
those providers get the
reimbursement that they need
from us as a pair source where
they don't have a lot of room to
look for shifting costs in other
commercial insurance that they
would receive payment from.
Okay I'm just a familiar as you
all because you'll hear from a
lot of us I think throughout
session again this is Justin
over.
Overview of the department and
An overview of the department
this is a livia.
And at and these are all of the
divisions underneath the office
of the secretary.
And I'm for those of you who are
as familiar the income support
division in particular is is
kind of the front face of
Medicaid so they are the field
offices and more Scott some that
had a are the folks who are out
there in rolling individuals who
come into the offices in person
to receive benefits they're also
the folks you know operate the
higher level of the call center
so in folks call into their
applications and that's who
they're speaking to you as the
folks on the income Services
Department.
And then additionally the
behavioral health services
division is truly just part of
Medicaid we are we see ourselves
as kind of joints they're
responsible for working very
closely with us for the delivery
of behavioral health services.
Again reference for those of you
who have to talk to us a lot but
wonder where everyone situated
here is that a breakdown of the
structure of the Medicaid agency
I'm just for your reference at a
later point.
Okay so I think you're probably
covered this but Medicaid is
that as a jointly funded are
state and federal program and at
states while we working in
coordination with the federal
government on that funding we
also establish our own
eligibility standards determine
the type rate and payment and
duration and scope of services
based on the parameters that
they outline so typically based
on the floor I sometimes the
ceiling but often just a floor
where states are allowed to
build from in designing or
Medicaid programs.
To give you all the national
context Medicaid nationally it
covers one in every five
Americans
over forty percent of all births
in the federal government pays
sixty one point five percent of
all Medicaid costs.
Federal spending is above three
hundred fifty billion annually I
and also provides essential
funding as I mentioned
previously to ensure safety net
providers like hospitals that
provide care for an answer and
they're served communities I
have the kind of funding that
they need.
That the graph earlier that you
already saw our sorry Matt.
What did you cover and state
plan amendments and waivers.
Yes and and and there okay I'm
so it sounds like you guys went
through this already but
essentially the way that the
Medicaid agency operates is
under state plan and that is how
the basics of the programmer to
provide those are things that
CMS at seas as the approved an
essential operations of Medicaid
at when we want to do something
that's new or experimental work
a demonstration we apply for a
waiver and there's a bunch of
different mechanisms that we can
do that through so I'm currently
in the centennial care program
which is the managed care
portion of Medicaid and all talk
about that a little bit more in
a moment is operating under
what's called an eleven fifteen
waiver
we're also working on it too
currently estimates amendment to
our eleven fifteen reverts makes
programmatic changes and that
will be submitted in March so
we'll continue talking about
those changes
I think we we mentioned some of
them in the inner
Okay.
I'm so we talked a little bit
about how we're structured how
we operate under what legal
authority at the centers for
Medicare and Medicaid services
is the federal oversight body
that we're responsible to sell
off and if you're trying to work
on us with something they were
working with CMS waiting for
them to get back that's the
entity that provides us approval
on all those state plans state
plan amendments and waivers I'm.
The I think one of the most
interesting pieces and and
Rary helpful for you all to know
when you're asking for
programmatic changes or changes
in the way that we decide to
provide reimbursement in the
state I is for you all to
understand how Medicaid is
financed so as I said it's
jointly funded
And at the way that we are
funded is through this federal
matching federal medical
assistance percentage called F.
map.
Try to hand her off give me one
moment.
I.
New Mexico because of the level
of poverty in the state I
actually received one of the
highest at matching rates in the
country so the way that the F.
not calculation is constructed
it basically ensures that the
government pays a larger portion
for covering the cost of the
Medicaid programs in states with
the lower per capita income as
you all will see in a moment
here.
This is from the data book as
well but shows the per capita
income.
You.
So what will they cut us off.
I apologize.
So.
It the I as you can tell here
New Mexico you can probably see
my mouse is right down here so
third from the bottom in per
capita personal income so as a
result for every dollar that the
state invests in general fund we
normally receive back about
three dollars and sixty five
cents from the federal
government so it's a pretty
incredible return on investment
for the state to drawdown that
kind of federal revenue during
the public health emergency
states received an extra six
point two percent on top of our
existing match that was an act
of Congress and that was
basically a recognition of the
fact that we were going to have
growth in the.
Growth in the population that we
would not have budgeted for and
at the that gave states those
additional funds to cover that
population.
That additional match means that
now for the past.
About nine months I'm when we
invest the dollars state general
fund we've been able to draw
down four dollars and seventy
six cents and federal dollars to
support the program.
Sure you you all have seen some
of those numbers and what that
looks like to the statement it's
at later in the presentation as
well.
Okay so finally just from kind
of the basics high level there
are two ways that Medicaid
programs are operated either as
the for service programs or is
managed care programs or both in
New Mexico we have a small fee
for service.
Hi component of the program that
means that essentially.
Physicians or providers provide
the service and that service is
reimbursed by the state directly
there are primarily know that
this point native Americans in
that population of the remainder
of the population I believe it's
about eighty six percent the
numbers of the slides in a
minute are in the managed care
side the way that managed care
Medicaid works is essentially
the state's contract with
managed care organizations the
three the operate here in New
Mexico are Blue Cross blue
shield Presbyterian western sky.
And we contract with that on a
per member per month basis and
we provide them a capitation
rate so a set dollar figure
based on a lot of analysis about
what the populations needs will
be on that monthly basis we
provide the that amount and it's
capped and they have to operate
within that amount so if there
expenditures are less they have
the ability to have some profit
which is capped in our contracts
that three percent anything
above that they have to give
back to the state fifty percent
but if they spend more of their
population has higher acuity and
they fail to
appropriately manage that
populations care an insurer.
Sample that diabetic individuals
are getting follow ups getting
there materials etcetera they
can have costs that exceed that
capitation and on that side of
the risk arrangement they absorb
all that additional cost we
don't provide any of the
additional funding on that side
of their estrangement.
Okay I'm going to enrollment to
give you awesome New Mexico
contacts so that was kind of the
overview of the program how are
operated our federal oversight
and how we are funded and then
the way that we're structured
fee for service and managed
care.
I'm so now talk about where we
are from an enrollment
perspective to let you know and
how many people were talking
about when we talk about what
Medicaid doing here in New
Mexico.
So I'm beginning and I.
Let's see the beginning of March
so the beginning of the public
health emergency we.
I'm.
It was the tax for madam chair
in the beginning of the public
health emergency the Medicaid
enrollment was about eight
hundred and thirty six thousand
individuals I'm.
As of November at our enrollment
was nine hundred one thousand
total beneficiaries we
anticipate to have nine hundred
thirty one thousand by June and
then after the public health
emergency declaration comes to
an end the maintenance of effort
requirement which I'll talk
about a little bit when we get
to the COVID section of the
flights
would come to an end and so we
would expect to see some of our
enrollment decline and I'll give
you more information out why
that will be in a second.
So currently like I said it's
actually eighty two percent of
the population is enrolled in
managed care.
I forty three percent of all New
Mexicans are currently enrolled
in Medicaid that's up from forty
percent at the beginning of the
public health emergency.
And forty three percent of the
beneficiaries are children fifty
eight percent of New Mexico
children are enrolled in
Medicaid.
That's up from fifty six percent
at the beginning of the PTA at
seventy two percent of all
births in New Mexico are covered
by Medicaid you all I think site
and that national contacts that
about forty percent of births
are covered nationally just to
give you a sense of the kind of
poverty that we're facing and
are the responsibility of the
program here in New Mexico that
number is only updated annually
we actually don't have the most
current data in that percentage
that we actually believe that
the larger and you can see it's
been about a two percent
increase student three percent
increase in all of the other
sections so we think that number
is closer to about seventy five
or seventy six percent at this
time.
I'm this is also an image from
the data Buck and gives you all
the census of your counties and
what the Medicaid.
And check recipient at
populations look like by county
as a percentage also in the data
bucket there is dollar figures
so what Medicaid expands in your
county is that you all can see
some of that there really just
staggering numbers there Sierra
County in particular is almost
eighty percent of that county
covered by Medicaid.
Well.
A lot of revenue driving
particularly some of those rural
hospitals and and some of those
counties.
Okay that's a little bit more
context and at Kaiser how these
fantastic infographics that we
is borrow and so that the site
is down at the bottom there
there's a lot more on New Mexico
but I thought these three were
probably the most interesting to
pull for you also you can see
kind of at the coverage of folks
in the state here.
and see that sixty five percent
of adult Medicaid enrollees in
New Mexico are working I'm now
this is data from the prior year
and doesn't take into account I
believe it's about fifty
thousand jobs that have been
lost so and that number may be
different now
and fifty seven percent of
children with special healthcare
needs are covered by Medicaid in
New Mexico that number is
probably higher now as well post
pandemic the last thing that I
think it's pretty interesting is
to see the make up of Medicaid
enrollees and their expenditures
so well adults and children make
up eighty percent of the
enrollees the account for sixty
four percent of the spending.
Elderly and disabled population
make up twenty percent of our
enrollees that account for
thirty six percent of the
spending.
Okay so this is to give you all
a sense have you seen my notes
to do I need to put a
presentation about.
Yes okay.
The letter B. L..
Okay.
I'm sorry to holler at me
so.
This is to give you all a sense
of kind of what has happened in
the last year in New Mexico so
the bottom line here at the
start Green Line shows you what
are normal Medicaid projection
would have looked like so prior
to the public health emergency
the growth in the program is
about point one percent every
month and at the slow growth
pattern and it's been that way
for a long time.
I with the exception of huge of
policy changes like the Medicaid
expansion out of the affordable
Care Act.
But I'm.
You can see here at the start of
the public health emergency in
March as I mentioned we had
about a hundred and thirty seven
enrollees and the growth just
began to climb really
extensively I'm the three lines
here give you a sense of what is
likely to happen with the public
health emergency declaration
comes to an end so.
Should have structure this
different public comment at the
beginning so that you guys can
see what the requirement was
under progress so I'll just go
ahead and say it but I do the
families first current virus
responds Act at that six point
two percent was given to states
at to support this population as
I mentioned but in doing that
Congress also give us a
maintenance of effort
requirement and they said you
cannot December all anyone who
has been on the program
affective March eighteenth going
forward until the end of the
public health emergency if you
want to keep drying down this
additional match.
So I told you guys we normally
grow at about point one percent
month over month we also
normally drop off about seven
thousand individuals every month
it's about one percent of our
population.
And that is just because of
normal administrative renewal
process these folks income
change this population is very
likely to move between jobs and
have their incomes fluctuate
quite a bit so they move on and
off of Medicaid also federal
requirements to update your
information if folks bill to do
that we have to administratively
terminate them from the program
and then they can provide the
information to come right back
on but that does we do have some
turn their that happens let
government with the maintenance
of effort requirement in place
we're not having any individuals
really roll off the program and
less three reasons they pass the
way you move out of the state or
they elect to be removed from
Medicaid program.
So it is instead of point one
percent growth month over month
we had on average one point five
percent growth month over month
and the program so very
significant and very costly and
that particularly a capitated
managed care arrangements so
every individual that we have
come on to the program we have
to pay that monthly capitation
for them no matter their
utilization of care or not so
you can imagine how quickly
those expenditures grow that
permit per per month average
expenditure is about five
hundred and fifty dollars for
every person.
But for some of the higher
acuity populations like the
developmentally disabled
populations or the long term
care populations it can be up to
twelve thousand dollars a month
so depending it really does
increase cost pretty quickly so
what this graph shows you is the
current public health emergency
declaration this first drop off
I when it comes to an end that
means about for requirement will
go away and all of those
individuals who are potentially
no longer financially eligible
or have failed to return their
information when we issue it to
them at that time which will be
I currently under current law at
some time in that the summer out
in July
those folks will start to roll
off I'm from the electronic data
sources that we have we think
that's about half of the
population that we're carrying
It's about eighty seven thousand
individuals who are being
maintained on the program so
whenever the public health
emergency comes to an end we
think about forty to fifty
thousand individuals will need
to be transition to another
source of coverage.
I'm giving you guys a lot and I
was going to leave time for
questions at the end of course
but if you have questions in
between please feel free to jump
in.
I'm.
Okay these alternative wines and
scenarios that you see are just
if the public health emergency
extends one more time it would
extend through September and
then if it extends another time
based on the assessment of where
we are with vaccination
percentages exciter at it would
continue through December and
then folks would start to roll
off.
Okay this is just another image
for folks to see kind of what
the enrollment has looked like
you can see what started to
happen in April these lines
right here I enrollment started
to pick up very significantly
and then you can see this is
where we're currently projecting
and about public health
emergency declaration and that
the role last kind of back to
our normal enrollment levels.
Okay.
This is kind of a at more Copa
slide and I have one other
section for you all the and
because I think some of you are
also particularly familiar with
the waiver populations and some
of the EDD activity that's been
happening so
This is chilling to say that I'm
we are doing our best but this
is that a an unbelievable left
that the staff has been
incredible and taking advantage
of every waiver authority that
we can to respond during the
public health emergency but it
has been a real big during on
resources and so one of the
areas where we know we could be
doing better.
It is in our consolidated call
center so with this growth in
enrolments at we saw I.
Two point nine times more calls
in twenty twenty then on average
and we were in the midst of
implementing a brand new call
center so we had to keep on
track with that contractual
agreement so we did put them in
place and we try to make some
quick adjustments based on the
projections that we were
building around the pandemic but
at random to really significant
challenging significant
challenging significant
challenges in staffing that call
center and training folks during
the COVID so wait times have
been longer than we would want
them to be and we're working
really hard to address that but
if you all hear concerns about
that we always want to hear and
continued to work to make
improvements there we're working
hard with the vendor to get
folks working remotely so we
don't continue to have a COVID.
I'm outbreaks that because
additional folks to be out but
it was pretty hard to train
folks remotely and then make
sure they're being careful with
sensitive information from
remote locations so this is that
just to let you all know that
that enrollment has meant.
That we are not at.
All the way up to speed with all
the things that we would like to
be and so I'm always happy to
hear from you all if you hear
that there's areas of concern.
Okay I'm probably going to check
myself on time away much longer
than I wanted to some of the
speed up a little bit and folks
feel free to jump in
So to be eligible for the
Medicaid program prior to prior
to the affordable Care Act
There were specific low income
populations elderly and persons
with disability children and
pregnant women and some parents
after the affordable Care Act
passed states who chose to
expand their Medicaid we're able
to enroll adults up to a hundred
and thirty eight percent of the
federal poverty level.
New Mexico made that decision
so I will give you a sense of
what that means I had just in
dollars so for a single
individual that's an individual
earning about fourteen hundred
dollars a month and for a family
of four.
Learning about three thousand
dollars a month
Now for our children the
coverage goes up a little bit
higher and this is a tool that
we actually built in
coordination with the pool and
the health insurance exchange
during the public health
emergency to let folks know
where they can get coverage
we're really lucky in New Mexico
to actually have a pretty full
continuum of coverage there
still some gaps but this shows
you kind of by income where you
would enroll so as I was saying
for children ages zero to five
Medicaid actually goes up to
three hundred percent of the
federal poverty level then you
can see when you get up to four
hundred percent you become
eligible for coverage on the
health insurance exchange and
then folks you don't qualify for
coverage in either of these two
pools can look to provide
coverage on the insurance pool.
Okay and Medicaid has
approximately forty categories
of eligibility they're all at
the end of the slide deck in the
appendix if folks are interested
but to give you a sense of the
categories their children
families pregnant women adults
long term care recipients and
individuals who are eligible for
both Medicare and Medicaid.
I'm.
Some of these categories have a
full range of services while
others are limited so for
example family planning is
limited to just those family
planning services and pregnancy
related Medicaid is related to
only services while you're
pregnant and then two months
after pregnancy I know that's
something that I've been talking
to some of you about and that
and that interim it was really
one of my desires and coming
here to extend post part of
Medicaid eligibility and so I I
know we've got some challenges
financially right now with the
budget and expanding the program
but for those of you could ask
them questions about that that
is something that the program
will be looking to DO hopefully
the budget picture becomes
better through the end of this
year I am hopeful that we will
get to a better place and be
able to look at some of those
expansions.
This is a summary of the
benefits for your reference the
federal government has mandatory
benefits that we have to cover
on the left and optional
benefits that we cover on the
right you all last year when I
shut the slide asked me which
ones we cover in New Mexico and
so I have it slide in the
appendix that shows exactly
which ones we have more.
We talked a little bit about
this fee for service Medicaid
and the services that are
offered through that side of the
program
but essentially it's it's all of
those mandatory benefits into
the additional optional benefits
that we offer on the managed
care side the match.
I'm however beyond that on the
managed care side of the house
which is referred to as
centennial care two dot oh
that at the NCOs are actually
allowed to offer additional
benefits above and beyond that
that they cover through
their dollars to try to provide
incentives for folks to engage
in healthy behaviors and things
like that so there's us into new
care awards program actually
that's a lot like that rewards
programs you may have on your
credit card so if folks go get a
a well baby check they can be
eligible to get a free
What what is in there now
I think it's like a.
But one of those the sleep boxes
that we've started giving away
for safe sleeping for babies so
things like that are built into
the managed care side that are
additional service as.
what we just talking about
benefits and how they're broken
down across all the Medicaid
populations and this is
certainly not all of that but a
good gives you a good sense we
also.
Operate the justice involves at
utilization program it's called
just health so per federal
regulation that we are not allow
to cover incarcerated
individuals and in New Mexico we
define an incarcerated
individual as after thirty days
or more detainment in a prison
or jail actually a pretty
incredible decision that was
made here prior to my coming
that allows for making sure that
folks don't have a gap in
coverage to end up spending a
short time and then going back
out so.
I'm happy to talk more about
that with folks who have any
additional questions.
Okay we are really high sense of
the budget and where we are
heading into this year the way
that the Medicaid budget is
constructed is the is the lack
of model so I used to be a
policy person I'm a lawyer by
trade and I got here and I'm a
finance person.
because Medicaid is a giant
budget and it is incredibly
important to our operation but
the lack model means that we I
look at the last two fiscal year
sorry the last fiscal year and
then that the year had in making
our projections so the estimated
expenditures for fiscal year
twenty total six point six
billion the expenditures in
twenty one or seven point three
billion in fiscal year twenty
two looking at seven point two
billion.
This table to shows the
expenditures and what those look
like at the change from the
prior projection is the bottom
line so you can kind of see
where adjustments happened but
the more important slide for you
all and the important numbers to
see this row that shows the
state revenue surplus or
shortfall so coming out of
fiscal year twenty last year we
talked to well we had a surplus
there will be coming out with
at about nineteen million dollar
surplus which is great news and
that is essentially we started
getting about six point two
percent to help with the
pandemic but we didn't have the
growth in the population right
away we started getting that
money in January of twenty
twenty but I do based on those
enrollment graphs are enrollment
didn't pick up so needed at our
cost until really March and
April.
We had some money left over
FY twenty one the last time we
saw you all the public health
emergency had an extended but it
just was
I believe January eight and that
extension will be effective
January twenty first.
Was effective January twenty
first and that means that we now
are seeing a small surplus
coming out of fiscal year twenty
one as well so
about forty five million to the
good coming out of twenty one.
and then heading in the fiscal
year twenty to this is where the
problem kind of continues to
move forward every time we
talked you also as a public
health emergency declaration is
forward.
So does the shortfall so we have
a projected hundred seventy
million dollar shortfall in
fiscal year twenty to and the
reason for that as you all saw
is that our population is
growing.
The maintenance of effort will
come to an end and so will the
additional funding the only half
of that population is really
gonna fall off so our base
budget doesn't account for the
cost of those folks who are
gonna stay on that we've brought
on so I'm that's where we end up
having this little.
Issue and kind of recovering
from the public health emergency
so national association of
Medicaid directors and I think
governor's association has
started talking about a similar
recommendation to the new
administration and Congress have
talked about hope where
potentially a continuation of
the additional asked Matt I
after the maintenance of effort
requirement and so that states
have a minute to let their
economies recover and get folks
back into other coverage
mechanisms and hopefully get
their budgets back to be
balanced.
Okay.
This is the C. also so what I
just saw a revenue from a six
point two percent looks like it
has brought in about a hundred
twenty three million additional
dollars in fiscal year twenty
and two hundred and sixty two
million in fiscal year twenty
one.
You'll see this more throughout
session but what it shows is
that the federal share and how
it has increased so
significantly in the last year
and then you can see it down on
the bottom where we're at.
General fund needed and the
general fund at that we are
currently expected to receive
and and that gap there.
Okay a couple risk factors to
the budget.
Almost as at least fifteen
minutes I promise I'm the at
risk factors of the budget are
obviously the prolonged health
and economic crisis employment
and unemployment uncertainty
continued enrollment changes the
duration and amount of increased
federal match in changes to the
managed care rates that's pretty
we do on like why that's an
issue but I'm happy to talk
about sex later and then finally
potential future risks what is
the most critical risks here is
we try to provide some support
providers during the really
during the public health
emergency and we continue to
hear from them that utilization
is down as a result revenue is
down for a lot of them and then
alternatively some how much
higher costs and so I will be
watching for kind of the
financial well being of our
providers in the coming months.
And then kind of the two highest
risks that we're watching right
now are the cost of the vaccine
not currently built into our
budget so the federal government
is covering the cost of the
vaccine but Medicaid is required
to cover the cost of the
administration of the vaccine
And I will show you the numbers
what that looks like and then
finally we've been working on
the implementation of an Indian
managed care entity and
depending on the enrollments New
Mexico lab of that I you know
that could also increase our
costs and some of the native
American population that's
currently in the fee for service
side moves and I managed care
side we start paying capitated
roots.
Okay.
So this is that the coverage of
the vaccine.
we've built this out to show the
single vaccine and at the single
dose vaccine in the double dose
right now the double this is the
only one out you are are I'm
sure likely aware so if we had a
sixty percent compliance rate
and we're nearing the published
Medicare rates for that we we
need to add an additional.
About two million dollars to our
general fund I think the hope is
that as a higher general fund
need I think that I hope is for
higher compliance rates so
closer to three million is what
we expected need over the next
year year and a half I'm not
significant really when you look
at the huge shortfall number
there but again just things for
folks to keep in mind is those
numbers have some other risk
factors at play I'm.
To give you all just a sense of
what's happening really from
Medicaid for the vaccine
administration
We are will cover that like I
said at the chair right we've
submitted a state plan amendment
to do that some back and forth
with CMS that we went ahead and
told folks to four R. M. C. as
are reimbursing at that right
now and then the current federal
requirement wouldn't allow for
Medicaid to actually cover
vaccine administration for those
populations that I mentioned to
you that are limited benefit
like pregnancy related Medicaid
for the subpopulation urgency
medical services for aliens
group and also would allow us to
cover it for the COVID and
insured population which is in
uninsured group that we've
covered testing entry testing
for so they are I would not
cover those we submitted a
waiver to go ahead and cover
those population so we make sure
that there's reimbursement for
vaccination as broadly as
possible I talked about this
earlier instead of going in
order so this is just talks
about the maintenance of effort
requirement in the extension of
the public health emergency and
this is just to give you all a
sense of how the pandemic is
impacting at Medicaid
individuals in particular you
think you've heard secretary
Scrase talk about this quite a
bit but I'm there is a mentira
it likely had for folks and
lower.
I in in higher poverty levels to
actually get COVID and now we
also have new data that I think
he'll show and AGFC in SFC that
demonstrate that unfortunately
not populations also passing
away at higher levels.
Okay how do you get to us.
This is all of the mechanisms
for folks who are trying to
enroll on that the left side
here there's chat mail fax Tax
email live voice agents and of
course online and you can go in
office three public health
emergency ordering curbside
folks can still go ahead and do
that just come in their cars and
their mass and then on the right
hand side is my information and
that's my cell phone and again
tax is the best way to get me
I'm.
Here's how you get to it and
also all of our performance
measures are now posted online
on these kind of
graph that you can manipulate to
see how we're doing on all of
our performance measures that we
work on with the LFC okay
question.
Thank you.
This.
At a general comment
it you can see that more than
forty percent of our population
is on Medicaid.
And once you add the federal
match in the Medicaid budget is
about equal to our overall state
budget so it's it's a very
significant
Programs that we need to pay
close attention to.
I'm raise your hand if you have
a question and again I want to
remind people that there's
another briefing on Medicaid and
how it works from the LFC and
that will include director
Comeaux and secretary Scrase
that I think is next week
sometime.
Representative Anderson.
Representative there we go I
think.
Thank you madam chair I had a
couple of questions it was a
great deal of of very useful
information and of course of.
A great deal of information but
I had a my questions I they go
like this short answers please
of we talked about one point one
percent increase in Medicaid per
month historical then we saw a
jump up in Medicaid host COVID
March time period
now we're expecting a drop off
of Medicaid after the pandemic
is over eighty six eighty seven
thousand people estimated to be
coming off.
Who currently are not allowed to
come off according to federal
law.
That eighty seven thousand is
going to quote find another
source of coverage in the quote
up I was really curious what
your answer is or where they
will provide coverage once they
are kicked out side of Medicaid.
Madam chair representative
Anderson and it's a really good
question so want to make clear
that.
About half of those individuals
of the eighty seven we still
believe are financially eligible
for Medicaid or eligible for
another criteria so we think
about forty thousand forty to
fifty thousand of those will be
transferred into another form of
coverage so their options would
be that health insurance
exchange so if they have didn't
have a job at one point during
the pandemic got on Medicaid
since then have gotten a new job
but have stayed on Medicaid
because there is no reason for
them to change and we didn't
kick them off
they now are no longer income
eligible so when the that that
maintenance of effort
requirements and will be working
really closely to provide the
health insurance exchange with
the list of individuals and will
also be putting notices out to
them lots of communication to
make sure that they're also
looking at employer sponsored
coverage opportunities and then
also looking at the pool is an
option.
If neither one of those our exit
for them but it is a really big
concern for us that's a lot of
people and the timing could be
odd with trying to make sure
folks are getting vaccinated as
well that wasn't a short answer
I feel during sex.
Thank you very much and if I
could add Representative that
even though the health insurance
exchange has a set open
enrollment period in November
December when you lose coverage
like losing Medicaid or losing
employer sponsored the you have
a new special enrollment period
so people will have a couple of
months in which they're eligible
no matter what time of year it
is to enroll in coverage through
the exchange and assuming those
people were lowincome at one
point and adjust fairly not
eligible for Medicaid anymore
should qualify for subsidies on
the exchange to help cover the
costs.
Thank you very much for that
chair chair lady
then my next question goes to of
something like I think on slide
number thirty four we saw a
final statement that was sort of
a change from prior in that was
sixty seven million dollars
change and I thought she was on
a seven point three billion
dollar budget that's.
That's a lot of money
and it was bigger prior changed
in the prior change numbers
shown on slide number thirty
four so so it was an estimate
because it was in FY twenty one
I think of so my real question I
think is.
Is the gap between is the new
change from prior number
expanding rapidly.
yes thank you very much if I
could real quick I have part of
the faces on web zoom web
knocking off the total number on
FY twenty one but I see that
sixty seven and I think that
sixty seven million in and it
really goes to art F. twenty if
we have a version of fifty two
million of we have a only a
state revenues surplus of of
nineteen point four four three
million.
Yeah and madam chair at
Representative Anderson so.
We actually have a total surplus
is about seventy million for
fiscal year twenty it's just
that we've already reverted the
fifty two I and we had a change
from prior an additional
nineteen thirty projection that.
And then the sixty seven that
you see that the change from
prior I'm the six point two
percent.
That's extra that we got from
the public health emergency it
totals anywhere between sixty
five million and seventy million
per quarter so that she.
Thank you very much for that
answer madam chair just one
quick final comment to the
committee and that is in to this
presentation I am personally
very concerned about the.
A child suicide rate New Mexico
and so far I have been a
noticeable I've noticed that
term and that need is not
discussed why anywhere not
necessarily expected in today's
presentation but in the press of
as we go into session I am very
interested going forward on what
we're going to be looking at as
a way to reverse this acceptable
trend thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative and
that's a really good a point
Next I have Representative
Matthews.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me.
Yes we can hear you okay I thank
you madam chair and and thank
you for your presentation that
was so bring an interesting up I
my question is how many or
percentage of New Mexico and New
Mexicans receive their health
care coverage through their
employment.
Representative Matthew that's a
good question and I actually do
have the number I just don't
have it in my head so let me
shoot that to you following the
presentation I might be able to
pull it up while we're while
we're going through other
questions as well okay.
Madam chair if I could ask a
follow up question
And I'm trying to figure out
sure where those people may
appear in some of these numbers
It is I'm in do we know well let
me sorry let me ask the question
this way there is a percentage
of is a high percentage
something like forty percent of
people who are getting.
Medicaid are employed do we
know.
The.
Industries the the employers.
Where that's the case that they
are getting their health
insurance through Medicaid and
even though they have
employment.
Madam chair and Representative
Matthews so
We.
We probably do have a sense of
that when they fill their
application they do tell us that
they're employed
I don't think it's a mandatory
the old so that we may not know
exactly who their employer is
but I'm I'm happy to look into
that and let you know and what
data we do have available that
what will pull that and then
also make sure that we find the
percentage for you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
And I will be able to somebody
else.
Thank you this is so we have the
call for just a couple more
minutes is there one last
question from anyone.
And again I encourage everyone
to go to the training next week
and follow up with us with the
director with your questions
Representative Terrazas.
The one on mute.
In one let me talk thank you
madam chair
Nicole thank you for the.
Presentation a lot of
information real fast.
Prior to you representative
Thompson mentioned something
about a thirteen year waiting
list to get.
That in that so it gave me some
concern why would take thirteen
years to get on that and Office
of subject there was a another
question that I had concerning
the vaccination distribution I
didn't hear anything about that
we're we're I'm getting some
constituents I've got a big got
veteran constituency here.
And the wondering if there's a
way number of this is a proper
time to ask this but if there's
a way to get some of that those
vaccines distributed through the
VA clinic and so I'll just throw
that out there and see what
comes out of that but I really
am interested on that thirteen
year waiting list that was
mentioned earlier.
Madam chair and Representative
trousers that
Very good questions and yes I'm.
I believe the waiting list is
still thirteen years so we are
responsible for the funding of
that program we tried on the
funding from the general
partners at CMS and we jointly
operate that with the department
of health so they have the kind
of front facing operation of
that we were in can give folks a
better sense of the current
weight last so when you all
speak with them I I at I think
that's a good question to to
have a more in depth discussion
on I will send you all an
updated number I'll get that
from them as well I do know the
in the past year we've done a
lot of work there is a desire to
implement what was called the
supports waiver.
And I'm what that was supposed
to do is I try to provide these
families at a more limited set
of benefits but at least
something while they were
waiting
and so we went through that
process applied for the waiver
it was approved and I know the
department of health has started
to work on getting folks to to
get on that supports weaver
while they have a they have a
three phase plan to work down
the wait list
as well.
and
what's the challenging during
the public health emergencies is
at really getting to folks
getting them to understand what
the supports weaver is and that
they wouldn't lose their place
on the regular waiver list by
taking that support so I think
the uptake has been less than
people would have hoped for.
in addition to that the only
good news is that a lot of those
support services are actually
available to a good percentage
of the population who's on the
wait list is actually currently
on Medicaid but they didn't know
that those were available and
we're taking advantage of them
so we have done a lot of work to
push on our managed care
organizations the three that you
heard us talking about to do
direct outreach and we have some
members on that to all of the
individuals that are on the wait
list to tell them about this
budget so they haven't had to
take the supports we re they've
just been utilizing the services
that were already available to
them
and that's given folks or come
for I think there is this
concern may think they're gonna
lose their place so
that's been at some good news
but I that we list still is long
I know they have a plan to work
it down and I'll make sure to
share it with you all it does
kind of a tale and I represent
of Anderson's comments about
child suicide rates are there's
an appendix I an update on a
waiver amendment that we're
putting in place for high
fidelity wraparound services for
kids it was currently limited to
kids in custody we're now
looking to do kids in custody
and then also kids with any
serious mental illness or
motional discernment and.
That program should be at that
we were getting submitted in
March and once approved we hope
to have that program in place
and expanding across the state
in July so that you know I think
some of these things are kind of
the inter twined so trying to
provide this will continue of
coverage and support for these
kids so I'll make sure to send
some follow up on that on the
vaccine peace deal which is
responsible for that the vaccine
distribution so with are to your
list for them you also might be
able to get it out of Secretary
Scrase if you come to the right
the next week as well he's since
he's leading the mat
my husband secretary at DVS
Veterans Services also also
talked to him about I'm what is
happening at Sam and at some of
the VA clinics and and we'll see
if we can work together to get
you some better answers there
too.
thank you did you fragmented
just a little bit and I didn't
catch that if there's any way
that might have been my internet
I'm not sure but I'd love for
you to reach out to me and and
and give me your husband's
information so that I can have
that conversation
Thank real quick back to what of
what Representative Anderson
was.
It's talking about when it came
to
child suicide we we have seen
some of that and and I feel that
it's because of some of the
children I've had some parents
constituents come.
To me and talk to me and
concerning their children not
going back to school and and and
some of that so thank you so
much madam chair thank you so
much the cold I don't know how
to pronounce your last name but.
Representative I struggled with
yours so I fair at its co well
just the French people of all
the valves I know I love the
food but it's anyway thank you
so much god bless you.
Director com all eight I know
you need to go so you are
welcome to step out as you need
to I was going to add a point
for Representative tries is
about the waiting list issue and
why it's so long so just to be
really clear this is for the
developmental disability waiver
so it's not a waiting list for
all of Medicaid but for a
particular group and unlike
regular Medicaid that once you
meet the qualifications you are
guaranteed access on a waiver of
like DG are we do not guarantee
access even though you may be
qualified it depends on how much
money we have in the budget and
so the real reason why there is
a waiting list of thirteen years
long as we have not invested
enough state funding and it to
fund it
these are generally pretty
expensive that can be ten twelve
fifteen thousand many are way
higher
cost per month and so it is an
appropriation issue and we've
been working on that for number
years.
As an alternative as the
director mentioned we put on an
on application to do that
supports waiver where we can
give some support.
And it to while people are
waiting for a full program and
as you mentioned these are
individuals also have full
Medicaid.
And so just on the regular
Medicaid benefits they can
access some therapies and some
other services that people had
been waiting to get it to the
waiver not knowing that they
could access it as part of the
full Medicaid benefits and so
that's
that's what they're trying to to
do more education and help
people access services under the
regular Medicaid benefit
it while they wait for the full
home and community based waiver
services which are funds all the
services you need in home
instead of institution but the
real reason for waiting list we
haven't invested enough money in
it to
to move that list down.
Thank you chairman Armstrong I
appreciate that very much.
gives me hope that we're.
What we're trying and I I yes
ma'am a question thank you so
much for that thank you thank
you thank you for the question
Yes.
You going
right now I can say for another
minute if you if you wanted to
ask anything else.
I don't see any other questions
so.
What will let you we'll let you
go okay thank you my husband's
information is in the chat
bye everyone great thank you.
and so we have until just a
little bit more time to about
eleven thirty and and will break
so we're going to go back
quickly to Karen just to walk us
through quickly what's in the
rest of.
Of her presentation again to
give you a general sense of the
scope of departments and
programs that we would address
on this committee.
I thank you madam chair so
I only have seven more slides I
think I can get through them in
about five minutes because they
really are again this
Representative.
Of.
Strong said their high level
there just to give you a general
idea of how broadly of health
care issues are addressed and
funded in New Mexico so the next
slide that I wanted to go over
with the department of health
I'll start with the disclaimer
that this is not even remotely
Representative of everything the
department of health does this
is the largest department and
state government it's not the
most expensive that would be HSD
but it's a very very widespread
fraud challenges and mission
that they have
first although I would mention
just from sort of specific
health care things they have
public health offices statewide
I think there county based on
that that offer of those public
health offices offer family
planning they also administer
the women infants and children
nutritional program also called
week.
They have some disease specific
services for health promotion
they track and administer
administer immunizations for
many years public health offices
in New Mexico were I think
poorly funded the funding had
had shrunk or had not kept up
with inflation perhaps but I
believe that their role during
the COVID pandemic has really
big become greatly enhanced and
more and more important so
public health offices you
probably all know where you're
public health offices are in
your district epidemiology again
is incredibly important at this
particular moment in our
country's history because they
track health conditions such as
COVID nineteen statewide so
whenever there's any kind of an
epidemic or a pandemic be it
be it to no I can't bring the
names to money but you know when
it when a public health issue
services in the state it's the
department of health and
epidemiology Office of
epidemiology that follows that
knows about that tracks that and
so that's an important role of
the department of health another
great big role is facilities
management and I just listed the
facilities that they manage
these are big to behavioral
health institute in Las Vegas
Sequoyah adolescent treatment
center for a future of renewable
justice involvement turquoise
lodge for substance abuse rest
rehab center in Roswell the last
one is community program for
fared this is a little bit of a
moving target so I'm not sure if
I left any off that are new or
if any of these have been closed
but again they the department of
health manages quite a
Representative and a rate of
Of facilities across the state.
Going on to the next slide a
little bit more about the family
infant toddler program also
you'll hear that referred to as
the fit program that also
managed by the department of
health that's a program that
provides early intervention
services from birth to age three
for children at risk of
developmental delay and for
their families and they
according to their website the
last number.
That's posted is that they
administer more than fourteen
thousand individual statewide
that so they this is a bigger
program than maybe most of us
appreciate or know about and the
services are provided through
individual providers and
provider agencies statewide.
That's the fifty program I
believe that the
Welcome back to that never mind
so again India which were still
in Department of Health they
have the division of health
improvement which licenses and
regulates all health care
facilities they investigate
abuse neglect and exploitation
of adults in facilities the main
eight agency that does adult
protective services is the aging
and long term Services
Department but there's plenty of
people who don't live in
facilities that all testing gets
to investigate so G. O. H. if
there's an allegation of abuse
in a nursing home for example
that's their domain.
They provide criminal background
checks on potential care givers
and they maintain and operate
the certified nurse aide
registry and that comes along
with the training program and
certification program for nurse
aides.
Again I didn't certainly didn't
cover it all another big program
administered by the department
of health is the medical
cannabis program this program is
regulated under the Lynn and
Erin compassionate use act like
what and it's administered by D.
O. H. the error and by the way
this referenced in that title is
our chair woman's daughter.
Erin.
who was very very passionate
about that topic and help for
the passage of that law.
that Pete in that program again
this is not comprehensive but
patients must be issued and
identification card that's
available only for certain
conditions these are identified
in law what conditions are
permitted to have a prescription
of medical marijuana.
The producers of
of cannabis must be licensed by
the state to sell transport
store or possess cannabis and
for participation in the Lech wa
a doctor has to recommend
medical.
Kind of the state can't just go
to the Department of Health and
say I'd like some it has to go
through a more formal.
There is a task force were of
maybe it's more than a task
force a committee that
it.
Continually evaluates the
effectiveness of this program I
will mention although there are
medical cannabis programs all
over the country now it does
technically still remain illegal
under federal law which.
Has caused certain issues
especially with children who
have been attending school and
who has needed cannabis in order
to keep them free from epilepsy
or other issues now are having
difficulty getting a
prescription for that being able
to attend school.
That's all I mentioned about the
department of health as I said
it's a very very very broad
Department
briefly all we'll talk about the
department of corrections we
have privatized the delivery of
healthcare services to people in
our state of prisons.
Of those services are provided
under contract with a company
called centurion they have
separate contracts for for the
administration or delivery of
pharmaceuticals and for women's
behavioral health so that's the
department of corrections
there's always a lot of
conversation maybe there will be
again this year to bring that
responsibility back in the state
government and as opposed to
contracting it out to the
private sector so you may see
some legislation I don't know.
Then children youth and families
department primarily they are
not providing health care
services however they do
coordinate with their internal
department of protective
services juvenile justice
services and early childhood
services to provide behavioral
health.
For children and those
behavioral health services
include infant and early
childhood mental health services
a statewide resources map which
is really really helpful for the
families that need to provide
those resources are they
identify resources by county and
they are in a cooperative
relationship with HSD regarding
a network of care which I
believe is a website and they
also produce COVID nineteen
behavioral distress resources
that have some have up okay fair
game a little bit because of
COVID nineteen has caused
behavioral stress among children
youth and families to a larger
degree.
The long term care services to
get both representative
Armstrong and I your chair and I
have both worked there and they
have a very broad
mission as well but I the only
thing I'm focusing on here
because they're primarily not
health care delivery agency
although there's a lot of things
that touch on health care.
But I think that it's important
for you to know that all testy
manages the aging and disability
resource center sometimes
shortened to the eighty Garcia
and that is a very very
important center they offer
centennial care home and
community based waiver registry
so the people who are on that
thirteen year waiting list have
registered through the all the
eighty Garcia so that they can
be tracked on and evaluated for
effect for whether or not
they're eligible for certain
programs they also do budget
counseling regarding Medicare
enrollment and they also
provide access to health care
options through the New Mexico
health insurance exchange which
was referenced earlier is now
called the well New Mexico they
do prescription drug assistance
they will help to help you to
evaluate that brown bag full of
drugs that you brought home from
Mexico when you visited there
four years ago and whether you
should still be taking them very
helpful thing and they have a
separate.
Very comprehensive online
service directory that's my last
slide and since Debbie may have
something to add on all testy
I'll turn off turn it over to
her I think I maybe I didn't I
chose not to mention the role of
the area agencies on aging but
of course they do the mail
programs and have a lot of
services in your communities
that are not specifically health
care related to support basic
health and in the aging
population.
Thank you Karen I I I would just
add to Karen went through the
issue focused on the health
related more more directly
health related services out of
these departments but I would
say broadly we can hear we hear
stuff on all sorts of things
from these departments and
as you said aging a long term
services and particularly that
they have a whole structure and
system to manage and fund and
manage the entire state wide
system of senior centers and all
the services that come through
the senior centers of meals and
transportation and and
Other services.
the Human Services Department
beyond Medicaid does
A cash assistance and where in
the awful lot of other
Services
the department of health says
got infinite number of programs
buried within the within the
department
children youth and family does
their adult protective service I
mean children protective
services we often hear things
related to that and also
responsible for foster care and
so we hear and and NAS
guardianship programs
and
So there's there's a lot more
programs but those those are
just wanted to.
To touch on
The variety of even just health
care that we that we see and we
we could be hearing on things
related to any of these
departments and the programs
that they that they were on.
And doctor salat and I realize
that that was a lot to take in
and
We will take take things one
step at a time as we get bills
presented in front of us and
again want to encourage you that
as we have a bill on the agenda
if it's something that you want
to talk about or ask questions
about that we can help you
before the session I'm before
the committee hearing don't
hesitate to
to reach out to the sponsor to
made to the analysts to try and
get
a little bit better
understanding it's not our
intent to
Raul things through without
folks are getting a sense of
what it is really about and
where it fits and so.
with that I will ask if there's
any outstanding questions
Are set to representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair I was
curious how is Karen the
The analyst and.
Erin and others going to be
sharing their information their
analogy on the on the bills
again well if you mail email
directly to us so it will be
emailed should be email the day
before to you via your assistant
so they and madam chair the
analysts should send those out
because you won't have a book in
front of you as we said
committee so we will get those
to you on the day before.
Thank you so much madam chair
you're welcome and I would
assume the minority analysts
will separately send
is and the major analyst will
separately son to the democratic
members hers but Karen's is the
overall committee analysts
nonpartisan and you will get
everyone will get her
of hers or Christie's analysis.
I might I might add and Larson I
haven't holy result this yet I'm
not sure what is expected from
the supervisors who supervised
the committee analysts but the
those might come to you in a
package through Delores because
she has the opportunity to send
to you all at once or they may
get trickled out one at a time
when we finish them from the
individual analyst some of that
is not yet resolved but we will
get them to you just saying I'm
not sure who will be sending
them precisely.
And I see that we have our
minority analysts is joined us
and I apologize for any
confusion about getting you in
the meeting earlier but a
current if you'd like to
introduce yourself to the to the
committee.
Missy is name I don't say.
Okay Kurt we can't hear you
although doesn't show you is
muted so you may have a
microphone issue on your and
just out to
to resolve and we'll let you
introduce yourself all there you
come I see you.
Go ahead.
Yes we hear you thank you.
If you'd like to introduce
yourself and tell us a little
bit about your that grounder.
Okay we lost you there you are
this is down from this is now
and I'm not sure if it's the
microphone is working right now
yeah okay well let me introduce
on Monday
it looks like it microphone is
not is not working okay
yes are you would maybe would
heap and I probably can get this
in another way but maybe he can
put in the chat his contact
information that would be nice
if and.
yes and there is a that all of
your assistance I think should
have a kind of a master list of
all the committee staff and
analysts are so we just had some
missing information on him I
yesterday when we were sending
sending stuff out so.
You madam chair.
Yep.
But will make sure you get that
probably one last thing is to
make sure if all of you would
communicate with to Lawrence
your preferred
email address and in your cell
phone.
I would like to be able to if we
have to get a hold of you by tax
or or whatever reach you but
some people prefer their
everything coming to them at
their
legislative address and some to
their personal
at I personally prefer my
personal because my Legislative
gets inundated with
with constituent on email at
again remember we're gonna send
all the official stuff calendar
analysis everything to your
assistant not to directly but if
we had to reach everyone would
like to know the most expedient
way to do that so if you all
Torrez maybe following up with
you if you haven't reached out
to her to let her know your
preferred method of contact.
Representative Armstrong did you
have another question yes ma'am
thank you madam chair I was
curious about the FIR will it
be.
But in Karen's analysis as well
in that packet.
And we're we still continue to
have the meeting if we don't if
we haven't received that.
So
that can go ahead Karen's I was
just gonna say representative
Armstrong that that won't be
coming from me the legislative
finance committee will have a
mechanism for sending out the
FIR is all of us so I I won't
get them except in the general
way that you all could get them
which is through the website so
they will come from me but all
that Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong tell you about all
the committee approach regarding
FY ours.
so of course our preferences
that there there but it has
things if things are moving
To quickly on occasion we don't
have the FIR so it's not a it's
not an absolute can't be heard
without the F. I. R. but I think
you know ninety eight percent of
the time we do have it and it
will be available online if not
having been sent to you
directly.
Thank you so much madam chair
and thank you may I may I just
add one more thing which is
oftentimes last session and so
far this session if I don't have
the FIR I'd indicate that what
under the section of my analysis
that is about the finances
because normally I just let them
tell you about the financial
impact if I haven't gotten an
FIR I say this analysis was
completed without an FIR which
has not been available to me at
this time.
So that's the most common thing
Representative Armstrong is that
our analysts are working without
an FIR but not that we won't
have it when we ultimately hear
the bill and we do as soon as we
know
what the schedule is we not only
alerts
all the analysts but also alert
LFC so that they know to
prioritize which which bills are
coming up next.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you anything anything
else.
we will continue to review the
process or fine tune as we go
forward with each committee
meeting
Torrez you had.
Madam I just want you all to
know that I watch for those FIR
is and I alert them as soon as I
know and I watch for them before
the meeting and so that you we
we have I I brought.
It and the I also try and do
at least a potential projection
of bills out four analysts and
and LFC a couple meetings I had
it's not a final agenda because
we may have to make some
adjustments
but particularly if if Sanchez
of asked to move their bill or
whatever but I as we start
notifying
Sanchez says to anticipated date
and alerting analysts and LFC
see what we think is coming is
coming up so we try and not keep
it a surprise
for those who need to do their
work to get ready.
Representative Matthews.
I thank you madam chair
gosh what was my question are we
typically gonna need for three
hours.
Our is at today so that we may
for a while we can't meet any
law ever do anymore bills and
what we could that the panelists
can prepare for but for the next
few weeks when we're not going
to the floor and we're only
doing committees we we don't
have to rush to get done it town
to get to the floor so we've got
some additional time up to
up to noon and I intend to
trying to fill the time and if
we get through an agenda early
then that's okay but we will
make good use of our time that's
in the next few weeks as devoted
to Canadian time
after we start going to the
floor I assume that it'll kind
of be back to a little bit more
normal of a mix of floor and
committees and so the time may
be a little shorter but you
should plan plan the morning
okay so madam chair we we
basically should block out eight
thirty to noon yes okay okay.
I know it's long but that's will
have
that's our that's our charge to
to focus on getting the
committee worked on for now.
Anything else.
All right I put my contact in
the chat the cell phone personal
email
please members don't hesitate to
reach out on if you need to and
otherwise we will see you all
back here at eight thirty on
Monday morning.
And we are adjourned thank you.
This is the still have the in
the meeting for us.
And.
