Your.
Representative Roger Montoya I'm
here thank you.
Representative Lujan we start
off the.
Representative Liz Thompson
here.
Representative Phelps Anderson
is excused yes also all three
are excused okay
Vice chair Joanne Ferrari I'm
here.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong
I'm here.
I believe we have a quorum so we
will get started and
with house bill two oh two and
Representative Dixon and we've
got your experts just let me
take a moment to tell the
audience welcome to the house
health and Human Services
Committee if you were not to
participate in our committee
before I just want to let you
know we will hear from everyone
who wants to make public comment
on any of the bills we here
today you do not need to rush to
raise your hands I'll let you
know when it's time to raise
your hands will do a poll of of
those support or in opposition
before we actually go to public
comment and
and I'll let you know when it's
time to raise your hand but you
don't need to rush to make sure
that you get heard we will hear
from everyone who wishes to make
public comment.
So with that
Representative Dixon go ahead
and present House Bill to to.
And I I know you have a cell so
I'll move this up for discussion
purposes and so that you can
explain
of the bill or difference
between saben Lee and will will
go to
when we get to the committee
questions actually adopting that
but so that the audience knows
and and we know what it is that
and what differences what the
bill is overall what differences
your sub presents so go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
here this morning to present
house bill two oh two first I'd
like to acknowledge the co
sponsors of this bill
Representative Marian Matthews
Candie Sweetser and Joanne
Ferrari.
House Bill to is the goal is to
address children in our foster
care system and to ensure that
they are receiving trauma
responsive care.
New Mexico has the highest rate
of childhood trauma exposure in
the country with eighteen
percent of all children in the
state having experienced three
or more significant traumatic
experiences.
Every child entering foster care
in New Mexico it's highly likely
to have experienced multiple
forms of trauma.
Once in our child welfare system
a foster child experiences an
average of six placement changes
per year each we're a likely
source of additional farmer.
We know that exposure to complex
trauma deeply affects the
development of a child and went
unaddressed often results in
problems with sleep cognition
behavior and emotional self
emotional self regulation.
Every child in New Mexico foster
care deserves a chance to be
safe and have the resources
necessary to heal and thrive.
The proposed legislation house
bill two oh two will utilize New
Mexico's existing resources to
make systemic changes that will
immediately improve the way the
state serves children in custody
hoping to ensure the system
itself is not committing more
harm.
First I'd like to turn to my co
sponsor Representative Marian
Matthews to make a few remarks
and then I'll introduce my
expert witnesses thank you.
Go ahead.
Madam chair sherry my throat is.
As a talked enough yet this
morning I keep coughing
it madam chair chair members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to say a few words
in the nineteen eighties which
is a very long time ago thirty
years or so I was involved in a
case involving CYFD called
Joseph J. Joseph a case was
about the need in the department
to provide better permanency
training I'm I'm not training
I'm sorry permanency of policies
and.
I was at and interim.
it let me back up I'm sorry and
choose Fe resulted in a consent
decree and.
With a number of provisions for
the for the agency to improve
its its efforts in this area
it was you know is this it of
this research on it of course
but if you keep moving a child
from place to place specifically
one who's been removed from
their home it's going to do harm
to that trial.
So
I was in interim committee
meeting health committee meeting
this summer and a group of from
Pegasus legal services for
children.
Senate on a case called Kevin.
And
is there talking about what
happened with Kevin it was like
almost throwback to the kinds of
situations that had led to
Joseph eight thirty years
earlier.
And quite frankly I was appalled
because and I said at that
hearing and and I repeated here
which is that after thirty years
the only thing that's changed in
terms of the permanency and the
situation with kids in CYFD
custody is the name of the check
children and I've found that
totally unacceptable and began
asking for what could be done to
create structural systemic
changes not just something
around a particular child but
something that would make this
system work and protect all
children in the custody of CYFD.
And then at that there are a
couple things are they came up
with that particular hearing an
effective sponsoring of the bill
that relates to one of those but
If this was interesting there is
sort of silence when I asked
that question and then a week or
two after that I was contacted
by Pegasus and they said well.
We got this Madam and they're
explaining and with Kevin with
this child and Kevin and there's
some really good.
I do is and provisions of that
settlement why shouldn't those
because of fights so that they
benefit other children.
And
from that led to discussions
about could we do that are they
provided those materials I
involved Representative Dixon
because I was involved in other
things it couldn't take this on
as soon as a primary primary
piece of work and that is the
background for this bill it is
an effort to codify soon the
provisions in the cabin
settlement agreement which means
a CYFD is already agreed to them
in connection with this child
that.
That the advocates and we felt
we're would improve the system
and the structure for other
children in the custody issue
why us.
Thank you for that chance to
explain.
Thank you you want to go to your
experts yes please thank you
madam chair first I'd like to
introduce Betty Fleischman she
will speak a little bit about
why this legislation is
necessary and then Gary how
steep in will speak about what
this legislation actually does
thank you.
Go ahead thank you so much madam
chair members of the committee
time that a place with I'm an
attorney and the executive
director of Pegasus legal
services for children and I've
represented hundreds of children
in the foster care system and
just for the closer Kevin ****
impact my client
and just to clarify that was
actually Kevin is the we think
that that is actually a class
action lawsuit Kevin
if you all were mentioning
stories while I was listening so
I'll give a very quick story
Kevin is going to be seventeen
years old next month he is
currently in and out of state
facility is been out of state
for four and a half years this
first placement in a residential
facilities when he was four
years old and he is not with his
parents since that time this
legislation wanted thanks so
much responses for bringing it
is so critical because it's
Representative Matthew says it
codifies the grievances
everybody has already made
everybody agrees we can give
better for these children and
that's why there was a
settlement in the defendants
which is the department to I do
in helping and services agree if
if this is a great opportunity
to fix some of these literally
thirty year old problems
and our our concern we spoke
with Matt Representative
Matthews is that.
This administration is clearly
making an honest effort to
improve things there have been
improvements we all know it
ministrations change.
And we don't want to slip back
so in thirty years we're all
looking at this case and saying
oh my god that was a great movie
and then you know what happens
is the there was no provision
this three this is not a consent
decree it's actually an anagram
that we've called neutrals for
three years and but after that
time the committee was go away
and there's no.
Real meaningful accountability
and again we have confidence in
this administration but they
will move on at some point and
we just we don't want to see
these children continuing in
these horrible situations when
and some of this the settlement
and then this legislation really
catches up to the the national
norms we have learned an
enormous amount about brain
development about what is good
in child welfare and New Mexico
like other states are trying to
catch up and be relevant with
what we have learned sure when a
young person moves from
placement to placement as
Representative Matthew mentioned
it's devastating they've already
traumatized to going to a new
home that often means they are
going to a new school with they
will fall behind it also means
are going to get a new doctor it
means other adults supports in
their life will be there anymore
they will lose their friends at
options fillings are separated
so this legislation really puts
in some excellent checks and
balances so what if and when a
child needs to move its
meaningful and thought through
and not just random and will be
in the best interest of the
child that is something we
always have to.
In order to consider another
thing this legislation addresses
is the use of offices for
children to sleep and and the
out of state placements
and this is right in the CYFD
strategic planning with a
presentation last week I do I do
then spend they talk about the
importance of bringing.
Children who are in out of state
placements back into the state
and they've made some progress
is only forty youth that are in
out of state placements Kevin
being one of them and the point
of foster care is reunification
think about a parent who had
their child taken away who
usually has financial issues may
homeless than trying to visit
their child in and out of state
facility no resources if the
it's the press to be for
disaster in terms of meaningful
reunification and there's also
other problems just as last
August thank you who was in and
out of state facility in
Oklahoma died in that facility
this is not appropriate
monitoring and supervision I had
another client and was in and
out of state facility in Arizona
and I.
Visit him as his attorney and he
was living in a trailer every
window is boarded up you
wouldn't put a dog in the kennel
like that and nobody noticed in
that thought it was fine which
we got to move to a.
That is you know we're the of
anyone being and so.
I don't want to take up all your
time but we so much support this
bill again everything in here is
what everyone has agreed to.
The technology is the trauma
that we all know children in
foster care faced a technologist
the need to have stable
placements to the extent they
need to be and to bring our New
Mexico children home and those
that need to be in residential
treatment let's spend our money
and our resources to develop in
here so the parent can develop
there's meaningful family
therapy.
I swear attorneys can check on
them and the.
In New Mexico really deserves
protection so I think.
Thank you.
I'm available for any questions
when you're done if I can be
thank you for this opportunity
thank you Mr.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Gerry asset building eggs CEO
of disability rights New Mexico
and I will try to compliment
would Betty has already spoken
about in with Representative
Dixon Representative Matthews of
mention of.
Your as you have legislation
before you the big question is
why why do we need to have this
legislation especially when
we're talking about we have a
settlement here that have been
has been achieved and let me
just take a brief moment to talk
about that this is been a
landmark settlement that has
been achieved through the
leadership of the administration
and state officials are is
Secretary Blalock center around
the table with us at that time
he expressed the desire to work
with us.
Around the table in order to
rebuild a system here.
The fact that New Mexico has
ranked at the bottom it will be
for decades R. tell you that
this is a decades long problem
that's beyond one administration
one legislature it's multiple
and so.
This is been in a ditch for a
while in which moved us to have
to file this lawsuit in and we
are grateful that we were able
to have the settlement achieved
to move forward are in so I want
to just put that in perspective
on the fact that we are working
with HSD and CYFD in.
Very importantly the behavior
health.
Elaborative on services to build
this system and there has been
some steps that have already
been achieved in the settlement
and we are grateful for that and
HSD in CYFD is been so critical
that they work together on it so
the question then becomes what
why do you need this how many
people are working together
you've got this framework and we
are happy about that but we
wanted to be responsive to what
Representative Matthews raise
that that committee hearing in
December it also effective your
experience.
Governors come and go
secretaries come and go
strategic plans come and go some
of them stay on the shelf.
But they come and go is so will
we but this is an opportunity
for the legislature to also put
something in the code to say
this is what New Mexico is going
to do for their kids and we're
gonna do it now because as we're
trying to build a system that's
gonna take a long time to happen
there is a sense of urgency
there are kids that are are out
of the state or we're moving out
of state that are in multiple
placements so can we do
something to speak to those
families and kids now and put it
in the statute and codify and
have New Mexico set a standard.
The federal standards aren't you
know we try to meet that federal
stand doesn't me that's good
enough we know we want to do the
best for New Mexico kids and to
get them out of that and so I
just wanted to explain that
that's the reason why it what
we're talking about the scope of
children here that we're talking
about is not all children these
are kids in custody but they
don't have to be removed from
their home in order to get the
services this is exactly what
Secretary Blalock and us have
been talking about in that is
let's get these kids upstream
let's get to these families
upstream before the removed and
placed out of state or out of
the home let's do some things
that make these services
available to them now.
Is so there are a number
provisions there are that are
speaking to that in this statute
in this proposed legislation
that says why not now why not
try to put it in here and let's
see if this can be.
Memorialize and sustained beyond
the seven and eight and also
provide some immediacy are in
getting the services to kids.
So I just wanted to kind of put
that in perspective but also
want to punctuate that there are
there's some great work that's
going on now we expect that
we're going to continue to go
forward with that in working
with Secretary Blalock secretary
Scrase price procedure all.
In in Dr Bowman in trying to get
the services out there to these
kids as quickly as provide as
possible with the provider
network so those were my
comments that I want to provide
to you with this I'm happy to
answer any questions about the
legislation in and we look
forward to continue to help
build a better New Mexico for
these kids.
Thank you
Representative Dixon did you
want to tell us briefly about
this
Yes thank you madam chair this
substitute cleans up some of the
language
That
you know I think in in some of
the agency analyses
Brought attention to and it also
made progress in some of our
discussions with the agencies
and advocates as we're working
through this process
so a couple things that I would
draw your attention to.
we removed the phrase the unique
needs of things like that and so
that's Page three line nine
through ten and I don't know how
specific you want me to get on
some of these changes but I
would say that the purpose of
the legislation remains the same
but what we've done is tried to
Just clean up some of the
language to make it better for
statute.
Does that madam chair is that
thank thank you I just wanted
the audience to know before we
went to COVID that that you've
not made substantive changes
just some language cleanup okay
correct thank you thank you so
and I assumed you're ready to go
to questions and for us to go to
the audience okay so first of
all for those in attendance were
going to do a poll to get it has
if we were in person would be
raising hands in the room in
support or opposition.
So if you would.
Of way and your support or
opposition.
Okay looks like we've we've got
it we've got thirteen in the
audience and support and on in
opposition.
So we will go to the audience
for for comments and first just
in case somebody missed
as a whole will give is there
anyone just double checking is
there anyone in the audience in
opposition who wishes to speak.
Thank seeing none will go to
those in support who wish to
speak you can raise your hands.
Okay and we have the time or up
see can limit your comments to a
minute we will get to everyone
who wishes to speak and first is
Derrick plan.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Derek land I'm representing New
Mexico voices for children we're
in strong support of this bill
because it helps ensure that
some of the state's most
vulnerable children foster youth
are provided with evidence based
trauma informed care.
As mentioned by the sponsor
foster children have some of the
highest rates of adverse
childhood experiences which are
correlated with lifelong
consequences for behavioral
mental and even physical health
outcomes time is critical in the
treatment of trauma providing
health interventions early on
give children the best
opportunity to offset the health
consequences this bill helps do
this by providing foster youth
with evidence based health care
and supportive living
environments for healthy growth
and development we urge you to
support support legislation
thank you.
Thank you on next we have Karen
Witt lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen what lock with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter.
And we stand and strong support
of this bill.
In New Mexico while we've
improved to forty eight in child
well being we are still at the
wrong end of this list.
There are so many things that we
need to do for our children and
we owe it to them and this is
one of many things and we really
appreciate the Sanchez for
bringing this bill
Representative Dixon and
Representative Matthews thank
you so much this is one of all
of the above that we need to
change the child the child well
being in New Mexico of the this
is long overdue and we want to
make sure that we never get here
ever again and with that we want
to think again thanks its
sponsors.
Thank you are occurring next we
have Maryland back.
Thank you.
Committee members my name is
Maryland back and I'm a former
foster at licensed foster care
in the state of New Mexico in my
time as a foster parent I had
almost forty children in my care
raging ranging in age from
newborn to.
Maryland you of.
Here you go go ahead sh for you
as the founder of New Mexico
child first network a nonprofit
dedicated to improving the lives
of children in foster care and
empowering those who serve them
we proudly endorsed this bill
and we thank the sponsors for
bringing this forward and
investing in the future our
children for generations to
come.
We are creating a system that
makes sure everyone who
interacts with kids understand
that if a child has been highly
traumatized it gives kids the
tools to navigate trauma and
build resiliency we think that
if we implement these reforms
will see much better outcomes
for the children of the state of
New Mexico our own CYFD
secretary bramble accent that in
regards to the settlement we
look forward to joining and
making sure that this
groundbreaking collaborative
settlement and the good work of
the folks at disability rights
New Mexico the native American
disability law center and
implementation team made up of
hi this is an all everyone else
and resist the thank you.
Thank you Maryland.
Next we have and McKinney.
This good morning madam chair
members of the committee and I
would first like to thank the
sponsors for bringing forth this
bill this is imperative I
believe I believe it it is a non
partisan bill is for the
children and I hope it gets a
hundred percent supporting goes
all the way through I think it
is more than credit call that
these important changes are
codified for the future of New
Mexico I have been called foster
grammar by dozens and dozens of
children in foster care and I
I've seen first hand that each
time their placement was moved I
am no longer in their lives and
so I'm most people don't get
this chance to see firsthand
what happens with our children
in foster care but when we are
saying that children have an
average of six placement moves
in here it affects the children
and I believe we can do better
for them so thank you to the
Sanchez thank you to the cabin
just the team and thank you for
your
I'm still need today to pass
this law.
Thank you and next we have you
live for us.
Stress test.
That's right you have friends
with.
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee my name is Eli
fest is an attorney for the
office of the general counsel at
the children youth and families.
First the bills did you lie I'm
gonna apologize you accidentally
got a cut off on our end we're
gonna start the clock again and
and let you start again thank
you.
Right can you hear me yes go
ahead.
Right.
My name is Eli fest is an
attorney of the office of
general counsel it's you I. F.
T. at this time CYFD is not able
to either support or oppose this
bill however we would like to
note the following issues first
this bill seeks to codify
sentenced on the settlement
agreement arising out of the
cabin S. lawsuit many of the
terms of the settlement are
still in the process of being
defined and agreed upon between
the state and the COVID trucks
second the legislation
interferes with the process you
could potentially undermine the
reform efforts that you just H.
S. D. CYFD are pursuant to the
settlement agreement for example
some of the definitions terms
and requirements of the bill are
contradictory to those outlined
in the settlement agreement but
others are still in the process
to be fine.
And finally and very importantly
CYFD would welcome the
opportunity to collaborate and
more specifically robust bill
with the Sanchez on this type
and it's a very important topic
during the next legislative
session after the terms of the
settlement agreement had been
finalized thank you very much
and again we look forward to
future collaborations.
Thank you a lie our next we have
Jim Jackson.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Jim Jackson I'm speaking this
morning on behalf of the
disability coalition that I and
the chair of it's a collection
of several advocacy
organizations on behalf of
people with disabilities and the
calling in to encourage the
committee to give this bill a do
pass and I think for the very
reason that you just heard this
is the it's important that New
Mexico commit through statute to
the kinds of changes that are
being proposed in this
legislation.
In order to
in order to protect the.
To promote the outcomes that are
best for people who are in state
custody whether they've been
removed or not
We think it's important to put
this into statutes so that these
provisions will sustain us
through this administration and
into the future as well so we
encourage in support of this
bill thank you.
Thank you Jim next we have Jill
Michael.
Thank you for hearing me today
sorry children in the background
I am a foster parent here in New
Mexico and I've been a foster
parent here for about ten.
When I want to
bring up it's time for in this
bill is it's not that we don't
know that placement is damaging
to children are multiple
placements accounting to
children we know that in so this
is finally something that we can
put into place to minimize the
placement movement of children
and do it in a therapeutic clay
as a foster parent I've seen
done in many many ways that are
very damaging to children just
recently in this past year I've
had children that were placed in
my home and because of a
disagreement with the worker I
was told one day they would not
be coming home from school and
that was all I was told and so
stuff like that those children
have no idea why they're being
moved or what the issue is and
there wasn't an issue I was able
to stop it and so luckily but
the fact that this is practices
one why we need this bill.
Thank you.
and next I think Paul writes my
wanted to also make comment Paul
are you there.
Yes I'm here.
It I'm Paul Richman the chief
general counsel for the Human
Services department and one of
the principal negotiators on
behalf of the state for the
Kevin else settlement you know
the state of New Mexico
expended enormous effort and
a lot of money to arrive at a
settlement agreement in care
yes.
That settlement agreement was
designed to correct decades old
problems with the providing
services to children in custody
at CYFD.
if.
If you're to pass this
legislation one of the things
that that is difficult for the
departments is having worked so
hard on the settlement agreement
it seems to for us frustrate the
very purpose of the settlement
agreement in is you lie mention
the very purpose of the
settlement agreement is to take
the concepts in the settlement
agreement in to develop detailed
plans.
Detail programs that can be used
for these children and.
If this legislation is to go
forward those detailed plans
seem to be useless the
continuing on with the Mexico
neutrals in the whole process
that we set up for the
settlement agreement
it seems to be kind of a waste
of time if we.
As the
as the
let's see Paul you.
You got muted as a principal
negotiator I'm gonna let you
finish.
All you need to meet yourself.
It's not that we're opposed to
this legislation it's just that
this legislation is premature
until we have developed all of
the plans and details that are
part of the settlement agreement
that we work so hard on it we
hire Kobe trolls to sort of
referee what we were what the
departments were doing in
approve those plans I think once
those plans were approved we
would be more than able to put
into and codified in statute the
things that we've developed it's
it's just
we're we're not there yet and
this bill is premature and it
would
effectively frustrate a whole
lot of the effort that we went
into to arrive at the
settlement.
Thank you thank you Paul and
last we have Douglas Michael.
Hi my name is Douglas Michelle
I'm a foster parents I was
debating whether or not to speak
madam chair and committee I
thank you for a let me just time
I just real quick as I as I
listen to representatives from
our.
That the different accounts
built
you know I can attest settlement
is.
I guess the settlement.
As my my concern is that we
don't codified some of these
items a lot of these things
actually being developed without
much public input if at all so
that information and details as
to what is being done I know we
have the co neutrals as kind of
a mediator but
I think the general public and
the legislature and everyone
else did also kind of your
listing dot org you know what
are the different details that
are being considered so that's
just my input thank you for your
time.
Thank you thank you Douglas
and that's the last we have oh
one more hand and Thorton.
Go ahead Andrew on mute
yourself.
Hi my name is Martin I'm an
attorney and one of the things
that I noticed when looking over
the fiscal report is that.
where they say that this is
premature and they don't oppose
I mean they're literally
opposing the passage of this.
When they say they don't oppose
and in addition the last
sentence of the report you know
says that.
If it's not codified.
There's nothing to say that this
actually holds up it's just a
short term fix putting it in the
code fixes it long term and
protects New Mexico's children.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay.
And we are going to now go to
the committee.
And.
Representative Dixon is there
anything you wish to say before
we start to anna.
Thank you madam chair we can
proceed to the committee
questions thank okay thank you
first on my list is
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair
representative so there's a lot
to digest in here I have my own
personal opinions I I.
We have so many problems with
the foster care system it's
it's.
Black forty bear scene and and
it's very sad and it's been
going on everywhere in every
state California have the same
thing where I grew up I remember
there was two kids that were in
and out of foster care parents
for alcoholics and I found out
later that one of the kids
killed himself and the other
kids during my present so they
had a really rough time in
foster care and I think it needs
to be fixed as much as possible
I do have some questions so
interesting I was reading as
we're going to try to update
myself as much as possible and
Kevin just settlement.
And there seem to be quite a few
people that called in.
Their concern is that we already
have this and I was looking at
the monitoring employee in
implementation of the Kevin asks
and it looks like it's a team of
lawyers for the public counsel
the Stamford youth and
educational project disability
rights New Mexico native
American disability law center
cases legal services for
children they will all be
monitoring this
and the first report will be
posted April twenty first twenty
twenty one.
So my concern is it is I think
with so many other people to
call Dan.
Is this going to conflict with
the have an **** Madam.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Lord I would
actually like to offer the
opportunity for my experts to
respond since they were involved
in the process from the
beginning thank you.
Madam chair and members the
committee very out seven again.
When we were working with the
sponsors on this we were we have
been mindful of the the
settlement and wanted to make
sure that it is consistent we
certainly are welcome a
continued discussion with CYFD
and department of CYFD in HSD to
and and the committee to make
sure that they're there are
there are not any
inconsistencies with this arm
but.
Our proposal was intended to to
be consistent certainly what the
settlement our Madam is is that
in itself you know a document
that will working for work
moving forward with with the
with the stakeholders not only
just the state department's but
we're also working with
providers just to let you
providers of foster parents.
In in hearing from you is that
they have been in the system so
that we can continue to work and
be mindful of helping build the
system.
I could just add very briefly I
agree with what my colleague
said in we don't believe there's
a conflict it's three years of
call neutral and some of the
deliverables are kind of faced
in some of the main ones in this
legislation the ones that are
due now.
You know there is an urgency
around the children are dying in
out of state facilities children
are still being children are
still and I tell so
We're pretty confident it's not
and I know that online once
speak for the sponsors but I
believe the vote to more
communication with the
department is this a kind of
specific tweaking but overall we
feel very strongly this needs to
get codified now for the
special.
Thank you for answering thank
you madam chair representative
yeah I always worry about you
know we always.
We have the best intentions
right Senator hope that are
Representative have the best
intentions and I always worry
about we passed something and
make something else was come
along worse because it was
obstacles I just want to make
sure that doesn't happen I do
have a question about the
The governor's commission I was
reading on their analysis.
That there are concerns that H.
B. two two will prevent a child
disability from getting the
services they need can you
expand upon that and maybe
Trying to explain why they seem
to have an issue with this.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Lord are you
referring specifically to the
changing placements the the
limit.
that
Hold on one sec it was chair
Alice's.
The governor's commission on
disability yes okay thank you
madam chair representative lord
and let me give a brief response
and then perhaps Betty or Gary
would like to two way and so yes
they were concerned about
limiting the number of placement
changes to three and one
thousand days and felt that that
could be a problem should
A child need more specialized
services or need to be moved to
fourth time the the committee
substitute and the link with
especially the committee
substitute does address that by
still allowing for extraordinary
circumstances for additional
moves due to extraordinary
circumstances Guerrier buddy did
I miss anything.
Matt madam chair members of the
committee and and Representative
Dixon I think you covered it I
kept on trying to look at
different versions because some
versions seem to not have the
extraordinary circumstances
exception there but certainly as
disability rights organization
we agree with the governor's
commission on disability we
certainly do not want kids with
disability trapped in that third
placement and they need to go
someplace else is sort of okay
what do we do now yes is going
to be beyond Sir three
placements but there's some
things extraordinary here we
need to get this youth in the
right place at the right time
but you know the whole whole
intended purpose which we are
glad that CYFD in HSD recognized
is that when there's three
placements and a thousand days
that should send a red flag if
you're thinking about moving
this kid again so let's let's
not wait to the tenth eleventh
placement to really start
thinking about it so
In summary Representative Dixon
a has has really I think
captured what is care critical
here and that is extraordinary
circumstances are gonna be out
you know are going to be able to
accommodate those situations but
we don't want the exception to
be the rule of course.
If I could just said briefly
what it does is it makes any
additional move a conscious
decision with decision makers
looking at it it may have to
happen but if it is done with
intent and integrity.
Thank you for into that that was
I think that's one of the
questions I have I'm just trying
to make the best decision for
the children because that's all
that matters in this nothing
else matters this is the
bipartisan and only what's best
for the kids so thank you for
asking my question this morning
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative next I have
Representative Ferrary and
Representative Ferrary I can
also add my internet is still a
little unstable so if I.
offer M. on responsive if you
would step in as chair but go
ahead with your question.
Thank you madam chair
I do see I can get everything
turned back on
I'm more of support for this
bill is one of the co sponsors
and I think this is really
important bill
so that
We have the behavioral health
support it's needed when
the children are in foster care
and to address some of the
issues of the trauma responsive
issue is I think really
important but for.
Reducing the adverse childhood
experiences is so important for
the development of the child to
you know be able to transition
you whatever situation but they
need to get that treatment and
from home to family settings all
of the different things that
could further traumatize the
child.
I'm sorry I didn't have my video
on and so I this is why this
bill is so important to me and I
really appreciate
Representative Matthews index
and for bringing this forward in
working with the foster families
that
a need this kind of support
throughout the child's
experience with foster care also
I really supportive of the
limiting of you know no more
than three different which seems
like it would be a lot already
at different foster care
situations so if we can limit
that and keep that to a minimum
and also support the foster care
families that seem to really
care about these children and
not to have some.
Something happened without
M. knowing about it and for them
to have time to help the child
transition to some madam chair
and a representatives I really
appreciate this bill.
Thank you thank you
Representative next I have
representative Thompson did you.
Have a question sure I changed
my mind thank you thank you
anyone else
I wills make a comment also and
I appreciate the parties all
working together I and I
appreciate that
the departments are actually
neutral and that what you've
done so far and codifying is
consistent with.
the settlement so far
and maybe premature because
there's more to come.
we can always come back and we
can codified more as more Madam
gets.
It's done so I appreciate
the work of everyone and the
need to really address what we
can address now now so thank you
for that what's the pleasure of
the committee.
Our first sorry at first does
anyone have objections to
adopting the committee
substitute.
Seeing and hearing none
your committee substitute is
adopted.
And now what's the pleasure of
the committee on that
House come our health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill to a to a do pass
I would do have just a second by
Representative Matthews we have
a haha dueling do passes
the doors you want to call the
roll.
Yes.
Representative pulp Sanderson.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative Britney but.
Yes.
Representative the current page
yes.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Yes.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes.
Representative Roger Montoya
yes.
Representative Louise that also.
Representative Liz Thomson.
Yes.
I'm assuming those the three
Representative Anderson and
Armstrong and process our excuse
they are
by chair Joanne burglary yes.
Madam chair Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes so we have a
of the eight two zero if I
correct.
eight eight you're right K. yes
so we have a do not pass on
house bill two oh two and I do
pass on house bill house health
and Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill to a
two.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you thanks thanks for doing for
being here this morning.
Okay next we have a house bill
two oh five representative
Thompson.
Was
I think we've we'll get our
office former experts moved out
and then if you have experts
will move them in.
I'm not sure if he's on yet yes
thank you.
Is dividing between committee
so.
And I should have asked you are
you Representative are you
ready.
Yes madam chair.
Okay I don't see him yet.
Okay you madam chair he'll send
us a text when he's down on and
then we can move them at that
time okay all right that's fine
okay.
So madam chair and as this is
this is that for the tobacco
settlement revenue oversight
committee and it is an act
that's related to the tobacco
products
it prohibits the sale of
flavored tobacco products that
defines the terms so thank you
madam chair M. most people on
this committee have heard over
and over about the the great
increased we have been on a
steep downward trajectory for
teenager part teenagers using
tobacco products and then vaping
came along and now it's
skyrocketed.
And there are I think I was
reading somewhere yesterday
there are over three hundred
different waivers of of tobacco
products including things like
to the fruity and acting out got
me bear.
So madam chair we are following
some other states and and now
other.
Areas that have outlawed tobacco
flavored tobacco products in the
reason for this is because they
they are targeting thank you in
our in our state
It also includes madam chair
menthol and and I used to think
it was okay to not
are outlawed menthol but then I
learned that the reason for
menthol is to kind of dampen
that horrible taste of the
tobacco so that people can get
addicted to the nicotine I'm and
you see some of those flavors
and some of the packaging and
you realize it is targeting kids
definitely I mean I can't I
don't know of any well I won't
say in the I don't think got
tricks flavored tobacco products
are going to be really really
attractive to a in a forty year
old who's been smoking for
twenty years so so madam chair
and I we do have an amendment.
and it is two one nine six five
nine.
And we and madam chair we had
some issues with drafting just
at we had to carry this
legislation before and one thing
what madam chair I will tell you
quickly with the.
But that.
Amendments do it essentially we
do not want to criminalize or
punish that that teenagers know
aren't that clerks so I'm
hopefully everyone I can take
you madam line line by line
through the amendments or and it
essentially it strikes out
position or purchase strikes out
penalties strikes out has the
purchase or possession
Essentially it's to keep from
criminalizing teens who may
have.
I have these drugs in their
possession and what that madam
chair I will turn it over to my
co sponsor Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Thomson yes this
is something that
Reducing the of flavors will
also help reduce under age use
because that is how they make it
so attractive for people to
vape or smoke and four are under
age
Users even though we've raise
the age to twenty one it's still
going to be a marketing tactic
that the tobacco industry uses
to attract young people if they
can get it to to smoke and they
and I just wanted to share about
how there's really great group
of use called the ball of mint
and the promote healthy New
Mexico and today are talking to
students throughout the state
to
You know promote tobacco free
school zones and also for
students to understand how a
life time they start smoking or
vaping now they're going they
could have a lifetime and most
likely have a lifetime of health
issues and premature death so
the costs for the health care of
our state depends a lot of what
we do to prevent use from the
beginning this
terrible habit it's very hard to
break and I think it's really
important that we do everything
we can to prevent of that
initial starting it's a lot like
under age alcohol use the more
attractive it is with different
flavors of alcohol such as
Mike's lemonade things like that
it it's the same thing that
happens with tobacco products so
I really
hope that this bill will help
make it less attractive and
Less of the
Health detriment to use as well
as
low income in the inequities
that happened with tobacco
products being advertised and
available in those areas so
thank you madam chair and
representative.
And with that madam chair we
will stand for questions thank
you so we will first go to the
audience for a poll.
In support or opposition of
house bill two oh five.
Okay looks like we
we have it we've got five people
or fifteen percent in support
and twenty eight or eighty five
percent in opposition.
So we will.
go to the audience and those
first of all those wishing to
speak in opposition.
And we're gonna limit of public
comment to one minute so watch
watch the clock.
and first up is Christopher
Ortega.
Unmute yourself Christopher.
There you go R. thank you madam
chair thank you on house
committee Munnings Christopher
with neighborhood Ford we have
I'm opposed to your we're posing
The ban on flavored tobacco
sales we want to make it
recognize that there are
unintended consequences to the
colored and minority community
both with small business
minority groups who I will take
a major hit.
as we are you know just getting
over COVID nineteen
Economic downfalls there also
unintended consequences of how
such a law would affect the
community on the basis of
relationship between enforcement
and you and all other tobacco
users so we just want to make
you aware that this is not the
proper way to go about a health
when it has so much included in
in small business and unintended
consequences thank you.
Thank you next we have Samuel
dnia Togo.
Good morning.
My name is Sam Unioto and I
represent southwest United
Latino veterans I served on the
USS Abraham Lincoln station in
Everett Washington from October
nineteen ninety seven through
October of two thousand one as
in the for damage control petty
officer and firefighter I'm here
today because the I oppose each
be tool five I wanted to alert
the committee members were
minute.
Of this.
Many of my brothers and sisters
that served in the military are
also part of the recovery
community they have changed
their lives for the better and
many of them have traded in
drugs and alcohol for coffee
tobacco as I'm sure you are
aware menthol cigarettes are the
figment of choice in communities
of color regardless of how we
personally feel about coffee and
tobacco please creating pirtle
for folks are ready in a
delicate balancing act in life
otherwise legal activity it to
illegal one and even if smoking
flavored tobacco itself would
not be cranked you create a
burden for people in recovery by
forcing them.
To you.
Thank you our next Michael
Madden.
Yes I am a family physician and
it worked extensively on harm
reduction for opioid addiction
HIV and smoking I urge you to
consider the public health needs
to balance limiting youth access
to E. cigarettes with the
enormous opportunity not
combustible tobacco products
present program reduction
reduction is to keep public
health personal used to mitigate
that like health risks like
methadone for opioid addiction
and condoms to decrease HIV but
we don't eliminate risk harm
reduction improve safety and
saves lives life saving public
health policy must balance the
needs to protect you and
maintain access for current
smokers to safer products that
they provide healing.
Smokers die prematurely not
because they consume nicotine
which is not a carcinogen but
because of how the consumer from
small moist snuff users have
significantly lower risk of
disease that smokers we health
authorities have agreed that
vapor products substantially
reduce smoking's hard industry
data show that sixty six percent
of adults Moss waste not for
users more than fifty three
percent of adults who switched
to E. cigarettes choose non
tobacco flavor drugs just in the
last year the federal government
banned tobacco products for
under twenty one please don't
add to the burden of the current
smokers and banned flavored
products.
Thank you our next we have Jared
agency are.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee chairman is our
behalf of Swisher international
we appreciate the intent of the
Sanchez and bringing this bill.
The that the intent is to reduce
youth consumption and and that's
certainly a noble cause however
we recently increase the age to
purchase tobacco products to
twenty one we believe this
should sufficiently address any
concern regarding youth usage
and and this bill would would
just result in adult
concern consumers moving to
tribes or our neighboring states
to make their purchases also for
these reasons and those
previously stated we
respectfully oppose this bill.
Thank you chairman of next we
have
Matthew Monty.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee can you
hear me OK yes go ahead.
I'm in strong opposition to this
legislation as the previous
individual spoke it's already
twenty one
as a third generation
tobacconist and business owner
here in Albuquerque.
We don't sell to minors we never
have every product we sell is a
hundred percent natural
including our favorite products
there's no chemical additives of
any kind also I think something
we need to consider is our
tribal communities we sell a
quite a bit of ceremonial
tobacco to them which.
Would be outlawed if this passes
I appreciate the intent of this
bill I think it's taken a broad
stroke when we could use a
scalpel and said thank you.
Thank you our next Missy help in
helping tend.
Good morning madam chairman and
members of the committee my name
is miss madam I am a small
business owner in the state.
Missing your muted.
Hello there we go okay I'm so
sorry I'm as far as packaging
those packaging has been
regulated in the industry since
twenty sixteen by the FDA there
are no cartoon characters on our
bottles the writing is very
simple it is very plain we're
not allowed via the FDA the
federal that's federal to have
those kind of things on our
bottles now you're more what
drugs have tons a little cartoon
pictures and everything else
like that on it so I mean maybe
that's something that should be
addressed instead of this side
of things but as for the right
administrative all the bottles
are regulated especially with a
premarket tobacco applications
have been submitted.
you know the flavors everything
that you put in your mouth has a
flavor to it and nobody wants to
put anything in their mouth that
is strictly just one flavor that
would be like you going to the
grocery store buying one item
and everything just tastes the
same you know you walk down
alcohol I'll in your local I'll
you have the pictures on the
bottles you have the flavors all
over the place you have shaped
bottles in the paper industry we
cannot do that it is against
federal regulation as far as
marketing according to the FDA
in those five hundred pages of
regulations that were dropped in
twenty sixteen we cannot market
we're not allowed to advertise
we're not allowed to market we
have not your your time is
expired thank you R. ten
managers.
Thank you very much for the
opportunity to present while I
appreciate the noble intentions
behind this bill it is
unfortunately based on number of
misunderstandings of Science in
evidence firstly in conflating
E. cigarettes with conventional
cigarettes he can with hundreds
of **** he reviewed scientific
studies which demonstrates that
E. cigarettes are approximately
ninety five percent safer than
the combustible alt conventional
cigarettes as such of the thirty
of the world's major medical
bodies and governments have
endorsed them as a valuable quit
smoking pool secondly the bill
sponsor said that adults just
don't I'm interested in I and
she doesn't know anyone this is
once again a fallacy again if we
study has shown about eighty
percent of adults care about the
use of flight this finally you
don't care about flight this is
less than five percent of youth
care about flight because so
this is taking away a quit
smoking tool for adults first
and in the aim of helping youths
who doesn't affect him can you
tell us who you represent I'm
sorry commanders on behalf of
Americans for tax reform thank
you.
Next we have Gil Garcia.
Thank you committee members my
name is Gilbert Garcia and I'm
member of I love homeless
Albuquerque where nonprofit
organization I work directly
with our most vulnerable
brothers and sisters living in
the streets I'm calling today
because I have a serious concern
with HB till I I understand the
intent is to decrease smoking
among excuse but I believe
there's a dangerous unintended
consequence of this menthol
cigarettes are popular with many
of New Mexicos homeless African
American and Latino residents
sure this bank going to affect
is a reasonable to expect
hundreds of thousands of
homeless to utilize menthol
cigarettes to just stop the bill
essentially create a new
criminal class amongst homeless
constituency.
At a time when there's so much
tension between law enforcement
and the community why would
legislators consider doing
something like this that will
just add to take a bad situation
let's not forget the reason Eric
garner was approached by New
York PED before losing his life
was due to a him allegedly
selling illegal cigarettes.
Thank you.
Thank you our next we have our
Joe oral.
Go ahead Joe.
Hi my name is Joe her role I am
a former smoker I smoked for
fifteen years and I tried every.
So all you Joe you are muted
yourself.
Can you hear me now yeah there
you go thank you.
Okay so I smoked for fifteen
years.
I tried every cessation.
Products that exit S. with the
exception of Chantix because my
mother used Chantix and has been
on and SSRIs for the last
fifteen years because of them.
I quit smoking because of mint
flavor I currently use coconut
flavoring and peanut butter
flavoring.
And I've actually contacted Liz
Thomson in the past and her
level of using the tricks
flavor.
I use tricks.
It's not the flavors that's
attracting children.
We can no one can.
advertise.
Okay next we have Chris falls on
Good morning madam chair members
of this committee I am Chris
bows out of the register
lobbyist for always is vaping
CBD madam chair members of this
committee when I was reading
this bill to bring to your
attention on page one nine
twenty four twenty five page two
line wanting to.
Madam chair this piece of
legislation is preposterous and
unreasonable I applaud the
sponsors for trying to keep this
away from the minors and we had
a ways is vape we work really
hard and we did present to all
of you during the interim our
system we showed you are are
vape system and is not
attractive to minors our Madam
chair and we have a lot of high
standards restrictions on to
that we again up law that the
sponsor for bringing this to
make sure that you know when
minors are are not target but
that's not the way that we we do
through this piece of
legislation we will create a
black market if this past and is
not good for New Mexico madam
chair thank you.
Thank you.
Next we have John Thompson.
Good morning madam chair can you
hear me yes go ahead Madam
chairman members of the
committee good morning my name
is John Thompson I'm a
registered lobbyist New Mexico
smokefree Alliance which is a
nonprofit trade association
comprised of independent
storefronts madam chairman
myself in the association worked
alongside a very proponents of
this legislation to pass a
measure that increase the age to
procure tobacco products madam
chair we stand in opposition to
this and and I'd like to note
that this is going to be an
impossibility to enforce madam
chairman we have tribal outlets
the internet border towns in in
black markets that will be
created as a result of the
enactment of this legislation
and I'd also like to point out
chair that house bill twelve
which passed this committee had
no provision whatsoever to
address flavored cannabis bait
latest cannabis vape is probably
be or likely the number one
sector in the recreational
cannabis market so tricks to
thirty incoming there will be
allowed for cannabis State but
it would not be allowed for
tobacco based products madam
chairman that's a disparity that
I believe is worthy of note
especially consider we have to
be the same age to buy both of
them thank you madam chair.
Thank you John next we have
Jennifer ****.
Good morning there you go.
Good morning good morning
everyone and thank you for
allowing me to force my concerns
in regards to HB to I would like
to say that I really do believe
that it is going to cost on
it soon consequences for people
of color thank you very much bye
bye thank you Jennifer.
You
we have Jason diamond.
Hello can you hear me yes go
ahead.
Yes go ahead.
Go ahead Jason.
We can hear you.
We lost Jason okay next Thomas.
Hello go ahead.
You don't have spiked thank you
for let me speak on his behalf
based B. two oh five I just want
to say it's going to cost
director who.
Yes this is in the Hispanic and
black community and I think that
we have more things that's more
judgment we need to think about
my comment our gun laws we talk
about smoking cigarettes some
that's been around for centuries
while we discuss this right now
I just don't think it's a good
thing to be off topic right now
with all this going on
especially taxes what the
blackouts I just think we really
need to look at the bigger
picture thank you thank you
Thomas.
Douglas.
Unmute yourself Douglas.
In here go ahead.
Good morning madam chairman I
just want to say that I am
against a speech will I I
believe that it is in on jesting
and it is against our
connections in the Spanish and
like those before ma'am as as
Thomas said bigger issues that
we do need to speak on the back
of the state of this thank you.
Thank you yes that.
Next we have sure Reese.
Thank.
I'm just calling you because I
oppose this bill I think that
this bill.
Sure you see just muted
yourself.
Okay.
Yes okay okay I oppose this bill
I think it unfairly targets
African American and Latino
communities just as someone else
stated before regarding alcohol
there there aren't any
bills trying to ban alcohol in
there just as.
Enticing to children as well you
guys mentioned not.
Publishing store owners and
clerks who these children get
these drugs from I think that's
wrong issue you should not
target people who have smokes
menthol cigarettes for years who
are adults and punish them for
smoking these products and not
punish store clerks were selling
these under age children these
products thank you thank you
sure is next we have Lorraine
tail.
Hi good morning.
Because the H. B. tool I use and
test and create additional
unintended consequences to what
committees and colors there is
already a child within a long
list and what I'm want to stop
an opposing negative police
tactics to African American
Hispanics populations and I just
feel like this is a role again
you know I don't I don't think
it's right that are you know so
passes will that how would you
know if I'm smoking a menthol or
Barbeau I will get harassed so
I'm saying no on the bill thank
you thank you Lorraine
next we have Charles.
Yes good morning and thank you.
I am actually very opposed to
this bill
I started smoking cigarettes
when I was sixteen years old and
at that point it was illegal to
buy them to.
I spoke for roughly twenty years
and the only thing that I can
find that allowed me the
satisfaction to quit smoking was
flavored vapor products.
they vaping itself is not
similar enough to smoking a
cigarette and I wanted something
that I could identify with that
I enjoyed.
I didn't want to sticker at that
point I wanted something
different.
And the vast majority of people
but I talked to in the friends
that I've made feel the same way
I have a seventy five year old
grandmother.
Who enjoys very much.
serial and desserts labor you
liquids vastly more than she
enjoyed any cigarette she's ever
had at this point doesn't even
like the smell of cigarette.
Thank you thank you Charles.
Thank now will go to those who
are in support.
And first we have to.
Dr page poem all.
Hi good morning madam chair
members of the committee and
after page promo and the
pediatrician in New Mexico and I
currently serve as the American
academy of pediatrics chapter
champion for you these are
prevention and cessation in New
Mexico and I'm here representing
the New Mexico pediatric society
and would like to state our
strong support for the house
bill two oh five as a
pediatrician the majority of my
patients who screen positive for
E. cigarette use actually report
using flavored products despite
the legislation from the federal
level with tobacco twenty one
the reality is that youth are
still accessing and using
tobacco products has was needed
in a CDC study and September
twenty twenty eighty percent of
high school students who are
currently E. cigarette use it
users report using flavored
products and in accordance with
the American academy of
pediatrics recommendations local
and national government should
be in all flavors including
menthol you know the cigarette
and other tobacco products house
bill two sides in alignment with
these recommendations and I urge
your strong support for house
bill two I thank you madam chair
members of the committee for
your time today.
Thank you.
Next we have Derrick Lynn.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Derek
lane and I'm representing New
Mexico voices for children we're
in strong support this bill
because we need to take every
step we can to address the use
vaping epidemic there's a long
history of flavored tobacco
products being intentionally
marketed to children in the
nineties tobacco companies
targeted marketing a mental
cigarettes to teens in black
communities this is part of the
reason that rates of smoking and
smoking related deaths among
black Americans is one of the
highest in the nation teen use
of flavored tobacco has already
had huge economic so Seidel and
public health consequences
studies show that teens who vape
are more likely to smoke
cigarettes we should learn from
the past and stop allowing the
tobacco industry to use flavored
tobacco to get another
generation of New Mexican kids
addicted to their harmful
drugs banning flavored tobacco
products now will give New
Mexico kids the best chance to
live healthy smoke free lives as
adults we urge you to support
the support legislation thank
you.
Thank you Derek next we have
Desiree.
Hi I was actually in opposition
to what go ahead.
Okay thank you.
I can remember is my name is
Desiree Valencia and I'm a board
member with the Latino
educational fund through the
course of my professional and
personal life I've learned first
hand about the dangers of
smoking in a way that has really
helped.
This new trend of vaping and the
use of E. cigarettes is doing
nothing more than creating a new
nationwide health epidemic that
was literally can't afford
cannot afford state to date
twenty forecast and reported
nationwide due to eighteen anti
cigarettes H. B. two oh five is
a great time to address the
serious health issues facing our
community yeah it's built four
billion one part it doesn't
consider the unintended
consequences of banning menthol
communities of color with the
usage of mental is high is
eighty five percent in some
areas we to believe that
communities of color work well
from one day to the next stop
using metal cigarettes and
switch to on flavored tobacco I
don't believe this is a
reasonable expectation I further
believe that we should that
should this bill become a law it
will create an underground
economy that will lead to more
unnecessary interactions between
law enforcement and communities
of color is this something that
we want at a time when tensions
are so high.
Thank you.
next we have care Karen what
lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen what walk with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter.
And tobacco is one of those
products that when uses and as
intended kills and we need to do
everything we can to prohibit.
To prohibit excess to to use to
beginning this this horrible
trip.
With tobacco products
We stand in strong support we
think Sanchez bring the stuff.
Thank you that was our last
Madam so we will go
to the committee but first of
Representative.
Out we you now have your.
expert if you wanna.
if you want to have him say
anything before we go to
questions thank you madam chair
we've go ahead just get just
give a short statement thank
you.
Madam chair and the
representative Thompson and you
know we we we thank you for
bringing this bill and you know
unfortunately there's a lot of
people could not be in
attendance today this is
supported by the American cancer
society the one association New
Mexico chronic disease
prevention council American
medical society we we we
strongly support this bill and
you know I I don't have to you
know.
Rep Pete or or remind you you
know the facts of this issue.
As you heard the there's a lot
of misinformation of falsehoods
and in and comments from the
other side just just want to
clarify again
you know E. cigarettes are not a
cessation products and the FDA
has not authorized so and E.
cigarettes have five times up to
five times more the Christine
and your you know traditional
cigarettes and they're highly
addictive and you know the
tobacco industry has
historically targeted minority
communities and Hispanic
communities.
So I mean this is a good first
step towards addressing issue up
but we got take any questions
thank you.
Madam chairman has can choose
who you're with
I'm sorry madam chair mark my
name is money's see the under
the American heart association.
Thank you and.
Representative Thompson do you
want to remind us again about
what the amendment has and I
apologize to the committee it
hadn't been up loaded into share
file although we've had it it
should be there now and can you
just briefly remind us about and
I'm I believe I already did but
if I have and I'll move it for
discussion purposes but we
actually what what it does is
take away punishment for
for possession or or for this.
Really for possession what I am
for we do not want to
criminalize G. you that the
that's what it's after so it's
it's mostly it is and madam
chair probably before the next
committee I will do a committee
set up because the it's not all
it's not a lot of the amendments
but it would just make for
cleaner bill so it it strikes
providing penalties and it
strikes a purchase or possession
so that we we the last thing we
want to do with criminalize you
around this so with that madam
chair I'm.
Okay is there any discussion on
the amendment.
Representative Lord.
Thank you for that thank you
madam chair I unfortunately
there's so much stuff line just
have not seen the amendment so I
can ask the representative
please
Did you remove all the penalties
or just for children did you
remove the penalties for adults
as well.
Can you tell me what you're
looking at I'm not patient I
apologize for not having that
amendment number I have
everything in order on page two.
Line six what will serve a one
five the penalties did you
strike out eight any person that
violates our is guilty of a
misdemeanor or did you just
strike out be a minor madam
chair and representative
Lawrence on page two we are we
strike something thanks.
Sub section B. in its entirety.
And then also we strike section
three in its entirety so we did
take out all of the penalties.
Okay sorry I just want to
mention I just want to make sure
clarified and that as I heard
you state be still on and the
entirety of section three is
gone okay so the whole section
three okay maybe okay thank you
Sir cross it out okay.
That was that was my main
question imminent thank you.
All right is there any objection
to the amendment.
Okay seeing none Representative
your bill is amended thank you
and now we'll go to the bill as
a whole Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for
explaining that amendment I
appreciate that so I I was just
about to ask madam chair at that
was four five that we're making
a new law and especially after
Representative Montoya had put
on that great video about how we
should no longer be penalizing
miners and that have passed
through I was thinking about the
great conflict in and how about
that would be the first thing I
did want to say before going to
this is I want to thank you to
all the people of color that did
call in today I heard you and Mr
nine to thank you for your
service I think we heard a lot
of voices today that were deeply
troubled and it's unfortunate
they didn't know about this
amendments being changed before
hand about the penalties so with
that being said I do want to
ask.
Since it's no longer.
Difference different shades is.
Okay go ahead technologies so
let me ask you now with the with
this portion being removed the
portion about the penalties
being removed so what is the
major thrust of I'm looking
through this and I look through
everything madam chair looks
like.
We're still addressing the
issue.
We don't want flavored products
but there's no repercussions for
if.
Madam chair representative lord
so if you look at the bottom of
page one it is unlawful to
knowingly sell offer to sell
barter are given slate flavored
tobacco products.
Product to a person so madam
chair representative that is
going after the sellers and that
the
The law behind that is what we
passed last year around selling
so what we passed a bill last
last year I guess that that took
the age up to twenty one and
that has penalties within that
so it for the seller and that
would that's that's who we're
targeting is the seller we're
not targeting someone for
protesting we are not targeting
that the clerk that that sold it
but at essentially the business
and and they will they will
receive hopefully if I'm they
will receive visits from the
people who are overseeing the
the entire tobacco products act
including the licensing and all
of those things so that it that
is in a different section of the
law madam chair thank you excuse
me is I work through this now
now that I'm seeing that this
one part was removed so madam
chair
So we have.
Laws correct that you cannot
sell any tobacco products to
anyone under twenty one is that
correct that is correct madam
chair.
Thank you so
madam chair just.
I'm trying to wrap my head
around it so does it make it an
extra special correlation.
Or or why we if we were to have
a law on the books that says you
cannot sell to anyone under
twenty one.
What does adding.
Labour due to that because it's
already illegal.
Madam chair representative we
don't want anyone using flavored
tobacco products that the costs
to our to our state in terms of
actual dollars has may have
those numbers are staggering
that the costs that in increased
health care for the state of New
Mexico and unfortunately through
that through the years that
decades the tobacco companies
have have really targeted
communities of color they have
targeted low income communities
and LGBTQ communities I have
been.
Frequently their target so madam
chair and representative I I do
chair the co chair the tobacco
settlement revenue oversight
committee and our mission is to
I decrease that the use of any
types of tobacco because they
are are they are dangerous so
this is just one more layer on
on the plan that we're building
as my hair stated we have an N.
as the speakers that we have the
support of the pediatric society
the heart the heart association
the loan American lung
association cancer society we're
trying to get a full all right
of laws in place to try to
decrease the the beginning of by
have you starting to use tobacco
and madam chair if I could have
my hash talk a little bit about
about when when kids start using
drugs and and and some of those
kind of issues Madam chair go
ahead me just go ahead.
Madam chair and representative
and Representative Lord I think
you know the tobacco industry is
is wearing a Taurus for
targeting kids eighteen and over
and you know I think the E.
cigarette epidemic took off in
twenty fifteen through social
media and it's still you know
going on so it's it's it's not a
coincidence that a target not
only you with the cigarettes
especially with the flavor pop
drugs you know especially with
the flavor part is the people of
color minorities I spent a
communities African American
communities and you know it's
it's it's no secret Worrilow
affects how frequently you are
exposed to tobacco act you know
those living in low income
communities of color are
significantly more likely to see
back.
NEO community so F. color have
historically being heavily
targeted tobacco retailers.
So it's it's it's so it's.
It's it's an ongoing issue and
it I mean if you are Albuquerque
and you know if if you happen to
go to the international district
which is one of the
low income communities Hispanic
communities.
Yeah you'll see you know per
capita smoke shops there more
than if you go to the heights
so.
you madam chair on that point.
And Representative Lord
menthol has always been heavily
marketed to communities of color
and it's harder to get someone
off of menthol tobacco than
regular tobacco and menthol also
has a slight numbing effect it
bypasses all the bodies usual
safety controls to save it from
us something harmful.
That's just what I want to add
thank you thank you thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative yeah I totally
understand I'm actually my very
first cigarette was a mental and
I threw up I don't like mental
so I actually went to lucky
strikes because which is
unfiltered which is.
Way worse but yes I understand
you're saying and I'm I'm
familiar with that reserves I'm
trying to look at both sides of
the coin because we have so many
people caller called in about
their rights and I get worried I
understand we don't want anyone
to smoke smoke nobody should be
smoking right but I also
understand they do have that
right.
I'm worried that people call
will be target the most that is
their choice and they have the
liberty to smoke because it's
not illegal to smoke in America
that that search way stations
allow the freedom.
To smoke whatever flavor that
they have so I'm I'm calling you
from a different perspective
madam chair will this what what
about internet sales will we be
able to stop like they have the
flavored vapes will be what will
be will we be able to stop
internet sales with this there's
just for the stores.
Madam chair representative it is
it of course internet is hard to
police but it will include that
in internet sales.
And madam chair representative
we leave that up to the experts
that have done that it's the
same and I can't remember that
the name of the or it's the same
group that for the state that
does the alcohol it's the
alcohol control board I can't
remember Representative Ferrary
do you remember the name we work
so closely with them on the bill
last year and I am not I'm
stumbling for the name of the
organization that that oversees
the alcohol sales that it use
called S. ID and.
Now it's
Special investigations something
that they changed.
Thank you for answering that
question so madam chair are you
guys familiar that there are
flavored the cartridges for
marijuana.
Madam chair representative yes
but that is not what this bill
is about.
The reason that I'm learning
more about marijuana than I ever
knew my entire life the session
so I learn something new
everyday so madam chair are we
going to would you guys move
forward then to ban flavored
cartridges for marijuana once
it's legalized.
Madam chair representative I
don't think we do oppose I
person at as as a health care
professional I don't like the
idea of anybody putting anything
into their lawns lawns are
pretty darn delegate so I'm you
know I'm I'm not a fan of of
smoking anything and and then
madam chair and representative
if there's research around that
although as I said I chair the
tobacco committee and that's
kind of where I've been putting
and my emphasis is to is to deal
with tobacco.
Thank you thank you for answer
that I was looking at I didn't
know the flavor all the staff
and I was looking how they they
strip it and then they add I
don't just terpenes turbines and
reduce flavors with all these
chemical compounds and all this
different stuff that they and
back into it again something I'm
learning about how they flavor
staff including marijuana and
also learn how I also learned
how now they conflate wrecked
well it's growing as well so all
kinds of things that I've
learned about flavored
marijuana.
So.
It.
Bored with this if it was just
the marketing of.
at eight and fortunately because
we still live in America and
people still have freedoms to do
things even if we think they're
dumb things I still think they
have the right if they want to
eat McDonald's every day three
times Daymon us back from them I
think that if people want to
make that choice they should
still be allowed to I understand
what you're getting at I really
don't want anyone to smoke
unfortunate started smoking was
very young and then quit luckily
early on
just because of I changed some
things in my life so I'm
listening to what the people
said that called and I'm listing
to the fact that they want
choices and listening to them
saying that they feel that
they're going to be the most
penalized and so for that I'm
I'm gonna vote no on it but it's
not because the concept it's
because I think it's punishing.
People but I do understand I
think this would be better off
being
just sticking with the marketing
and I'm always about the route
costs right trying to get people
to smoke.
And I still have issues that
adults that they want to do dumb
things and and and smoking I'm
sorry not seems more dominant
best friends a smoker but if you
want to smoke and you know that
it's going to.
Damage your body you still have
the right to do that even if
it's flavored so thank you very
much I do appreciate what you're
trying to do here that's all
that I have a yield my time.
Thank you Representative next I
have Representative to rass.
Good morning madam chair thank
you I just landed up here and
all back home and so thanks for
this flight.
It was pretty simple it was fast
paced but I'm glad I'm I'm
finally home
Madam chair representative
I think I've mentioned this
before I keep trying to find as
a freshman
Representative.
I I keep track keep struggling
to find the consistency.
In in this committee
on on the issues last week I
brought up.
Some of the things that
Representative Lord brought up.
On
I I do want to on cannabis.
Stating that we needed to if
we're gonna we're gonna enforce
things we needed for set and
treat smoking all the same.
I'm saddened to hear that I
didn't hear the the long
association the and I I missed a
lot of things but I think I
heard the lung association the
cancer association is on today
but they seem to be absent on on
some of the other things and and
if we're going to keep people
smoking like bill that we should
we should be consistent in this
committee
Madam chair representative and
so I wonder my question Madam
chair representative why the
difference Representative today.
Madam chair representative at as
far as the cannabis
that is just beginning and the
all of the rules are not written
around that yet and and I I mean
I don't know this for a fact but
I I do know that there are
people who smoke to are more
packs of cigarettes per day or
vape you know many times per
hour as I said I'm I don't know
this for a fact but I just based
on cost alone I don't think
there's anybody who's smoking
the equivalent of two packs of
cigarettes in terms of cannabis
I think that you have to be
pretty darn rich and from what I
understand you probably be
asleep and and not able to
alright possibly taken that much
smoke from cannabis but as I
said that but there's no there's
not a lot of research around
cannabis because it's not
allowed and I I I would just say
that I don't believe and and if
someone else has done different
information that there's
essentially any way humanly
possible to put as much cannabis
smoke into your lungs as you
could through vaping or smoking
cigarettes.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
The problem that I have this
last week.
I'm
sorry I'm just walking in right
now.
Waste my wife and kids are just
seeing.
I hope that doesn't mess up
this.
This bill give me a second let
me just sit down for a second.
So.
Again last week I mentioned.
But I had research saying that.
one sh one one joint.
Keep in mind this smokes also
okay.
And so you for money so I mean I
I read out to everybody last
week that.
One joint for the quarter of two
and a half to five cigarettes.
And.
And so this is where I get I
think I.
I get disappointed I get
disappointed because we're here
we are trying to keep saying
that's the.
Where the health committee.
And.
All the time it's it's a
different each time sorry I'm
trying to log in here.
On my computer.
At the same time so.
I brought up vaping.
I brought one joint as it is
equipment two and a half to five
cigarettes.
And yet it pastor committee like
it with flying colors for.
Excluding my bill but still
regardless it was it's and that
is disappointing so today some
of the same people are not
telling us that.
we should be doing that.
And and so I get.
I get frustrated.
Listening to one thing one day.
And the next very the very next
time we have a committee meeting
it's completely the opposite.
And.
That to me is is very
concerning.
Being that I I I mean I'm I'm
ready to keep people from
smoking I I don't want people
smoke but here we here yesterday
we heard another some other
issues my body my choice today
it's.
Not your choice.
And it's just very very
disheartening I just can't find
I just cannot find consistency
in this committee.
And I want to work with you guys
and I want to work with the
people and I want to do the best
for New Mexico a when we're
hearing hearing when I'm going
back and forth every other
committee depending on what the
issue is.
Smoking is smoking is smoking
and and Madam chair
representative you just said I
don't want to I don't want to
vote for any fees for anyone who
spoke and and and help anything
in two other ones yes.
What did we do last what it what
it how did you all last week.
And so it's this is where I get
frustrated because I want to
work with you guys I truly want
to do the best for for New
Mexico but it's it's frustrating
when we're doing that thank you
for.
Let me ask you a question.
I I brought this up last time we
we we just your my understand is
you guys just passed
legislation.
Last last year that.
That basically
Increased legislation and
penalties and taxes on the
tobacco industry.
That literally has just been in
force about fifty days.
And I said well let's make
uniform this bring up all those
uniform laws on cannabis.
And nobody was injured nobody
entertain that at all.
Now I'm gonna ask you a question
why are we punishing only the
store owner but not the clerk on
this bill.
Madam chair and representative
we believe that it's a training
issue with that and and eight
You know what let me let me let
me take this one thank you madam
chair.
Madam chair and representative
of drowsiness I think the last
year we we I think the
legislature passed a bill it's
called the tobacco products.
And before that law was passed.
we had no penalties for for
store owners.
And the penalties were two kids
who are buying tobacco products
underage kids were buying
tobacco products.
And the into the clerk's were
supposedly selling to them.
And both of them were you know
it was like up something like a
the misdemeanor punishable by a
thousand dollars in one year in
jail but the store owner was
not.
You know when it's got three.
So we change that law last year
to make sure you know the kids
and the store clerks who make
minimum wage and if they are
arrested for misdemeanor and all
they basically lose their jobs.
So that that was a concept big
behind taking those penalties
out and even the the the tobacco
products act.
They're all there are no
criminal penalties for anybody
including the store.
They are all civil penalties so
this ammendment you know this
fashion in the same way where
you know we don't want to
penalize kids because we know
you know the tobacco industry
has aggressively marketed to
with the kids and we don't want
to penalize you know poor clerks
who are making minimum wage no
seven dollars or eight dollars
an hour so that that was their
reasoning behind you know
adopting this amendment to take
those policies.
Representative.
So this.
When we get off one and sh.
Give me one second let me just
what.
Okay is that better.
Yes much better thank you.
Thank you let me get out of
this.
Madam chair representative.
Can you please explain to me
what the penalty is on and the
store owner.
Representative madam chair a
reserve draws us I think up the
the first penalty dislike for
the first offense I don't have
the exact number in front of me
I think it's a this is a civil
penalty for the store owner I
think the first step of friends
if you why late selling to you
know the store.
The owner of the store will be I
think the fine is like thousand
dollars posted friends.
And.
And
but I can send you that it's
it's a thousand Bucks and the
suspension of of for one week.
Not selling any tobacco products
for a week and then it graduates
you know up to.
You know
I mean I I don't have the
numbers with me but on one for
the fans you know the the
retailer would lose you know
their license permanently.
So that that's these are all
civil penalties these are not
you know any criminal penalties
and and this this law and also
just disturb you know give you a
little background Madam chair
representative arises before we
pass this law
you know the store owners were
not being held accountable for
anything they did or did not do
in terms of training there you
know
your employees.
Madam chair representative so.
I heard a number that was ten
thousand dollars is that correct
are you a hundred percent sure
it's only a thousand dollars.
Madam chair representative as I
mentioned this is the full list
of friends those differences
thousand dollars.
But you know hi I can you know
pull those numbers for you and
and senator here but you don't
ten thousand dollars a you know.
You know I don't want to be an
accurate here but you know that
might be like you know sort of
friends four friends but it's
it's not the first point.
I can get you those numbers
Representative outlet number Sir
I mean you guys are the ones
that work on this Madam chair
representative that worked on
this legislation I'm not I'm not
up to par with it exactly
because again I'm new and I'm
trying to get myself up to speed
I do read a lot and I do study a
lot but I want to make sure I
have those numbers correctly now
I'm gonna be a little funny here
because honestly it would've
there's a cool in your store is
donor number call it a coup
because they say you know what
yeah stand my boss he can give
you the day off you know what
I'm gonna sell so I'm gonna sell
cigarettes to my friend or my
cousin or someone.
In retaliation to my store owner
that I get the day off.
Is there any penalty for the for
the work other than losing his
job.
Representative we we don't
really want to get involved in
that.
Labor disputes with and I'm an
employer and their their
Their employee and and it I
that's pretty a pretty far out
there a hypothetical and and the
chances of you do it you know if
you were a disgruntled employee
and you did sell to your cousin
the chances of you being caught
for that are are slim I I you
know I mean I guess anything is
possible but that's kind of a
Not a scenario I think it's very
likely madam chair.
Madam chair representative I I I
I know I was being silly about
that but but what I'm what we're
I'm going with that is this.
Has to be a balanced you can't
put it all in the store owner
story can be baby sitting up
there works and so there's no
balance in that.
Eight I'll be a hundred percent
with you guys if the school the
store owner is telling the their
their parks Hey let's go ahead
and you just do that don't worry
that we won't get caught be
careful LevelUp that's one
that's one scenario.
That's not happening I don't
think these some of the store
owners whether we agree with
tobacco sales are not as I again
I'm not a smoker I don't want my
kids to smoke I don't none of my
family smokes we're just not.
I've told this story before I
asked my father to stop smoking
when I was a little kid and it
was because the state of New
Mexico at that time when I was
growing up as a little kid in
nineteen seventy eight nineteen
eighty eighty one we're we're
out there promoting non smoking
by the.
Given this a little fraud that
big red lips and it's at best
AUMENT your no formal and then
they give us a little it gives a
little sticker and they would
they would tell us about how
smoking was bad for your lungs
and have killed you and out in
Loblaw cause cancer so for.
This is what's going on here
this is just a complete assault
on just the business owner which
sometimes it has to be balance
is my point.
Balance I don't want a young
individual I said that the other
day look a kid does something we
wanted Sanchez director because
he got caught with a little with
the with smoking marijuana I'm
okay with that.
Yes with a bill that we got a
problem same thing with with
with with smoking you know we
all have to work together to do
the right thing okay.
I understand.
Things balanced so Madam chair
representative my point is we
are getting involved in disputes
when we're creating legislation
it is literally.
Creating these issues.
And again you know all your
hearing people again.
I don't like people should smoke
in.
Around me I I I but but I
respect them I sometimes move
away.
and others are just respectful
name away.
My point in all this Madam chair
representative is I'd like to
see
and would you entertain.
An amendment to your legislation
setting I mean there's a thing I
mean I know all of them playing
that's my fault that I missed
some of the some of the
discussion but I mean we don't
even get the amendment we didn't
get to read it and that's why I
don't see anything about it and
and I see that you you carved
out some of the stuff
and I just listen to what
Representative Lord Madam.
And so it's it's just this this
keeps happening on we're these
these these are amendments keep
coming in not twenty four hours
in advance and causing us not to
what we're supposed to study
madam chair today this the the
date on this amendment is
February fifth.
Yes it the amendment
Representative did come and it
didn't get put on the share file
by accident and we have the
representative explained the
amendment this morning and there
was no objection to passing it
it removed the penalties to
to the purchasers on the
clerk's.
So bill is amended.
I see that so again you know is
it so this only.
This this this legislation
basically and that's too bad
that I missed all that
is is only going to Senator Lee.
Punish the store owner.
Madam chair representative just
like if if if the clerk had
mopped and someone slipped on
the wet floor they're not going
to suit the clerk they're going
to sue the store so madam chair
has has found that the penalties
if if we could have him I answer
that madam chair go ahead
meshed.
Madam chair
representative draws us you know
that the penalties for selling
to minors you know the first
offense it so one day
suspension.
With a thousand dollar fine and
the second offense just about
seven day suspension of four
thousand dollar fine in the
third.
Violation is a thirty day
suspension and seven thousand
dollar fine I mean that's for
selling to minors and before
while ation like you know you
would lose your up you know the
license the tobacco license and
they're also you know civil
penalties for other other
legislations but that that this
is the you know big violation
provide civil fines for selling
to minors.
And just to be clear
Representative my hash that sure
that's in current law right now.
Madam chair yes thank you.
Madam chair representative
achieves that are set up you
know Michael against this this
chair representative has anyone
ever entertain the idea of
possibly having parks the
license like all servers are.
Here Representative we there is
a in in the bill that passed
last year there is and that a
notification essentially that
that owners are expected to
train their employees and
signage needs to be posted
so I I did you know that alcohol
server training you have to you
have to learn whether someone
appears to be intoxicated none
of that is in the is is it this
is a very cut and dry your age
twenty one you can not in
Leicester age twenty one you
could not sell any tobacco
products to to anyone under age
twenty one so I don't think
they're really it it's it's it's
essentially a five minute
training look the loss that we
cannot sell and the but why is
it is now is forced selling
under twenty one
and in terms of this madam chair
I I it will be the owner who has
to bring these illegal drugs and
I don't think the clerk is going
to go out and get a wholesale
while black market shipment of
of
Of flavored eat E. cigarettes
and and sell them this this
especially in this part the
courts essentially have nothing
to do with that because these
drugs should not be in the store
because they are not going to be
legal at this past.
Representative.
All on Madam chair
representative will on that
point please I let please I'm
just not sure on this on this
point.
That that that I'm making
We're just talking about this
part I haven't even gotten into
the labor part I get it that's
that that that's the
responsibility of the clerk of
the one of the.
Representative Representative
today's bill is on the flavor
the rest is just language so
please stick to the bill.
But madam chair.
Target your bills your which is
about us.
Well madam chair representative
again that was in the bill when
I was reading and and it wasn't
in my share file so I wasn't I
wasn't job privilege to that and
so regardless I think my my
point is
that we should.
Possibly and and I'm doing this
with respect please okay I mean
it's just it's just frustrating
Madam chair representative that
we just keep bouncing back and
forth depending on the issue I
think that's what I'm
disappointed.
Look I'm.
I'm with you guys a lot of these
points.
It's just the way it's handled
it's disappointing.
I mean I can come in here truly
with true intentions of doing
good.
And I can't I can't come in here
on on on Monday and it's it's
one way and on Wednesday it's a
different day and a different
solution to the same problem.
Here's what I'm saying it's just
you know we're supposed to be
sharing ideas here put it on the
table and working with one
another.
And it seems like sometimes I
I'm.
I'm gonna do my job because
that's what I was elected to do
is to come in that these bills
and get real results is what
we're doing.
At.
Madam chair representative all
of you the committee I truly
when I come over here I'm not
just picking at it you guys have
seen me Madam chair
representative we're I feel
strongly about something I'm
just reading that and I still go
with it because I believe in.
So I would like the same respect
when we're not when I'm doing
that.
When I'm expressing things that
I'd get bit that I'm given the
same respect.
When it comes to to to or
expressing here it would be nice
if we have if it's a five minute
training Madam chair
representative you got something
so there's balance in it so it
just doesn't someone the current
knows what he's doing you just
mop the mop the floor in some we
slept he's purposely selling to
a minor.
I should be held to those
standards.
We can't put it all on the
owner.
He can not be watching
everything that's going on in
the store and we're not gonna
hold people equally accountable
it's just not gonna work.
All the data that
Representative as you said that
is not that has nothing to do
with this bill both our current
law.
Thank you madam chair
representative but it was again
we're reading and and I was I
was going but I was just
finishing up my statement to
what I.
Previously Representative.
Now.
Back to back to the flavors.
I talked about the building I
talked about that.
Another issue with cannabis no
wonder team my my my idea and
and and might regards to smoking
as smoking is smoking.
Today here and I'm find myself
in the same situation again.
Tobacco products are the only
seem to be the only target of
what we're doing here.
Again I'm gonna state what I
stated earlier my district is
close to the borders of Arizona.
Texas.
And New Mexico.
When they can just drive down
the road and get some of the
products for a third of the
price so with all the flavors
and everything we are losing
control because we're just we're
we're.
I mean it to the point that
they're just going to go
somewhere else and get it I
didn't hear all the testimony at
all when I can assure you there
were people on here that are are
that are.
The purchase these products.
Take you away.
Taking them away again I'm not
I'm not a person that that
promotes this stuff but at the
same time.
By removing menthol and and and
these flavored tobacco products.
All we're doing is pushing them
to go to another market or
creating a black market.
We had a discussion last last
week right expressed my concern
of that we were up that that
this committee had passed
legislation of taxing this these
some of these
this these tobacco products up
to eighty three percent.
Yet on yet on cannabis twenty
percent was too much over twenty
percent too much.
So here I am and and and I was
reminded last last time that by
bye bye taxing and over twenty
percent it was going to create
an illicit market yet we can do
it on the tobacco industry
eighty three and still pressing
and creating more more more
years on top of that and we're
not and and it's not it is not
held to the same standard.
Analysts and market can be
created any product.
And so for that reason I mean
and and I heard some other
testimony that this.
No I think everybody has the the
the the ability to taste and
smell and I'm a person of color
you want to call me a person of
color and I just as well the
same as my wife was angle and I
just don't see how I was
targeted any different than
anyone else I think sometimes we
go a little too far in in saying
that everything that is done is
done just to certain places.
Follow it in New again I don't
like any smoking let me make
that clear I don't like smoking
period.
And you're not gonna get me here
on ever to say Hey I want to I
want to use a smoker does to
smoke.
The end of the day Madam chair
representative we have to be
fair to everyone and I don't
think it's fair that we keep
coming up to one.
Type of of consumer and one type
of business over and over and
over and not holding the same.
Accountability on other things
that is be passing this body
this excuse me this committee
when it comes to cannabis and
other drugs and so I'm I'm I I'm
sorry to say that I'm not going
to support this cause is just on
verily what and being that
within the last fifty days they
have already sustained at the
legislature just passed and the
so that and and we haven't even
had time to see the statistics
of what's going to happen with
that legislation was up it's
only been fifty days that's all
I have and thank you so much
respect for.
Madam chair I just I just want
to have one response and that is
there are decades and decades of
research that show that the
tobacco companies have targeted
communities of color LGBTQ
communities.
Communities living in poverty
that it that is a proven fact
that has been researched for
decades and with that madam
chair that's all I have thank
you madam chair representative I
would I would like three share
that information with me because
I would like to educate myself
better on that please
it because if I'm wrong I will
recant those those those those
statements that I made but I
will tell you that I don't like
to make it all about that I like
to make it about this stuff the
substance is we don't want
people to smoke we have to and
we have to this is a health
committee that wants to help our
state the best of our ability
and we have to be fair.
Thank you very much thank you
Representative and is it it is
sometimes difficult to navigate
the nuances between different
public policies I appreciate
that next we have Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me OK.
Yes we can hear you.
Thank you madam chair at my
apologies for being late I was
on appropriations committee this
morning and I just got summons
to Senate based on in my yep all
driving directions I don't want
to miss any more of the
committee so I've I've heard
this legislation
I believe since I was a freshman
it's brought every year to do
away with labour's and so on and
so forth I understand that the.
there was a that was not share
share file it was in the
committee soon enough and that
so it's unfortunate that we we
didn't get to read it but I
completely understand we're all
trying to be patient with this
new so and share file situation
so I understand that the whole
criminal part has been removed
is that correct.
Madam chair representative yes.
Thank you for that and so but it
still is a crime is that.
Madam chair representative what
are what is it Sally flavored
tobacco in.
So if I were to back is it
definition is this bill will be
a crime it will be prohibited
with civil penalties madam
chair.
Okay thank you very much and
And that's all flavors that's
including and regular tobacco
including vaping is that correct
Madam chair representative we
did come up with eighty eight
definition of by tobacco
products and some years ago so
everything that falls under that
including bait chewing tobacco
cigars cigarettes all of all of
those things as I think that
that definition is in and of the
bill madam chair.
I'm sorry that definition is in
current law.
Okay thank you I'm so you know I
think everyone in the committee
knows that I own a convenience
store gas station I stated
before that I sell fresh fruits
and vegetables in that store
because of the demand the same
reason I sell tobacco products
is because of the demand at some
point
madam chair and and committee we
have to let adults be adults and
make adult decisions are I
making adult decisions to have a
soda I make an adult decision to
eat McDonald's are I don't think
that
are implementing this type of
legislation is.
Good legislative I don't
understand we just passed the
law last year where we have to
have a license to sell the
tobacco you have to be twenty
one to buy tobacco and.
I just don't see.
telling my fifty four year old
husband that he can't to scroll
Representative flavor.
That's what he likes to to
I don't I just don't understand.
The reasoning behind this other
than the fact that your chart
that people are trying to get
people to stop smoking but
they're making adult decisions
and we make adult decisions
madam chair and committee every
single day to speed to
push the gas limit what we're
almost on empty I'm hungry I'm
ready that double cheese burger.
We make adult decisions that are
not healthy and not wise every
single day.
And I just don't think that
legislating decision making.
Is is a good.
Process in my opinion.
madam chair and and
Representative.
The other point is is that we we
just created legislation last
year that we haven't given a
chance to see how it take to
find out what it's done to New
Mexico and to the communities.
It's twenty one.
I'm glad that you remove the
penalties they're still
penalties civil penalties and
when.
I heard a statement that these
are minimum wage workers at
seven and eight dollars an hour
well guess what not at my gas
station.
These are grown adults that need
jobs that are making good
decisions about what this kind
of legislation is keep prohibits
me from higher right.
The sixteen year old the
seventeen year old eighteen year
old that wants to work out of
work in an environment and start
a career at a minimum wage.
And so I.
I I don't have any other
comments other than.
What are we gonna start letting
adults make decisions for
themselves thank you madam
chair.
And madam chair just on that
point it your clerk cannot sell
a product that is not in your
store so it is the owner who
will be.
Putting these products for sale
if they are not legal they
shouldn't be in your store they
shouldn't be there for a clerk
to sell if there there that's a
problem and here Madam chair on
that point I'm also referring to
the last legislation that was
passed but I actually voted for
to become a licensed distributor
of tobacco and be able to sell
it of course I'm not to sell it
it's still legal of course I'm
not going to bring it but in my
opinion it shouldn't be illegal
to do it you should should not
be illegal thank you madam
chair.
Thank you and I don't have any
more questions what's the
pleasure of the committee.
Madam.
Most
we have a we have a.
Can't able okay the motion to
table takes precedent.
Torrez if you would call role on
a motion to table yes and the
bill is tabled no and we're back
to a vote on the.
to do past motion.
Motioned to table
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Anderson boats yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative Britney by.
No to table.
Representative Karen bash no.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Yes to table and I am bored
maybe Representative Armstrong
may have gone into a debt some.
Representative thank you
Representative
I'm sorry what will catch
representative Armstrong okay go
ahead Representative Marian
Matthews.
No.
Representative Roger Montoya no.
Representative Louise that
Ossoff yes to table.
Representative Liz Thomson no.
Representative
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Yes to table.
Vice chair Joanne Ferrari no to
table.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong
no.
So that.
Nos to table and for yes.
Okay we're back on a motion to
do pass.
Now go ahead and call the roll.
Madam chair.
As amended yes thank you.
And who motion that please.
I believe it was Representative
Barreras and Representative
Ferrary second do I have that
right.
I think it was okay okay here
bash I think seconded okay okay.
Representative wealth Anderson.
No.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative Britney but.
Yes.
Representative Karen bash yes.
Representative Stephanie lord
no.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes.
Representative.
Roger Montoya yes.
Representative Lewis had off of
no.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Representative vice chair Joanne
Ferrari yes.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong
yes.
I want to.
The opposite seven yes.
And for now.
Cut representative Thompson you
have a due pass as amended for
house bill two oh five.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you next on
our agenda is house bill two
town Representative Barreras.
Yes madam chair I have.
Just before you start I wanted
just to make an announcement to
the audience and I neglected to
do this earlier that to the
sponsor has withdrawn house bill
eighteen so House Bill eighteen
will not be heard today so if
you're in attendance for house
bill eighteen just wanted to let
you know that the the sponsor
has asked to withdraw that.
so Representative back to you on
our house bill two ten and you
have
some experts you'd like to be
brought in.
Yes madam chair if we can move
over Dr Richard cram and Dr
Michael Kaplan.
Okay I think we have a.
All right madam chair and
members of the committee if
you're sitting here hoping to
hear a bi partisan and non
controversial bill today look no
further I'm pleased introduced
house bill two and enacting the
audiology and speech language
pathology pathology interstate
compacts the purpose of this
contract is to facilitate the
Interstate practice of audiology
and speech language pathology
with the goal of improving
public access to audiology and
speech language pathology
services.
The lack of access to medical
and educational services in the
state of New Mexico in New
Mexico has been well documented
many of our most vulnerable
citizens in the state of New
Mexico including the young and
our aging population relying
heavily on audiology and speech
language pathology services.
The nurse licensure compact
compact has provided increased
access to medical care for the
residents in the state of New
Mexico similarly enacting the
audiology and speech language
pathology energy interstate
compacts will be of great
benefit to the citizens of the
state of New Mexico.
Madam chair I would like to our
to have my expert witnesses
introduce themselves and talk a
little bit more about thank you.
Go ahead.
Not sure who you want to go
first Richard Frank.
Go ahead.
Richard cram I am the
audiologist and I'm off of the
chair of the.
speech language pathology
audiology hearing aid dispensing
practices board.
In the state of New Mexico I
also served on the advisory
committee back in two thousand
seventeen which with the
national advisory committee
concerning this interstate
compact I am involved in the
beginning of the idea of
limiting the compact.
I don't I would just introducing
a limiting offer that I can.
Thank you doctor.
Exactly.
I'm yes good morning I'm Dr
Michael Kaplan I'm a past
president New Mexico speech
language and hearing association
and I'm also a member of the
speech pathology audiology and
hearing aid dispensing practices
or wired
and so you know we're we're in
favor of this bill we feel that
this bill will offer a higher
degree of consumer protection
this bill will also allow better
access to services especially
for population of adults and
children in rural school
districts and for example the DD
population which is so
drastically underserved in
receiving specific services
throughout New Mexico and so you
know and then we're available to
respond to any other questions
as necessary.
Thank you.
Madam chair go ahead we're also
I'm sorry we're working within a
committee stop and I wasn't sure
when you're appropriate time to
acknowledge that would be.
Okay have
All it.
for discussion purposes and ask
Committee whether.
they have seen this we did
receive it yesterday morning.
Madam chair I I have to
substitute here and it's
amendments as well okay.
Can you explain before we go to
the audience briefly the
differences in the some of from
the original.
Yes I do want to add to just
make sure to clarify that the
committee I does not change the
substance of the bill at all
there was some concerns brought
up from the New Mexico medical
association and our the FIR LFC
and DFA
because of these concerns we did
something to to clean up the
language and if either one of
our my experts would like to go
into detail about that they
care.
Go ahead Matt madam chair this
is this is doctor Kaplan the New
Mexico medical association we
work with them they made some.
Clarification and they requested
in their amendments to clarify
certain aspects of the bill but
none of their amendments changes
of standup nature of that the
bill itself so the American
speech language and hearing
association which is been
instrumental in
developing the language of this
bill accepted all of those
changes the other change that
was recommended by the in the
legislative analysis that
addressed the
that address the current statute
on the on the books in regarding
to licensing speech language
pathologists and audiologists
and they're like they're
language was integrated into
this bill substituting you'll
find that particular language
that they wanted integrated in
on page section excuse me page
seven lines.
One notes use me lines thirteen
through seventeen and that was
just to ensure that the state
licensure board would require
criminal background check of of
applicants so that would be
consistent with what the
interstate compacts would be
recommending this well and so we
were okay with accepting that
change and and that amendments
amended language went into the
substitute that you have before
you now thank you.
And just for clarity
Representative as I understand
that you had you had amendments
and this just roll it all into a
cell.
I'm sure that's correct instead
of adding more amendment we we
put them all together in there
in one the stock thank you and
one more question for clarity on
the sub the contents or the
structure of the still
substance of it still meets the
requirements for the.
Emission the credit the compact
commission.
Yes madam chair that's correct
okay thank you
any questions on
At well let's let's leave that
at that a will will come back to
the committee members after
we've taken public comment but I
wanted the public to have an
understanding of what we're
talking about in the sub before
before taking COVID so first
we'll go to a poll.
Gabrielle if you could put up
the Paul of attendees if you are
in support or opposition to this
bill.
Thank I think we've I think
we've got it we have
Seven in support and of one in
opposition.
And so we will go first to the
audience and those in
opposition.
Who wish to speak in opposition
of the bill would raise your
hand.
Thank those in support.
You wish to speak in support
raise your hand please.
And we'll go first to Sherri
Dotson.
Go ahead sherry.
Madam chairman members of the
committee I am us three dots and
a volunteer advocate for A. A.
R. P. E. which stands in support
of house bill two ten house bill
two ten will help the US The New
Mexico schools with their
staffing shortages and it will
facilitate the process for New
Mexico licensure of military
spouses who wish to work in our
beautiful state A. A. R. P.
stands in support thank you.
Thank you Siri and.
Let's say I don't have anyone
else Richard Romero you had
raise your hand up and down.
let me just go make sure.
Richard did you want to make
COVID yes can you hear me yep go
ahead Richard Romero I am the
registered lobbyists
representing the New Mexico
speech and hearing association
and we are in full support of
this station thank you thank
you.
Okay.
We'll go to
I'm I'm sorry I almost.
Let's see no I've got everyone
in there so we'll go to the
Committee now is there.
and first we have Representative
Thomson.
You madam chair I just I would I
wanted to speak in support of
this bill it we we are moving
this way with a lot of
professions I was invited by a a
by the group that was working on
this to Washington DC gosh two
or three years ago or maybe I
who knows time time kind of
doesn't mean a whole lot anymore
so but it's a great it's a great
concept and and adds that she
reset it will allow military
spouses to to be Representative
to be licensed here and and act
madam chair woman you and I
probably know better than anyone
on this committee about the
shortage of all health care
providers.
And and being the mother of a
son with autism we we made full
use of speech and language
therapy services for decades and
we'd love SLPs and I'm totally
in support of this bill thank
you madam chair and
representative but I just.
Thank you Representative and
before we go any further I
neglected to go back to the
Committee some.
And ask if if there's any
questions specific to this
Seeing none is there any
objection to adoption of the
committee substitute.
Saying none I your bill
Representative has been
substituted.
now we'll go on to more
questions from the committee
representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative
read this forward I agree with
you wholeheartedly the only
question I have is is this in
conjunction with and does it
match with our LP and the
commission.
All of those things that that
might there might be issues
Representative are are they all
together on this legislation.
I appreciate the question are
Madam chair representative if I
can have all one of my expert
witnesses after that I would
appreciate it whoever wants to
go.
Okay I'll call on somebody that
cap of.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Armstrong
both the New Mexico speech
language and hearing association
and the speech pathology or
speech language pathology all
right audiology and hearing aid
practices board membership
support passage of this bill.
Thank you.
Chair answer that's exactly what
I wanted to hear thank you.
All right thank you
Representative Lord I thank you
madam chair first of all I want
to say thank you I appreciate
the part added about the
background checks on page seven
thank you appreciate that I also
do appreciate the active duty
military personnel and their
spouses can make this a home
state I do have a question for
you
is this system going to be
applicable to the VA system or
is this something for just
private ideology policy
hopefully that question makes
sense.
I think it does make sense thank
you are madam chair
representative I think it does
make sense I'm gonna shoot it
over to Dr cram you are you have
to do for you thank you for the
question.
I actually employed in the air
right now is an audiologist New
Mexico at right now the working
in in the a the requirement
because of the position and the
only person in the license in
any state
you don't necessarily have to be
licensed in the state that they
are currently residing and but
it would provide an and madam
the their previous license
within the state has a member of
the compact but when the fact of
the a that much of the time.
Thank you thank you I appreciate
that and thank you for being the
building my husband is a veteran
and we go to the VA ideology all
the time for his hearing aids so
can you give me just and then
Turkey senior brie sorry to be
very Representative I'm on board
with this can you tell me how it
would benefit my husband and how
this is benefit him as a
consumer without hearing issues
at how does this make life
better for him.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I will send it
back to our doctor Graham after
the thank you.
You know I that may not
necessarily benefit your husband
that much in in this exact
casing are going the
Senator Kernan whereas if your
husband we're not able to
receive the a and maybe he would
have done in a more rural area
and this bill is able to
facilitate more telehealth
practice
this bill would facilitate that
service to him or maybe he if
you learn that in an underserved
community maybe in the
southeastern part of the state
where he would be able to
receive services from another
state the council member the
compact hatches Texas or Arizona
and they would be able to cross
the border easily more easily
with the privilege to practice
and Joanne find audiology
services specifically if you
serve the VA this may not impact
receive services in the a and
may not affect him that much of
the time.
Thank you Mr you madam chair I
do appreciate that I think the
call services though is is the
important part if we did revert
to a more rural area especially
now it's been so frustrating
trying to get NBA with COVID and
it specially the audiology with
the steps are working he's
actually not sending it directly
us to Denver and having
including assisted not set back
when it needs to be readjusted
and trying to get back in this
is been difficult but Mexico is
very difficult such thank you I
appreciate that and Mr Gramm I
wanted meat here what I do you
ever get back yes that are
happens again in thank you madam
chair and thank you are
Representative I think you do
you may have a long
controversial bill right.
Thank you Representative
Montoya.
Madam chair and representative
but it us thank you so much for
bringing this important
legislation forward I'll be as
brief as possible.
I am a huge advocate of any way
that we can bring practitioners
across the Health spectrums in
and and and really fill those
gaps much of my work has
centered in K. six rural
education in the Espanola valley
and I have seen up close and
personal what happens when
students are spread students
especially are denied or there's
a gap in services and so on that
basis I applied this I look
forward to voting and he'll
back.
Thank you I move it to pass.
Thank you have a deep.
And madam chair can I mean I
move a do not pass on house bill
whatever number eighty two ten
but I do passed on see that
feedback I'm so
committee substitute.
Okay we still have more
questions as thank
Representative tries to have
questions.
Ma'am what I had is I just
wanted to congratulate her on
this and I look forward to
hearing or seeing.
Thank you and I actually have a
couple of of very brief
questions Representative.
How many states are required for
the compact to be in place and
and operational if you will and
as that number already been.
achieved and what number.
You know how many states are in
the compact now.
Thank you madam chair doctor
Kaplan.
madam chair and representative
madam chair.
there are six states that have
currently adopted the interstate
compacts there are ten states
that need to adopt the compacts
in order for the contact to go
into
into to start
so we would be may be state
number seven there are at least
ten other states in the country
that are considering legislation
this year as well to adopt the
interstate compacts so that
we're hoping that by the middle
or end of twenty twenty one we
will be in the interstate
compacts thank right great thank
you I just wanted to
yeah make that point that when
these compacts start you have to
get enough states to participate
and so that's
that's great and hopefully it's
sooner rather than later we will
we will have a functioning
compact so what's the pleasure
of the committee.
Madam chair I move a do not pass
you did
thank you thank you and and the
and who was who and seconded.
I did Roger call second Roger as
seconded okay thank you
Torrez you want to call the roll
please.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Nibert a cost.
Yes.
Representative Karen bash yes.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Yes.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Yes.
Representative Roger Montoya yes
please Representative Lewis that
awesome yes ma'am.
Liz Thomson yes.
Chair Joanne J. Ferrary.
Madam chairman this is
Representative Anderson who also
votes yes thank you I was just
going back to you thank chair
Joanne Ferrari yes.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong
yes
and madam chair all right
Representative congratulations
you have a unanimous do pass on
house bill two town committee
substitute.
Thank you so much members of the
committee and madam chair I'm
I'm very proud right now thank
you so much for being a part of
it thank you next we have house
bill two fourteen
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and if I
could ask for my expert Jim
Jackson to be brought up to the
panel.
All find him quick.
There he is okay he's on board.
Go ahead Representative she
thank you madam chair house bill
two fourteen.
Remains an outdated and in
equitable exemption from the
states minimum wage statute
which allows employers to pay a
sub minimum wage to people with
disabilities.
And the sub minimum wages by
Violates workers rights the bill
enacts the recommendation of by
the US commission on civil
rights that states repeal
Senator that asked aides to
repeal a sub minimum wage loss
the US commission on civil
rights reports that although
intended to prepare of.
At people with disabilities for
competitive work and incentivize
employers to hire them the sub
minimum wage laws disadvantage
or exploit
people with disabilities and the
commission recommends that
states repeal or phase out such
laws and invest in other
supportive work opportunities
for people with disabilities.
And
Seven among wages no longer
considered a best practice it's
being adopted
by states across the country
I've attended the national
conference of state legislators
and
Going to committees where states
and even presented how states
are trying to do this
to repeal the seven among wage
and it's being phased out in New
Mexico in in January twenty
eighteen there were a total of
only four hundred thirty
individuals who are permitted to
make less than minimum wage in
New Mexico.
I'd like to go ahead in
and referred to my experts Jim
Jackson.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee on June Jackson
on the registered lobbyists for
disability rights New Mexico yes
Representative Ferrary has noted
on house bill two fourteen
simply repeals an existing
provision in state law which
should note was enacted more
than fifty years ago when we had
very different attitudes about
people with disabilities but I
should also note that this
provision in state law has never
been utilized
and so it's appropriate to just
take it off the books now
working people with disabilities
are no less deserving and it any
other employee and shouldn't be
paid less than the minimum wage
at the national level there is a
federal law the yield with sub
minimum wages of but it also is
in the process of of being
phased out as some of you may
know
when president Biden was a
candidate for office he called
for phasing out this the federal
law as well and his current the
stimulus package my
understanding is that it also
includes this provision to phase
out the federal law.
Those disability field is
clearly moving away from this
approach as Representative
Ferrary has noted and recent
federal law does reinforce that
trend the workforce innovation
and opportunity act past a
couple years ago it actually
prohibits across the country
prohibits moving students with
disabilities as they leave
public school and go on to to
work or higher education it
prohibits them from being.
Enrolled in spike special enough
workshops that would pay less
than the minimum wage and here
in New Mexico the department of
health which administers of the
the the developmental
disabilities program has adopted
an employment first policy that
requires all state funded
provider agencies to make every
reasonable effort to provide
employment opportunities for
people with disabilities the pay
at least the minimum wage.
There are no madam chair members
of the committee at this time of
there are no private businesses
at all and only three nonprofit
agencies in New Mexico that
until recently employed of
people with disabilities at less
than the minimum wage
and for better for worse during
this pandemic it's my
understanding that there's
actually no one whose.
In that position at all and so
now is a particularly good time
to make sure that we take this
the of this legislation up in
state law off of the statute
books
of the and we just want to make
sure that as this bill is phased
out at the federal level that we
don't we don't allow for a back
door sort of approach to do this
in New Mexico as well so we
encourage the committee to adopt
this a fairly simple bill which
simply removes this underuse
provision in state law thank you
madam chair.
Thank you
Representative szerint are you
ready you're on mute.
That's why you can hear me madam
chair I'd like to also invite my
other co chair Representative
Thomson co sponsor.
Thank you madam chair and I will
be very brief I I have always
really hated this provision I
think what it does is say if you
have a disability you are less
than you are worth less than
minimum wage and and you know
you couldn't make all the
arguments you want I think
that's a statement we do not
want to make as the state and I
don't want to make as a as a
person I think I think that's
what this is about is yes.
It's finally moving forward and
stop pretending that stop stop
the perception that because you
have a disability you are less
than thank you madam chair.
Thank you are you ready now
Representative Representative
for us to go to the audience yes
madam chair thank you K. thank
you and so first we're going to
do a poll.
Those in attendance who are in
support or opposition of this
legislation.
Of house bill two fourteen.
Like we have it
we have the seven in support and
one in opposition according to
the poll.
And we will go first to.
Opposition anyone who wishes to
speak in opposition.
Okay then we'll go to support
anyone who wishes to speak in
support.
And we will start with Felipe.
Where blah.
Philippe.
Hello yep go ahead okay thank
you madam chair and and members
of the committee my name is for
the big about and I am workers
rights attorney in New Mexico
Center on poverty all workers
deserve the right to New
Mexico's minimum wage New Mexico
currently allows the state's
authorize workers with
disabilities to work for
significant over the state's
minimum wage the statue has
never been used in New Mexico in
New Mexico so employers don't
need it and workers don't need
it just creates an opportunity
for workers to be discriminated
against a rate unfair New Mexico
should eliminate the school to
show support and is committed to
uplifting all workers as opposed
to discrimination for these
reasons we strongly support the
two fourteen we encourage the
committee to pass it thank you.
Thank you next we have Jerry
Marin's.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Jerry modest
time the policy analyst for the
office of the Attorney General.
Our office has been involved in
some case work that scrutinizes
the practice of sub minimum wage
and we support this legislation
which maintains the ability
contribution and dignity of
workers with disabilities and
pay them accordingly thank you.
Thank you next we have Karen
Witt lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen what lock with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter.
And as social workers we want to
we want to know that everyone is
created equal I think that hi
Representative Thomson said it
best that nobody is less than
and with this antiquated law we
are.
We are
Causing people to be less than
in fact according to the law.
This doesn't help hi help employ
those with disabilities.
In fact it hurts them.
And with that we're done thank
you very much thank you next we
have Ellen pines.
Madam chair this is Ellen pine
speaking on behalf of the
disability coalition and we
stand in strong support of this
bill as previous speakers have
noted this is a very old statute
that represents very outdated
thinking and more over it's not
even being used in there for for
all those reasons we believe it
should be removed from New
Mexico statutes we have the
coalition believe in promoting
integrated and meaningful
employment for persons with
disabilities just like everyone
else and we're pleased to see
that the US civil rights
commission agrees with us on
that point as does the
department of health and we are
just part of this bill thank
you.
Thank you our next we have
Marshall Martinez.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee
Marshall Martinez executive
director of equality New Mexico
LGBTQ people are working for
full liberation across New
Mexico in many ways and we
believe that none of us will
need full abrasion until we all
have we strongly refute we
strongly support repealing the
slide that we believe sends a
clear message from the state of
New Mexico the living wage as a
matter of respect dignity and
justice we urge this committee
to pass this bill as one more
step toward full liberation for
all New Mexicans thank you.
Thank you.
Okay that was that was it so
we'll go to our
our committee and first I have
Representative Anderson.
Madam chair could I of first I
have our other
sponsor and Representative Rubio
to say a few words she was in
another call but she is in the
audience now okay let's.
Get her over and.
Yes yes okay Representative
Rubio.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee members I'll be
brief but I just wanted to
provided just a brief comment
this is one of those bills that
Representative Ferrary and I
have been working on the last
several years and as stated
before we don't believe that
this is
this is just antiquated language
that really needs to be removed
and and that all people deserve
a dignified way H. and so thank
you for the opportunity to speak
and I really appreciate it.
Thank you I'm Representative
Anderson did you want to ask a
question you had your you were
first with your hand up before
notes down so I wasn't sure.
We'll come back to if he has a
question Representative
Matthews.
Thank you madam chair
they do it the right way yes yes
we can hear you thank you and
eight I clearly support this
bill but I did want to ask.
About.
What impact if any
The ending of this area of.
Discrimination against people
with disabilities
has there been any impact on the
employment of people with
disabilities as this has been
phased out both in the state and
apparently across the country.
Madam chair I'm going to defer
to my witness Mr Jackson.
Madam chair Representative
Matthews of that hi of the I to
be honest there are employment
opportunities for people with
disabilities continues to be a
serious challenge of people with
disabilities are are unemployed
at a rate that's much higher
than the general population of
people without disabilities of
the of the there is a clearly
been a movie in the field two of
to emphasize
of the competitive wages for
people with disabilities
at least equal to the minimum
wage and to do that in
combination with other
incentives to encourage
employment of people with
disabilities I think there are
mixed to the they're a mixed
breed mixed results are mixed
reviews around the country in
terms of the impact of this.
as because a number of states
have taken this position of
phasing out any authority to
provide less than the minimum
wage it's not a magic bullet it
doesn't solve all those problems
there continue to be challenges
and of and we look forward to
working with the Legislature in
coming years to continue to look
at ways to provide incentives
for employers to hire people
with disabilities.
That I I I think it's fair to
say that there had not been
there's there's not really been
conclusive the conclusions of a
from a from the studies of the
few that I'm aware of around the
country
of the but I don't think that
this will reduce opportunities
for employment and as we
continue to encourage employers
and state agencies and others to
hire people with disabilities I
think we can do it in a way that
that as other folks to.
A looted to really respects the
dignity of the employees with
disabilities.
Madam chair and representative
just like to add to that
with
The
Yazzie Martinez case you know
there's more attention on you
know students with disabilities
and there's a program best
buddies that has in a
transitional aspect to it I
believe it's only in Albuquerque
and in Los crucis but we're
trying to expand the program but
the transition part of the best
buddies program is where they
at help students
and according to the
It's a disabilities
in in the school system you're
supposed to at like age fourteen
start helping students to get
information about different job
opportunities and to focus on
the different capabilities that
they have and how they might
transition to a job so there
does need to be more work and
this is just one start of making
it so that
people aren't put into these
kinds of positions where they
are assessed
How fast they can do a job
and paid accordingly we need to
stop this and then start working
with department of
the DVR and.
Different things and
opportunities so yes we need to
pursue those more
Focus you know have more of a
focus on those things.
And madam chair Representative
thank you for that answer and
and Jim who is an old friend
thank you for your explanation
chair and I just kind of wanted
to follow up on that I to at CNN
for number of years and over
time the school had a very
active support system for the
the individuals with
disabilities and I had.
Just an incredible range of
students in my classes who
yeah receive some additional
assistance and it could be as
simple as
that they would take an exam at
the at the disability center
where they could be given more
time for example up to a deaf
students of blind students you
had people who came to class
with them and help them navigate
the system and so I'm I'm
wondering I as we in this this
process of denigrating the
abilities of people with
disabilities I look forward to
working with the disability
community and other legislators
on.
Seeing if perhaps what we need
to start to do is think about
how we put some support systems
available to business and to
employers not just government
employers to provide
the assistance to because these
are often very talented people
but they just need some
additional assistance so I just
wanted to say that I want to
thank you for bringing the bill
forward and
the scenario we obviously need
to work on thank you.
Thank you next we have
Representative Montoya.
Madam chair and representatives
who are bringing this bill
forward thank you so much it is
absolutely a social justice
issue that we're talking about
in my years of working with
children and young people I
think that words matter I have
always looked at this unique
population as uniquely
challenge uniquely able.
And I think that this
legislation will bring the
dignity and respect in closing I
think in the good one student
to.
Inspires me today she's now
nineteen had in my classes for
about twelve years and to know
that this law will affect her
life in an equitable way.
Brings me joy and I'm proud of
New Mexico if this indeed
becomes law thank you to the
Sanchez I yield back.
Thank you Representative trust
us.
Hi madam chair.
Thank you Representative
I I just have a quick question
So sometimes it in maybe I'm
wrong on this but do this yet
sometimes the people that are.
in this situation with
disabilities do they receive
sometimes disabilities and are
there any issues with them
making too much money or in and
and I mean that in a in a
respectful way that it will loop
the could they lose their
disability.
Madam chair and representative
I'm gonna ask him if he would
answer that I know the general
answer but I want him to be able
to.
Get it exact.
Madam chair of the
Representative asked us
it it would be extraordinary
unlikely that a that a person in
this situation earning you
moving from less than minimum
wage up to the to the minimum
wage would the would lose
benefits there are some federal
programs that provides for
incentives for instance that the
people in the long run to be
able to earn enough money that
they move off of of benefits and
that's a that's a win win
situation for everybody but in
the in most of the circumstances
that we're talking about the
individuals that would be
affected if we were if if this
law were to be implemented
these are these people to
typically are are working only
part time in the first place so
it would be extraordinarily
unlikely that they would lose
any of the benefits that they
might be receiving now based on
that kind of income so I I don't
think it is a problem with we're
not talking about
you know sort of.
Of the people who would be
typically at the limit of what
they could earn for instance so
I I I I appreciate your question
because it's an important one
for us all to be aware of that I
don't think it would apply in
this circumstance.
And I could just jump in and
because not everybody is the
steep in in this committee and
in disabilities as of some
others so madam chair there is a
a cap of how much money that a
person receiving social security
can make and and when it when it
comes over that but but so what
Jim I'm totally agreeing with
what Mr Jackson said is that
these are these are not the
people who are going to go from
sub minimum wage to making
twenty dollars an hour it
working forty hours a week
that's not the kind of person
we're talking about so there may
be a rare case and as Mr Jackson
that there are there are some
programs that are trying to help
people.
Transition off of disability
income as their as their income
thank you madam chair.
Give madam chair thank you
Representative Townsend for that
that that that helps health
issues that I up Matthew.
it's only because it in I want
to bring that up because I'm
thinking you know someone I have
some employees myself there on
school security and have limits
Madam chair representative and
and that means that sometimes
the limit they're they're
they're they're not the number
of hours the only reason I'm
saying that is I I we should
have a program here in town
we're thanks to hire them com
and and do small jobs around so
my my my buildings and and and
present my residence and stuff
to try and out support them and
help them this some of these
individuals they just love to be
part of of she's going to work
and I'm not again I I'm not I
think it's great I think any
time we can transition anybody
with some of these people
unfortunately had disabilities a
limited them quite a bit and and
I'm wondering if.
Suing that.
Minimum wage passes to fifteen
dollars an hour I don't know
where that is and I have been
paying attention to that but
if.
That maybe limit those number of
hours that they can that they
can work in a week and and and I
I I mean it more in that.
At least some of the parents
that I knew there are child that
was disabled enjoyed going to
work and enjoyed spending time
there what really technically
couldn't do a lot and so that
being said the the
I just I I'm just trying to
figure out with there are there
to be a problem were you know
being that that that threshold
isn't that hard to to to meet
this to make it clear and you
may be right in most cases I'm
not really sure so but let's
just say that you're right most
cases let's say I don't know
seventy five percent of the
cases are are just as you
described there's a twenty five
percent of those that would lose
their benefits if they work what
they want to enjoy going to be a
part of something whether they
work in a restaurant for a
little bit this for these
particular up this particular
group used to going out working
Mr G. used to these to help
landscape these two make little
crafts and stuff things are kept
their their money and and and
and kept him busy with their
with their peers and and other
people and got him into society
and so really my only my only
question is would it be what it
be our.
A smart thing for those people
of the for those people that
following that maybe that sliver
that possibly their guardian
their parent up could maybe give
them your waiver where maybe the
the the what I guess what I'm
trying to say is I would hate
for employers say Hey you know
what I'm not going to pay
fifteen dollars an hour or the
the the or the employee
themselves is only limited to so
many hours and so that's the
only thing that came to mind
when when when all this was
talking when we were talking
about this discussing it so I
guess would be a smart thing for
us to possibly Rick have a
waiver put in here but that at
if.
The guardian and you know and
and and if they were capable the
the person has a disability was
capable to you know to just step
in cells with and I think you
would have to have a with a
waiver with the a guardian or
someone else to be present so
they don't take be so they also
are taking advantage of.
Where they could possibly
Enjoy working hours.
And and and at a lower lower
rate only because they enjoy and
keep themselves on a losing
budget doesn't.
I would think that if they were
able to sustain themselves would
be doing that anyway but I know
the people that I the night that
I was helping and and working
with
they needed their parents they
needed someone else still the
big couldn't quite totally live
on their own
Madam chair representative how
would you answer that for me.
Madam chair representative
that's what we're trying to
eliminate is having a waiver he
people less than minimum wage
this is because
everyone deserves a dignified
raids and regardless of their
limitations and so this is
exactly why we're bringing this
bill forward.
To add to that amendment
I could and I'm not saying any
agencies would do this any
employers would do this but I'm
not going to hire you unless you
take a job for two dollars an
hour we where we want to go wait
no and that having any sort of
wiggle room will open that up
and at the that would that would
not be that would be
counterproductive to what we're
trying to get out here miss
madam chair and and
Representative thank you very
much Mr I have Mister Jackson I
do want to it.
It also Jackson's it was things
were coming to mind I'm not
trying to say they shouldn't be
I I just was thinking of that
one person for those few people
that voluntarily sign a waiver
that that this is an automatic
we were talking about
voluntarily sign a waiver maybe
if that person enjoys I'm not
trying to.
Look I'm an employer when I
when I Madam chair
representative when I.
Hire someone and I know they
have limitations
whether due to their age or
whatever I know what capacity
they have an apartment that has
you know how many hours and I'm
I'm okay with that at the end of
your week always I always have I
never pay minimum wage I don't
like it so but that's my choice
that's what I do.
Look for those that could lose
are left they're they're they're
disability is by really the only
question I'm I'm saying I don't
want to be.
I was trying to find some some
some way of them to find a way
to balance that that's all and
Representative I'm gonna let Mr
Jackson respond because of the
the thing that you don't know in
our history of looking at this
issue is that we did have says
minimum wage going on in the
state that my understanding is
that's not happening now and so
now we want to kind of sealed
the deal if you well about not
just a minimum wage Mr Jackson.
Madam chair representative also
so I just wanted to point out
that you for instance in your
part of the state of doing in a
county Grant County south
central southwestern New Mexico
there are no old there are no
businesses and there are no
providers nonprofit providers
and there's nobody else in that
in that entire area that pays
less than the minimum wage so
that those employers have found
ways to accommodate people and
they've been able then to choose
you know how much they want to
work the what kind of jobs that
they want to take and so on so I
I just wanted to clarify that
you know I don't want to I don't
think it this is the ability to
get into a debate about whether
if you raise the minimum wage is
that gonna affect how much
people can earn this is really
about is protecting people from
from ending up in a position
where they're they're being paid
less than the state minimum wage
and and that seems to be working
throughout most of the state.
Thank you madam chair
representative thank you Mr
Jackson and and again I'm glad
to hear their district is doing
that and doing it well I just I
was just thinking of that of
because of former relationships
that I have with some of these
companies that have
people that were working in that
capacity and and I I know they
just enjoyed it and that's
really the only reason I I just
want to make sure it wasn't
inadvertently.
Limiting them from enjoying
spending time because it you
know because I thought well they
could become a volunteer after
this is say they were Donald
fifteen hours and so you know
what I still want to go to work
and I want to volunteer but then
I go they'll be some issues
there of liability coverage and
I don't know where that would
fall so it was just I was just
brainstorming Sir and thank you
very much for all your answers
thank committee thank you
Representative what's the
pleasure of the committee.
Your friends have a motion for
do pass.
Second and the second our doors
you want to call the roll.
Absolutely.
Representative wealth Anderson.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative Brittney Haas.
Yes.
Representative.
Sh yes.
Representative Stephanie lord
yes.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Yes thank you Representative
Roger Montoya yes.
Representative that are faster
yes ma'am.
Representative Thomson yes.
Representative stops Anderson.
I I believe they were called
back and two appropriation.
Can I excuse.
Excuse
Yes Anderson vote you have okay
area.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Until.
Representative.
Chair Joanne J. Ferrary yes.
Right madam chair Deborah A.
Armstrong yes.
And all excuse Gail Armstrong
yes okay so that's a total of
ten in the affirmative one
excuse okay Representative you
have a do pass on house bill two
fourteen thank you thank you our
second unanimous of the day.
I appreciate that thank you
madam chair during the third
unanimous of the day actually
I'm a lucky number yeah so next
we'll go to house bill two
forty.
We're gonna skip over to twenty
for the moment because there's
been called back in to
appropriations so house bill two
forty is Representative Fajardo
and
At and our Baldonado and let's
bring over.
Representative Baldonado and
Representative Fajardo was
driving and not sure.
When should be able to join us
so we'll watch for her and our
Representative Baldonado were
there experts that you wish to
bring over.
Representative Baldonado your
muted.
Are you there.
Hey
let's hold Committee let's just
hold on for a moment we're not
going to have
Recess quite yet let's see if we
can if I'm not sure I have
Representative Baldonado those
number if.
Right now madam chair okay if
you want Representative are to
let me know she was driving in
might have difficulty joining
and I'll see if I have the
number I might have it was.
I had a cold Representative
Fajardo and issues very
concerned about what the bill
would come up and.
Lancer so she's probably not
debt while in CPS and she texted
me to let me know that we could
go ahead with.
Up Representative off of the
number should be on right now.
I believe he's on madam chair.
I thought that was going to be
his introduction is it madam
chair that there was going to be
here at crescendo coming with
you when you came on but I guess
that wasn't the case.
Representative Baldonado I see
that your hand is raised and
that you are muted but we cannot
hear you.
On me now.
Yes thank you.
Okay sorry about that chair
members of and then house
education now and I was talking
can you.
You came to this point so I was
expecting another the one front
of us but Taos Madam you ready
for me to to go ahead.
Representative.
You madam chair I don't hear
you.
We can hear you but I don't know
if he can.
I can hear you Representative
Baldonado okay.
With.
Madam chair we have the
right
We'll go ahead with with with
the vice chairman.
Yes please introduce your L.
thank you and I believe
Representative Fajardo is on now
and she's listening already here
we're still getting in but madam
chairman and members of the
committee
house bill two forty house bill
two forty goes into the the
hospital funding accident and.
And a piece of language stamped
is
I'm and then a piece of land
that would help
get a project rolling in the
Valencia County area we've had
done many of you at least those
of you that have been around
awhile know that we've had an
issue with our hospital the lack
of a hospital for quite some
time in two thousand seven mill
levy was voted into place by the
By the people at a at a click of
about eighty five percent on the
question posed was would you
support a mill levy if it wants
to county from the hospital on
the way that question was
crafted like it would be in any
other county was
problematic in the regard that
it in some only allows for the
operation and maintenance of a
hospital so to the state in
twenty twenty one we still have
no hospital twenty five million
or so dollars sitting in the
bank that
was taken on a on a mill over
eight years and run its course
on and so what we're trying to
do you know what one of the
biggest stumbling blocks that we
at least try to identify as
members of the community and
then.
The commission County commission
feels I think the same way and I
believe most municipalities and
folks in the community feel is
that the proximity of the county
to the major hospital outlets in
Albuquerque of course of those
present U. N. M. you know that
there's maybe a few citizens
that are that are maybe forty
five minutes away but most most
of the population went to
counties about twenty five to
thirty minutes from many of
those hospitals and and for that
matter on can you hold one
second Madam Activo.
I'm sorry I'm trying to do two
things at once you madam chair
so the idea that we would maybe
open up the.
The opportunity to
To
Do one of these twenty four hour
center some some sort of less
than four hospital but somewhere
in the middle something in
between and so the language that
we want to amend is is pretty
clear so if Representative
Fajardo you take over from
minute level.
Yes absolutely I don't know.
Thank you I'm thank you chairman
thank you members of the
committee and what we do
apologize and you just love all
this great technology that we're
dealing with now I'm not I was I
was totally kicked out of my
internet like last night Paul
who is trying to get you guys
going so we will we will
slaughter had go ahead
Representative thank you so much
so I'm not going to go too much
longer Representative well that
is a great way to explain what
we're trying to do sh we have
twenty five million dollars
sitting in an account that we
can't do anything rash so we
want to change change some
language we want to make sure
also that that language only
affects Valencia County we don't
want to supersede any other
community we don't want to mess
up doing I'm and we do we have
that we do have an amendment
that we have been discussing I
did I learned late yesterday
that we have an opposition
within working on some language
and we have amendments drafted
and and and sent to committee I
just learned today that the
numbers are wrong in that
amendments I'm so I'm gonna cut
a leading up to the committee on
what we want to do how they want
to proceed in regards to the
amendment because it is not
correct but it does I'm the goal
is to make sure it only affects
the land J. county it doesn't
affect other equipment other
municipalities are our
communities and we do have an
expert I don't know if David K.
though if you've been able to
bring him into the committee.
Representative I just promoted
him to panelists for you awesome
I'm I'm gonna go ahead and we
have several other members I
don't know who's in the room I'm
but we have Gail Armstrong
Senator back and senator Sanchez
Ross on this bill I'm gonna see
if they have anything they want
to say madam chair.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair sorry hi
I'm just holding on the line go
go ahead twenty Lord so I
stepped out of my appropriations
meeting real quick to just say
that this is something that's
really needed in Valencia County
there's been issues of the whole
time since this this past and
and we really we have been had
people bag and plead with us to
fix this I went to secretary
Konkol last year and tried to
get her to
make analogy of what we were
trying to do and I and I never
got a response and I I chalk it
up to comment which I do
everything it's all COVID fault
so without madam chair
I would really hope that we can
support this legislation to help
with you County do what's best
for the area thank you madam
chair.
Thank you and Representative
Ferrary I don't see any of the
other
co sponsors.
That's fine I if that Mr Kato
has any comments.
Go ahead Mr.
Thank you Representative Fajardo
good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is detail on the county attorney
for Valencia County and I hope
to share with committee both the
genesis and the need for
hospital to forty one as
Representative Baldonado alluded
to earlier this this
conversation in late two
thousand six and percent
possible funding at the once the
county voters approved a
hospital tax question
authorizing the county to impose
a two point seven five melody to
pay the cost of operating
maintaining or providing for
hospitals slash twenty four
emergency health care facility
and once the county for a period
of eight years
and despite collecting over
twenty six million dollars and
Melanie funds to improve access
to health care in the county
litigation suspended the
counties efforts to move for the
project for well over a decade
the first case which was
resolved in the county state
remote the district court and
the court of appeals challenged
the county's Authority to
execute a contract with a
contracting hospital those non
current physical existence.
In rejecting the plaintiff's
contentions the court of appeals
recognized expressed legislative
intent to encourage and enable
counties to provide appropriate
and adequate facilities the
second counties and provide
flexibility in financing
construction operation
maintenance of act adequate
facilities in all geographical
areas of the state the second
case challenge the validity of
the vote of one of the
commissioners and after number
here is an appeal to the court
of appeals on the court also
remanded the matter back forty
county commissioners determine
how to proceed Senator a
militant proceeds and of course
possible funding act after
reading the board the board of
county commissioners passed
resolution directing that staff
commence the preparation of the
school station identify and
select an offer with which to
enter into health care please
contract the minutes operation
of a hospital such me former to
health care facility the county
in the last solicitation it
received an inquiry from a
perspective offer
enquiring with the county would
be permitted to transfer
military proceeds in support of
a hospital slash me for
emergency health care facility
licenses remote location of an
acute care hospital in seeking
to avoid becoming entrenched in
yet another round of litigation
County answered increasingly
operate a negative and
accordingly the county did not
receive a response that's what
station.
County ministration then sought
clarification from the D. O. H.
with our representatives help
regarding whether to transfer
military proceeds in support of
a hospital session for mercy
health care facility licenses
remote location that you heard
hospital NMDOH by that wallet
could examine whether any
particular hospitals last week
for mercy health care facility
the license remote location was
unable to advise whether mill
levy proceeds could be
transferred support such
facility this legislation is
intended to address the
permissibility transfer those
ability proceeds support the
hospital or twenty four hour
emergency health care facility
license remote location of the
teacher hospital pursuant to
section seven point seven point
two point eight the impact on
particularly the draft
legislation is clear the
militant proceeds may be used
for twenty four hour emergency
health care facility license
remote location of acute care
hospital and after working
closely with the literature
Andrea Lazarow we're optimistic
that the draft legislation would
dispense with any need for the
county to seek a declaratory
judgment regarding the
permissibility transferability
proceeds for hospital or twenty
four emergency health care
facility should that be with
only proposed by the High Street
offer and we're hopeful this
clear educational ward off any
publication regarding
accountability transfer the
million proceeds
and additionally the draft
legislation advances the goal
and purpose of the hospital
funding at on the part of the
express purpose of which is to
encourage enable counties to
provide appropriate and adequate
facilities for the second
counties provide flexibility in
financing construction operation
and maintenance necessary
facilities and to minimize the
cost constructing new facilities
and maintaining adequate
facilities in all geographic
areas of the state can
consistent with the goals and
purpose the hospital funding and
legislation open the door for
the once the county utilizes
multi proceeds support both
hospitals and requirements the
health care facilities licenses
remote locations of acute care
hospitals on permitting the use
of such proceeds in that manner
will expand access to health
care in the county and I think
you also very much for your
consideration I stand right.
Since committee might have.
Thank you madam chair I'm and
it's I just learned that my
understanding and I want to
confirm from this with Mr paid
out that the amendment that we
offered she is okay with the
numbers that correct Mr Kato.
Madam chair representative
harder that's correct so the
those proposed would would
really can is down twenty County
but because we didn't have the
census numbers twenty twenty at
those concerned about whether or
not to be sufficient flexibility
between seventy five and eighty
five thousand but all the
numbers that I found online seem
to suggest that it would fall
within that that realm and I
just I just wanna make sure that
we don't have a solution here
that we're not able to dollars.
What's the census numbers come
out but it does appear as though
we should fall within that realm
and it should dress or concern
thank you for thank.
In and just to be clear to the
committee Representative Fajardo
got the amendment to me this
morning and we were told is that
that's not the twenty four hours
and I asked her two we could
discuss it today and may or may
not adopted by the committee or
or ask her to do that in the
next committee depending on
exactly of the extent of then at
but so recognizing that no one
has had a seen it yet after you
sent it to me I did ask it was
just before the committee
started so all all just double
check with Delores issues able
to send that amendment around to
committee members.
Madam chair I sent it yesterday
I got that we received it
yesterday okay all right so just
want to it it is not we're not
necessarily
because it's not the twenty four
hours a gonna adopted today but
wanted to be clear about the
intent of the sponsor in in
doing an amendment.
Madam chair are we.
I received it yesterday so are
we madam chair we able to make a
motion to adopt it.
Madam chair.
I built.
Karen go ahead sure I believe
that the amendment that we
received yesterday was on house
bill two twenty not on house
bill twelve forty.
So we do not have I do not have
an amendment on house bill two
forty we received one yesterday
that the lower sent out on house
bill two twenty there similar
bill state deal with a lot of
the same topic but that's not
the amendment we have today so
the the one we're talking about
today I received from
Representative Fajardo just
before the committee started
and.
yeah so that's correct madam
chair yeah.
If I may interject something we
did the other day and C. pack
which worked out really well was
we voted on the bill anyways and
the sponsors that promise to get
an amendment in before it went
to the next committee so that
that could also be option thank
you yes I think we have options
so I just wanted to be clear
with the
with the sponsor that because it
was less than twenty four hours
I couldn't promise that we would
try and adopted today but we
will we will be able to discuss
and that and that based on the
committee may take action or or
might have heard do that for the
next committee and and madam
chair I totally understand that
may appreciate your
consideration you know we we and
if you don't adopt it we can
definitely do it and the next
committee we just wanted to make
sure the committee did
understand that we didn't want
to take our issues and make a
statewide issue we wanted to
make sure that these that left
the logic county and that was
the reason so absolutely
whatever you want to do madam
chair we totally understand
thank you.
Thank you.
R. thank you anything else
Representative before we go to
the audience madam chair we
stand for questions okay thank
you so first we'll do our poll.
for the audience those in
support or opposition.
To house bill two forty.
Okay.
Looks like I think we've about
got it so we have
fifteen in support and zero in
opposition.
So we'll go to the audience of
first and just double check that
there's no one here in
opposition that wishes to speak
that mess the poll.
Anyone in opposition.
Their name on that are you here
in opposition.
No ma'am no your we're gonna let
you go ahead and everyone else
who wants to speak can go ahead
and raise their hands standing
since we've got to go ahead
thank you madam chair committee
members my name is Danny
enrollment on the Valencia
County Madam we appreciate you
having to of.
I hope you have the opportunity
look at this and we ask for your
support this is something to
give plenty County abuse move
forward with this hospital issue
that the residents
voted for and pass the mill levy
and we just ask for your support
and thank you very much.
Thank you next we have of Larry
R. ram.
Chair thank you madam chair
members committee Larry around
registered lobbyists for
Christian Health Care Services
we appreciate Representative
Fajardo Representative Baldonado
working on the amendment M.
because we understand the unique
problem points to county as we
want to help that help them
provide health care in any way
we can but we didn't want to
have happen is that have mill
levies and other where we have
there's will hospitals
throughout the state with the
levy funding is very important
to the operation of the hospital
and you don't inadvertently
impacted that mill levy funding
in their in their planning by by
having others come in and
tapping into it without proper
planning considerations so we
really appreciate you minute
weather goes on now or in the
next committee were comfortable
either way because the Sanchez
been really good to work with on
it and I and and I'm sure we'll
get it fixed so thank you madam
chair this legislation and
expansion of health care which.
Thank you and just so that the
committee is clear
Leri Garrand uh representative
Presbyterian.
Our next we have on Andrew
solace.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm Andrew solace plan
city manager speaking on behalf
of more chair a court of law we
have terrific hospitals in
Albuquerque and in Sapporo in a
couple of trips that urgent care
facilities within the county we
don't need more of either
necessarily but what we do need
is life saving twenty four seven
emergency care on this great
amendment taught by
Representative Fajardo and
supported by representatives
Armstrong and Baldonado and our
two senators is the perfect
solution to allow us to have
this facility at least as an
option for residents to consider
please support this amendment
thank you madam chair.
Thank you our next we have
A Greg Barton.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Gregory Martin Los Lunas
village administrator on behalf
of more trials Griego and Los
Lunas village council we stand
in support of this bill Los
Lunas Sandilands yet County is
one of the fastest growing areas
of the state but we have
severely limited access and
proximity to health care
services and facilities relative
to our growing population
Valencia County is collected tax
funds through the hospital
funding act for many years but
has struggled to use those funds
partly due to the restrictive
and outdated definition of a
contracting hospital if approved
this legislation will help
provide greater flexibility in
the use of the collected funds
tacked funds to construct a
twenty four hour emergency
health care facility or
appropriate facility closer to
home and lunch at County saving
time money and even lives for
that reason we are in favor we
thank the sponsors of the bill
and the committee for your time
and consideration.
Thank you
next we have commissioner.
Jack's eyes.
I chaired a size as soon as the
goes allows talking it covers
your name so I apologize
commissioner go ahead good
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee Representative
Senator said have helped us
along the way.
my name district size would lead
to county Commission chairman
thank you for allowing me to
speak I come before you this
afternoon to respectfully ask
for your support of house bill
two forty.
Previous commissions our current
commission and staff have worked
diligently to overcome the
challenges that have prevented
the Valencia County commission
from being able to contract with
the health care facility to
provide the needed health care
for the residents of Lynsey
County I feel this legislation
will clarify the contracted
hospital definition and provide
a pathway for us to utilize
ability money supported by the
voters to enhance and expand
health care and ultimately save
lives it lives to County I thank
you in advance for your support.
Thank you commissioner next we
have Dan weeks.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and thank the
sponsors of this legislation
back in two thousand six
actually did the
Feasibility study for placing a
hospital in Valencia County and
and subsequent to that the US
was included two of the voters
of alleged county supported this
by about eighty five percent so
unfortunately this is got mired
in some legal issues over the
years.
the I think with the amendment
which we worked out on an and
think of the sponsors for
helping with that of the New
Mexico hospital association as
well as Bernalillo county will
support this
the amendment will actually
specify Valencia County of this
as a separate entity that will
only be able to take advantage
of this particular legislation
so we appreciate the Sanchez
again and and support the
legislation thank you.
Thank you damn.
And we will go now to the
committee Representative
Matthews.
Thank you very thank you very
much amended change my view here
just give me a second.
Great thank you
Madam chair and members of the
committee and sponsors of the
bill thank you for doing this I.
I am totally committed to trying
to improve the health care
resources
particularly in the rural areas
of our state and this is a great
project but I do have a few
questions.
First question is where is is
going to be located hasn't been
decided.
I'm madam chair and and
Representative that's a great
question we have actually
our expert David potter has
actually in in his opening
statements we purchased some
litigation that we've had we've
had we've had we've had studies
on a hospital
and do nothing has really
happened to wait should have
there's we that we've had
addition with within our county
do with the government as a
values on where that hospital
should go by changing the
definition we will have to go
back and do some more studies to
determine the best location but
it's.
There's there's been some
initial work already done that's
been laid out and we've just
been waiting first for.
Change in the legislation so
that we can move forward.
Then Chairman representative
thank you for that answer
You can can you tell me what the
difference is between an
emergency health care facility
and a hospital.
House facility going to be
different than.
A hospital thank you madam chair
thank you Representative I'm
gonna defer to my witness to
explain that little bit further.
Thank you madam chair
Representative so the department
of health says for the
definition for what a hospital
is and has to have three
inpatient beds and speaking with
loveless and Presbyterian I
understand that include other
additional services that may
render it
challenging to implement and
once you county so.
Emergency health care facilities
something less it's not it's not
specifically defined or
delineated it's not but it is
something less than a hospital.
It miss madam chairman at and.
Mister condo thank you your name
right Pedro Pardo.
Yes okay something less you mean
it would be smaller in size or
smaller in what it offers or I
mean I'm just trying to kind of
understand what what we're.
Going to be building.
Madam chair Representative
Matthews it will not be the
statutory definition of the
regulatory definition of what is
a hospital so for instance it
would not have the mandatory
minimum of the three that it
wouldn't it wouldn't have the
other regulatory requirements
for what constitutes a hospital
under New Mexico law so it won't
be licensed in the same fashion
I'm gonna be right licensed as a
remote facility of an acute care
hospital so it would be
something different than
standalone licensed hospital
yes.
Madam chair at this rate thank
you for that answer
it will it be associated there
is the idea that it would be
associated with a with an actual
hospital of.
Madam chair Representative
Matthews yes the the intent here
is reflected in the the draft
legislation is that it would be
the licenses are remote location
of any to care hospital.
So so yes.
And.
Madam chair Mr thank you have
you identified that hospital is
is that process on going or
where are you and that.
Chair representative Matthews at
this point what we would do is
more we to secure the approval
of legislation is that we would
issue new solicitation that
would that would allow potential
offers to either proposed
hospital twenty four emergency
health care facility or both
and it is not on the non site
specific as that is been
following the past and so the
the offer would then have the
opportunity chairman where would
be best located and what sort of
facility to offer.
Madam chair.
Madam chairman chairwoman
Mr Pedro thank you so much for
that answer
Is
The twenty six million dollars
to to raise through the mill
levy is you mentioned that that
was for operating and
maintenance is there money
available for the capital
expense building the facility
and if so where is that coming
from.
Madam chair representative
Matthews on fortune there's not
so that will be coming from
whatever offer comes border
whatever offers come forward and
with the proposals to construct
a hospital where the county or
twenty per emergency health care
facility or both.
And madam chair
Mr chair thank you for that
answer I think I understand a
little better what what what's
being proposed here
and will this arrangement with
the hospital help with the
staffing because staffing is
often an issue in rural health
care facilities.
Absolutely Madam chair
representative Matthews we hope
that it will of course you know
we we have no there's no degree
of certainty but being required
to provide less than what is
required for a full hospital for
instance in visiting with one of
the with one of the potential
providers understand that if
they were going to have a
hospital they would have to have
a nutritionist on site you have
a it requires the staff entirely
differently and this would
provide those potential offers
more flexibility with what they
can offer provided less each
county hopefully to expand
access to medical services my
County.
Madam chair Mister chair thank
you will the levy the mill levy
that you mentioned will that
continue to provide that
continuing and will it be still
available to provide for the
operating expenses of the
facility as you as you're able
to build it and open it.
Madam chair representative
Matthews at this point then
Montoya is expired so the the
money that we have is sitting in
the in the in a separate account
and and and and the treasurer
and and they general contrary
for the for these purposes and
if that if there is additional
public support in the future
once were able to move forward
in the county may introduce at
some point to future the new
melody but at this point there's
such a lack of confidence based
on the years of the way and
litigation and the lack of being
able to follow through on a
promise to expand medical care
in the community that there is
not one presently in existence
nor do I anticipate it in the in
the very short term a new melody
for the consideration.
And.
Madam chair.
Mr Kato when we then the statute
and and I know you mentioned
that somehow this is going to be
set up so that only applies to
the Lynsey County but if we
amend the statute we would be
authorizing acute care hospitals
in any class B. county and I'm
pretty sure there are other
class B. counties in the in the
status and I is that correct.
Madam chair representative
matches on I'm not certain that
there are but I understand from
earlier correspondence with
Representative Baldonado that Mr
Moran expressed concerns about
expansiveness of the of the
proposed legislation and and
that is a that is the purpose
behind the amendment is to
narrow that so really does just
incorporate once you County and
we're gonna work to continue to
do that so that way there is not
a broader impact of the
legislation to allow other
counties to then use that
instead of you know supporting
our hospitals to now pre mercy
health care facilities as well.
And madam chair.
Mr Pedro I I think I now
understand the significance of
the census numbers because you
need to reach the county needs
remain a class B. County and
probably for period of time
hopefully not at least it health
we're not gonna be delayed ten
years but
in order to make you make use of
this
situation so
madam chair and representative
may I offer up something in that
regard this as Representative
Baldonado open house there there
are several class B. counties
throughout the state the only
one that's similar in population
is I believe Chavis County and
so keeping the scope of of that
of the numbers for say the ten
thousand you know census the
census data ten thousand people
window there if you will help us
keep it within within just this
county have to be very careful
because if you if you widen that
that they're going to pick up
you know other other counties
that you don't want to to bring
along with the so it is so it's
it's well thought out to make
sure that we can do that Madam
chairman Representative.
Madam chair thank you for that
answer Representative and Mr
Pedro
we have had a recent controversy
and so that's the source of my
next question.
Is this facility once it's built
going to be a public facility.
And so that it's it would be
subject to the malpractice
limits under the tort claims act
as opposed to anything that
might be available through the
medical now statute.
Madam chair representative
Matthews I have not X. examine
and create depth but it's my
understanding that it will be a
private facility on twitch will
be transferring military
proceeds so I I I do not believe
the counties express any intent
of creating currently because we
don't or constructing partly
because we don't have the
ability proceeds to do that I'm
a facilities so this will be a
contract with a private operator
to
under health care facilities
contract by which we transfer
the ability proceeds to support
the provision of medical care in
the community so I I do not know
that it will be available I do
not believe that will be a
public facility subjects we are.
On that point.
I'm at I would suggest is the
potential least I don't know
what the interest is that it
could be
a public for instance if it was
you NM that that what wanted to
do this or some kind of public
private partnership so not
necessarily just private is the
only option.
Madam chair
thank you thanks for the
clarification I yeah this is on
my mind a lot these days because
we have we clearly have a real
problem with these private
facilities being covered through
the medical malpractice act we
need to find a solution for that
and in my only hesitation on
this is because otherwise it I
think it's eight he and it's
unfortunate it's been delayed so
long there no fault of the folks
who are here bringing it forward
but
It really would like to see this
kind of facility added but
absolutely do not want to add to
our malpractice and our during
on the patient fund by adding
another private facility without
a resolution of our problem that
we we're seeing in terms of HB
seventy five so I just graduated
I just raise that because we
don't make that problem worse.
and and with that I I I will go
ahead and I'm gonna dumbness.
Support this site.
Is going to be awhile before
it's built hopefully we will
have sixty medical malpractice
problem by that touring
it certainly gives us more
impetus to make sure we do
because we need more facilities
and we need to get him on board
a at a sap so thank you of madam
chair thank you representatives
for bringing this forward thank
you Mr your for your information
and get hopefully this can can
move forward on a fairly quick
basis as
said it is better health care
operate not opportunities but
better health care facilities in
the county thank you thank you
I'm Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman madam
chairman I'll be shortened to
the point and really following
up with the Representative
Matthews comments.
Of.
What we have here in actually
both this bill and the next bill
in my mind R. two counties when
she and ray Rego who had a vote
of the people
and we're we're looking at
trying to clean up language in
the case of when C. have
resolved a longstanding lawsuit
in addition and I just think
this is about improving health
care in New Mexico and I hope
that
we can try to keep these two
bills relatively close together
because I think we're going to
hear when we hear the next bill
sort of a similar argument of
the vote of the people is been
done and we need to improve
health care in these are the
areas and so I don't that's my
comment madam chairman so I hope
we can find the so then much if
they're necessary adopted
mention these bills on to I
think Judiciary next thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Montoya.
Chair and Representative
Baldonado and Fajardo I commend
this piece of lead legislation
because I have absolutely.
A strong sense of empathy.
The number of rural
Representative is well for
bringing this kind of access to
health care it seems that as a
freshman following
Representative Anderson and
Marian Matthews that most of my
questions were covered diverge
zero
It does seem that there is a
real parallel with the Rio
Arriba.
Which is up next you know and I
think that linking them.
Is interesting the amendment
which is sort of a mystery
amendment at this moment.
Is it safe to assume that the
language.
Sort of limits the jurisdiction
to Valencia County is that kind
of the basis of the mystery
amendment.
Thank you madam chair and thank
and thank you miss and thank you
Representative tried yes that
that's exactly what it does
we what we you know we we we
dropped the bill in order to you
know deal with the Legislature
county but we inadvertently
for test email levies across the
state we don't want to do that
you know it's it's it's
something that we're having here
so yes are then it does
specifically deal with
the luncheon County and I
learned of Representative
Herrerra is bill just recently
and I did speak to her briefly
and I would not be surprised if
this bill does part of a group
of five bills come out of the
many if we probably we might end
up joining legislations together
because we are dealing with very
very similar problems the same
area of law so that those are
definitely conversations where
it's just having going forward
and joining forces to to make
this work for it for both
communities.
Madam chair and representatives
the fact that the mill levy
passed by eighty five percent is
impressive I know how difficult
it can be in rural settings to
do that so I commend that the
eight year span in the twenty
five million dollar you know
generation of funding sitting
there for operational is
certainly a momentum I am
absolutely with you I support
this effort I think we need to
adopt that amendment first as
the order process but I just
want to speak publicly that I
have empathy and support so I
will leave it there and I yield
back.
Thank you and Representative
that brings up a good
point in that the while the
amendment was late it is in your
shared drive so anyone that
wants to pull it up and look at
it can do so but I I would ask
if from the committee if you if
there's a motion to adopt the
amendment or if there's a
problem
okay.
A motion madam chair to adopt
them in.
Okay most and I'm ocean and the
and a second is there any
objection to a doctor adopting
the amendment.
I see none you have an adopted
bill
going forward and then what's
the pleasure of the committee.
Excuse me does that amendment
need to be read out loud.
I believe we receive that we
receive we received it that's in
share file so we we have the
amendment.
A motion to.
Go ahead Louise let
nope you go right.
No I'm simply going to make a
motion for do pass I make a
second.
Okay a motion and a second for
do pastores you want to call the
roll as amended madam chair as
amended yes.
Sanders yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong
yes.
Representative Brittney about a
hot.
Yes Representative bash yes
Representative Stephanie lord
yes.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes.
Representative Roger Montoya yes
Representative Louise that asa.
Yes ma'am.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Vice chair Joanne Ferrari.
She's excuse is putting on a
bill another committee okay
thank you.
Chairman Deborah Armstrong yes
that.
One excuse all right you have a
do pass representatives on the
house bill two forty as amended.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee members thank you.
Okay now I think we still have
and attendance Representative
Ferrero.
He moved zero over.
Welcome Representative Herrera
and thank you for your patience
Are waiting for us and
do you have any experts that you
would like us to bring over.
Yes thank you madam chair I
would like to bring experts
Christopher Madrid is our
economic development director
from the county of Rio Rita and
Frank Kopel who's the legal
counsel to every account.
Thank you have.
Yes we have them both so go
ahead Representative how to
twenty.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee and
thank you for your patience in
and waiting for me at
appropriations to come over here
I I deeply appreciate that and
I'm I'm just going to start with
a little bit of background
because I'm proud to say that
the chair of your committee was
involved in this in two thousand
eighteen we had a nursing home
that was shut down over
thanksgiving and in two weeks
everybody was going on from that
nursing home the all the
employees and all the all the
this the patients in the
facility and they just shut it
down and there is really nothing
we could do about it.
Do anything we couldn't hi and
other nursing.
Clause in their contract this if
it was ever sold it could be
sold to another nursing home
facility so the county was left
without a county the size of
Massachusetts was left without a
skilled nursing home and
There is just nothing we could
do and I want to thank chairman
Armstrong for her leadership and
kind of helping me through this
I just been elected I I wasn't
even sworn in yet and I'm trying
to see what I could do but I'm I
am so proud of our county
because the real reasons decided
that they weren't that they were
gonna have a skilled nursing
home and the next year and nine
on November fifth two thousand
nineteen the approved a twelve
million dollar go bond or
skilled nursing and
rehabilitation hospital.
But the county.
And borrow the money and build
that building in yes unless the
statutory glitch is fixed much
like what happened with them
Representative Fajardo is
districts up House Bill to
twenty would clear up the issue
identified by the New Mexico
finance authority and NMFA so it
could fund the bond best
clearing the way to honor the
vote isn't they voted when they
voted to
tax themselves for the money to
build this building I if H. B.
two twenty becomes law
construction of the sorely
needed Rio Arriba county project
can proceed as authorized by the
voters it would also provide.
Well that's enough so I'm just
saying in it then it fixes a
technical glitch that we need I
did put an amendment through so
that we could identify that you
can't just say Rio Arriba county
you got to go back and put in
all this language and and that's
not language in the amendment
really just identifies the
county as Rio Arriba county New
I guess I'll hold back and see
what questions there are but
that's pretty much the bill it's
a it's to help the the residents
of Rio Arriba county who I'm so
proud of your I always tell them
you can't expect the state to
pick up the tab on everything
you know we got it on some of
our own projects and they did
that this time madam chair so
I'm really proud and I'm proud
to be this that bring this
legislation forward.
Thank you Representative and we
did receive this amendment
yesterday so it should be it
should have been it was
distributed and should be in the
Here file.
And did you want to
Representative did you want your
experts to say anything now or
Sure if I either Christopher
Frank would like to add anything
you're welcome to do so.
Thanks short because these guys
have been here a long time
today.
Very good Christopher Madrid
here Rio Arriba county economic
development are very briefly a
Representative are
representative mentioned it we
lost our facility it was a
horrific experience we had no
notice people in the middle of
night where are our loved ones
are being shipped to farming to
Representative Jones are these
are folks that are family
members you should be able does
that on a daily basis now they
have to wait for weekend so
maybe go visit their loved ones.
Las Vegas has a skilled nursing
facility house House one we no
longer have one our voters voted
we hired an attorney when this
question was put to the voters
the attorney again yep the
opinion that the question was
proper in accordance with
statute are we relied on the
same attorney for a bonded just
base no he gave us the opinion
that so we could move forward
and and receive that funding and
that attorney no longer is is
practicing a practicing bond
attorney so we moved on to other
attorneys to continue down this
road the new attorney said.
we're not sure about this
language we have a tech
technical glitch and we advise
you to try to get this
ammendment so I want to give you
that background of what god is
here today and up will stand for
any questions thank you and Mr
copper did you want to add
anything else before we go to
the audience.
Your muted if you're talking Mr
coupler.
Okay well we can circle back to
the wind and Q. NA so we will go
to the audience if you'd put up
a poll if there's anyone here in
opposition or support on house
bill two twenty.
I think looks like we all
stopped voting on that so we
have five here in support and
zero in opposition.
So we will go to members of the
audience who wish to speak and
first we have Vincent Vargas.
Yes good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is the scent of August on the
executive director for the New
Mexico health care association
in New Mexico Center for
assisted living
with regard to the cement hello
our association by the way
representative sixty four of the
seventy one nursing facilities
across the state of New Mexico.
after listening to the COVID of
the previous bill and in this
bill we understand the intent of
the of the amendment
we we don't oppose it are
supported we just are
disappointed in that this is a
initially the bill would have
allowed for funding to be an
opportunity across the state of
New Mexico for nursing
facilities and in and another
counties because what happened
in Rio Arriba county in the
condition of that facility is
not exclusive to Rio Arriba
County it does happen in other
counties and has happening high
doll go and in a Colfax County
thank you.
Thank you next we have Michael
Spurr Burke.
McQueen.
You need to unmute Michael my
apologies sorry go.
Thank you Matt.
Madam chairman members of the
committee my name is Michael
Sperber the queen resident Rio
Arriba County and I'm here to
support this bill thank you
please give it to pass.
Thank you.
Okay we'll go to members of the
committee and first I I just I
just want to say Representative
yes I was there with you when
that facility was being shut
down and our community and you
had a can you invited me to our
community
meeting about it and it was a
pretty tragic that people were
moved all over the state with
very very little notice and
nothing you could do so thank
you for bringing this forward
Representative Matthews I have
you first.
Representative Matthews you're
on mute.
Okay.
Madam chair and Mr
Representative Anderson thank
you
At the this is similar to a bill
we just heard and I'll try to go
through the series of questions
much faster this time
it is going to be a skilled
nursing and rehabilitation
hospital and it and
first let me ask you do you have
you figure have you identified a
location within the county.
You're on mute.
Madam chair representative I
actually think the county has I
think it's worth looking at just
a few sites that County owns
land and we've we've done some
initial work on and there was a
lot of community involvement it
was was quite nice to see the
old nurses from the nursing home
come in and work county
officials on how they would
design a new nursing home so a
lot of work has gone into this.
Madam chair Representative
Herrera thank you for that
answer the twelve million dollar
bond is that for capital to
build the facility or or is any
of that for maintenance then
operating.
Madam chair representative I
think it's really for capital to
build the building but I guess I
should ask is I'm I'm sure it's
not for appropriations but I
will defer to Christmas trip.
Mystery there.
It is for capital.
And madam chair I'm.
Mr Mr chairman this is a twelve
million dollar bond for of a
capital expense for maintenance
for operating and maintenance.
I believe you said it was for
capital yeah it's Victor yeah
okay and then madam chair
It you where where where will
the funds come up for the
operating and maintenance.
Madam chair and representative
that will run like any nursing
home I mean people paid to get
in the past I've been it it
would be eligible for Medicaid
patients as well as for other
patients that but it remains
like any any business running a
skilled nursing home facility.
And madam chair Representative
Is
gosh what was my question will
this be a private facility or
will this be owned by Rio Arriba
County.
Madam chair and I Representative
Matthews it will be owned by Rio
Arriba County they might be sent
out to private company to take
over the operation of the of the
skilled nursing home that they
might do that or they might
decide to run it themselves they
could do the there.
In and madam chair
Representative
The R. I just this came up in
the last one so I'm just asking
because you have these very
specific population figures have
you have you checked with the
census is likely to change your
your your figures your
population figures.
Madam chair representative we
did that we did the best we
could
You know it wasn't a very good
census we we all know that at
and that's part of the problem
you know but I think we have a
range so I think we're in pretty
good shape on those numbers.
At and Madam chair
representative
Did you have a time table for
when you'll get this
functioning.
Okay.
Madam chair representative I
think as soon as we get if we
can get this for the session
this we can get this bill for
the session on this session I
think I think we're ready to go.
Go get the money and start
building.
Madam chair representative the
bond is already been issued.
Well it can't Madam chair
representative it can't be issue
because of this glitch in the
law we have to defined we have
to define this at with this
language so that that that so
that will include a skilled
nursing and rehabilitation
hospital for purposes of the
bond that's why we're here NMFA
said we can't do this you've got
to go back in and and then the
language so it will allow for
the building of that is for you
know for we're giving the money
for the bond to include as
skilled nursing and
rehabilitation hospital that's
why we're here okay and madam
chair representative I. ****
question be.
the prior group to and since is
a nursing home but it's also a
rehabilitation hospital
is will be considered a public
facility for purposes of
malpractice coverage.
Madam chair and representative
I've I've got to tell you I
don't know the answer to that I
assume it will be you know it
will be a.
I'm I'm sure it will have to
have insurance to cover that I
mean that the you have doctors
and nurses working there and
it's a rehab hospital to you all
so that madam chair
representative the reason I ask
is because of the of the of the
situation we had with HB seventy
five and the medical now act and
trying to figure out all this
who gets covered and who doesn't
and so forth that's why I'm
asking whether we're going to be
adding another hospital in or
not that's that is the purpose
my question I have is a public
and if it's a public facility is
covered under the tort claims
act instead of through the
medical out situation so.
Okay thank you thank you thank
you madam chair and
Madam chair thank you and and
and Representative Herrera and
Mr
semantics Mr not semantics.
Sorry sorry thank you for your
answers and thanks for the
information and I will yield to
someone else thank you
Representative next I have
Representative Montoya.
Madam chair and representative
it up I am
President of the Rio Arriba
County and I'm a representative
as well I am intimately familiar
with this issue.
When it emerged it was indeed.
Rogic for so many to have that
nursing home close.
I am in awe of the navigation
and the leadership that you are
working here to take think the
critical steps navigating around
these.
Challenges
The line of questioning that
representative.
Matthews brings is so complete
and I applaud that because they
think you're you're reality
based questions are so on point
you know we know what we need in
rural New Mexico and we know
what it takes to execute so I in
in closing I am in support of
this obviously this is my home
turf
I do have one question about you
know in the last K..
The amendment limited the
jurisdiction to Valencia County.
Is there a potential for the two
cases to emerge and kind of re
think that maybe this is
applicables statewide does that
open a can of worms that thank
you Mr Frank Copley might be
able to answer that question.
That's really the only question
that I have at this moment and I
yield back.
In chair this Madam chairman can
you hear me this is Frank Kopel
yeah go ahead yes Representative
Montoya of you a very good
question and.
Here's how it's complicated
unfortunately the earlier bill
bill is the same type of
situation as everyone has
commented that the earlier bill
addresses operating money.
The earlier bill is a mill levy
for operations for a facility
that had not been identified.
Well in the statute this bill is
significantly different.
This bill addresses bond money.
And the.
Bond financing of as
Representative Matthews
clarified is for capital outlay
it's for the building and the a
quick.
And so.
It's saying to you
Representative Montoya I suppose
a committee subs.
Building these two together
would be.
Just a little.
But you're going to have a very
long bill with us sort of apples
and oranges in terms of the
source of the money.
Into the bill it's not
impossible drafting much.
But
that that that's the difference
between two bills thank you.
Madam chair and representative
and Mr public thank you so much
for that answer it is not my
intention to sort of delay this
process because I know up close
and personal that this is
absolutely needed to thread this
needle as soon as possible and
that is the end of my
questioning I look forward to
voting a yes on this particular.
Issue.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative
Anderson and I realize we
haven't actually acted on the
amendment yet with but we will
get to that Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman in my
concert really with the idea
that we're going to adopt the
amendment and and since this
bill on I think of it is Mr
copper a man chairman Senate of
any combination is is a bit of a
cat and dog of
Scenario so I think we've got to
Cindy's forward individually
because of the issues are not
similar enough to merit of any
consideration of combination but
I city here and thank you know
it's it's it this is a great
bill we've had a tragic origin
to House Bill to twenty coming
from that two thousand eighteen
nursing home closure we see a
community reacting and taxing
themselves.
I might add at a time of
historically low bond rates
which sort of suggests to me you
better get going because
historic low bond rates don't
last forever so I I think madam
chairman the of the I look
forward to
seeing this bill move on and
that I'm sure the Judiciary
Committee if they are of
interest can can delve into some
of the others lasting madam
chairman yes I heard that a call
for action he'll Dogo also
mentioned it it just reminded me
that perhaps the interim health
committee can take a look at
this apparently not uncommon
conflict that arises from
communities trying to improve
health care within their
community and taxing themselves
and the resulting glitch in the
in the enabling legislation or
or whatever that that that can
complicate the process at the
exact moment when you're trying
to forge ahead with a community
support and the G. as so madam
chairman wants I hope we can
adopt this amendment and to deal
with this bill I look forward to
supporting it thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative and
that's a really good point about
looking more broadly during the
interim so let's deal with the
amendment and.
What's the pleasure of the
committee.
With.
And okay.
Second is there any objection to
adoption of the amendment.
Seeing and hearing none you have
an adopted
bill and now what's the pleasure
of the committee the movie do
because I'm a do pass second and
a second go ahead and call the
roll Torrez.
Senator.
Yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong
yes.
Representative Brittney about a
hostage yes.
Representative Karen bash yes.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes.
Representative Roger Montoya on
behalf of the elders of Rio
Arriba county in northern New
Mexico yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Representative by chair Joanne
J. Ferrary yes.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong
yes and we'll excuse
Representative Lord thank you so
that's a total of ten and one
excuse thank you Representative
Herrerra you have a do pass on
to twenty as amended thank you
so much madam chair and members
of the community.
Community.
Sorry thank you thank you and
Committee members we almost out
of the thousand today on
unanimous
passing of bills and we have
reached the end of our agenda if
you missed it earlier or any
attendees House Bill eighteen
was withdrawn so that's all we
have on our agenda for today and
everyone enjoy the rest of your
weekend we'll see you Monday
morning.
Bye bye.
Thank you everyone.
