present.
Representative Jones.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Madam Vice Chair. Yeah.
Madam Chair, here, you have a
form. Thank you. Since we don't
have our first sponsor and this
sponsor promises 5 minutes. Um,
I'm gonna go ahead and move him
up so we are on Senate Bill 53.
Um go ahead and send it to your
soul. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and I very much appreciate it.
Uh, this is a cleanup bill from
last year when we passed the
prescribing psychologist being
able to supervise their own and
on the definitions portion of
things, which is page 2 of the
bill.
They left out in that one place
that prescribing psychologists
who have at least 4 years of
independent experience in
prescribing that they get added
to the independently licensed
prescribing clin clinicians.
That's all it does.
OK, we will go to the audience.
Anyone on Zoom in opposition.
Raise your hand. Anyone in the
room in opposition.
A
Jessica, go ahead. OK, thank
you.
OK, um, so that was opposition.
Anyone in in the room in
support.
And he went on Zoom in support.
OK
then either place, um,
I will entertain emotion.
I'm sure I'd like to make a
motion for a due pass on Senate
Bill 53. I'll second.
Is there any opposition?
and you have a due pass.
I.
OK, next we will go back to the
beginning. House Bill 593
represent um
Minority leader Armstrong. Thank
you, Mad, Madam Chair. My
apologies for being late. I'm
Whenever you're ready.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. I'm grateful
for the opportunity to present
HB 593 with me, of course, is
minority Leader Armstrong and
also uh she's also a sponsor and
I have experts that are on their
way. They should be here
momentarily.
Probably waiting for an
elevator.
But we'll be here soon. Um,
Jerry Harrison is my, is my main
expert. He's the executive
director of recruiting
healthcare professionals for New
Mexico, New Mexico healthcare
resources.
So we all know that the citizens
who sent us here are
experiencing a healthcare
crisis.
Many are suffering.
Physicians are exiting the
state, and some are just closing
up shop. It takes months to see
a specialist.
And across the board we have a
drastic healthcare workforce
shortage.
And it's getting worse.
As we approached the end of the
of the 60 day session, it
appears little, if any, of the
hard work we've done will
improve healthcare for the
people we serve.
It's important to remember we
are competing with every other
state for a healthcare
workforce, and we're competing
even more so if the many
interstate healthcare compacts
we've passed out of this
committee become law.
Compacts go both ways.
Without drastic changes to a
company licensure compacts.
We will have created an easy
exit to the greener pastures all
around us.
New Mexico is already the number
one exporter of physicians.
We need to give doctors, nurses,
and other licensed
professionals, meaningful
incentives to practice in New
Mexico.
So
HB 50 593 is a fix for our
state's growing crisis.
It's a multi-pronged approach to
attract and retain healthcare
workforce, which will ensure New
Mexicans have access to quality
health care, when and where they
need it.
I will uh go through a summary
of the
Um, the bills that we have
combined to accomplish this,
this goal.
We have, um,
Well, summary that the health
committee substitute for HB 593
addresses the state's healthcare
shortfall by increasing and
expanding tax credits for
healthcare practitioners.
Creating a new loan repayment
program for physicians who
complete their residency in New
Mexico.
Fixing medical malpractice?
Prohibiting prior authorization
on certain critical healthcare.
And requiring cost studies to be
completed on Medicaid programs
every 3 years.
Um, a little bit more expanded
summary here, the rural
healthcare practitioner tax
credit increase and expansion.
It increases the 3000 and 5000
rural healthcare practitioner
tax credits to 900,015,000. It
triples it and increases the
eligibility.
Um
For the 9000 tax credit to
include licensed practical
nurses, emergency medical
technicians, paramedics, speech
language pathologists,
occupational therapists and
chiropractic physicians.
Then there's the physician
income tax credit. Uh, this
establishes a new $50,000
refundable income tax credit for
full-time physicians who have
completed medical residency and
have outstanding student loans.
And the tax credit may be
claimed for up to 5 years.
Medical residency loan repayment
Act is, it establishes a new
medical residency loan
repayment, um, for doctors who
complete their
Um
I just did that.
The medical, OK, loan repayment
Act for doctors who complete
their medical residency or
fellowship in New Mexico within
a year of applying and who
agreed to work as a physician in
New Mexico for 5 years. The
program would pay off the
student loans of qualifying
physicians over a three-year
period, um, section 2 of the
bill includes a $3 million
appropriation to cover that loan
repayment for the first year.
This assumes conservative
participation in the first year
between about 45 to 55
participants.
Medicaid health provider cost
studies, um, it establishes a
new section in the public
Assistance Act to require those
healthcare authority, um, the
healthcare authority to conduct
cost studies in Medicaid
programs every 3 years and
provide recommendations for
adequate reimbursement to the
legislature based on those
studies because the majority of
New Mexicans are on Medicaid.
And uh Medicaid represents a
large portion of the healthcare
providers' income. This will
provide much needed information
to ensure that New Mexico has
reimbursement rates that support
our healthcare workforce.
Medical malpractice changes
redefines the occurrence to
ensure multiple medical
malpractice claims cannot be
made against healthcare
providers or harm caused in a
single incident of malpractice.
It reduces the medical
malpractice limits to those
existing prior to 2021, 600,000
per occurrence with 200,000
limitation per healthcare
provider's personal liability.
Finally, limits, uh, it limits
punitive damages only where
clear and convincing evidence
demonstrates the provider acted
with deliberate disregard for
the patient to no more than 30
times the median annual
household income in New Mexico.
Prior authorization requirement
changes prohibits the prior
authorization for chemotherapy,
dialysis, elder care, home
health care, and medication for
diabetes and high blood
pressure. This treats chronic
healthcare problems that are not
elective, the same as recent
rules promulgated by the
healthcare authority related to
transgender hormone therapy and
surgeries, which no longer
require prior authorization.
And um
I'd like to introduce my uh my
expert, uh Jerry Harrison.
And so I will go to
And chair, members of the
committee.
My name is Jerry Harrison. I'm
the executive director of New
Mexico Health Resources.
It is a private not for profit
organization that recruits and
tries to retain health
professionals for New Mexico.
And um
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee, uh, appreciate your
time, energy and effort on this.
And, um, uh, with that, I'm sure
we stand for.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is JD Wellington and I'm
speaking on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce to strongly supports
House Bill 593, which you have
just heard from the sponsors is
a truly a package of healthcare
solutions that are much needed
to address some of the key
issues affecting our ability to
attract and retain healthcare
professionals. Chamber believes
we can't go another year without
taking meaningful actions to
keep our healthcare
professionals and to attract new
practitioners.
only about 25% of UNM medical
school graduates are staying
here. Affordable and accessible
healthcare is a key component in
quality of life, which in turn
is a key factor in businesses
deciding whether to expand or
relocate to New Mexico and
create new jobs in the chamber
urges that you support this
legislation.
Um, I just also wanna say
personally, it's great to see
Jerry Harrison again, he has
been working tirelessly for
about as long as I've been up
here to recruit physicians to
the state, you're doing a great
job, thank you.
I
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Angelina
Via Adams, a physician, native
New Mexican, fierce advocate for
patients, the patience of New
Mexico as well as President of
the Mexico Medical Society. I am
here to represent the 2400
physicians that serve patients
of our state. I have had
countless conversations with
physicians, those in training
who are from New Mexico deciding
where to practice, those
contemplating to stay versus
leave and those who have left.
The reasons are many. While
doctors here make less than
surrounding states, which
certainly makes it challenging
to recruit.
That is not a factor for those
of us that are from here. We're
happy to serve our community.
And what physicians want is a
safe space to advocate for
patients, cohesive support from
the community to foster care.
This legislation will not fix
all the problems, but it's a
giant step to help.
I must acknowledge it's harder
to practice here every day.
A prominent respected
neurosurgeon left loves the
community, pays 5 times less in
Arizona. My best friend and her
intensivist husband moved in
December. We need to grow our
own. We need to incentivize
staying, we need to create
roots. No one will advocate more
vehemently than for patients and
the physician. Thank you.
Excuse me. Thank you online, I
have Sharon, Jody, Jacob, Paul,
and Barbara McEnany. So we'll
start with Sharon.
Thank you, Sharon, but I was
actually on support. So, um, I
will go back to Zoom if you are
in support, keep your hand up if
you're in opposition, please
lower your hand. OK, so we'll go
to Joie.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you. Thank you.
I'm sorry, we're sticking to
time. So, um,
Those in opposition on Zoom,
please raise your hand.
And in the room in opposition,
if you could come to the center,
please.
Oh yes, raise your hands first
if you're in opposition in the
room.
OK, and then I'll take 5 at the
center aisle.
Thank you, madam chair and
Representatives of the
committee. My name is Robin
Zimberov, in 2020, I was injured
due to what I alleged was
medical malpractice.
That left me with partial
paralysis and dependent on
others to help with my daily
activities of living.
I oppose the medical malpractice
reforms in HB 593.
My injuries occurred before the
2021 compromise that raised the
caps under the medical
malpractice Act, which means
mine were capped at 600,000 as a
result of my injuries, I will
require medical care in and
assistance for the rest of my
life.
The patient's compensation fund
is responsible for paying my,
for my care as incurred, I will
be dependent on the insurance
company called the fund to
approve and pay for my care
needs.
Letting injured patients like me
receive a lump sum payment for
medical care allows me to use my
new setup guaranteed sources of
payment for my future needs and
the rest of my life.
Such as annuities and trust, I
urge you to oppose the medical
malpractice reforms in HB.
Go the helper.
Uh
My name is Alita Pisanozo,
Washington.
I'm from the publics of Acama
and Laguna. I'm here to for to
urge you to vote no on House
Bill 593. My late husband died
due to medical malpractice, and
I know firsthand how difficult
it already is for harm patients
to seek justice. HB 593 will
make it even harder, especially
for Native American patients,
veterans, and rural residents
who already
struggle to find legal
representation to hold powerful
insurance companies and billion
dollar hospital corporations
accountable. This bill gets guts
punitive damages awarded by
juries allowing corporate
hospitals and big insurers to
escape accountability for the
harm they cause. It also forces
patients into an insurance
controlled system that strips
some of the option to receive a
lump sum settlement and instead
requires them to.
seek approval from insurers from
every medical expense.
Yeah, a Benny, Madam Chair and
members. I'm Osa Chavez from NM
Native Vote. My father was
Everett F. Chavez, the 3 time
governor fromuhua Pueblo. He
worked here in the roundhouse
alongside many of you in 2018,
he became sick, and a month
later he was gone. The truth is
he was a victim of medical
malpractice and a corrupt health
care system. This is not a bill
for patients. It will not bring
good doctors to New Mexico, it
only benefits the multi-billion
dollar medical corporations and
insurance companies. The
punitive.
Cap is like a speeding ticket
for homicide, injured patients
should not be forced to beg for
future care in a corrupt health
care system that will just deny
their claim. Stop protecting
insurance companies, vote as if
you and your loved ones needed
help. This bill only perpetuates
the corrupt health care system.
Please vote no, yeah.
Oh
You hold it. Thank you.
Good morning, uh, Madam Chair,
fellow senators. My name is uh
fellow representatives. My name
is Adrian Vega. I represent
victims of medical malpractice
in New Mexico. I had 3 clients
and patients that wanted to be
here today and I want to talk
about the reason they were
unable to come. They are each
paralyzed.
Holy wheelchair bound.
Because a hospital corporation
chose profits over safety.
When they went to see this
surgeon, he had 19 prior medical
malpractice lawsuits, and when
they went in for what they were
told were routine surgeries.
They came out with their lives
taken, unable to walk.
Unable to be here today because
their caretakers were unable to
bring them.
This bill chooses profits over
safety. It puts hospital
corporations in place and
insurance companies to continue
to reap the benefits off of the
backs of our fellow New
Mexicans.
no.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Sid Lopez.
I'm a lobbyist with the New
Mexico trial attorneys.
I'm asking you to oppose House
Bill 593 as the medical
malpractice reform sections. We
keep hearing about increase in
insurance premiums, yet to date,
we're not provided with reliable
information that establishes the
reasons for those increases. In
2022, the corporate hospital
repayment agreement went into
effect in which the hospitals
agreed to repay the deficit they
helped create through 2027. Our
PCF administrator has told the
public in a public hearing that
the 54% premium increase that
you
keep hearing about, um, is
actually mostly due to the
repayment scheduled agreement
that the hospitals agreed to do
and repay the fund through.
Insurance companies are
repaying.
The the fund and their framing
this and playing with numbers in
order to mislead the public into
thinking there's an insurance
crisis. Please vote no against
this bill. Thank you.
Sorry, I'm trying to follow, so
we will go with Brianna. Hello,
Madam Chair Representatives. My
name is Brianna Baker. I'm
speaking today as a victim of
medical malpractice in
opposition to the medical
malpractice parts of HB 593. In
my early twenties, my life was
turned upside down and forever
changed due to medical
malpractice that damaged my
heart.
Since that time, I've had to
deal with another insurance
company that is known as the
patient's compensation fund.
Because of the malpractice I'm
dependent on lifelong medical
care, and I will eventually need
a heart transplant. A jury of my
peers found that 3 dependents
were negligent because my case
was kept under the medical
malpractice Act, the damages the
jury awarded were reduced to the
cap, and for the last 14 years,
the patient's compensation fund
has been required to pay
my-related medical bills. The
funds administrator has
repeatedly told me that I must
have proof for each and every
bill that is submitted for.
payment.
My life expectancy depends on
quality medical care. My medical
care depends on the fun payment
providers. You can imagine the
distress I feel when I have to
argue with the fund to pay my
medical bills. Any more injured
New Mexicans to this fund does
nothing but add another
insurance company to the process
that makes it more difficult for
us to get here.
Thank you. um, thank you
Dominique.
Thank you. Um, chair and members
of the committee, my name is
Dominique Dupont, and I'm here
to urge you to vote no on House
Bill 593, um, 12 years ago, my
daughter suffered a catastrophic
brain injury at birth because of
a hospital's negligence. She
will never live independently,
and she needs lifelong care
because we settled before
restrictive caps were
introduced, my family received a
lump sum settlement, which gave
us the freedom to plan for my
daughter's future.
House Bill 593 would take that
option away from future harmed
patients, forcing them into a
government run insurance system
where they must ask permission
for every medical expense. I've
spent years fighting for my
daughter's care, and I know how
insurance companies delay and
deny treatment. This will forces
harmed patients to deal with yet
another insurance company,
stripping them of their
financial security and putting
the most personal medical
decisions into the hands of
bureaucrats, CEOs, and
shareholders. Please don't force
New Mexicans to have to beg for
every $1 of care they need, but
that's exactly what he um House
Bill 593 does. Please vote no on
House Bill 593.
Thank you. Next we'll go to
Jessica.
Mhm. Madam Chair and members, my
name is Jessica Gonzalez. My son
Anthony was severely injured at
birth due to medical
malpractice. As a result of his
injuries, Anthony requires 24/7
care and is completely dependent
on others for his daily needs.
He will require significant
medical care for the rest of his
life. A portion of Anthony's
lawsuit was subject to the
pre-compromised caps, which
means his claims were capped at
$600,000 and his future medical
care is dependent on the
patient's compensation fund
paying over the course of his
life. My dealings with the fund
have been
difficult. The caps on Anthony's
damages don't come close to
compensating him for his
lifetime of injuries. However,
the requirement in HB 593 that
Anthony and future injured
patients must beg an
insurance-controlled fund is
more unjust and strips harm New
Mexicans from securing future
medical care, and without a lump
sum settlement, families could
not set up a trust or buy
insurance to guarantee long-term
medical needs. This bill puts my
son's medical decisions in the
hands of the fund, not doctors
who understand his needs. Please
vote no on House Bill 593.
Thank you.
Good morning,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Felice
Riel, and I represent seniors
and disabled individuals, I urge
you to vote no on House Bill 593
due to the provisions that
protect corporate profits over
patient safety. Already, senior
seniors face some of the highest
risks of medical harm, but
received the lowest malpractice
compensation.
The data shows that patients
over 70 are twice as likely to
die from medical errors, yet
only 10% of the malpractice
payouts go to people aged 65 and
older. 1 in 4 Medicare
beneficiaries suffers harm due
to medical errors, and many
leave the hospital more disabled
than when they arrive. House
Bill 593 takes away seniors'
protections, even more than
they're already limited, and it
forces patients into a bureau.
Democratic system where they
must seek approval for every
medical expense. That's why I
urge you to vote, please vote no
for House Bill 593. Thank you so
much.
Thank you. And finally, we have
Deirdre.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Deirdre Murphy and I'm
here today to urge you to vote
no on House Bill 593. I've spent
15 years fighting for the
medical care I need after a
routine spinal surgery, let me
paralyzed due to doctor's
negligence because my care is
tied to the patient compensation
fund. I've been forced to beg,
wait, and battle for every
treatment and essential medical
need. Even basic care like
replacing my wheelchair can take
multiple court battles.
for approval, leaving me
dependent on others for many
months at a time. House Bill 593
will trap every future harmed
patient in this broken system by
eliminating lump sum payments
and forcing patients to rely on
an insurance controlled fund
that delays and denies care
whenever patients need it most
because it's more profitable.
This bill won't help bring
doctors to New Mexico. All it
does is put insurance companies
in charge of harm.
New Mexican health.
decisions instead of their
doctors. This bill is not about
helping patients.
OK, I will go back to the
sponsors. Do you have any follow
up before we go to the
committee?
Um, yes, Madam Chair, committee
members, I'd like to point out
that the focus of this bill is
to bring physicians to New
Mexico. It's not to get rid of
medical malpractice, because I
think that's what we've heard
most in opposition. I just
wanted to point that out, not
only to bring physicians, but,
but healthcare workforce of all
kinds, all professions. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Do you have anything
Uh, thank you, uh,
Representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair and committee members. I
would just like to state that,
um,
We're not against medical
malpractice. We, we know people
make mistakes. We're all human,
we all make mistakes. Uh, but
what we are for is making sure
that um everyone is treated more
fairly and mainly this is about
recruitment and retention of
doctors, medical professionals,
professionals in the state of
New Mexico when that we stand
for questions.
Thank you. So questions. Just a
moment, Madam Chair. I think um
my expert has just one second.
Let me, let me get questions. So
representative, and then we'll
come back to you. I'm sorry.
Anyone else question? OK, OK.
Oh, in Chavis, OK.
All right, I'm sorry, go ahead,
Jerry.
Uh, madam chair and members of
the committee, um,
Mr. Bullington has had the
unfortunate opportunity of
listening to me over the last 30
years in meetings like this.
And I think that he probably
would.
Agree with me.
That maybe the title of this
particular act could be changed
to the health professional
retention. I've been involved in
elements, except for the medical
malpractice piece.
For exactly 30 years.
And have been involved in
Virtually each element.
Of this act.
And I want to encourage you to
think about.
Retaining the health
professionals that we have
because we are in
Very serious, serious. I would
stand for any questions related
to that.
And we hope that
You would take a, a look at each
element of the act.
And
Say, what does this do?
To retain the health
professionals that we have in
the state, and what do we need
to do more to recruit additional
ones.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you. First we'll go to
minority Whip Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I
appreciate it.
Um
Representatives.
How many different
sections are there that deal
with
What you're trying to accomplish
here.
As I counted,
Out of the 21 sections.
There's like 8 or 9 different
pro uh tax credits, other
recruitment tools.
It
This is not just a medical
malpractice.
I'm seeing rural healthcare tax
credits.
Position tax credits.
Um
Lone repayment, there's one
section about it would seem from
the from.
The
public's testimony that this was
Just a medical malpractice.
I
Um
You just very briefly.
Tell me what you're trying to
accomplish with this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
It it is truly a a a way to
attract and retain healthcare
professionals, and I honestly
believe that this would instead
of us being an exporter of
healthcare professionals, this
would bring people who want to,
they would be incentivized
financially to work even in
rural New Mexico, which is so
desperately, we have such a
desperate need for healthcare
professionals in rural Mexico
right now.
So it's an, it's to attract and
retain.
Uh, healthcare professionals,
um,
Of of all kinds, not just
physicians, but all of them.
Thank
you, Madam, I missed a step. I
need a motion to discuss the um
the substitute. Make a motion
to.
Discuss the Health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for
593. Are there any, is there any
opposition then you have a
substitute bill. Sorry about
that.
Just have to do it when I think
of it.
Um, thank, thank you for that,
madam chair, um.
I mean, there's some really
Really good provisions in this
bill.
Um, license practical nurses,
EMTs, paramedics.
speech language pathologists.
Occupational therapist,
chiropractic physicians.
Loan repayments, tax credits.
I
I, I don't understand the
The opposition to this bill
There's so many good parts of
this bill.
I mean, just, just trying to, I
mean,
When
Aside from the appropriation
applicability, there's 19
sections in here.
All dealing with ways to
recruit.
And retain
Medical
Practitioners, EMTs,
Therapists
Uh
I don't know, I, I may be
totally off.
Track here, but I think this is
a great bill.
And if, if we were able to pass
this, it would go a long way.
To recruit and retain.
All these different types of
Medical care, especially in the
rural parts of the state.
We're, I, I hear constantly.
About
Patients that are having to
travel.
hundreds of miles, hours to get
medical care.
And it would be a shame to shoot
this down because
Somebody doesn't like the
medical malpractice part of this
bill. It's just
It boggles the mind, to be
honest with you.
Um, Madam Chair representative.
You
You're from the rural part of
the state.
To get out, to get up an
appointment with the primary
care physician in Albuquerque or
Rio Rancho.
I mean, it takes weeks, even
months.
The reason is because we don't
have
All these
Practitioners.
We need to really take a hard
look at
How we deal with these things.
And just because
Um
I, I'm trying to be very careful
about
How I say.
Because there's one piece of a
bill we're gonna
Throw the whole thing down.
That, that kind of practice.
does not make any sense to me.
Um
I don't, I don't read in this
bill that you're against.
Patients receiving compensation
that's due to them for
You know, somebody's
But
care.
Am I reading this wrong, Madam
Chair Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Martinez with
Martinez. I, I don't believe
you're reading it wrong. I
believe you're reading it
exactly right, rather than our
current state in New Mexico,
where people are leaving in
droves to practice in
neighboring states, we would
become the state they're moving
to. I honestly believe that when
you, you tell an LPN and RN, a
physician, they will pay no
taxes here.
That is an incentive to come
here. It absolutely is, and, and
as I mentioned, um, earlier in
my opening presentation, I'm
very concerned. I was, uh, Madam
Chair Representative, I was
hesitant to sign on to the many
compacts that we passed because
I realized if we did not make
these drastic changes in this
bill.
That we will lose even more
healthcare professionals even
faster.
And that that will be the state
of healthcare in New Mexico, if
we don't pass these changes.
We have
The next 2 years to look at.
What will happen today with this
bill, and I believe you're right
on that this is, this is what we
need to, to provide healthcare.
In New Mexico, Madam Chair,
representative, um.
The people in my rural district,
and I think rural districts all
across the state are going
without healthcare.
They're, they're simply not,
it's simply not available to
them.
And they are and oftentimes in a
situation where they can't drive
to Albuquerque to receive health
care even if they could get an
appointment. So I believe this
is the answer. Thank you for
your questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I, I just
It, it, it hurts the soul.
To see
People like my father who's 86
years old.
It's taking him months.
To see a doctor.
And my fears will kill this
bill.
Over one section.
It just
Mm
I, I just hope that this
committee sees
clearly to get this on to the
next.
Stop and, and really
Provide healthcare in New
Mexico.
I'm, I'm tired of hearing.
How we have a great medical
school, but they're all leaving.
They wanna go practice somewhere
else where it's more practical,
where it's more
Uh, affordable for a doctor to
to practice. There was comments
about
billion dollar.
Hospitals. I had a conversation.
November, early November.
With a uh primary care
physician.
Oh
His sold his practice.
To
A conglomerate and the
The problem, he said,
It was because
New Mexico is the most
unfriendly state when it comes
to
How we treat our our medical
professionals.
We need to look at that.
It's not about
Um
It, it's not about just one
thing, and that's what I love
about this bill is there's so
many parts to this that would
benefit
People that need health care.
I, I have really taken a hard
look at what's going on in the
rural parts of the state.
And
I fear that
Because people have to travel so
far or wait so long.
That
We're gonna lose some of these
people.
I fear for my, for my father's
health.
Um, all the time because there's
just not the capacity.
He lives in a rural part of the
state, and there is huge.
lack of medical care.
Um, to the point where I've,
I've tried to talk him into
moving in with me.
Um
And, and uh, for me,
I, I can't tell everybody how to
think, but for me,
That's what this would fix.
And I hope and I pray that
Um, we can, we can see our way
clearly to to get this done.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, representatives for doing
this. I know it's
A heavy lift, but I appreciate
what you're doing.
Thank you, Madam. Next we go to
Representative, um.
Nicole Travis.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives.
I think this is a
bold way to really take charge
of the access to providers in
this, in this state. It's a
balance and proactive approach
to strengthen our health care
system. I mean, looking at the
amount of rural healthcare tax
credits.
Position income tax credits, the
loan repayment Act.
Medical residency loan repayment
funding.
This is great, and when we're
talking about um
Patients
It right here you create part
that prioritize authorization
acts. I'm reading here, and it
requires no prior authorization
for chemotherapy, dialysis,
elder care, home health care
services, that is putting the
patient first. Um, I think
right, adding diabetes and high
blood pressure to the list of
prescription drugs that insurers
cannot require needing prior
authorization or step therapy is
putting the.
Patient first. This is not
putting health plans or health
systems over the patient. We are
actually doing the opposite, um,
I would like to ask your expert,
please, if you could tell us how
many providers have left in the
last couple of years and how
many providers are we
recruiting?
chair uh representative Chavez,
uh, the first part of your
question, no one can answer.
They're currently is not good
data about the workforce in New
Mexico.
And
On the second part, I can answer
in terms of our organization.
I didn't look at my computer
this morning because it was very
early.
Yesterday evening.
We were aware of 769.
Uh, openings that employers have
come to us.
To ask us to fill.
And we worked at the upper end
of healthcare education.
Physicians
Nurse practitioners, PAs.
Dentist, uh,
Social workers.
And
To give you a little context.
At this time,
last year.
The number of
Physicians that we were
attempting to fill.
It was roughly half.
Of that 760.
Adam Sha representative expert
769 is a lot of doctors across
this state. I know I've been in
healthcare for almost 26 years,
and it seems like we're losing
doctors left and right. Um.
To be honest, I, I wasn't able
to make health committee on
Wednesday because I had a
gastroenterologist appointment
that I waited 5 months for.
That's a long time and I'm
pretty healthy, so imagine
somebody that may have had
Paula or cancer or couldn't
breathe or was choking every
time they swallowed water, um,
we have a huge issue and it's
not OK anymore. I, I know.
Medical providers that practice
here and um have now tried to
even move over to a more
creative boutique offering
because they can't afford to
practice individually in
medicine anymore unless they
work for the big health systems
and a lot of doctors don't wanna
do that or can't do that,
especially in specialty areas,
and I think that's really
important. Um, I wanna ask you,
uh, you know, I really love the
authorization requirement,
taking that away from
chemotherapy dialysis, home
health, and elder care. What
made you decide on those key
areas.
To take that prior authorization
away. Thank you, Madam Chair,
uh, Representative.
These are areas, um.
That are, are very common,
they're they're commonly needed
and they're not elective. It's
not something that um people go
out and seek. It's, it's a type,
these are all the types of.
that are needed urgently.
And, and I, I'm sure as you
know, we have physicians who get
caught up in instead of caring
for their patients, um, they're
on the phone trying to haggle
with what they can and can't get
reimbursed for, and these are,
these are necessary and they're
urgent types of care. I had my
nurse practitioner contacted me
the other day and he said, I had
to get a prior authorization for
Norvasc, a very commonly used
high high blood pressure drug.
And
And that is.
That's not serving the patient's
needs. Um,
So, you know, there's some
conflict, there's some
opposition to that, but we want
to serve the people of New
Mexico, and this is one way of
doing that. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative, and I
want to point that out because
there will be opposition, right
from the healthcare systems,
maybe some from providers,
insurance companies, but we're
trying to put the patient first
in this bill, um, you know,
again, you just talked about
prior authorization and then
adding diabetes and high blood
pressure to the list of
prescriptions that they can't
require.
prior authorization for either,
um, you know, we know that some
insurance plans aren't gonna
like it, but it's needed,
especially in this state. There
are so many individuals that
have diabetes, um, and
especially in my Hispanic
population. A lot of my
relatives have have diabetes,
unfortunately, and high blood
pressure, and they run together.
Um, so that could be a life
saving measure, cause I know um
that.
Working in the healthcare
system, sometimes.
We've tried to drop.
co-pays for those specific
healthcare related needs to $0
or $2 or $4 because we don't
want those individuals having to
decide am I gonna pay the light
bill or groceries, or can I get
my prescription. And so I'm glad
that it's showing that you are
putting patients first. This is
not about putting patients last
at all. Um, I know that there is
a conversation about medical
malpractice, um, and I
I know that it is hurting our
independent providers, they
can't afford a practice. And of
course our our large providers
as well. Um, so I was looking as
you were talking, cause you're
trying to drop the cap from 600
to $600,000 which I still think
is reasonable and looking in
Alabama, the cap is $400,000.
Alaska is $400,000. Arkansas,
$500,000. Colorado, $300,000.
Florida.
$500,000 Georgia, $350,000.
Hawaii, 375,000.
Idaho, $250,000.
Ohio.
Let me see, Kansas, $250,000.
Louisiana, $500,000. Maine
$500,000. Massachusetts,
$500,000. Mississippi, $500,000.
I could go on and on and on, but
600,000 is still much higher
than most of our states right
now, and that's what we would be
capping it to in this bill. So
again, I don't feel that it's
putting the patient last. We are
putting the patient first in
this entirety bill.
And the medical malpractice is
still.
Much higher if we lower it to
600,000 than the majority of our
country.
And with this bill, we would be
putting the patient first by
taking prior authorizations away
for a lot of those needs and by
bringing doctors. I hope
everybody understands, we are
not a state that doctors want to
practice in. I have received
numerous letters, just in the
last 3 weeks from doctors that
have either left already or
planning on leaving or in the
middle of selling their house
and their providers that have
been
here for 20 and 30 years, giving
me the reasons of not being able
to practice cause they can't
afford it, but our community and
members of our state are the
ones that are left.
With their needs not met because
they don't have doctors to
provide services. So I just want
to thank you for bringing this
forward. I think it's a
wonderful bill and I hope.
For the sake of our doctors and
the sake of our individuals in
this community that this passes
today. Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair, may I, may I
ask my um expert if he has
something to add about uh his
experience with the doctors
coming from out of state as it
in regards to your statements.
Madam Chair, uh, representative
Chavez.
Every day.
In fact, I'm feeling a little
guilty sitting here.
We reach out across the country
through various outreach
activities to find physicians
and other health professionals
to practice here.
Um
This fiscal year at the end of
February, we had
Contacted about.
Had interaction with about 2500
health professionals.
Um, mostly out of state people,
but people here in New Mexico as
well.
And one of the things that um
we do is try to learn about
those people who
Interact with us.
About whether or not they are
serious about coming to work in
in New Mexico because we don't
want to refer people on to
employers or practices or
hospitals.
That, um, really don't have an
interest. It's passing, and one
of the
One of the big things that
eliminates uh uh those people
who are not serious is to simply
ask for a resume.
I don't know
Roughly 2500.
During this fiscal year.
So far.
We've only received 185 resumes.
And uh that is phenomenally low
in our
In our experience.
So
Those who are looking for work.
are looking for
But places to practices.
practice good places to live,
good places to raise their
children.
Good schools and those kinds of
things.
And
When there are impediments.
We, we always have to deal with,
with pay.
And I'm pretty sure you all have
heard about.
OK and, uh, health
professionals.
Uh, I know that.
Through research that I do.
Regularly.
That
Typically across the country, a
new graduate primary care
physician would expect about
$300,000.
As an initial wage.
I know physicians who are
practicing here.
Under 200,000.
And when you add
Difficulties.
The healthcare communities in
New Mexico are small.
And when there are problems,
They get spread
Rapidly
And
I'll repeat what I said before.
We are in very tough times in
terms of recruiting.
And again, I look at elements of
this particular act.
As being large steps to retain
those who do want to practice
here.
And want to continue and that we
really should eliminate
barriers.
If we, if we can at all.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, expert representative, I
appreciate that.
Senna Cortez.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Madam Leader, ranking member and
expert, um, I truly believe that
having more physicians will
increase access to getting
timely care, especially,
especially with specialty care,
and I know that all of us want
that. Um, Madam Chair, Madam
Leader, ranking member and
expert, what is done to get good
data from RLD since
Or or just to see how many
providers are already living and
working in the state.
Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, uh, I am a
member of the statewide, um,
Oh
Workforce Committee.
And um,
Roughly 2.5 years ago.
The RMD database.
In addition
RLD process the licensure of
health professionals.
For the medical board, for
example.
And I don't know the details of
that hack, but I do know the
impact upon the workforce
Committee where we were starting
to make real progress.
In terms of measuring.
The FTE.
Um, clinical, uh, population for
13 of the health professions
that we have.
For whatever reason, the
decision was made at RLD.
To rebuild the databases as
health professionals.
Applied for relic.
Uh, only
Only
One of the
Um
Of the 13.
I have to make a a sidetrack.
So far we've only received
One of the two-year renewal
licensure number, numbers, and I
forget.
Which discipline that was, we'll
be working through the summer as
those two-year cycles, um,
complete, and there will be a a
greater report in October when
it comes to you all.
For the 3 year cycle, which
includes physicians.
Dentist, uh, what have you.
There'll be another year before
those database rebuilt.
Um
It's a serious problem. Uh.
I have had um both professionals
tell me that they didn't know
that their information might
have been that they weren't
informed that um
That was only when they went to
relicense their DEA numbers that
they learned that uh
There was no real information.
I may have wandered away
when there are 3 licensure
groups that we, we know that we
have good information on.
That is nursing.
I think that we reviewed last
month that there are 27,000
nurses that are licensed uh by
the nursing board.
Uh
Certified nurse midwives, I
think there are about 250.
And uh EMTs.
Those are the only
Groups that we have a solid
information about the number of
licensees.
That is not the number of people
who are practicing in New
Mexico. They could be retired,
they could be working in other
states.
Madam Chair, I'm I'm just gonna
ask if you can be a little
briefer, we still have a very
long agenda.
Madam Chair, expert, thank you
so much for that response. That
is terrible. Um, I'll move on to
my next question, Madam Chair,
Madam Leader, ranking member and
expert, are we predominantly
relying on the J1 visa doctors
to staff are undeserved
communities.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, uh, Senator
Cortez.
Um
I'm proud to say that New Mexico
health increased resources
created the J-1 visa program
back in 1998.
We had to force the then
Secretary of Health, you, uh,
To accept it and we recruit.
I should say, employers recruit
30 physicians each year. That's
the major source.
Of specialist and hospitalist to
the state. We recruit
uh between 20 and 25 physicians,
uh, a year.
Um
To answer your
Question.
The way the definitions work for
international medical graduates
is that they can pretty much
work everywhere in New Mexico,
aside from Los Alamos.
Madam Chair, madam leader
ranking member and expert, what
would you recommend to move the
needle forward to recruit and
retain physicians here.
I'm sorry, Madam Chair, would
you repeat that real quick,
Madam Chair, um, what would you
recommend to move the needle
forward to recruit and retain. I
would recommend that we pass
this bill.
I mean, it is, it is a
comprehensive approach to what
is needed and, and in addition
to that, we have one week to do
it.
If we don't, we have 2 years of
Not just status quo, but I
believe even worse conditions
for healthcare in New Mexico.
Madam Chair, I have 2 more
questions and then I will
conclude, Madam Chair, Madam
Leader, ranking member and
expert does UNM, the Medical
Society or New Mexico Healthcare
recruitment know which states
the the MDs are predominantly
going to and why.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee of the people that we
work with that are looking for
work.
Uh, they look at the adjoining
states, they look at California,
and they look at Washington and
Oregon.
Um
Over on the east coast, they
look at North and North and
South Carolina.
Those are the predominant states
that.
Physicians in particular are
looking at.
And the second component, Madam
Chair expert was why are they
going there?
Multiple madam chair uh
representative, there are
multiple reasons. And uh uh
really those states offer uh
Themselves as good places to
practice and uh many of the
things that are encompassed in
this bill.
Madam Chair, Madam Leader
ranking member and expert, and I
think our goal here is to bring
people here to New Mexico,
again, so that we can increase
access to timely care,
especially with specialty care.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Madam Leader, ranking member and
expert.
Thank you next upload to
Representative Kates. I thank
you, Madam Chair, and, and, and
thank you, um, madam leader and,
and ranking member uh for your
presentation. I, I wanna say
that I, I believe that we have a
shared goal or a shared belief
that we are in a healthcare
crisis currently, uh, right now
in the state of New Mexico. Um,
my concern is that they're
I'm not sure why there's so many
things in one bill 7 days before
it needs to be passed.
I'm not sure why we didn't, we
had a bill in this front of this
committee to expand the non, uh,
the pre-authorization of drugs.
Why, why didn't you those other
drugs were put in and why didn't
we receive a a bill about
increasing the tax benefit.
Um, and so I'm kind of concerned
about that. Um, I, I will say
that.
Although um it has been stated
here that um
Well, let's go back to here on
page 28.
Uh, lying 11, it says the amount
of punitive damage award shall
not be greater than 30 times the
state median annual household
income.
So if you're an individual
supporting your family at 28
with two children.
You're gonna get the current
median income for 30 years.
If you can't
Create an income anymore.
Um, I, I, I, I'm concerned about
that. One of the reasons why I'm
concerned about that is, as well
as um
Uh, your, your lump sum versus
incurred. So, um, I am a mother
of a daughter who was injured at
birth, severely a lifelong
injury. She's had multiple
surgeries and continues to have
PT.
today
Um, when she was born, it was
not a happy birth story. It was
a very traumatic birth story for
me.
Um, I did have individuals who
came to me while I was in the
hospital, friends of mine,
family of mine that talked about
medical malpractice, and that is
not what I wanted to hear, what
I wanted to hear is how
Can you fix my baby? What's
wrong with my baby?
Because they wouldn't tell me
what was wrong with my baby.
As it was a medical malpractice.
And
I had to go through enormous
amounts of struggle to figure
out what was wrong with her,
what she needed. She needed a
surgery at 6 months. She needed
one at 1 years old. She needed 1
in 2 years old. How much PT did
she need?
And we did go into that, into
medical malpractice. It took us
5 years to get a settlement. I,
I couldn't have paid.
the doctors and the expert
witnesses and the research and
anything like that. I had to go
this way, and by receiving a
lump sum as her mother.
I'm able to invest it into an
annuity that I thought was
appropriate for her. When does
she want to go to undergrad.
Will she go to graduate school?
We're still hoping, but we don't
know. Um, what kind of doctor's
visits will she need? Will she
never be able to earn an income
that would be able to pay for a
house. So maybe she needs a
little help with paying for a
house.
As your parent, I want those
decisions. I don't want her,
especially as an 18 year old
with the bureaucracy of getting
a driver's license is too much,
much less fighting with an
insurance company for every
single reimbursement.
This is, this is a a poison pill
to this bill, and I strongly
encourage you to really, if this
is truly what your goal is, is
to look at what will recruit and
retain medical providers without
taking away patient voice.
That cannot be balanced. I have
yet to see a bill that has been
supported that will
Reduce medical malpractice
because they've increased
accountability or safety
measures or nurse staffing or
any of those other things that
will help increase patient
safety. I'm so sorry. I just
wanna say that, you know, I
wanted to make sure that we
talked about the lump sum
because
For those who may not haven't
gone to tax or is that by
allowing the insurance companies
to hold on to that money,
they're making interest on that
money, not your child, not you.
They are.
And you have to go through the
bureaucracy of getting
reimbursed many times.
Or at least being paid for,
which means going back to your
doctor saying I know that they
haven't paid you yet, but we've
got to go to the next procedure
why you still fight for this
one.
This is um there are some ideas
in here, I hope to continue a
conversation with you about it,
but there, as we said, there's
21 sections, and most of them
look like something that would
not help me take care of my
daughter in the best way, and so
I cannot support this bill. If
you would like to respond to
some of that, please do. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Kates, and I
appreciate your story and.
And I've, you know, I've seen
those in healthcare over the
years and, and
I think
There are
The way you've described that,
um, your struggles, there are
many different aspects of those
struggles, and they don't know,
they're not all included in this
bill, but I, I, my heart goes
out to you. I, um, I'm going to
address the first, your first
concern, Madam Chair
Representative Kates, the bills
that are incorporated into this
bill.
The, the reason that was done is
um because these bills were not
heard. These bills were
introduced, many of them. This
is a, a combination of, of um
several bills, HB 52, the Rural
Healthcare Tax Credit
eligibility. It was passed.
Um, out of this, it was passed
out of the house.
No, no.
It, it was passed unanimously
out of somewhere, my notes notes
may not be.
Um, legible here, um, HB 2226,
increased rural health care tax
care credit.
Um, it passed unanimously, um,
on, oh, I know on 212. The other
one passed on the 30th of
January, and that was it.
It was never heard again.
This HB 226 was passed on to 12,
not heard again.
SB 296 physician income tax
credit.
Never got a hearing.
HB 512 medical residency loan
repayment Act. No hearing.
HB 400 Medicaid health provider
cost studies.
I don't believe that had a
hearing.
HB 374.
Medical malpractice occurrence
definition, no hearing.
HP 378 medical malpractice Act
changes no hearing.
HB 379 punitive damages and
medical malpractice claim. No
hearing. HB 570 prior
authorization requirement
changes passed.
Um
passed unanimously.
Out of
Our committee on 310.
So,
The, the urgency is now
realizing this is not done, and
I have to add, you know, we've
done some good things. We, we
have a recruitment tool.
And
Think of how it's successful
recruitment tool would be if we
had this in place.
The, um, so that was my, my
contribution to your concerns,
the um
The punitive damages, I, I can't
speak to that. I, I was trying
to find it in my bill. I, I was
hoping that um
I was hoping that Representative
Armstrong would, would speak to
that and she's left. So I
apologize that I can't explain
that further than what we have
in the bill right now. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and, and thank you,
Representative. Um,
Yeah, I look forward to these
bills being developed with
stakeholders and pre-filed.
They're they're all prepped
pretty high numbers, but I do
share with you representative,
this is always the sad time of
the session where we realize
what's not getting passed and
what's being heard. I do think
some of these are in the tax
package.
And if we were in the tax
package or in the
appropriations, um, and, uh, and
I look forward to when the
Senate releases that
information. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for presenters for
bringing this bill, you know,
you do have some really good
portions of this bill that would
be beneficial to many people in
our state. And I want to ask you
first about the tax credits that
you have here, and they're
mentioned, you mentioned the
$50,000 tax credit for
physicians, you increase amounts
of tax credits on page 2 and 3
of the bill. My question to you
and one of the things I look at
having
them involved in tax for many,
many years is the effective tax
credits on other uh provisions.
So tell me what uh what was the
analysis that you went through
to determine these amounts of
tax credits.
Uh
I think the focus, Madam Chair
representative of the focus was
how do we get providers to New
Mexico.
And uh, and this makes us
competitive.
Um
As you know, you know, tax
credits, their their their
credits, it's not um.
It's not something that we're
paying out, it's just something
we're not receiving, and it, it
is.
It is worthwhile because it
provides the service that we
need to New Mexicans, um, maybe.
Maybe a Representative Armstrong
can add to that. Thank you,
Madam Char representative.
They came Madam Chair. Thank
you. I'm sorry I'm going back
and forth called me up and then
they skipped me, so, um, Madam
Chair representative, uh, we're
trying to, to establish the
greatest amount possible for
these tax credits and as
representative uh ranking member
Jones stated, um, this is about
recruitment retention, uh, we
came up with, we wanted to
double that. I believe it's a
double of the 10, it's triple.
We wanted to triple the the tax
credits, mainly, um, you know,
Madam chair and Representative
and uh
In the past, every year I've had
to fight for some of my doctors
to be able to get this through
Thaksin Rev. It's, it's kind of
amazing. So I think uh we can
improve that as well, but really
looking at what can we do?
To help recruit and retain here
in the state of New Mexico and
specifically in rural New
Mexico, but yes, Madam Cho,
that's it.
So thank you, Madam Chair
Representatives, uh, uh,
presenters for that. One of the
things that I look at very
carefully is that we collect
taxes in our state for lots and
lots of benefits and provisions.
And so if there's a credit that
means that something else is
going to go lacking. And if you
haven't done that research, even
if you want to increase it,
double it, uh, a tax credit, but
you haven't determined what
other benefit within the state
is going to be affected. That is
a problem. I just bring that to
your attention.
To, to, to think about. I want
to go to another section of this
bill that I'm looking at. I'm
looking at, uh, page 21. I think
that's the page, if you could go
there with me for a moment, and
I want to share with you.
Something that I find to be
quite interesting and and quite
disturbing to me, and it's the
definition of a occurrence in
this bill. And so, as I, I, and
I want to read it to you, and I
think the language alone should
be alarming to people who are,
are reading this. So, uh look,
it, it says here currently the
definition of occurrence is a,
is a, is as follows. occurrence
means injuries to a patient
caused by
Health care providers,
successive acts of omissions
that combined concurrently to
create a malpractice claim. So
that means that if a doctor has
been involved or more than one
that has caused successive
injuries in different ways, then
they're gonna be responsible in
every single aspect, but then
let's look at, at what, uh, the
definition that you want to put
in. It says the occurrence means
all claims for damages from all
persons arising.
from harm to a single patient,
no matter how many healthcare
providers, errors or admissions
contributed to their harm. I, I
just think of the woman who came
up to talk today, who talked
about how she's now, uh,
paralyzed and how she's the
injuries that she's affected.
And what if there were 15
doctors who were involved in
this, and but now she's only
limited to one claim. That's a
problem. What is your response
to that and please tell me, I
to know how
How you can benefit from making
a change like this in a statue.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, could you
restate the last part of your
question, how, how, yes, I will,
and thank you very kindly. You
know, I, I guess I'm just
reading that, it just really,
uh, it really bothers me because
I've been involved in watching
so many people sometimes who've
been hurt in situations, and
then I heard the woman who spoke
today, but I'm asking, can you
explain to me if there is any
benefit to making a change like
the one you have made with
respect.
to the definition of occurrence.
Tell me why you think that's a
benefit.
Uh, Madam Chair representative,
thank you for the question. Um,
if, if we could have heard the
exact bill, but it was never
scheduled actually in this
committee, uh, we could have had
a long, um, uh,
Talk about this, but ultimately,
um,
Uh, with the definition of
occurrence, it's to ensure that
a single injury is considered
one occurrence under the uh
medical malpractice Act. This
changes aims to prevent claims
stacking.
Where multiple cap amounts could
be paid out for a single
malpractice claim.
So, Madam Chair,
representatives, that, that is
um something that I, I, I worry
about. What if a patient is
wronged multiple times in each
of those harms be taken into
account when they make a claim.
I, I just want to take you to
one other aspect of this bill.
I'd like you to turn the page to
page 22, if you don't mind. So
we heard a, a testimony here
which talked about, well, the
cap should be at 600,000.
Because this 500,000 in, in uh
Missouri or and I'm just picking
these numbers, these cities out,
I just, there were a number of
lists that were less than
600,000, but if you look at the
on page 22 under Part B, it says
the aggregate, now this is what
you are eliminating. It says the
aggregate dollar amount
recoverable by all persons for
arising from any injury or death
to a person as a result of
malpractice shall not exceed.
50,000 per occurrence for
malpractice claims. So why would
you want to lower it to 600,000.
I mean, I'm not quite sure I
understand why we're going in
the opposite direction if what
you want to do is to help
patients. I'm listening.
Manages representative. I
believe the changes that were
made in 2021.
have caused an exodus of
physicians out of New Mexico.
And I think that's well
documented. We did, I, I think
it was last year, I think it was
last year, Madam Chair
Representative, that we did
bring those caps down somewhat.
Um, all this bill is doing is
restoring the the caps prior to
2021, which, as we noted
earlier, um, representative, we
noted earlier that it those caps
are still higher than many, many
states, including, I believe
it's Colorado who has a $300
cap.
Madam, thank you.
Madam Chair, and, and
presenters, I, I'll just close
with this. I, I'm very concerned
that the chains that you are
proposing, particularly if I, if
I just focus on that aspect of
it.
would save money for the wrong
doors in situations where they
shouldn't be saved, and let me
just say, I want to give you an
analysis of a bigger picture of
what I see in this field. There
are so many good things, but
there are things that are
hurting these, uh, patients a
lot. It's sort of like if you're
saying.
Oh, you know what? I will, I
won't tax tips and you're gonna
tell your daughter that, and
your daughters, she's the one
who's now working in um in a
restaurant, but at the same
time, I'm going to eliminate the
education department and your
mom is gonna lose her job, and
I'm gonna eliminate the Veterans
Department and your dad's gonna
lose the job. So then overall,
you like, but I can say, oh my
gosh, I'm not taxing tips, so
you have good things in here,
but there are other things in
here.
That are really hurting people.
So with that, Madam Chair,
members of the, uh, thank you.
May I respond, please, Madam
Chair, representative.
I, I understand frustration. I
really do, but I, I just want to
take a moment to uh after 40
years of, of nursing alongside
physicians, many physicians, you
know, and residents. I worked in
teaching hospitals and and big
hospitals, little hospitals. I
just want to say a few things
about the physicians that I I
worked with who were devoted,
absolutely devoted, committed to
caring for their patients and in
spite of that, Madam Chairs
representative.
They are human.
And
Our environment here in New
Mexico.
Has excellent physicians.
Fearful of making one mistake as
a human being that would ruin
their career, that would not
allow them to even move to
another state and practice, and
so I'm, I think that we're
trying to reach a balance that
takes care of patients who have
been the, the, um
You know, I've had problems with
those mistakes that are made and
and some even absolutely
malpractice. I mean, I know that
happens. I've seen that as well,
but it's very, very rare in my
experience with working for many
years with physicians, um, so
this is an effort to try to to
create a balance where patients
are cared for and and
physicians.
can, can be here, can, can be
practicing in New Mexico and be
assured that they're not.
Going through many, many years
over decade of uh and um getting
into many, many dollars of debt
with all of that, um.
Being taken away and not even
allowing them to practice even
in this state or any other state
in the future. So it is an
effort to balance it, it may not
be perfect, but I think it, it,
it's, it's, um, I think it is a
good balance. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative. Madam
Chair, let me just make one
other comment for you to think
about. You know, this is a, a
highly
Uh
Important issue in our state and
making sure that we have doctors
here. We also don't want to do
things that are gonna say, OK,
well, we're gonna give you all
these benefits. We want all
these doctors to come and what
if they're all the doctors who
have been doing bad things in
other states because they can
come here, but their medical
malpractice is gonna be low. We
don't want that either, you
know, I'm just wondering with
all the things that you have in
this bill, everything you took
out from pages 21 to 26 if you
put them back in with all the
other things that you bought.
with this then be a better bill
that we're talking about, and I,
I'm things that are here, you
have good things, but you have
things that are very, very
harmful to patients also if a
patient gets hurt. I just asked
you to think about that, and
thank you so very much, Madam
Chair.
Rip and Eleanor checks.
And I'm sure if I could pass for
now. OK, thank you. Next, I'll
go to representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, um, Representative
and also Jerry, it's um a long
time you've been working on this
issue for getting doctors to
People to go into being coming
um healthcare providers and then
to stay in our state in the
different issues and hopefully
with some of the other
legislation that's going
through, we'll be doing that.
This is a great compilation of
all of those things together,
but as Representative Hedington
pointed out, um, and Kates that
this part of the bill where you
reduce the, um,
Amount, debt, people can get and
then how it's distributed is
concerned, but I briefly want to
talk about the corporate health
care um issue and as you know,
Memorial Medical Center, which
is in Las Cruces where I um
represent has recently come
under public scrutiny for some
of their practices, and the AG
is investigating um them for
denying care to cancer patients
having questionable billing
practices and creating a
culture.
of fear among employees, and um
I think that's one of the
problems that we have too of
keeping our doctors, but um,
The AG has also said that he
believes this investigation will
have to broaden in scope as it
continues to become, they become
aware of more things. And I
mentioned this because the data
shows us that when private
equity firms take over
hospitals, the rates of patient
injury and death increase, and
I'm concerned that nothing in
this bill addresses the real
problem in our state for
providers and patients and we
have the highest number of per
capita.
of of private equity owned
hospitals in the country, and
Harvard Medical research shows
that private equity owned
hospitals cost the public more
and have 25% higher rates of
injuries to patients.
And I've heard so much about
lawsuits and but I haven't heard
anything about reducing the harm
to patients that cause the
lawsuits have, um,
You've given this some
You know, concern or can you
offer anything that will help
reduce, you know, the harms
because of possibly the private
equity firms having different
processes that um make it harder
for doctors to practice and also
for um not having, you know, the
injuries that in death that can
be caused.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative. I, I certainly
see that as a concern, and I'm
glad that we're looking into all
those issues that really wasn't
addressed in the bill because
the focus of this bill is to
incentivize um healthcare
professionals of every kind to
come to New Mexico and practice.
So no, that wasn't addressed in
the bill, but I do, like I said,
appreciate your concerns,
Representative Madam Chair.
Well, Madam Chair and
Representative, I agree, um, but
I feel like, um, we are being
told that medical malpractice
rates are the real problem, but
these measures don't follow the
money or the data.
So thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you
Madam, may I go ahead.
Um
Um, as I said before, medical
malpractice is just one part of
this bill. There's much more to
it than that. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you Representative for um.
For bringing this forward. Um,
there's actually much of this
bill that I love and agree with.
Um, Madam Chen represented, but
I want to go through each of
these sections because as I was
reading through this bill, I
thought, oh, real healthcare
practitioner credit. I was like,
wait a minute, we already passed
that.
With and
so Chair Representative, I'm
just wondering as that bill came
through, um, why we didn't just
amend it to reflect what
What is um reflected here in.
Madam Chair, representative, to
be clear, oh, the amount, the
amounts, um, this was a, this
was a, um, it is a combination
of several bills, and there was
more than one bill, um, that
addressed rural healthcare tax
credits. So this was, I believe,
taken from the different bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
because my understanding is that
we've actually passed this in
different amounts, but I think
my real question here, Madam
Chair Representative, is, is
this funded? Is it in the tax
package? The um, the only
allocation here that would be
required in this bill is the $3
million. And um I think we can
probably come up with that.
Madam Chair Representative, if
I'm not mistaken, I believe the
Senate is currently waiting on
the tax package, I believe it's
kind of wrapped up. So Madam
Chair and Representative, how
would you recommend we get this
into the DAX package.
Madam Chair Representative.
I am still relatively new, but
I've seen it done. Thank you,
Madam Chair Representative, and
I know we were talking about um
financial bills coming through
here. I think it's a good thing
for us to say, is this good for
health? And then it goes on to
the next committee in either
appropriations or in in the tax
committee, um, but when I used
to represent some of the folks
in the healthcare field, I would
say you guys, these bills are
simply symbolic if you don't
have them in the budget or if
you don't have them in the tax
package. And so what I would
recommend folks do is actually
advocate for the actual money
that comes with this and not
just the words, because the
words themselves are, are a
little symbolic. Um, and so
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
going through this. There were
other pieces, uh, the physician
income tax credit, if I'm not
mistaken, Madam Chair and
Representative, there's actually
a bill coming from the Senate
right now to eliminate taxes for
physicians, um, and I believe
it's made its way over.
Um, on page 10, Madam Chan
representative, there is, um,
material for medical residency
loan repayment, which um we do
have loan repayment right now,
and I believe we are actually, I
believe one of the
Bills that has made it through
tax committee is definitely
funded, is also the preceptor's
tax credit, Madam Chan
representative, and so I, I'm
pointing this out because I
believe there are many more
robust things that are moving
through right now that have legs
that are funded, and so I just
wanted to point that out because
I agree with all of these, and
I'm definitely going to vote yes
when they come to the floor. But
Madam Chair Representative, a
lot of these are already moving
through in different bills.
Um, and so I will now move to
Um, the
Uh, medical malpractice portion,
which is very clearly one of the
hot topics, um, but Madam Chair
Representative, I keep hearing
that doctors are leaving the
state, and we know that across
the board here and nationally,
we are losing doctors, medical
providers, all types of medical
providers. But Madam Chair
Representative, one of the
studies that keeps coming up.
is the UNM Workforce report that
showed a severe decline in um
healthcare providers from the
years 2017 to 2021.
And Madam Chair Representative,
I want to point this out because
everybody keeps saying it's the
medical malpractice compromise
that happened in 2021 that
caused the shortage, but Madam
Chair Representative, that data
shows the severe decline from
2017 to 2021, which was before
this compromise was even passed.
And so Madam Chair
Representative, can you speak to
that?
Madam chair, um,
Refuges in, um, I have to be
careful because I'm a member of
the committee and I don't speak
for the committee. Um, and, uh,
Perhaps, uh
The uh
Chair of that committee at UNM
would be a better person to
address that other than
participating in the period that
you spoke to represents the
national shortage of the um
Consequences of the baby boom
generation starting to retire
and die, and those, those types
of things.
And I can only say from our
perspective of recruiting is
that we've seen a dramatic
increase in the number of
Employers
Not just the number of
positions, but the number of
employers being desperate.
To find uh um.
Practitioners since 2021.
is uh pretty phenomenal,
particularly the last couple of
years.
Thank you, Madam Chan
representative, and I would
imagine so after the decline
from 2017 to 21, that you would
need to figure out how to get
more providers. And so Madam
Chair Representative, is it fair
to say that the compromise in
2021 did not cause the decline
of healthcare providers from
2017 to 2021. Is that fair,
Madamarian Representative?
Madam Chair, uh, represented by.
I could not attest to that
because we don't have data.
They're, there is no data.
That's currently available on
the practicing workforce in New
Mexico.
I agree, and I agree, um, Madam
Chair Representative, um,
because I have been talking to
doctors in my district to try to
figure out what the heck is
going on. Um, because also, um,
you know, I, I think in this
whole medical malpractice
debate, like,
One of the things that is very
clear to me in terms of the
values that we share is like we
have to do our job to recruit
and retain providers in the
state. There's no question about
it, but to me, Madam Chan
representative, we can't do that
at the expense of patients. And
I think a lot of this has gotten
out of control based,
unfortunately on that original
report.
Um, that said, we're losing
doctors like crazy because of
medical malpractice. And so I
don't really see the correlation
there, Madam Chan
representative. Um, and so, so
it gets me to the foundation of
this particular section, which
is, are we addressing the
shortage that was already
happening by, by addressing
malpractice. So there are a
couple of things that I found.
So,
If I am, if I'm an insurance
provider, I'm thinking how is it
that we mitigate risk?
Right? Like, you're, you're
constantly weighing risk with
the, with your clients. And so,
Madam Chair Representative,
there have been multiple
opportunities for this body to
mitigate risk, so I'm thinking
nurse ratios, the whistleblower
protections, um, in particular.
Those are bills that have come
before us. And to me, I'm like,
yeah, that sounds like pretty
sound policy to make sure that
we have staffing ratios that are
going up, which means patient
safety is even better than it
was before.
And
We know that, you know, even
based on car insurance, right,
you get good driver credits. If
you're a good driver. And so
Madam Chair representative, one
of the ways that I see to
address medical malpractice and
medical malpractice premiums is
to make sure that we have safe
staffing and things like this
within, um, our healthcare
facilities.
Um, and Madam Chair
Representative, um,
The other thing that I want to
talk about is, you know, I have
also been talking with
independent clinics, um, and
folks who are in um hospital
facilities. And one of the
things that one of the folks
said was, hey, look, like my
insurance premiums are rising
like crazy and we have never had
a medical malpractice claim. And
so to me, I'm going, oh man,
there's gotta be something going
on here. But Madam Chair
representative in talking with
um some of the providers, what
we're actually finding is that
In 2021, when everybody came to
the table, doctors, uh, the
medical society, the Hospital
Association, the trial lawyers
patients. Everyone came to the
table to put the current
language that we're trying to
take out in this amended
portion. Um, everyone came to
the table, came to some
agreements. One of the
agreements was because hospitals
specifically hospitals like
Loveless, Ardent, who are owned
by private equity companies.
They were causing so much debt
in the patient.
Compensation fund that every day
mom and pop docs independent
clinics were paying the price
for these big hospitals. And so
Madam Chair representative, like
I think part of history also
just has to be told because this
history comes with this bill and
it comes with all the bills that
are coming before us. And so
Madam Chair Representative, one
of the agreements was that these
big hospitals, these big
corporations, we're gonna pay
back what they owed.
That was one of the agreements
that people came to, and that we
were going to finally get big
corporations out of the medical
malpractice Act.
And so Madam Chair represented
what we've been finding is that
many of these mom and pop places
and independent clinics are
shouldering that burden of
paying back that debt from those
big corporations by having that
debt added onto their insurance
premiums, giving this like false
positive, if you will, or this
false inflation. And I don't
think that's fair. It's not fair
to the independent providers. It
is not fair to the mom and pop
folks that they are paying the
debt for these big corporations.
It's a matter of.
representative as I'm going
through this bill. I'm like, are
Arguments here are so out of
line with who we should be
holding accountable.
Madam Chair and Representative.
Um
And so Madam Cha representative,
I will start asking my questions
now, but I hope you see where
I'm coming from. Like I
I want more than anything for
independent docs and independent
clinics local would be great.
To be able to thrive here.
And I don't think it's fair that
they're paying the price for
these big corporations. And so
Madam Cha represented, I want to
speak to the caps because once
again, I don't think we attract
and retain providers, but we do
it on patients' backs. And so,
Madam Chair Representative,
How did we come up with the
$600,000 cap.
Madam Chair representative,
that's restoring to the pre
2021.
Uh, levels.
Thank you. I, you reminded me of
that. Thank you. And Madam Chair
Representative.
If we are saying a patient gets
injured or a baby is lost or
something like that for the rest
of their lives. I'm thinking of
someone who maybe loses a limb,
can't work for the rest of their
lives. They're going to get a
$600,000 cap for this
particular um injury for the
rest of their life. Madam Chair
Representative, if you average
that out, it is less than
minimum wage that that person
gets for the rest of their life.
Madam Chair and representative
for not being able to maybe do
the work that they were supposed
to be able to do, and they were
supposed to get repayment for.
So Madam Chair Representative, I
just see like this is really
awful for people who never asked
for their entire lives to be
changed.
It's awful for people.
representative, I would imagine
that.
The values that we share is also
holding bad actors accountable.
I know we've talked about it,
not, you know, not just in this
debate, but we actually talked
about it when we were talking
about the survivors Justice Act,
or like when bad actors do bad
things, we have to hold them
accountable. Madam Chair
Representative, when we're
talking about punitive damages,
that's what we're telling bad
actors. That's what we're
telling the $11 billion loveless
ardent that is taking away money
from independent providers and
mom and pop providers. We're
telling them, you know what,
it's not OK to just roll up.
The
I had a slap on the wrist,
punitive damage into just the
cost of doing healthcare.
That's not OK for people, Madam
Chan representative. And so I
hope you see that.
Coming into this, I believe the
entire narrative has just been
skewed around medical
malpractice and why these um why
rates are going up and the fact
that we're losing doctors
because Madam Cha represented
this was happening before the
2021 compromise.
Madam, I can keep going, but I
will say.
When we get to the average cost.
On page.
Let's see.
The punitive damage award.
Not being greater than the
median annual household income.
Madam Chair Representative, we
did the math.
Um, that's about $1.5 million
give or take.
And so that is for
Multiple years of work is for
multiple experts that.
Um, but lawyers would have to
pay for for the case. It's for
multiple people working on the
case, and Madam Chair
representative that actually
doesn't amount to very much over
the course of I think somebody
said a case was your case was 5
years representative, there are
others that have been longer.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
I know during the debate on uh
House Bill 73, the Survivors
Justice Act.
There was actually a deficit
number.
In terms of the amount of money
you need to pay for an actual
lawsuit, and we just said,
Laws should work for free.
And that is crazy. I haven't
seen anyone else who said, hey,
I think doctors should work for
free. I think, uh, educators
should work for free. I don't
think that's the case, Madam
Chan representative. And so I
just need to express how bad
each of these amendments is,
piece by piece, for everyday
people, when they did not ask
for their lives to be changed
and they're seeking justice.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representatives.
Thank you. I just have a few
questions and comments. So we're
gonna go back in time to 1997,
when the American Medical
Association lobbied Congress,
uh, they said there was gonna be
a glut of physicians, so they lo
lobbied Congress to kind of
choke the choke choke us. Um, so
they, they lobbied to reduce the
number of medical schools.
Capping federal funding for
residencies and cutting a
quarter of all residency
positions. So this mess started,
um,
Decades ago and, and we, we have
a lot to, to figure out. Um,
So the um
I mean,
so presenters, um,
Is New Mexico the only place
with physician shortages.
No, madam Chair, in fact, that's
what I was going to respond to
about your comment the 9 1997
changes that were made, that's
why this bill is so important
because we are competing with
every other state for a lack of
physicians across the nation.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Um, and then let's see.
We, we don't have an FIR on this
because they can't do an FIR
until the sub is adopted, so we
have no idea about the financial
consequences, and the fact that
it has both a a major tax hit
and a $3 million and it wasn't
referred to either text or
appropriations is a
true concern. Um, and I, I think
everybody has this.
Um, looks like this.
So if you look on page 3,
they're not numbered.
But this, this is the data that
we have to go on, um, and so
this is an LFC report, and if
you look at the
The
The very lowest line, the yellow
line, that's total total medical
malpractice rates. So those,
those have stayed flat.
Um, pretty much from 2019 to
2023. That was maybe, well, it's
hard to tell. There was maybe a
tiny tiny boost in 2021 page
page 3, they're not numbered,
it's the graph.
Yeah hospital net income.
Is the
So I'm, I'm just pointing that
out and, and the the sponsor has
talked about not hearing other
medical malpractice bills in
here and this is why I did not
hear them because the data that
we have to go on from who we
trust is LFC and it did show, so
I asked the sponsor at the time
if she wanted to bill heard if
she would provide me with more
data to prove that that was
something that we need to do,
and I never heard back, but um,
but
See.
OK, and, and representative
ranking member Jones, you said
physicians leave.
Because of malpractice. Do we
have data to show that? I mean,
we know that, you know, our
education system isn't the best
that um
That New Mexico just generally
isn't growing and that, you
know, we have some issues, so is
there a study or are there
studies that show that it's
mostly from malpractice.
Uh, Madam Chair.
I'll back up just a moment and
and address something else that
you said about LFC having data.
We've been requesting that data
that you say we have that proves
malpractice is not an issue for
physicians leaving New Mexico,
and they've been unable to
provide us with that data. In
fact, they've said they don't
have that.
Um
So, uh, this, this graph right
here having to do with
hospitals.
Is that what you were referring
to as malpractice data.
The, the very, the yellow line
is total medical malpractice
rates.
So, yes.
And I agree that we don't have
the data that we need because we
get frequently told by um
Various organizations that their
data is proprietary. They don't
mind coming to us for funds to
prop them up, but they don't
want in order to get the, the,
the data that we
Used for, I can't remember which
bill. LFC had to IPRA.
The, um, healthcare authority.
So we don't have access to data.
That's 100%, and I will tell you
at this point, um, with the hard
work of Representative Chavez,
um, and I, there is a million
dollars in House Bill 2, to look
at, at cost study to look at
what's costing so much and, and
part of that can be looking at
malpractice. So we will be doing
that in the interim, and also a
million dollars for interim
committee.
expenses so we can have experts,
national experts, state experts
come in and actually pay them
to, to talk to us, but we also
will be doing research, um, to
figure out what, what's going on
with what, um,
Let's see.
Um, and, and I did hear, you
know, that somebody we talked
about ruining their career of a
of a provider. Well, you know,
losing someone you love or
losing a limb or losing your
control over your body is also
um ruining.
Their lives, and they, and the
patient generally had nothing to
do with that. Generally, it's
not, you know, they, they went
in hoping for the best outcome
and had a horrible outcome. So I
think it's unfair to say that,
you know, we have to protect.
Only the doctors because the
patients are um and then just a
few more things. Um, there are
definitely parts of this bill
that are worth further
discussion down the road, and as
I said, we will be getting more
data on the interim that can
help um tax credits and loan
repayments are good ideas as, as
I think representative Ferrari
said there are somebody, there
are, there is some of that
coming through, but
We can't just say, OK, we want
to give, you know, we want to
give every New Mexican $10,000
and we're gonna put it in a bill
and do it. That's cause that's
not how the legislature works.
Um, so I would suggest
discussion with, with HAFC well,
LFC and, and the tax folks in
the interim.
Um
we do need to do a deep dive and
get to the bottom of what is
motivating insurance companies
to increase rates on providers.
I'm committed to figuring out
what we have to do to improve
care in New Mexico. If we really
do have one of the highest rates
of medical malpractice in the
country, that is a terrifying.
statistic that we have more
medical malpractice, not cases,
but more medical malpractice.
And then I want to remind
everyone that just 4 years ago
in this building, hospitals,
physicians, insurance carriers,
and patient advocates all came
to the table to negotiate on
caps and changes to the process
that made sense for independent
physicians and hospitals and
ensured the patient compensation
fund was made whole after years
of being drained.
I think it's really important
that all parties stick to that
negotiation. Let's focus on real
solutions to the problems that
we're having. And with that, I
will uh.
Go ahead, representative. Yes,
madam Chair, I would, yeah, I
would like to respond to those
last 50 or so comments that have
been um
Have been stated, but I, I will
just, I would say a couple of
things that I think stand out
that um I have been notified
that neither the tax nor the
budget have been finalized, so
that was one thing that we, we
addressed and I, I didn't really
respond to. I hope that when we
do the, the data collection and
the statistics on on the very
important um malpractice issue
and so forth that would address
healthcare in New Mexico that we
have experts from
both sides, and I would love to
be involved in making those
choices so that we can make sure
that we all agree that the data
is sound and we can make
decisions that are good for New
Mexico.
And I think with that I just
wanna.
Say I appreciate the
conversation.
And uh look forward to.
Um,
making a difference and, and
helping people.
Healthcare professionals come to
New Mexico and take care of our
citizens. Thank you very much.
Thank you. I will entertain
emotion. I'd like to make a
motion for a do pass, Madam
Chair. Madam Chair substitute
motion to table. OK, so this is
the tabling motion takes
precedence, so we have a motion,
oh wait, back up. First we have
to adopt the substitute.
Do I have a motion to adopt the
substitute, Madam Chair, I moved
to adopt the substitute. Is
there any opposition? OK, you
have a committee substitute, and
now we will go back to the
tabling motion by Representative
Anaya with the 2nd by
Representative uh Ferrari.
So Karen, can you call the roll,
please?
Representative Anaya, yes to
table.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez,
Representative in Chavez? No.
Representative Ferrari? Yes.
Representative Jones.
No.
Representative Martinez? No.
Representative E. Cortez.
Decriti, sorry.
Noted table.
Madam Vice Chair, yes, the
table.
Madam Chair, yes.
5 to 4, by a 5 to 4 your bill
has been tabled. Thank you.
Great to see you, Jerry.
OK, next we will, we have a lot
of um presenters here and we'll
try and go quickly. So Senator
Steinborn, is he, oh, there he
is.
Hiding in plain sight.
get that
So this is, this is how Senate
Bill 45 as amended. County
Health Care assistance fund use.
And I'd ask you to please take
your conversations out cause we
gotta keep on, OK, we got it.
OK, we gotta keep on moving. So
go ahead whenever you're ready,
Senator. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I'll be very brief. We, um, this
bill amends and expands the use
of county indigent funds by law,
by law, the, the state of New
Mexico created what's called the
county assistance fund, which is
an indigent fund where we
allowed counties
years ago to tax themselves just
a little bit to raise money uh
for and chip fund, pay for
healthcare for indigent people.
What this bill in 32 of 33
counties have an indigent fund.
Burnleyo County is the only one
that doesn't because they assess
themselves a mill levy, which
was a separate legislation that
you, uh, they re you all ask for
years ago.
What this bill does, Madam Chair
Committee, is it expands the use
of the county health assistance
fund to include allowing
counties to buy premiums for
people and pay for some direct
medical expenses.
That's all the bill does. Uh,
currently, the law allows some
medical expenses, ambulatory
care, ambulance, care, hospital
visits, which are really
expensive. I think there's a
more affordable way to be able
to help people that doesn't rely
on, you know, an expensive um
emergency room visit because
someone doesn't have healthcare.
So I think we can get better
return on investment. By passing
this and, you know, my county is
super excited about it. With
that Maam Chair, I think they
may be online as well, our
county health director Jamie
Michael, but I'll, I'll stop
there and stand for questions.
All right. Thank you. Um, we
will go to um
To the
Opposition. If you are an
opposition to this bill on Zoom,
please raise your hand.
Uh, anyone in the room in
opposition, seeing none.
OK, we'll go to support on Zoom,
if you're in support, raise your
hand in the room and support.
If you'd like to speak, you can
come to the center.
Good morning chair committee. My
name is Erica Sanchez. I'm with
New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty, we stand in support of
Senate Bill 45 as amended and
thank Senator Steinford for
Steinborne for bringing it
forward.
We believe all New Mexicans
deserve access to quality
affordable health care, and we
know that counties provide an
important safety net for New
Mexicans who face the greatest
barriers in accessing
healthcare. This bill gives
counties the option of
additional flexibility in
administering county healthcare
assistance funds to cover
premiums and out of pocket
costs. Meeting the need
identified by patients and
counties.
Well, offering an option to
leverage indigent funds to have
an even greater impact. We ask
that you support send Bill 45.
Thank you.
OK, on Zoom I have Yolanda, Nat,
and Jamie. Go ahead, Yolanda.
Good morning, everyone.
Uh, thank you for the ability to
speak, um, I very much emphasize
how important it is to approve
this bill because it takes us
back all the way to 2014 and
detrimental changes that
occurred. I'm gonna give you the
example. What Memorial Medical
Center did, and this report came
out in December 18, 2014. I
surely want to read a little bit
and please, please bear with me.
This.
came from John Harris, the MMC
CEOO on December 18, 2014. The
management Memorial Medical
Center MMC began fiscal year
2014, facing a variety of
financial and operational
challenges and opportunities
during the past 5 years, MMC had
steadily lost impatient and
outpatient market share,
probability proability and had
not appreciably grown its
outpatient footprint. During the
same five-year period.
MMC MMC slipped from receiving
$39 million annually for the
treatment of indigent slash
charity.
Oh, thank you, Yolanda. We'll go
to Nat.
And I'm sorry to remind folks,
it's a minute and you should
have a on your Zoom screen you
should see it countdown. So go
ahead now, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, members of the
committee, in the interest of
time, I support Senate Bill 45
as amended.
Just for those who think that's
uh um AI generated, she has some
Respiratory issues and is using
that to as opposed to trying to
cough into the mic. So we will
have Jamie next.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This is,
thank you, Madam Chair. This is
Jamie Michael. I'm director of
the county's Health and Human
Services Department for Donatta
County, um, our county does
support this, um, primarily
because it's not mandatory for
for counties. It will not have
an increased uh financial impact
on local government or state
government, um, and as stated,
it will give us flexibility to
use our um local indigent gross
receipts tax, um, in a more
ative way, give us more
flexibility right now, the
people who qualify for the
county's healthcare assistance
program. They're covered very
limited, kind of like a fee for
service for just contracted um
specific contracted types of
healthcare. If we're able to use
the money to help people
purchase comprehensive coverage
then instead of just limited um
access to to services, people,
you know, enrolled in the
program will have much broader
access to services.
I can also answer questions as
needed. Thank you all.
OK, thank you. Anything for wrap
up, senator?
OK.
So we will, oh.
We will go to the committee for
questions. Any questions?
OK, there's no, if there are no
questions, I'll move for a due
pass. OK, so we have a a motion
for a do pass on Senate Bill 45
as amended by Representative
Ferrari and a second by
Representative Anaya.
Is there any opposition?
There is opposition, OK.
Karen, can you take the role?
Representative Anaya.
Yes.
Representative Kate.
Yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative in Chavez? No.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez? No.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
6 to 2 in favor. So by a vote of
6 to 2, you have a due pass on
Senate Bill 45 as amended.
OK, now we have Representative
Trujillo
Senator Trujillo. You'll always
be a representative in our
hearts. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you members of
committee, um, I suspect that
you've already heard a number of
compact bills because I've seen
that they've rolled over into
the Senate. I think, give you a
thank you for giving me the
opportunity to present Senate
bill.
105, which is the social work
compact. If you'd like me to
give more information about
compacts in general. I see the
chairwoman shaking her head no.
Um, this is a compact that we've
gotten through Senate Judiciary,
and we've done that with a
tremendous amount of work. Um,
you know, there's a number of
things in life that have made me
turn gray, and one is cannabis
and the other is compact.
And so I just, I bring this to
you today, um, I, it, we've
taken out the qualified
immunity. I have gotten a
communication from the national,
um,
Council of state governments
that they believe that taking
out the qualified immunity will
make us ineligible for that. Um,
I wish that I had, um, Senator
Sadia Lopez here because she's a
law professor and I'm just a
lawyer. Um, she can explain
things better, but I'd like to
give you just a little bit of
information about why qualified
immunity is so bad for New
Mexico. And quite frankly, this
bill passed unanimously off of
the Senate floor, because
Everyone understands why
qualified immunity is bad for
New Mexico, and it's actually
bad for the country. So,
qualified immunity.
Hold on. Allows
Requires that state actors and
the state actor can be any one
of us. We could be a state
actor, uh, an employee at a
state agency could be a state
actor, a foster parent could be
a state actor. It requires that
they're immune, we're all immune
from suit.
And that includes someone who
has done horrible actions to
another.
I'm just gonna give you the
example that was given to us
when the Civil Rights Act, when
we discussed that on the House
floor, which I was in the house
at that time.
Foster child brutally sexually
assaulted by their foster
parent.
They were not held liable.
And the reason they were not
held liable is because they were
found to be a state actor.
There was not a specific law
that prohibited them from doing
what they did.
And there wasn't a case that
backed up that there was a
specific law that prohibited
them from doing what they did.
And so they were immune.
The other thing I want to say is
that by having the qualified
immunity out of a compact, the
only people that are qualified
immunity, uh, paragraph in any
of our laws would ever cover or
the one or two people who we
appoint from our state.
To go and participate on the the
commission to make rules.
So that's one, maybe 2 people.
Those two people would get
qualified immunity under this
statute. New Mexico has no
authority to extend qualified
immunity to someone outside of
New Mexico. That's how the law
works. We have a compact. It
applies to us and it's agreement
with other states. We do not
have authority to grant
qualified immunity to anyone
outside of our state.
So with that, um, I wanna share
with you.
A letter that we're preparing to
send to the social work.
Um, if we can get it through the
house, and this was written
again by Senator Savi Lopez, so
she's in finance helping to
defend something else at this
moment.
The New Mexico Tort Claims Act
Section 41-4-1 was enacted in
response to the judicial
abrogation of sovereign immunity
in Hicks versus Case versus the
state. The tort Claims Act
states that it is the public
policy of New Mexico that
government entities and public
employees shall only be liable
within the limitations of the
tot Claims Act.
The act defines public employee
to include elected or appointed
officers. The act then states
that any public employee while
acting within the scope of duty
are granted immunity from
liability for any tort came
claim except as weight.
A member of the social work
licensure Compact Commission
will consist of an appointed
delegate who will serve on a
joint government agency, which
fits the definition of a public
employee under the Tort Claims
Act.
And a review of the waivers of
liability within the act or
within the Civil Rights Act do
not apply to the activities that
are within the scope of the
compact commission.
Thus, under New Mexico law, the
commission has at least as much
protection as is offered by the
qualified immunity of the
compact. So we already have laws
that are gonna uh protect our
Individuals, our state actors
from from
Not qualified immunity as it was
created by the Supreme Court.
But by immunity for doing things
that are out unless it's
something outside of the scope
of their job.
So how did I convince everyone
on both sides of the aisle to
determine that qualified
immunity is just a bad.
Bad
Policy
If you Google, you'll find that
the ACLU.
Talks about how bad qualified
immunity is.
You Google a little bit deeper,
you'll find out that the Cato
Institute.
Says that qualified immunity
should be eliminated. So with
that, Madam Chair, that's really
the reason that we just cannot
accept a qualified immunity.
In any compact bill, and if they
decide that they don't want to
let us in, then we'll figure out
other solutions to that, um,
that let's, let's do this, but I
will just stay qualified
immunity is a bad, bad thing for
New Mexico. And with that, Madam
Cheryl Samber questions.
So thank, thank you. Um, we'll
go to the audience, but I just
want to clarify something. So
what you're asking is for us to
support this as is with the
understanding that it may or may
not be accepted by the National
Compact. Madam Chair, that is
absolutely correct. And the
interesting thing is, is that we
amended out some other things,
right? That uh rules have the
force of law. So the force of
law, we kept in all of the other
stuff that indicates.
that they have the force of law.
We just took out they have the
force of the law. Thank you for
being here. OK, so we did take
out some other stuff, but the
communication we got back from
them addressed none of that,
only the qualified immunity. OK.
All right, and with that, we'll
go to the audience. If you are
on Zoom in opposition, raise
your hand.
And I'll come back to you.
Anyone in the room in
opposition.
done
on Zoom in support.
Raise your hand.
Um, and I'll come back to you in
the room and support.
Come forward, JD.
And then I'll go to Cherie
Patsy, Paul and Kelly May. Thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. I'm JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce, which supports Senate
Bill 105, entering the social
licensure interstate compact
it's going to make it easier for
licensed providers in other
states to treat New Mexicans.
It's that simple, whether
they're in person or in a
telehealth setting. So this bill
creates an effective path to get
more to Mexicans, the care they
need and address the lack of
Providers. This is gonna help
New Mexico remain competitive in
this area in the chamber as that
you support this bill, thank
you.
Thank you. Next we'll go to
Cherie.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Cherie Dotson and I'm a
volunteer advocate for AARP New
Mexico. We support the
interstate licenser Compact SB
105 to help alleviate some of
the workforce shortages that
often impede access to quality
care, especially for our New
Mexico aging population and
those who care for them. We urge
you to pass this bill. Thank
you.
Thank you, next, Patsy, and
Patsy, thank you and your group
for a delicious breakfast a few
weeks ago.
You're welcome, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, uh,
Patsy Romero, uh, advocate for
the National Alliance on Mental
Illness in New Mexico, and we
strongly support this
legislation. We, we thank uh
Senator Antoinetteedil Lopez for
bringing this forward. And Madam
Chair, I won't belabor all of
the reasons. I think they've
been clearly stated and I urge
the committee to support this
legislation. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Thank you, Patsy, Paul.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, very much
encourage you to support this,
thanking the sponsors for
bringing this forward and
working with the Department of
Defense on behalf of all of our
installations here in the state
of New Mexico. Paul, could you
please introduce yourself.
I happy to, madam Chair. Thank
you for that. Uh, Paul Cassidy,
I'm vice chair of the
military-based planning
commission and a member of
Kirtland Partnership Committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. And we'll go to Kelly May
Douglas. Go ahead, Kelly May.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Kelly May Douglas, and I
work at the Defense state
liaison office within the office
of the Undersecretary of Defense
for Personnel and Readiness on
behalf of the Department of
Defense and Military families
stationed in New Mexico. I would
like to express strong support
for the policy addressed in
Senate Bill 105. State policies
enacting interstate licensure
compacts such as the Social Work
compact facilitate greater
career sustainability for
military spouses, improving
their family's financial
security and overall wellbeing.
The Department of Defense is
very appreciative of New
Mexico's ongoing commitment and
efforts to support members of
the military and their families
who sacrifice much in service to
our country. Thank you for
providing me the opportunity to
provide comments in support of
this policy. We appreciate
Senators Trujillo and Sadido
Lopez for their sponsorship.
Thank you.
Thank you, um, do you have
anything to wrap up? Are you
ready for committee? No, Madam
Chair, I would like to wrap up.
Um, we had a couple of no votes
in the Senate Health and Public
Affairs, and I um just want to
explain why those were. Um, I
had a Republicans who voted no
because I hadn't take out, taken
out the qualified immunity, and
my plan was to take it out in
the next committee and
judiciary, instead of in the
health committee. They voted.
Unanimously on the floor in
Senate Judiciary, we'd made all
of the corrected changes, and we
got unanimous support from the
chairman and everyone else.
Thank you, so, so far I have
Representative Jones.
Anaya
OK, Representative Jones, go
ahead. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, um, senators.
Yeah. Yes. I have a question.
We've seen a lot of compacts. My
understanding of a compact is
that it's an agreement among
states and I was not under the
impression that we were
Ever allowed to change a compact
that we were voting on joining a
compact.
Joining a group of states who
agreed upon certain practices
that were across the board the
same. So what you're asking us
to vote on here is to change a
compact.
Or to join a compact because I
mean, back up and just say Madam
Chair, senators.
I don't think you can join a
compact if you've changed it.
Madam Chair, you can, um, with
this, with this social work with
wait, what is this guy?
Yeah, this is a social worker.
The social work compact allows
the compact to be substantially,
um, and I think you're looking
for the language, um.
Substantially.
Um, similar.
To the compact. And so what we
changed were things that were
inconsistent with New Mexico
law.
Because you can't, you know, and
we had to make those changes.
We're planning to write a letter
explaining the changes um that
were necessary because of New
Mexico law or in the case of
immunity, explain how immunity
works in this state and that it
didn't make sense to have
qualified immunity in this bill
with our law, since, since
really they actually have at
least as much immunity or more,
I, in my opinion, than they
would if we had um
can qualified immunity in the
bill. So it's up to them. What
we will do is we'll send this
bill with a letter explaining
the changes in the law and if
they believe it is what's the
standard.
Um, substantially substantially
similar. Yeah, OK, so I was
right, substantially so if if
it's substantially similar. They
in their opinion, they will let
us into the compact. If they
don't.
We haven't lost anything by
trying.
And Madam Chair sent a
representative, um, I do want to
point out that um there are two
other states that have modified
their compacts, and that's
Montana and Alabama, and they
have done similar things. Now
the letters that we've gotten
from um
Compact
Entities in regards to, oh,
we're not gonna let you in.
We're, we're gonna ban you, um,
are coming from the attorneys.
And are coming from this um
council of state governments,
neither of which have the
authority to make a decision
about whether we get accepted or
not. The decision is made by the
commissioners, and the
commissioners are the members
from each state that joined the
compact.
Similar to the decisions that
you all have as you sit up
there, you make the decisions.
You have attorneys, you have uh
staff that help give you advice,
but ultimately you make the
final decisions. Those attorneys
did not make the final decision,
and may I add those attorney
let's keep it brief. We, we are
supposed to be on the floor. We
still have 4 more agenda items,
so I just wanted to quickly say
those attorneys are not licensed
in New Mexico.
OK.
OK. Thank you very much. I
appreciate that.
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, senators. Welcome to the
house. Um,
With every pertinent compact
that's come before us, I have
sort of given the bat signal
warning, like, hello, abortion
and gender affirming care. How
are we going to protect it here
in our state, um, especially
with conversion therapy also
being challenged, um, I really
think of the social worker
complex in particular. So will
us taking out the qualified
immunity piece, make sure that
abortion, gender affirming care
are protected here, um.
Uh, especially with the um New
York lawsuit that's going
through right now with the
compacts. Um, I was just
wondering, taking out qualified
immunity, does that mean that
our own state laws here are
protected.
Madam Chair, representative,
that's a really good question.
I'm gonna make it as short as
possible. There's language in
this compact and quite frankly,
the social work compact is the
most progressive compact of all,
there is specific language in
the social work compact that
makes it very clear that the
state law is applicable to all
of the practice of social work.
And so the, the compact itself
doesn't determine how a social
worker can, can, um, you know.
practice in New Mexico. In fact,
we had some concerns about
whether or not New Mexico
cultures because it's required
for licensure, and if you're
skipping over and not going
through our licensure process
cause your licensed elsewhere
and can practice here. So we
mended the scope of practice to
say that you have to practice
under that you have to be
knowledgeable in New Mexico
cultures.
So no, um, this compact will do
nothing to negate any of our
laws here in New Mexico for the
practice of social work.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK.
Um
Uh, I will entertain emotion,
Madam Chair, I'd like to make a
motion for committee sub Senate
Bill 105 for due pass.
OK,
so we have a motion for a due
pass for Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 105.
Um, will you take the role?
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative in Chavez, yes.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Senna Cortez,
yes.
Madam Vice Chair? Yes. Madam
Chair, yes.
92,920, you have a due pass.
Thank you, madam, and good luck.
OK, next we will go to um commit
substitute for Senate Bill 118,
organ donor license box and
registry.
So we have our own
representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee, um,
Uh, this, um, house Senate Bill
118 and I have as um a committee
sub and um this is really
simple. It's um.
Uh, replaces
I, I'm sorry, it requires the
motor vehicle division, um, part
of tax and rev department to
create and distribute.
Um, to state agencies material
explaining the process of
applying to be an organ donor
and the material is to be
distributed no later than
January 1st of 26. Um, the
reason this is a bill that was
um initiated during the interim,
I believe I um Senator or TC
Pino, and um so uh Senator
Stephanic and I will be, you
know, promoting its passage. So
it's just to make sure
that the motor vehicle division
has a box that you can check off
and um they have put that into a
registry, but not enough people
really know about it. So if we
have other agencies, state
agencies like um.
Uh, DOH or PED and um people who
can distribute um the brochures,
then they'll get more people
when they come to motor vehicle
division to sign up and we need
organ donors um.
Especially with kidney
transplants and things like
that.
With that I'll stop.
OK. Thank you. So we will go to
zoom in opposition if you are in
opposition, raise your hand in
the room in opposition.
OK, singing now in support on
Zoom, raise your hand in support
in the room.
All right, not seeing any uh oh
there now, go ahead. Support.
Pardon me, in support. Thank
you, Nat. Take care of yourself.
OK, so with that, I will go to
the committee for questions, OK.
So Representative Senator Cortez
and Martinez.
OK, go ahead, Madam Chair, I
would just like to reserve my
comments for a due pass when
it's that time.
OK, well, I think it's that
time,
so Madam Chair.
2nd.
OK, so we have a motion or a due
pass, let me get this all right.
It was, I
I think it was Senna Cortez with
the motion and Chavez with the
2nd. OK, so we have a motion in
a second for the committee sub,
which I can't.
Let me see what anyway,
committee sub.
On Senate Bill 118. Is there any
opposition?
then you have a due pass.
8 to 0.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. OK, um,
Representative Herndon, are you
ready?
Madame Chair, I am ready. Go for
it.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm bringing before
you today House Memorial 53 and
House Memorial 53 looks at um
is asking for a task force that
would bring together the
Department of Health, aging and
long-term services and the
Alzheimer's Alzheimer's
Association in New Mexico
together to look at ways in
which we can provide better
health, public health
programming that better
practices and better educational
efforts about increasing disease
of Alzheimer's, uh, and dementia
in our state. New Mexico, of
course,
to the Alzheimer's Association
will be growing to a rate of
46,000 people in just a few
years. And so there are things
that can be done, Madam Chair
and members of this committee
that we can help people get
ready and understand how they
can help themselves because we
don't have a, a cure right now
for Alzheimer's disease. So I'm
asking that we do a better job
of informing people about this
disease and what they can do to
protect themselves. with that.
Madam Chair, I stand for
questions. Thank you. We will go
to the audience, um, anyone in
opposition on Zoom, raise your
hand. Anyone in opposition in
the room?
Seeing none, anyone in support
on Zoom, raise your hand in the
room in support.
OK, so I have nat and Patsy on
Zoom. Go ahead, Nat.
It's support.
Sorry
Thank you, Nat. Take care of
yourself.
Uh, Patsy.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Patsy Monroe, I'm
advocating for the national
alliance on Mental illness, but
also, Madam Chair and members of
the committee as a provider for
individuals with intellectual
disabilities. This bill is
critically important for us to
continue to study and how we're
going to, on the impacts of
Alzheimer's also with uh
dementia, and I think we just
need to
Demonstrate that New Mexico is
committed to providing good
care, understanding what the
what to do, what are the
appropriate strategies in
dealing with our individuals
that we serve with these
diseases. So thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee
for voting yes on this
legislation and thank you to
Representative Herndon for
bringing this forward. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Patsy. I will go to the
committee for questions.
Madam Chair, I'd like to reserve
my comments for a due past when
it's appropriate.
OK, so we have a motion for due
pass on um House Memorial 53 by
Representative Senator Cortez
and the second by Representative
Anaya. Is there any opposition?
Seeing none, you have a due
pass.
And I'm here before I go, can I
please just introduce Tommy, uh,
Henderson Hernandez Hernandez,
I'm sorry. He's, he's my cousin
and uh he also is the policy
director for the Alzheimer's
disease. Thank you. OK, thank
you. You have a due pass.
8 to 0.
No, she, she just wanted to make
a motion.
OK, so you have a due pass.
OK, next we have Representative
Lu Han House Memorial 56
maternal mental Health Awareness
Month.
Whenever you're ready,
representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I think anyone could
have.
Yes, on this committee could sit
at the table with me. I think
we've all signed this, but it's
a simple memorial, but has a big
meaning meaning, um, Madam
Chair, the purpose of the
memorial is to raise the
awareness of maternal mental
health issues and needs in New
Mexico and to encourage the
Department of Health to
collaborate with other
organizations addressing the
issue. Um, it encourages the
department uh to collaborate
with local, state, and national
coalitions, organizations and
agencies to address maternal
mental health.
In order to improve access to
screening, prevention and
treatment. The memorial resolves
that national maternal mental
Health Awareness Month be
observed in May?
And that the memorial will be
transmitted to the Secretary of
Health, Madam Chair, and I bring
this forward which is um
My own personal story is what uh
having gone through um
postpartum depression, um, not
knowing what I was going
through.
Not understanding that, not
being screened for that and just
really bringing forward the, you
know, that we need more
awareness. We need more
information and, and, and this
is a way of, of addressing that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you. Um, we will go to
Zoom in opposition if you're in
opposition, raise your hand in
the room. Anyone in opposition?
I feel kind of silly asking for
that, but um in support on Zoom,
if you would like to speak,
raise your hand in the room in
support.
OK, we will go to Zoom with.
The, the comedy team of Nat and
Patsy.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, in the
interest of time, I support
House Memorial 56.
Thank you, Nat. Go ahead, Patsy.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Patsy
Romero, representing the
National Alliance on Mental
Illness. As you know, and if you
may be aware that the National
Alliance on Mental Illness, 100%
supports
anything that we can do to
continue the studies on mental
health, how it impacts all
individuals and try to do
everything that we can in the
state of New Mexico to ensure
that we have
a robust behavioral health
system and that we address all
of the needs of individuals,
whoever they are, maternal, you
know, individuals who are uh
pregnant or people who are
suicidal, anything we can do,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee to improve behavioral
health, mental health awareness
is absolutely what NAI supports
and Madam Chair, if I could just
take a moment to thank your
committee for always being
supportive of behavioral health.
Issues in New Mexico. You have
demonstrated a bipartisan
support for behavioral health in
New Mexico and I think every
single one of you needs to be
applauded and thanked for all
the hard work that you do, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. Thank you.
So it appears that I let her go
on because she was
Applauding us and that will
continue.
Um,
so in any questions,
Representative Senna Cortez,
Madam Chair, if there are no
other questions, I'd like to
make a motion for a due pass.
OK, so I have a motion for a due
pass on House Memorial 56 from
Representative Senator Cortez,
the 2nd from Representative
Anaya. Is there any opposition?
Singan, you have a due pass.
Thank you
and Patsy keep coming on our
Zoom and and um we, we need all
the props we can get.
So we have one memorial left,
uh, that's representative block.
Oh, OK, OK, so hopefully he'll
be here shortly and we are
excused from the floor until
we're, until we're finished or
they need us.
So
We'll, we'll give him a few more
minutes and then we'll adjourn.
No, no running in the building,
please.
Who is liable if he falls.
Whenever you're ready,
representative, take a deep
breath and go.
I, I know you're not supposed to
run up the stairs, but I did so,
a little out of breath, but I'm
here. OK, so, House Memorial 29.
So the memorial, Madam Chair, a
few of my constituents actually
reached out to me because.
They were being required to have
medical.
Uh, like a
Like a doctor's note when it
comes to getting their licenses
renewed.
And since uh
Well, these are folks with
diabetes. So this just uh
request, respectfully, of
course.
The health committee in the
interim, uh, do some research.
On the requirements for getting
these.
His renewals and licenses when
it comes to having diabetes
because we don't want to put an
undue burden on people who have
diabetes. So,
That's the memorial.
OK, um,
I see Patsy has her hand raised,
and so I, I'm, I'm, well, let's
see.
We will go to in support first.
In the room in support.
In the on Zoom and support, is
that you, Patsy?
Yeah, I'm sorry, madam chair. I
think my hand was raised and I
should have lowered it, but
thank you so much. Sorry about
that. That's OK. Uh, now.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee in the
interest of time, I support
House Memorial 29. Thank you.
OK, we will go to opposition. Is
there anyone in opposition on
Zoom, anyone in the room in
opposition.
Aing none either place, um, I
will, I'm sure I'd like to make
a motion for it to pass on House
Memorial 29th.
So
don't confuse this.
We have a motion for a due pass
by Representative Cakes and a
second bite, I think Santa
Cortez was first.
Um, so is there any opposition?
then you have a due pass.
I
1234
Thank you so much,
madam
just had to count for a second.
OK, so we are adjourned.
