On the autism spectrum and lives
in a group home. And, um, I am
not a cancer, but I am a cancer
survivor. So so I sit in there
too. So, um, Representative Lord
Yes. If you would know it's okay
if you would introduce yourself.
And and there are burritos from
New Mexico Tourism Department
for us, So, um, feel free to
wandering Get one. Thank you.
madam Chair represents Stephanie
Lord from District 22, which is
now torn county in Berlin. Uh,
Burlington County. Thank you.
And our committee assistant is
Jennifer Hill. So you want to
introduce yourself?
Hi. I'm Jennifer Hill. I'm the
committee assistant and you can
find me in room 314.
And we will, um, start over here
and just just say who you
So good morning and welcome. All
I think with that, Um, we we We
are the same committee. We will
follow the same rules. We will
try to start on time. As soon as
we have a quorum. We will start.
Um I'd appreciate either a text
to either me or or to Jennifer,
um, to let us know if you're
going to be late or if you're
going to be absent so that we
can have you excused.
Um, And as always, we're going
to be respectful of each other
and presenters and the public
and, uh, we're gonna just get
our work done like we did last
year. So with that we will start
with House Bill seven health
care affordability fund
distribution.
Oh, I forgot. Roll call.
Representative Cates.
Here.
Representative Chavez here.
Representative Ferrari here.
Representative our meal
Representative army. Oh,
thank you.
Representative Joe
Here.
Representative Lord
In the house.
Representatives Capan ski here.
Representative Vincent
Here.
I met him vice chair present.
Madam chair.
I'm here and we will go ahead
and let representative Chavez
introduced herself just who you
are. What? You're where you're
from.
While you're on this committee
Thank you. I was. I thought you
were gonna say. Why were you
late?
Not today Wednesday.
I'm representative Eleanor.
Travis. I represent House
District 26 on the west side of
Albuquerque.
Good morning.
Go ahead, Representatives
Opinsky and introduce your
witnesses, and off we go.
Good morning, madam Chair and
members. I'm still getting used
to the microphone. So if I need
to adjust, just let me know.
Um, I am here today to present
to you. House Bill seven.
I have with me to experts, Gina
de Blasi, Health policy advisor
for the office of the governor,
and Colin Bio of the office of
the superintendent of insurance.
Little closer.
Is that better?
In the back If you can't hear,
wave or do this or something, so
I can let them know to speak
louder or get the mic closer.
Um, House Bill seven.
Is that better?
And House Bill seven. Better
Okay? House Bill seven regards
the health care affordability
fund. Um, healthcare. I'm going
to take a minute to explain the
health care affordability fund
because this bill is very
simple. Um, it's it's such just
this 1.5 pages. But the
Programs that the health care
affordability fund supports are
incredibly significant. Um,
Health care Affordability fund
was just established in 2021 and
has led to major affordability.
improvements for consumers and
for small businesses in New
Mexico so that the targets are
really those two groups.
Um The purpose of this fund is
to provide resources for
programs that reduce consumer
costs on the health insurance
marketplace or be well.
To small businesses and their
employees and to lower income
Prince has been implementing
these programs, one of the most
striking facts about the health
care affordability fund is the
results that have been attained
just in the last couple of
years. Um, so to date, small
businesses and their employees
have saved 45 million on their
health insurance premiums.
Um, that is providing assistance
to 6000 businesses across the
state as well as 41,000
employees.
Find on the exchange. Um, the
programs are reducing both
premiums and out of pocket costs
for lower and moderate income
consumers. One of the issues on
the exchange historically was
that people could buy very low
cost coverage. It might cost you
10 or $20 a month, But the out
of pocket costs were very
significant. So when you
actually went to utilize
Healthcare. You are actually
paying a ton out of pocket so
OSC has designed program
specifically to address those
out of pocket costs. One of the
results is that the, UM exchange
now has the highest enrollment
in its history and over 57,000
people are now signed up for
Ah, a private product on the
exchange, which is a great
result.
The issue. That House Bill seven
is is designed to address is
that the distribution of the
revenue to the fund is scheduled
to drop significantly in FY 25.
so the fund currently receives
55% of the revenue generated by
the surcharge on health
insurers.
This is going to drop to 30%. If
House Bill seven does not pass.
Um, this bill simply changes the
distribution back to 55% of the
revenue from that surcharge so
that we can keep these programs
maintain them for the future,
and, uh, continue with the
planned expansion in January of
25.
That would offer more coverage
more affordable coverage options
for people who otherwise are not
able to obtain insurance. Um and
I'll just
And by saying, You know, I think
this committee understands very
well the importance of access to
affordable healthcare coverage.
Um, but in in recent months, we
have been spending a lot of time
talking about health care
workforce and healthcare
reimbursement issues.
Ensuring that more new Mexicans
have affordable coverage not
only helps them address their
healthcare issues earlier before
they, um before they develop
into more acute or more long
term issues personally, but also
it helps the entire system
because when you have more
people covered
Providers are actually getting
paid for the care that they are
providing through that insurance
network. Um, the levels of
uncompensated care can continue
to go down. Um, it's a great
boost for hospitals and other
safety. Net health care
providers in our communities
when more people have access to
coverage.
Um so I will pause there and I
will see if either of my experts
would like to to add anything.
Madam Chair.
If you could please introduce
yourselves.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee. I'm
Gina de Blasi Health policy and
the governor's office have
nothing to add Representatives.
Japan ski covered of the issue
quite well for us, So thank you.
And madam chair. Members of the
committee calling bio with the
office of Superintendent of
Insurance and I don't have
anything to add beyond what
representatives come. Penske, um
presented other than um, We have
been very honored to implement
these programs that are really
proud of the work that's being
done in hope that this bill
Will help us be able to continue
that and expand those efforts.
Okay? We'll go to the to the, um
public. Is there anyone here in
opposition to this bill?
Okay. Anyone here in support?
Okay. We will take a few
comments. If you feel, um you
need to make a comment. Please
come up and we're going to limit
it to one minute each. Yes. One
minute for all of you Decide
that. I
Okay. We will take a few
comments. If you feel, um you
need to make a comment. Please
come up, and we're going to
limit it to one minute each.
Yes. One minute for all of you
Decide
that
you
just leave it.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Nicolas Cordova from the
Center of Lamb Poverty, a member
of the New Mexico together for
health care campaign.
We think the sponsor for this
bill and ask for your support
because our families deserve a
stable source of funding to make
our health care more affordable
and therefore more accessible.
As you've heard, the health care
affordability fund was created
to be our state's reliable
source of funding to lower
healthcare costs.
Right now. The fund receives
just over half of the revenue
from a fee with the remaining
45% of the revenue going to the
General fund. So that means
right now, the general fund is
getting over $100 million from
this fees revenue.
The health care affordability
fund share of revenue should
remain stable so the state can
continue lowering health care
costs.
Already. It's doing that for
6000 small businesses there
41,000 employees and the tens of
thousands of folks who are on
the marketplace.
Thank you. And we hope you
Madam chair members of the
committee, Marla shuts
registered lobbyists for Blue
Cross Blue Shield. When New
Mexico we stand in support of
House Bill seven in the health
care affordability funds, cross
Blue Shield supports maintaining
the current distribution
generated from the premium
surtax into the health care
affordability fund.
This will continue to ensure
that the current affordability
programs administered through
the fund, such as the 10%
premium reduction for small
business is able to continue at
the same rate. Thank you.
Thank you, madam. Chair members.
Patrick Allen, secretary of the
Department of Health Department
of Health, supports the bill to
help maintain access to
healthcare but especially
primary care.
Good morning, madam material
Members of the committee of
Sarah Jacobs, deputy secretary
for Aging
would like to thank the
governor's office for bringing
this bill and you're absolutely
supportive.
Good morning, madam Chair
Members of the community. Akira
Ochola, new Deputy cabinet
secretary for the Healthcare
Authority, Human Services,
Department or department is
strongly in favor of HB seven.
And thanks you for supporting
the Mexicans continuing access
to high quality care. Good
morning, Madam Sharon
representative committee. My
name is Cecilia Pinyon. I live
in Anthony, New Mexico in the
I mean, community organizer with
strong families. New Mexico
For many years. I haven't I seen
and I've experienced what it is
to live without health
insurance. My father died
working as a farm worker, and
everyone was able to have health
insurance. We all come from
different backgrounds and our
families experienced different
healthcare concerns. We all
dream of raising our health. Our
families healthy here in our
beautiful state.
I ask you to please support HP.
seven, so New Mexico can
continue its path toward a
health plan for everyone. Thanks
for your consideration.
Um, Madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Lansana,
policy director for the Center
Pacific Policy. I'm here to urge
your support for House Bill
seven as the health care
affordability fund is funding
critical programs that address
health care inequities in our
state. I want to specifically
address how the fund is funding
programs that would help those
locked out of access to
coverage.
My family knows what being
locked out of coverage. Feels
like my grandfather who was
ineligible for insurance
coverage due to his green card
status and had to forgo
chemotherapy because he didn't
want to put a household of 16 to
be homeless.
He died at the age of 64. That
is why we need to stabilize the
funding available for these
programs and I urge your support
for hospital seven.
I'm just going to jump in here.
I guess there's some microphones
up there so you don't have to
bend over. I was thinking. Oh,
as a PT, I shouldn't be letting
people's backs do that. It's
like we have to raise it, but I
guess there's mikes and they're
hearing you find so don't worry
about that, Mike.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Dr Clay Lopez. I'm a
primary care physician family
doctor here in Santa Fe, New
Mexico, and I am in support I
have seen personally what
happens with patients who have
lack of healthcare, either on
onset or continuation and
worsening of chronic conditions.
And maintaining affordable
continuity of care is really
important to our fellow new
Mexicans, and I would support
this bill and hope you do as
well. Thank you very much.
I'm chairman of the committee.
My name is John Arango. I'm a
member of the board of the New
Mexico Medical Insurance pool.
Hmm. Sees the health care
Affordability act as an
important part of the effort to
ensure that small businesses and
individuals have access to
healthcare and Mexico.
30% funds will be insufficient.
provide access to the businesses
and individuals who cannot
afford health insurance will out
of something very madam Chair
members of the committee and
Bill Jordan with New Mexico
voices for Children, and, uh, I
think there's a lot of winners
with this legislation. This is a
benefit to small business
because they can get
Ah, insurance coverage that's
more affordable.
Benefit to individuals who don't
qualify for Medicaid so that
they can get affordable
healthcare.
It's a win for providers because
now they have a pair source from
folks who ordinarily wouldn't
have had insurance and might not
have been able to pay.
And its benefit the local
governments because it will
relieve some of the pressure on
their indigent funds. So we
think this is a win all the way
around and we urge your support.
Thank you.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee. I'm
Larry Martinez with Presbyterian
Medical services. I represent a
federally qualified health
center, which among others
throughout the state, we turn no
one away when they're in need of
health care, regardless of their
ability eight. But it's
particularly important that this
bill be passed now at this point
in time because of the
Unwinding that's going on in
Medicaid to the end of the
public Health emergency
Declaration caused by the
coronavirus.
So we strongly support this bill
and will continue to serve as
the health safety net for people
who can't afford care, and we'll
be there to try to provide it
with this one job significantly
easier. Good morning, madam
chair al part resident lobbyists
on behalf of the New Mexico
Hospital Association ended
exchange and both groups stand
in strong support of this legend
here.
Thank you all for your
orderliness in your timeliness
Much appreciated. We didn't have
to have the timer go off for
anybody. So let's all take a
lesson from that, for the rest
of this session as things get
crazier and crazier, so we'll go
to the committee representative
Jones
Yes, Here's Here's something
we're grateful for a good start.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative Polanski and
and presenters for the
conversation about this bill. I
have a
Have questions about the history
because I'm curious about why
it's dropping. Why did we decide
to drop
Percentage to 30 at this point.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative, Representative
Jones. Um
The the
The percentage decreased over
time, just as a result of
negotiations at the time that
this was adopted.
Excuse me, Um
I think it's and I would defer
to my experts. I think
particularly Mr Baio was
involved at that time, but part
of it at at that time was not
All of the programs were fully
developed. And so
While there was a desire to
preserve this revenue for the
healthcare system, there wasn't
necessarily a precise set of
programs because some of that
was set to be developed. Now
we're in a position where we
have
Um, we know the uptake of the
program. So far, we know their
exact scope. We understand the
costs and so we're in a much
stronger planning position to
understand the future
utilization of the fund.
Um Madam Chair and just get
asked. Mr Bio. If you have
anything to add on that, or
Mystical Asi. Thank you, Madam
Chair and representative. I
think that's a good summary. I
think at the time there was a
question about you know whether
we'd be able to use all the
revenue that is provided. Um by
that, 55% what we have
developed, Um um some reserves
for the programs. The reason for
that really has mostly been
Um, that we've had to anticipate
that this drop in funds so we
will be able to go forward with
these programs as they are now
and continue to build on what
works. Once we have that
certainty around the funding
being maintained at the current
levels.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
and, um
Presenters for that answer. I
do. I didn't have kind of a what
might be a difficult question,
but I feel like I need to ask
it, Um
With the understanding that
we're all in favor of
affordable, accessible
healthcare, and that's what
we're working towards. And how
do we get there? Um,
New Mexico has the highest rate
of publicly insured individuals.
And the lowest rate of privately
insured individuals.
So doesn't that indicate that at
some point with this system,
which is built on 7% tax of the
insured
That will reach a tipping point
and fail once there's not enough
privately insured individuals to
sustain this this system. Thank
you, Madam Chair and
representative Jones for that
question, because I think it
highlights what's different
about this fund.
This fund is not designed to
fund Medicaid or some of the
other public programs. This fund
is, uh, leveraging our private
insurance market.
To offset some of the costs on
the exchange. So the individuals
For example, in the small
business program. Those are
those are small businesses that
are purchasing private
insurance.
They are doing that through the
health insurance exchange, and
this program is providing them
with a 10% discount on those
premiums, So those are private
products.
So I really want to distinguish
that it's one reason why it's so
exciting that the health
insurance exchange enrollment
has increased for the 1st 1st
time. In many years that
enrollment has been very flat.
And, um, just as a reminder to
those who are listening to the
exchange as a marketplace of
private products.
It's It's another reason why
this fund is important for
provider reimbursement.
Because one of the challenges
Medicaid although a very strong
and wonderful program, the
reimbursement rates have not
been at where we have wanted
them to be for some types of
providers. Um, I know the
governor's office and the
Legislature has been working
hard on increasing the
reimbursement rates, but
generally your commercial rates
for reimbursement for providers
are higher.
So another way that this is sort
of an ingenious fund in terms of
supporting that piece of the
coverage.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
madam Chair.
Representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Presenters.
And I just had a few questions,
which I am a big fan of
insurance. And the older I get
the more I'm a fan of big
events. Sure, it's because I
want to live a good, long,
healthy life.
And you had mentioned, according
to the office of the
Superintendent, Uh, to date,
approximately 55,000 Mexican new
Mexicans have received
Coverage through be well. New
Mexico
And there was a cost savings.
You mentioned 45 million
Um what was the cost to the
state?
Madam chair and representatives.
So, um, the direct cost to the
state for both programs so far
that have been implemented is 60
million over basically since the
fund was created.
Um, so it wouldn't include just
that $45 million that's been
saved for small businesses and
their employees, but on our
marketplace as well, and we've
been very careful to design our
marketplace programs so that
we're leveraging the federal
funds that are available through
premium tax credits and only
essentially building on top of
those so that that coverage can
be more affordable, making sure
that we're not supplanting
federal funds wherever possible.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
It's not a loaded question. I'm
just trying to get my mind
wrapped around $60 million. So,
uh do you think we're getting
the most bang for our buck? It's
60 million. I mean, helping that
Is that money wisely spent.
Thank you, madam Chair and
Representative Vincent. Um
The idea of these folks
receiving these discounts on
premiums is only part of the
cost savings that we're
achieving because
If you think about it, knowing
you have insurance, you can go
in and see the doctor when you
have a cold, as opposed to
waiting until it turns into full
blown pneumonia, For example,
we're preventing, I think
Further acute care needs, as
well as hospital needs by
getting all of these folks
covered in there still about
240,000 people that lack
coverage, which is one of the
reasons why continuing to expand
this program that leverages are
the private side of the
insurance market is critical. I
think to keep saving local
governments, hospitals,
providers money.
So it is.
And in one sense representative
and Madam chair I've been
thinking about this is Are we
paying for this sort of on the
front end with the
Access to insurance. Are we
going to pay for it on the back
end with the actual health care
costs in uncompensated care and
other issues that are local
providers face
Thank you. Thank you for that,
madam Chair, so presenters.
Can you explain the surtax?
Please.
Help me understand the surtax.
Um Madam Chair and
representative Vincent. So, um,
New Mexico historically had, uh,
surtax on health insurers. Um
and I don't recall. I think it
was in the mid two thousands
When that was initially adopted,
Um
Both right before this fund was
passed, there was a federal fee
on health insurers that was
actually getting phased out. And
so part of the rationale for
developing this fund was to
ensure that we could guarantee
that that funding would actually
get passed back to consumers and
small businesses and actually do
it through these programs. So,
um, in doing so, this surtax was
raised so that we could capture
that revenue that was going to
the federal government.
Um, employed into these
programs.
Thank you. So, um, this isn't
it in addition to the premium
tax on the insurance policies,
correct, Madam Chair,
Representative, Correct. Okay.
Thank you.
Thank you, madam. Chair,
Representative Lord. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative and experts
Entertainment this little
closer.
So I do have a question where I
see
I'm trying to figure this out.
On the paper from the governor.
It says.
Among enrollees 43% have
selected a plan priced at $10 or
less. Where are these plans?
Because whenever I go on there
It's like $650 and up for a
$6000 deductible with no
coverage. It's like a
catastrophic plan.
Where are these special plans
that I've never seen on be well,
or where are these plans?
Madam Chair and representative
Lord, they are offered on be
well in them, which is the
state's health insurance
marketplace website. Currently
they're they're limited to
certain below certain income
levels, and so part of the
rationale for wanting to make
sure that our funding is more
stable is so that we are able to
provide that assistance to more
people. We would definitely like
to expand that.
Cost sharing assistance that out
of pocket assistance to people
so that when you go to that
marketplace, you'll have access
to these lower cost plans
currently because of the funding
restrictions, and we've designed
the program so that they are
limited to lower income levels.
Okay, so madam Chair
representative experts at leads
to another question. So is this
one of these plans that
technically would be $600 if
there wasn't a supplement or
these
Specific that are just $10
because there has to be somebody
supplemented this because $10
would nobody would make a profit
on that it would fall so as
these strictly subsidized and
where is that money coming from?
Uh, Madam, Chair and
representative, You've got that
exactly right. So the the
underlying premium is based on a
number of factors, but, um, it
is subsidized by federal funds
that were passed through the
affordable care act and then the
funding that we're providing
comes on top of that. Um So,
like I said, we're doing
everything we can to make sure
we're making the best use of our
state dollars not supplanting
those federal funds, but
ultimately
The full amount of that premium
is being paid to the carriers so
that they can take that risk of
covering more people coming into
the market. Okay, madam chair
and experts. So when you say
that there's a small business
10% premium reduction, I'm going
to assume that that's that
premium abduction of that really
high price where you're going to
supplement the
Businesses. 10%. Is that what
I'm understanding
Madam chair and representative.
That's correct. So, um, it is on
the underlying premium that the
small businesses paying and
again part of why we do want to
make sure we've got this stable
funding stream is so that we're
able to provide more assistance
to those businesses were also
doing outreach to some of those
businesses because there are
cases
Where they may be able, you
know, their employees may be
better off purchasing coverage
through the exchange, and they
can provide some of the
additional funds they'd
otherwise spent on health
insurance to their employees and
higher wages, Or is it
contribution to premium? So, um,
they're kind of both of these
programs have some overlap in
terms of the population that
they might be assisting.
Madam chair representative and
experts.
Which businesses which small
businesses are eligible for this
substance to being subsidized
for the premiums, Madam chair
and representative, um any
business in our state that is
purchasing coverage for their
employees that is under 50
employees. So that's how the
state defines a small business
for purposes of health
insurance.
Um
They have to purchase coverage
in the small group market in
order to get that, and we've set
up the program so that that
discount gets automatically
applied. They don't have to fill
out a bunch of paperwork as a
business to get that done. We
work directly with the carriers
to apply that discount.
Thank you, Madam. Chair
representative. Experts, um
I think the frustrating thing
just overall as you know when,
when
We first decided that we're
going to do for lack of better
word. Obamacare. I thought it
was going to be like it was when
I got my first job. I got
insurance. You went from paying
500 to 250. Everybody had
insurance is just the most
frustrating thing is that these
plans seem to be
Super high deductible, very high
premium that causes us as a
taxpayers to then have to go and
subsidize it. I thought it was
gonna be this wonderful thing
where we would just have all
have a low rate of $250 a month
and everybody can afford. I
think it's it's kind of absurd
that we have
This big discrepancy and then it
causes a taxpayers to have to
subsidize it when it should have
just been a very low rate for
all, But I do have one question
before everybody gets upset. You
need to understand that my
grandparents came over from
Mexico. And so this is not any
kind of racist question. I do
have a question, so I'm
understanding and I hope people
that have a green card they
would be
Eligible for that. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair represents Madam
chair in and representative
Lord. Um, it depends on the
program, so the exchange has
stringent federal requirements.
So it
Depends on the nature of the
Legal status of the individual.
Okay, that because I know
somebody brought that up roll,
and it made me think I'm
concerned about because I want
to make sure that our migrant
workers people are coming over
the legit visas would be
eligible. I do get concerned if
we have a huge influx of people
coming to New Mexico that we're
not going to have the money to
cover people, and that's going
to end up being a different
financial burden. So
Again. It goes back to I just
don't understand why in the
first place, it wasn't just set
up to like when you go to a
business and everybody's paying
this great flat rate and
everybody has equity when it
comes to health insurance, But
we have these plans with this
and a huge deductible which if
you go the doctor, you can't
ever think that concludes my
questions. Thank you.
Representative Harmony.
I want to thank you for bringing
this forward. I, um last session
we heard from many positions in
hospitals. And during the
interim, um I became extremely
sick and I could not access the
specialists that I needed and,
um and I needed immense help to
be able to get to the Mayo
Clinic, which I was there for a
month.
Trying to figure out what was
happening.
Um, it was a terrible time for
me, but a wonderful lesson. Um,
and how we need to support
health care providers in New
Mexico so that we can grow the
system. I was fortunate that I
did have healthcare and I can't
imagine what would have happened
if I wasn't able to travel to
Arizona to get that care. Um,
with that being said, I also
know in the interim. There are
20 hospitals, rural hospitals
that are just hanging on.
And, um, that would be
detrimental to our whole state.
Knowing that, um, many
individuals are indigent and
they're having to cover those
costs, and they're unable to
keep their doors open. If we do
not, um, exercise immediate
changes to many of our
healthcare system, so this is a
small piece of saving rural
hospitals and healthcare in New
Mexico, So I appreciate you
bringing that forward and I also
appreciate the immense need that
we have to do.
Right now, having gone through
this, so thank you so much for
bringing that forward.
Thank you represent our meal and
just to just a reminder to all
of us that no one is perfect. I
forgot to go to zoom for
comment. Um, so we're gonna go a
little out of order. And so if
you're listening in on zoom and
you want to raise your hand, we
will hear from you. I'll give
you a couple of seconds to, uh,
raise your hand and
I apologize. I It's like a new
new year. Every time. I think
I've never done this before.
And also while we're waiting on
that we will not be hearing
house Bill 33 today. Um
We didn't have an F I R as of
yesterday, and I, it's It's a
complicated bill and I have
apologized and apologized to the
sponsor. But we will not hear
that. Today. We will hear it on
wins. I don't see any hands
raised. Okay. Okay. I will go to
represented Ferrari. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I'd like to move
for a do past or House Bill
seven.
Representative Cates.
Yes.
Representative Chavez.
Representative Ferrari. Yes.
Representative are Emilio Car
meal, Adamu. It's a yes for me.
Thank you.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Lord
Representative.
Japan Ski
Yes.
Representative Vincent
Yeah.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes. Okay. Rescued by a 9 to 0
vote, you have a do pass. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Okay. Next, we
will go to representative Cait
on house Bill 26 Medicaid,
Environmental Modifications
services.
Go ahead. Whenever you're ready
and make sure your witness
introduces herself.
Thank you. Chair and members
today A. I'm representative
Kathleen Cates. Today I'm
presenting HB 26.
Uh, for, uh, environmental
modifications. I'd like my
expert witness to make a
statement and then I'll proceed
with the bill.
Good morning, madam. Chair and
representative. Excuse me, Chip.
Representatives. Sorry. I'm a
little nervous. I apologize. My
name is Stacey Johnson Davis.
And I'm the vice president of
business development with home
modification solutions and
environmental modification
company in New Mexico that
provides the services that we're
going to speak about.
Thank you. Thank you. Chair and
members so home modifications.
We have a program in place for
Medicaid recipients, uh, that
have disabilities if they are
living in a home and for them to
stay in their home safely, they
can access funding through a
letter.
Written by their home health
aide requesting for the
modifications to occur,
modification, speed grab bars
and, um, showers. Zero entry
shower if you're in a
wheelchair, Hoyer lift 88 toilet
If your home is built before
1990, maybe even a little before
95 before things were enforced.
Um, doorways maybe too narrow
for wheelchairs. Um, you'll have
a step up into the house. You'll
need wheelchair ramps from the
garage and the front door, maybe
even in other parts of the
house. This is a small amount of
funding. Um, uh, several
administrations ago, It was at
$10,000.
Every five years. It got lowered
eight. Several administrations
ago, lowered it to five and
that's where it sits. Now. Those
of you have been doing any kind
of construction work. No, how
much $5000
Well, we'll get you and that's
where I'm bringing in my expert
witness to let you know that
this is it's not just $5000.
It's $5000 over five years.
So you cannot widened a doorway,
Build a wheelchair ramp. Have a
Hoyer lift for the tub and
within that budget, and it is
not, it is it has not been
raised for 15 years has actually
been lowered. And so we are
asking, um, for the budget to be
increased to $15,000 every five
years.
Currently, um we have about
approximately anywhere from 22
to 2500 individuals in the state
who have requested such funding.
Does your historical numbers
Um so a lot of times in the
analysis
Sometimes we'll look at like the
whole number of people on the
waiver. So, um, this this
particular bit of fun funding is
usually only accessed by a small
portion, and that's historical
numbers is that 22 to 2500 on
now like to yield for my extra
witness to be able to talk
anything about, um
The cost and the importance of
individual staying in their
home. Thank you.
Thank you, madam chair and
members as representative Cates
indicated the amount of lives
that actually access this
funding is a very small amount,
but it's a very important amount
of lives. Often these members
that we provide services to are
getting these services. They can
stay in their home and not be
placed in a skilled nursing
facility, which can cost the
state a significant amount more.
Of money about $9000 a month per
life that's actually in a
skilled nursing facility. Um, a
lot of these services that we
provide help to decrease fall
risks for these lives and again
We're talking about the cost to
our health care system in the
cost of a fall and a hip
fracture for somebody can be
quite significant to our health
care system.
Um, And as a representative
Kate's mentioned the cost of
construction and equipment has
continued to escalate and rise
with everything else and it's
very difficult. Um currently,
members right now are either
getting a ramp installed or
shower.
Conversion from a walk, You know
a tub to a role in or walk in
shower, and everybody I know
wants to get out of their home
and take a shower. It's not a
one or either situation and so
the increase in funding would
help people remain safely in
their home and allow them to
have more independence be able
to perform their activities of
daily living to be independent
and survive in their home.
Thank you, Madam Chair members.
We stand for questions.
Kate, We will go to zoom first.
So if you're on zoom and
listening
Please raise your hand. If you
want to speak. You can take that
for the rest of the bills.
Don't raise your hand now. But
if I forget to ask you to raise
your hand, I'm putting it on you
to remember that when your bill
comes up to
Sorry. We have new technology
that we're
Trying to figure out Plus, we've
been off for a year, and it's
amazing how you think it's part
of your everyday lexicon. And
then you take a year off and you
forget how to do things. So
okay. Jim Jackson is on zoom.
Go ahead, Jim.
Thank you, Madam. Chair, June
Jackson for Disability Rights.
New Mexico.
Um, the community benefit and
the developmental disabilities
waiver programs. Excuse me under
Medicaid are an important
vehicle for people to stay out
of large facilities and remain
active in their communities and
in their home.
And the current limits on news.
Home modifications is simply not
enough to cover the need if you
become disabled, as the expert
is indicated, there might be a
wide variety of modifications
that you need and you can't if
you're trying to stay at home.
You can't wait five years to get
a kind of a second allotment to
do all of the modifications that
would be important to keep you
at home. So
Raising the raising the limit as
proposed in this bill is an
important part of keeping people
with disabilities active and
participating in community life
and staying in their home and we
encourage you to support this
bill. Thank you, Um and we'll
just go to the audience real
quick. Anyone here in
opposition?
Anyone here in support.
Okay again. If you want to
speak, please come up forward,
and we'll give you one minute
and Jennifer will keep the time.
You have a sponsor, madam? Sure.
Uh, madam Pool chair and vice
chair members of the committee.
I stand in support of this.
Thank you.
Madam Chair Members Committee.
My name is Art Hall. I'm a
lobbyist for home medical
No modification systems.
We talked about access to health
care every day in this
legislature, This is the most
basic form of access to
health care every day in this
legislature, This is the most
basic form of access overlooked.
Access through your front door
or access to your bathroom.
Um
Over the last 10 years has been
reduced from 12,500 down to
5000 last year. We were lucky to
get it back up to 6000.
So during that 10 years of
exploding inflation in building
cost, we've had significant half
decrease in these costs. If
you're elderly, medically
fragile or disabled.
This is a basic important
element of access.
And it's only over five years
and by the way, it's a 3 to 1
match whatever money we put into
it.
Many of the federal government
matches 74% so it only cost the
state 25% standing strong. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Damn the jar
representing Amber care. We
serve many of the people in this
population. We support this bill
strongly. It's about quality of
life as much as it is about
reducing risk, and we applaud
the sponsor for the
Thank you.
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee Ellen pines
representing the Disability
coalition. I am a Leo. So watch
out. Um, we stand in very strong
support of this bill. Um, home
modifications can be something
as simple as installing Grandma.
Grandma is in the shower. They
can be as extensive as widening
doorways and remodeling a
bathroom to make it accessible
to somebody who is using a
wheelchair of the amounts
currently in place are
Out of date to say the least.
And I want to make clear that
you don't get a check. If you
are on the on Medicaid. You
don't get a check for five or
$6000 to do as you wish with and
if it goes up to 15,000, you
won't be getting a check for
that amount. Either. You have to
show a documented need for the
modification before it's
authorized.
Most people, as the expert has
said, um, are not accessing this
benefit because they don't need
it. Many of them are accessing
only a portion of it because
that's all they need. But for
people who need more, as Mr
Jackson said, you shouldn't have
to wait. Get your bathroom
remodel when I have to wait five
years for a ramp. Maybe somebody
else said that I'm not sure it
was Mr Jackson.
Anyway, We strongly support this
because people with higher needs
should not be denied having
those needs. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Tawanda Rock. I am the
founder and director of
Therapeutic riding program.
And many of my clients are
On the Medicaid services and on
the waiver services. My daughter
included. I have a 42 year old
disabled daughter, whose
abilities have reduced
Significantly over the last 10
years. We did use her funding
about three years ago to do a
partial bathroom, redo, redo,
and we were not able to cover
all of it.
Um
The fact that it's been reduced
years in the in the past years
is
Just crazy for those of us who
experienced this problem, and I
stand in support of raising it
to 15,000. Thank you.
I'm chair members of the
committee. I'm Larry Martinez
with Presbyterian Medical
Services. We are a provider of
services to persons on the
developmental disabilities
waiver.
At a time when the healthcare
Authority Department is striving
to try to end the waiting list
for the DD waiver as we call it.
It's critical that we have this
type of resource and I'd like to
just simply emphasize again the
importance of the cost
effectiveness of it.
The cost of having someone in a
skilled nursing facility or even
in an assisted living facility
is outrageous, uh, and far
exceeds any kind of investment
that the state of New Mexico
make in environmental
modifications, which will allow
people to live in their own
homes much more cheaply, and we
will be able to provide home and
community based services to
them.
Thank you very much.
Again. Thank you to the public
for your brief comments and
meaningful comments. Okay, we'll
go to the committee
representative Jones, Vincent.
Har meal. I'm sensing a pattern.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative Cates and
I'm sorry I didn't catch your
name.
Stacy. Stacy. Thank you, Stacy.
Um, really appreciate this
conversation. I know. I know the
need and how important it is to
keep people in their homes
whenever possible and and to
help them with just the daily
activities of life. I do get
that. In fact, I don't I can't
think of anything I disagree
with. It's been discussed, but I
have some real concerns. I need
For you guys to answer. First of
all, um
Representative Cates. Do you
remember? Or maybe any of you
remember, it's just comes to
mind last session.
We saw a bill that increased the
amount, um, that was allowed for
ramps and so forth. It was and I
can't remember the details.
Does anybody remember that? I
couldn't access my in and
ledges, right? I was trying to
look that up, but But Jones, I
believe that you brought
A bill last year regarding the
the grocery seats taxes on
these these modifications. Thank
you, Madam Chair in
representative, Yes. And and, uh
and I will be in front of you
again with the same bill as a
waiver of the grocery seeds tax,
So you were kind enough. The
both chambers.
Uh, kept r g r T bill which is
House Bill 93, That is will be
listening to you later on
Hopefully in the week, um, that
will waive the G R t on that
this Bill House, Bill 26 is
asking to increase the budget,
So we made it in the tax package
last year for the other bill.
The Grt waiver one.
But it was line item vetoed. So
I'm bringing it back. But this
is a separate bill to actually
raise the budget. $5000 is
Shameful. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Remember now? Yes, it just
It was stuck in my mind because
I know what a great need that
is. And all those were good
points. The same ones we brought
up today in this bill. I guess
my my one of my concerns will
have several delicious start
with, um
From a nursing perspective.
What I think is absent. Here is
the education piece.
And, uh,
And I, and I'm concerned about
how a person is, is, uh,
Qualifies for this this money,
So those are kind of almost two
different subjects, but But
let's start with how a person
qualifies. I heard someone say
that they had to provide a note
from someone who would that be
Madam Chair, representative
Jones. Great question. I
appreciate the opportunities to
speak about the process for
patients who would qualify for
this benefit.
The qualification starts
actually with the health plan,
the health plan care coordinator
or of physical their PCP
provider can coordinate with the
health plan. Provide care
coordinator
And they send a referral
typically to three different
home modification. Companies
that have to be registered with
the state of New Mexico is a
Medicaid provider and credential
through the health plan.
The environmental modification
company will go out and do an
assessment of the home to ensure
that, um what they what they
care coordinator who is also
gone out and done an environment
an assessment of the patient and
their home environment is indeed
what we've received the referral
for, um and so we will go out
and and and evaluate and then
submit an estimate to the health
plan.
And then the health plan
actually sends it through the
utilization management review
within the health plan or within
for the DD waivers. The
programs um their support
Brokers will review the estimate
and then it has to be approved
through utilization management,
Just as you know any prior
authorization if you will, as a
patient, if you've ever been a
patient on the receiving end and
had to wait for a P A from the
health plans.
And then the health plan will
notify the environmental
modification provider that the
work has been approved. We go
out we do the work, it gets re
evaluated from the care
coordinator after the work. We
have to submit pictures that the
work has been completed.
Um, and then we bill it as a
claim as any other health care
provider will. So it is. There
are multiple steps in order to
ensure that the patient is in
need of the work. Um, and that
the work is done properly to
meet the clinical needs of the
patient.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Stacy. That was that was
really good. I really was
wondering about all of those
things. You just
Answered so from a nursing
perspective.
What about education? Does this
health care coordinator provide?
Do they do an assessment of the
home and offer
Um other
Education as to like
You have rugs on the floor that
are going to cause you to fall
and fall Fall prevention policy
assessment All prevention. Do
they do that? So thank you
Manage Chair and thank you,
Representative. Yes, the home
health aide, Um is is educated
if that's what the question is
is educated regarding to reduce
the risks of
Falls and increase accessibility
throughout the
Environment.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
What about the environment?
Environmental modification
provider after they've
Done the work.
Who goes back to assess this and
to make sure that it really is
meeting the patient's needs and
that there is safety that would
prevent, for instance, Um
Lawsuits against the state.
Thank you, Manager and thank you
members. Thank you,
Representative. Yeah, as Stacy
said that they have a pretty
thorough um, uh before and after
process of evaluations and
Um, one of the ways that makes
it so thorough is they have the
health aide looking at what is
the need And what is the
physical requirements and
abilities of the patient? And
then you also have the
environmental modification. It
can the home handled this Grab
bar. Are we installing it in the
correct way?
Um and then the state vets the
installers themselves, So it's
not just anyone you can hire it
is these specific individuals
the state has already licensed
and vetted to be able to do this
installation. Then there are
photos taken afterwards, and
there's also signing off just
Yeah, maybe in like a possibly
sort of like a PT or ot, uh,
services as well. No, thanks.
Okay. Thank you very much. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, madam Chair.
So just to
Kind of dovetail off to what
Representative Jones was talking
about.
You don't have to understand the
process now the evaluation But
is there a bid process?
Madam chair. Thank you, Madam
Chair representative and said
yes. So the the referral is sent
from the health plan to the
environmental modification
provider and we do an evaluation
and an estimate. I will say the
process is a little variant from
health Kinda health plan, but
they do get estimates from
multiple vendors. And then they
do do a cost. It's a cost
analysis, so typically the
lesser price.
Is the one that is awarded, But
I will say.
From my experience that we are
all coming in, You know, Shower
conversion is a shower
conversion, and there's not much
difference in the cost of that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
I'm not asking for a low bid
because sometimes when we go low
bid we get what we pay for. I
understand that, But I also
understand that now with the
workforce, and there's not
enough workers, sometimes
contractors might even go bid
something that they really don't
want and when they throw a
really high bid out there, and
you don't have no choice.
I don't feel like we're getting
the most bang for our buck.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. Um so
you're you're right. It is much
more complex than what we're
trying to, Um, communicate here
right now. So this the bidding
process is not in the
The Legislature. It's part of
the M C O s processes and when
they can get bids, they request
bids. You're absolutely right.
If this isn't a very rural area,
they may not have a bid, but
what they do is they can't just
send somebody out to do it. That
person has to go out.
Do an assessment right and
estimate submitted to the
insurance company. They have to
prove that it's within the
standard ization before they
approve it, so they have that
process in place, And that
process is not, um, written in
Legislature.
Is that clear? Helps. Thank you,
Madam Chair so
What? Me through this. I I need
a ramp.
And I apply.
And I go through the proper
channels by the time
They send everybody out to do my
assessment. Everything. When do
I get my ramp?
Manager representative. I wish I
could give you a for its same
timeline I with you,
representative. I agree, But,
um, as you know, in any
insurance, um there is a process
and and I will say that the
vetted providers of these
modifications
Are excellent, and and that's
why they have been vetted. But
you know, I don't know if your
wheelchair ram
Is 50 ft. Long or 3 ft long, so
I couldn't give you a time line
and I don't even think that
estimators. Good depends if you
live in different parts of the
state.
But, um every day is painful and
at risk for the patient that is
at home every day. My my husband
was in a chair and and we had
one of the places we had to
move. Um, you know, you have to.
You have to have proper caring
that now, if we don't have a
Hoyer lift now we have to,
Actually, the people in the
house have to lift
Which puts them at risk as well
And every day before that.
Shower conversion is done is
putting the household at risk.
Thank you, Madam chair and I'm
just asking for a ballpark if
you could give me a best case
scenario in a worst case
scenario.
I apply. I need a 25 ft ramp.
What's the best case scenario?
When do I get my ramp?
Thank you. Man. Members are
defer to my expert witness,
Madam Chair representative. It
is, um as representative Kate's
mentioned, it's It's hard to
pinpoint but best case scenario
again, recognizing that the care
coordinator has to go out and do
an evaluation of the home.
I, You know the home
modification provider gets the
estimate or the referral. We
have to go out and do an
estimate. Best case scenario
three months. Worst case
scenario a lot longer than three
months.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
sorry to hear that, and
You know, we were I come from
Lincoln and Otero. If you have
somebody that's in need
You know, you call up our church
and we'll go over there and try
to build you around and get it
done Pretty quick. Um, one of
the other things is I I I really
appreciate transparency and
making sure that
You know the funds are being
treated correctly and
Uh um, as far as environmental
modifications, including, um you
know many things. Um, how do we
have anything in place?
To make sure we're
Handling the money, right and
possibly
I'll just go and throw it out
there. There's no misuse of
funds.
Something you, madam? Sure And
thank you very much.
Representative. Um, I'm I'm I'm
a big believer in accountability
as well. So, as we've explained
in this process there there is
no really handling of funds. Um,
the family is not requesting
that what they need the health
care of that, Uh,
Provider is that comes into the
home that's assessing the needs
there documenting that in a
letter that sent to an
insurance, then the vetted
licensed, registered approved
installer is doing the same
thing than they are taking their
spending their money going out.
Doing the estimate, bringing it
back without getting paid and
and submitting everything and
then completing the work. So you
know that they there then they
have to spend the money
completing the work, taking the
pictures, filling that out and
then sending to the insurance
company so the handling the
money is really from the
insurance provider to the
installer.
There's not a lot of handling
money. The handling is the Third
party review, which is really
what you want and all
accountability.
Excellent. Thank you and Madam
chair.
One thing I wanted to really
project is I love people.
And I'm a humanitarian guy.
But
I want the listeners and the
audience and everybody to
understand.
Through the world, just like the
other day in our in our military
and labor and veteran affairs
committee.
You know, we're voting on $50
million
And I, and this is just our
second committee. And here we
are at $5 Million, and at the
end I don't know how. I don't
know if we're going to be at 200
Million or what, but I want I
want what's best for new
Mexicans. I want to make sure
that I'm doing the right thing
As far as
Handling the purse strings and
getting the most bang for our
buck.
And
Right now, From what I
understand people are eligible
for $12,500 correct or 15,000.
Madam chair and representative.
No, That's not correct. You're
trying to bring it up to 15,000
correct Right now they're at
5000.
Um, 6000 correct.
Alright, So I'm trying to get
that around My okay, So we're we
want to go from 5000 to 15,000
to 6000.
Right here, representative.
We're currently we've been at
5000 for many years for over a
decade. We're currently at six.
And my bill is requesting to go
to 15,000.
And where did you come up with
that number?
Yeah, very good. We didn't
analysis of what? Historically,
you know, as as Stacy has said
of my expert, witnesses said
some individuals may only need
like $800 to $1200 for grab bars
and others need substantial
widening of doorways and and
zero injury, showers and things
like that. So we used
Historical data of what has been
used in the past.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
wrapping it up. Madam Chair. I
got two more so
I'm gonna ask this one first.
And I know since this is a new
program that you know, it
probably hasn't been studied.
But have we studied like a low
cost or no cost?
Type thing like somebody's
having slips, trips and falls.
Are we going in to show them why
they're slipping, tripping and
falling? Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, representative.
So I can't answer that in in the
broadest General Sam, but most
individuals who are individuals
with disabilities or elderly
people who are especially
vulnerable.
Who are in their home. They're
receiving some sort of health
support, and that is part of
most people's medical plan. I
know I haven't had a throw rug
in my house for five years
because my mom lives with me. Um
and so, uh, that was just part
of the general process. They're
also nonprofits out there for
houses.
But this is, um for Medicaid
recipients. We want them to stay
in their house. We don't want
them to say that they can only
own homes built after 1995,
which are 88 compliant houses,
Um, their family homes and we
and we know that they stay
healthier and they're integrated
and they have the dignity of
being with their families.
Um And so that's we think it's a
very small investment for that.
Thank you. Thank you. And last
question, Madam Chair. Uh,
So I I think I understand the
6000 for the 15,000 now and, um,
you know if you raise it up to
like 15,000, I mean the way I'm
doing my math that's about 350
patients. So how will these
patients be selected? Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
representative. So I will also
say that this is a Medicaid
program. So, like all Medicaid
programs, we will be able to
access
Oral dollar match.
So it will actually be
generating revenue for the state
by
Making the investment in the
Medicaid program.
I'm so sorry, Representative.
Repeat your question. That's
alright. So, Madam Chair. Let me
let me make it easier. I heard
who was qualified.
Who might be disqualified. What
if you had dementia, Parkinson's
or something like that? Would
that disqualify? Thank you,
Manager. The qualification is
through Medicaid. It's not
through state statute, and so
Um
I paid for my mom's grab bars.
Didn't you know I had no program
for it, So it's through that
federal qualification and I'm
just going to jump in here. This
is for developmental disability
populations. So, um, it's so
elderly unless you happen to
have down syndrome and develop
dementia as you get older.
This that we're not talking
about Elderly just, you know,
just people who Oh,
Ellen is saying no.
So I I understand, Madam Chair.
I understand about the
qualifications, but I'm
wondering who would be
disqualified.
You know, I know some people
with dementia or Parkinson's, if
they were having a hard time
getting up there steps would
they be qualified for? You know
around so the historically um
and and I'll go back to the
historically whose access this
fun are individuals with
disabilities, Madam Chair.
But they are the eligibility is
through the Medicaid. And so I
will also now defer to my expert
witness on this, Uh
representative Vincent.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Thank you so
much. Um, so I do want to
clarify It is, uh people who are
on the waiver, but it is also
Medicaid recipients that are
eligible for the home based
community services program.
Um, long term support service
program. Um, so it is a
medically driven requirement,
not a
Um so somebody has a medical
criteria, Parkinson's dementia
and they are on the home based
community services program. The
LTs s developmental disability
medically fragile they would
qualify, so it's a medically
driven qualification.
Is that help? It does help.
And every time you speak, it
helps me just understand a
little bit more. Thank you,
Madam Chair and I'm going to
jump in here just because my
family took advantage of the
$5000. My son with autism loves
to break glass, and we moved
into an older home with glass
that turned into huge shards,
and he broke many, many windows.
And luckily he the most he ever
got was one small cut, but so we
used the environmental mods we
had. We had a case manager who
came to our house once a month.
We had an occupational
therapist, speech and language
pathologist and we together as a
team decided that for his health
and safety, not to mention he
was in L A per so if he broke
glass and tried to go through
it, um so $5000 didn't cover all
the windows in our homes, So we
had to choose which ones we
thought he would break.
And we were I mean, we were a
young family, paying out
thousands of dollars for his
care at that point, and, um, so
that's how we used it. We also
wanted to raise the fence around
our backyard so he could have
some autonomy and not be able to
get over the fence. We didn't
even get all the windows, much
less the fence and it's very we
We talked with our case manager.
We had an occupational therapist
come out and measure things and
And see, you know, look through
his history of breaking glass.
He still has that issue,
including windshields of cars.
Um
And so we never saw a cent. We
We requested what we requested.
We got the bids. We chose
someone, and we got the windows
that
Could be I mean in this was
probably 15 years ago, maybe
more than that, and we couldn't
get all the windows in our home.
To be Eric Proof, essentially,
so if they're there, as far as I
could see, there was no way um
To cheat the system.
So I will go to General
Representative Jones real quick
and then we're going to
represent it Hard meal.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
have one more quick question. I
thought of what we were talking
about.
Is there a difference between
the availability like the
process and the qualification
for somebody who's renting their
home versus
Thank you, Madam Chair and and
and thank you, representative.
So now we're going into another
bit of Legislature when you go
into the rentals, But yes, you
should be able to, um, but be
able to access this funding
stream for rentals as well as
for ownership of of your home.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Cates and
Stacy.
Representative army. Oh, and
then representative Lord
Thank you for bringing this
forward and I just need to point
out um contractors, um and and
give a plug for them.
Um, economically, I know that
that group of contractors doing
this work has shrunk because,
um, it's not cost efficient.
And, um, and speaking oftentimes
we search for contractors to do
this type of work, and it's very
difficult with one individual
was 16 strokes had to choose
between having, um, a ramp to
her trailer home rather than
having a modification to her
bathroom, which was crucial
after her husband threw out his
back, lifting her.
And in speaking to that
contractor, he was simply
getting out of the business
because he couldn't afford to do
this. And he wanted, um, to
remind me that this is also
economically beneficial to our
community. And so he would be.
He was of retirement age and
wanted to do this because he had
a daughter with disabilities and
he wanted to give back to the
community. But he said, I can't
afford to give this anymore. I'm
giving up my time.
And and and my own retirement
money to be able to do this, in
an increase would keep him in
business. Keep that business in
our community and his ability to
help individuals in our
community. So thank you for
bringing this forward. There is
truly an impact in our fiscal
impact within our community that
is a positive fiscal impact. So
thank you.
Thank you, representative,
Representative Lord. Thank you,
madam Chair.
Representatives experts. So want
me through this so
When you're on disability, you
were also at eligible for
Medicare disability. No, they
have a specific
Medicare disability. So these
are people that are medicated.
What's the separation between?
You're disabled and can get
Medicare health and I'm talking
about health insurance and
versus having Medicaid.
Man. You sure this is not
representative Lord that that
doesn't really have to do with
this, and we're asking them to
Talk about federal
qualifications and things that's
not really to do with the bill.
Um, I will say that my son
recently got on Medicare. I
didn't apply for it. I don't
know what happened, but he all
of a sudden he has Medicare and
Medicaid. It was a shock to me,
but but that's that's beyond the
scope of this bill. Madam chair
and experts. The reason I'm
asking that is because of
somebody was on
Medicare. They're different
qualifications, correct and so
Medicare and Medicaid what I'm
trying to get it is you're
saying that Medicaid does not
cover any of this. This is why
we're asking for state funded
because Medicaid is not covering
these things that we need to
supplement. These is that
correct? Manager representative
know it. We This is part of our
Medicaid. How Medicaid works is
our state.
Or our state agencies right
applications to the Federal C. M
s on how they're going to run
their Medicaid pro programs.
This is one of the programs in
which our state runs through the
federal Medicaid program, who
matches the state investments by
three times.
Three times. So for every dollar
we put in the federal government
gives us three
Okay, So Madam Chair
representative experts, so it's
a
Six Prime minister and we're
going to 15 You said that was
based on an analysis. So I have
a question. What happens if you
go in and there's a ramp that
needs to be made and it's
$20,000, who picks up that
excess work?
Who picks up the excess $5000 or
is it
Not. How is that? What happens
with that? Madam Chair
representative. I can't answer a
hypothetical I mean,
I can tell you. I know
individuals who've
Had
Donations or churches or non
Donations or churches or
nonprofits, I or we heard as we
heard today, many had to choose
whether or not they got inside
their house, so they had access
to the bathroom.
Men couldn't have both Madam
chairperson experts. So let's
say a contractor comes in
because I'm worried about
oversight contractor comes in
does a bit
They know it's 15,000 bid their
15,000 won that bid. What
happens if Let's say, because
I'm an American Legion
auxiliary. We find out we go
ahead and build that for free
for them. What happens? How do
we know that the contractor
isn't taking the 15,000 and that
the work was completed? Who's
going to oversight? The
completion of the work?
So
Um, the the individuals who are
Uh, building
Home modifications are not being
paid because they're not been
vetted or registered as a state
provider.
And this one's that our state
providers.
Um, they are not just submitting
their estimate, but they also
have to take pictures of the
completed work and write a
letter of completion and have
it confirmed by the health. Hate
aid, who started the process to
begin with that it has been
built to their satisfaction.
Before those funds are released
to the state licensed and
Staller.
Okay, So if I understand
correctly, Madam chair represent
experts so
The health aide is the one
that's putting in for that, and
they would be the one
responsible. Is there going to
be anybody else? So they're
gonna take pictures They're
gonna send stuff in. Is that a
designated person that we're
gonna have to pay?
A new employee.
That's going to have to do the
oversight or how are they going
to handle all this? This uptick
in the work that's being
completed?
So, Madam Chair representatives.
This program has been in place
for almost 20 years. So
They have an accountability
process. That's that's been
working. We've we've We have not
had any.
Um, uh, incidents brought to our
attention that there's an
accountability issue. Madam
Chairman and representatives and
experts always worried because
you know that those things do
happen. People scammed the
system all the time and aid
could be working. The contractor
scan the system, so I do kind of
worry if there's not gonna be
another extra outside person
coming in
Because I would hate to see that
in the paper that people were
getting something has been done
for free and they're still
getting charged. So with the
rent versus owning
Is there something in your bill
that states that they have to
get approval from the homeowner
or how does that work out? So
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you representatives that that is
another piece of Legislature,
Representative Lord, um, that is
part of the Fair Housing Act and
also the Human Rights Act for
renters. Uh, landlord cannot
deny
An individual to be able to make
sure that their rental space is,
um
Accessible. They just have to
return it to its original form
once they move out, but that has
nothing to do with this bill.
You won't see that in this bill.
It has nothing to do with that.
That's another piece of
legislature. Okay, Madam Sharon
and represented expert just
leads to a quick question. So
who would turn it back?
Where does that funding come? If
you guys are funding to put the
ramp in and they move out who
would fund to take that ramp out
if they moved out of that home
manager representative? That's
another piece of Legislature.
It's not that it's not this
Legislature. It's not this
program. It's a It's a
completely other law.
Okay. Thank you, Madam chair and
represented. I just want to make
sure that
If we're giving the money to do
that, that somehow the funding
is get to them. I'm guessing on
a federal level Madam Chair
representatives that without
coming from Madonna different
law, or is it coming from the
state? Or is it coming for the
feds to turn the house back to
normal? The way it works by
normal was inappropriate word
that turn it back to what it was
before.
Manager representative. I am not
prepared to speak.
Of another law today. Today, I'm
going to talk about house Bill
26.
Um, that was kind of my main
concern that Madam Chair and
representative just want to make
sure that
If we're doing this
That
Uh, the other question. I have
going back to that.
Madam Chair representative. Is
this a first come first serve? I
mean, is there only so much
money per year or is it
unlimited amount of money per
year? So how do we capture and
how do we decide who gets
priority? Thank you, Madam Chair
representative. I have no
personal knowledge of any
Buddy, Constituent of mine or a
client of mine ever seen, They
ran out of funds.
So I don't
I don't think so. And, uh In
fact, they've had money even
though
Even for a long time. It's been
5000 every five years. They've
had more money sitting in the
budget than that. Um, but so no,
I'm not aware of ever.
Okay, so manager groups and
experts so if we increases are
you sure that there's going to
be enough funding that it
doesn't end up where only
certain people are getting their
needs met and others aren't
Is there anything Madam Madam
Chair representative. So it, um
So Medicaid and individuals with
disabilities
And having access and safety.
There it is illegal to cap
Uh, their ability to
Um
To access safety. I'm not really
sure I'm so sorry,
representative. I'm not really
sure what the question is. Can
you repeat it again? It's okay.
I think Madam Chairman and
representative. You try to
answer what I'm trying to make
sure is that if we're going to
do this, and we're going such a
huge leap up and I know they're
gonna match I just don't want to
make it to where
All of a sudden we have this
larger amount, and there's not
enough funding. But you're
saying that no matter what those
could be funding to always worry
about.
We're saying that there's going
to be enough funding, but I just
want to make sure that there's
always my question, but that's
okay. I think that's all that I
have.
On this bill for now. Thank you,
Representative Chavez. Yes,
madam tried like to move with
two pills do pass from
representative Chavez, the
second from representatives of
Polanski.
Um, is there any opposition?
Thing. None. You have to pass.
10 to 0.
Thank you.
And we are supposed to be on the
floor at 1030, so we really need
to get moving. And I'm going to
ask the committee to please
let's not do a whole lot of
hypotheticals. You can't really
answer a hypothetical um
And, uh, we have. We're gonna
We're gonna be meeting Saturday
this week for sure. And if we
don't get through our bills, we
may meet Sunday as well. So, um
Representative Herndon has HB 34
State run substance Use Rehab
Facility Study representative
Madam Chair before you start a
point of order, according to
Mason's rule, 638 motions and
limit debate should not be
allowed, and there is no limit
to the number of times the
committee member can ask a
question and the whole point of
this is to ask questions. We can
have a clear understanding of
how to vote on this, bill. Thank
you.
Representative Lord, I said, We
will not be doing a lot of
hypotheticals. If you have a
question, not what will happen
on a Wednesday if the Taco truck
doesn't stop here or whatever.
We're trying to stick with what
the bill does. It has nothing to
do with Medicare. We're trying
to stay on the bill and I didn't
limit debate. I let everyone ask
the questions that they had just
reminding folks that we have a
lot of bills to get through.
And we will continue to meet.
As much as we need to meet, so
thank you. Go ahead,
representative, Madam Chair
point of order is necessarily
understand the subject which
were making decisions on we need
to be able to ask appropriate
questions. You saying that they
are hypothetical are your
perspective and not mine? Thank
you. Go ahead, Representative
Herndon. Thank you, madam Chair.
The purpose of house Bill 34 is
to conduct a study that
identifies and evaluates the
merits of strategies for
creating a coordinated
behavioral health plan between
the state, the counties and the
cities with an eye toward long
term residential rehabilitation
facilities that treat
individuals with substance use
disorders.
Um, Miss Madam Chair I have with
me my expert. His name is Nick
Bolkus. He is the director of
behavioral health in the new
Healthcare Authority.
And with that, madam chair, I
will turn it over. If there's
anything else you would like to
add good morning chair and good
morning members of the
committee for House Bill 34, as
we have seen a in increase in
the number of, um, substance
misuse related deaths, um,
looking at how we can best
partner from the state level
with
Local agencies to address
specific community needs is a
priority as we move forward to
best look at where we can place
facilities and what types of
facilities
Thank you.
Madam chair with that we will
stand for questions. Okay, Let's
go to the audience. Anyone here
in opposition?
Anyone here in support.
You don't have the sexy bill of
the day. Sorry. Um okay. Is
there anyone on zoom if you're
on zoom and want to make a
comment, please raise your hand.
Oh, we don't have any hands. We
don't we We lost our I T person.
I remember this time and, uh and
we have no one. So, um
Those in favor. Did we already
did that? Okay, so
Um, we will go ahead with
questions from the committee.
And then when the I T person
comes back in, we will go to
zoom. If there is anybody.
representative Jones,
representative Vincent
representative Ferrari.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, representative
Herndon.
And I'm sorry. I'm I'm
I don't remember your name. No
worries. Representative Nick
Bolkus. Oh, my goodness. I'm
still learning. I've met
thousands of people in the last
year and I know your name Well,
and I know what you do just
didn't connect it with the face.
But thank you for being here.
And, uh,
We all know and agree What
crisis we have with substance
abuse, So I
I do appreciate the study. What
I'm concerned about is that I
don't see any reporting
requirement with this.
Can you address that?
Thank you, madam Chair once the
task force completes its, uh,
study, and I'm sorry if it's not
mentioning the bill, the first
place that it will be reported
to, of course, back to the
governor and then to this
committee, the results of what
has been shown and then it would
be published for everyone to
see.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative Herndon, I I wish
it was in the bill would What do
we have to do to get that in
here? Because I think that's
really important, Madam Chair,
one of the things that happens
when
When you do a test force, you
have to provide a study. I mean,
you have to provide a report so
it will be reported. I'm not
sure I understand what your
concern is These are you
thinking that the study will
happen, and there won't be any
reporting.
Madam Chair, representative
Herndon. It's not that I think
there wouldn't be. It's just
that if it's not in the bill,
how do I know?
Madam's here, Um
Representative Jones.
Is a standing legislator.
I'm giving you my word. It will
be
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative Herndon would
would you be amenable to a
slight amendment for the next
committee that says what the
reporting requirements are,
Madam Chair? Uh, yes, I would be
okay. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
represented Herndon. I just
wanted to be on the record that
I'm not questioning your word in
any way. I just would like to
see that in writing. I think it
would be the best way to know
where this information is going
to be available. The governor us
the public. It's I just feel
like it would. It would be a
better approach to the bill. So
thank you.
Representative Vincent
Thank you, madam Chair.
And you
You read my mind? I'm the same
way. I just I like the the
accountability and the
transparency and that's what
I've been hearing the most is,
you know people feel like
they're in the dark, and if we
just put a requirement in there
that there's going to be it's
going to be published. I think
it's a great deal. I really do.
Um, I have a couple of
questions.
Um, what definition is H C A d
using for rehab.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, representative.
Um, so the definition is going
to be based on the type of
facilities that are going to be
run. Each facility has different
focuses. Um and as such, I think
it would be best if we left it
to the general definition of
rehabilitation, as opposed to
being too narrow and maybe not
meeting the needs of specific
community or population.
And the more I researched this,
you would think that we would
have a definition of a rehab,
but everybody thinks there's a
different definition of it. So
thank you for that answer. And
what information do we currently
have about substance abuse in
New Mexico, including treatment
options, efficiency cost and so
on.
Certainly thank you, Madam Chair
and representative Vincent.
So one of the things that we
look at for efficiencies we do
get quarterly reports from the
managed care organizations which
are evaluated and then we have
regular meetings with them to
see how we get doing to get
people into rehabilitation
facilities, whether they're
intensive treatments.
They or residential treatments
and working best, uh to that
portion
I think a large portion of this
also looks at Howard best
utilizing our prevention
programs because that's probably
the best outreach that we have
to get, folks. So when they come
in, and we have, for example, an
Arkham program
That's an opportunity for us to
talk to someone and get them to
move from that type of
prevention to treatment and to
kind of continue that spectrum
or continuum of care.
Um, as far as cost, sir, I would
have to get you back. Um,
figures of their specific
figures you would like I can
reach back out to you.
Thank you and Madame chair, you
know, just going through rehab.
Are they going to study the
length of time that somebody is
going to be in rehab? And I've
heard that you know if there's a
30 Day
It's almost useless if there's a
60 day, it's a little bit
better. But it doesn't work. And
what's the length of time? And
what is the most effective to
get people back on track and get
a foundation build back under
him?
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative Vincent, I I
think it's we would end up doing
a disservice to say that
33 days is the magic number or
42 Days is the magic number and
the way I like it. It is that
you know, for example, um,
someone who is a diabetic, and
they are receiving insulin might
need X number of units. Um, but
someone else might need
considerably more based on their
health. So I I don't think that
we can put a magic number to
that.
As opposed to saying that we
need to kind of continue to look
at what is best suited for the
individual patient. I would have
just also add that based on the
recommendations of the treating
provider that they can put in a
medical need of necessity to the
M C. 02 Butch, my knowledge is
overwhelmingly approved, but I
don't have an exact number for
you.
To extend the stay.
Thank you to remind her that
we're going to stick to the bill
that how many days in all of
that stuff? This is about a
study of the feasibility of a
state run program, so we're not
going to talk about which
treatments are best or how long
or who's eligible. This is a
study that will hopefully come
up with some of that
information, so please state
strictly to the bill.
Madam Chair on New Mexico Page
11 Point Order. No member shall
be interrupted when speaking,
nor shall any emotion in order.
Be reached until the member has
concluded the discussion. Thank
you, Representative Lord. I
didn't interrupt him. I let him
finish his statement. I reminded
him as I'm reminding all members
that we are discussing this
bill. We are not discussing the
state of substance abuse in New
Mexico. We're not discussing
what the best practices are.
Please stick to the bill.
Thank you, madam Chair you
interrupted While I was
speaking, he still had the
floor. He still had the
microphone.
And also thank you. So options
for substance use treatment are
basically private or public.
Public would include
governmental clinics and
hospitals, Prisons, court
mandated programs and so on.
Can you expand on that? Please?
Sir, Representative, I don't
believe that has anything to do
with this. Bill. This is a
study. We're not looking at the
methods were not looking at the
payers. This is a study to
determine whether the state
Um, the healthcare authority
will identify the merits and
strategies for creating a state
run long term residential
rehabilitation facility. We're
not discussing any of those
other things we know there's a
substance use problems in New
Mexico in the country, and so
please, let's stick to the
study. This is a discussion of
the study.
Point of order, Madam Chair. New
Mexico Page 11 November shall be
interrupted while speaking.
Thank you.
Thank you. I'm done, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Ferrari. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, Secretary and
Representative Herndon. Um
Is part of this study to also
make sure that we can provide,
um in ST long, uh, long, uh,
term recovery and not send, um,
so many people out of state.
Madam Chair representative
Ferrari, one of the biggest
items that we're looking at.
Here is the fact that there's no
coordination right now in the
state between our cities are
counties in the state. So
perhaps one of the things we
might be looking at is the long
term rehabilitation of facility
being, uh, provided in the state
of New Mexico, maybe a midterm
care
Facility would be at the county
level. Maybe the short term care
would be at the city level. But
what happens that no matter
where we're looking, we need to
make sure that nobody is ever
left without care. And this is a
long term life process. And
right now we're not saying that
in place.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you. I support this.
Representative Lord Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
representative experts, So I
have some questions on the
study.
So I'm gonna ask you a bunch of
juicy questions about this. So
can you explain the study? What
are we looking at? Are you gonna
use meta analysis or you can
look at other states but
successful. Are you going to
look for new raw data and what
areas will you be looking in?
Madam Chair, representative
Lord, the task force will be
making that determination in
terms of what the platform is
and how they will go forward
with making its report.
Finally that will be produced.
Thank you, madam chair and
expert kind of wish I would have
gotten better.
Understanding on that, because
if we're going to give money to
that, I'd like I love studies
and I'm
I understand how they work and I
want to know. Are we going to be
looking at other states? Because
one of the things we do a lot
new Mexico is reinvent the
wheel and when I look at other
states like they fix crime
issues, they've done all these
great things.
We could do the same if we said
this work there. We could
probably use this here with a
little bit of tweaking of data.
So what you're saying is Madam
chair and representative. I
don't know.
What
Or how we're going to be looking
at it. There's going to be a
task force.
And they're gonna be given
$400,000.
But you're saying I'm not going
to know what it is. They're
specifically looking at are
looking for. Is that what I'm
understanding? Madame Chair,
Representative Lord? No, that is
not correct. What they're
looking at is the feasibility of
putting forth a long term
residential rehabilitation
facility within the state of New
Mexico. And how do we coordinate
the state? The counties in the
cities to make sure that people
are getting the care that they
need.
Sometimes what happens is, um
someone may have been a state
facility and then they're
dismissed. And but maybe they
need additional care and what
we're going to be looking at is
how to coordinate the care
wherever they are long term.
Mid level, short term, but
whatever it is, is there for the
rest of their lives. Okay, Thank
you, Madam Chair representative
experts, So we're looking at
Feasibility.
Of long term care.
So is that gonna include having
more facilities because you know
one of our big facility, so it's
just going to include
What
Like Let's say we decided the
hotspots are these different
areas and they're going to need
an actual facility. Are they
going to look at that too? Is
that what they're there? I
wouldn't. I'm trying to help you
with this bill. I want to vote
for it. So I want you to tell me
what it's doing. That's all I'm
asking you.
Madam Chair, representative,
Lord, I really appreciate your
questions, but one of the things
that I think is important when
you put together a task force.
We have a high level
determination of what the task
force will be doing. What, how
they will do it what they will
do to carry it out. We really
need to leave that to those very
details to the task force.
And that's the reason why we put
together a task force. Really
sorry about my voice today. If
Madam Chair back would ask one
more question, But I'll ask it.
Maybe you can answer to spare
her voice. So who who?
Who is going to be on the task
force.
And who's appointing them to
that task force, and you went to
that one. So she does.
Doesn't have to. Madam Chair and
representative Lord, Thank you
for the question. Um, so the
task force while it's not
outlined in the bill, we wanted
to be a representative of the
state so looking at urban
populations, rule, frontier and
tribal partners so that we can
kind of look at what that cross
section looks like.
And I would imagine that we
would be looking at how we can
engage maybe using. Um uh, the
Association of counties or other
entities as well as um, getting
feedback from providers through
the provider association to
identify what some of those
needs. Maybe. Okay, And thank
you, Madam Chair represent
experts. So
Please keep in mind Torrance
County. We're in a weird area.
It's like
That's really far from my
Torrance County folks to get
into Berlin County, but they
don't get anything because they
say they're within the distance
and they can't get rides.
There's there's no van, There's
nobody to take them. There's
nothing out there, so they're in
this weird limbo where they're
on their own. Don't have a whole
lot of money, and they're
supposed to go to into Berlin
account and sometimes there's
just way too far. So, please,
I'm begging you.
Take Torrance County into
consideration and that's all the
questions I have. I will
entertain a motion.
And I'm sure I like to make a
motion to approve the bill.
Do pass on House Bill 34
seconds.
Okay? And this is with the
understanding that you will add
in, um, the reporting
requirements. Is there any
opposition?
Saying, Then you have a do pass.
10 to 0.
Okay, and we will go on to our
Could I ask one somebody to get
a 60 where we 1030 today? If we
could be excused. We will do one
more bill, and then we will go
to the floor and not sure whose
responsibility that is. But, um
If somebody wouldn't mind
getting us excuse. You know what
I'll do it. Never mind. I'll
just send a text so we will go
on to representative Herndon's
next Bill House, Bill 35.
Yeah.
Madam chair members of the
committee. The purpose of House
Bill 35 is to increase the
capacity of the communities to
careers programs to address a
critical shortage of that verse.
health professionals through
projects that will enhance the
health care and Health Korea
pathway for programs delivered
both in the rural
And underserved communities I
have with me today. Three
experts. I'll let them introduce
themselves, Madam Chair.
Madam chair and members of the
committee. Hello? I'm salary.
Romero Leggett. I'm the vice
president for diversity, equity
and inclusion at the Health
Sciences Center and a family
practice stock and the director
overseeing these programs so you
can't hold them closer closer,
But turn it off before you pull
it or you will get a horrible
sounds.
Restage. Yes, please.
Thank you. I'm Dr Valerie Romero
leg. I'm the vice president for
diversity, equity and inclusion
at the Health Sciences Center
and a family practice doctor.
Madam chairman representatives.
My name is Mateo Garcia. I'm an
emergency medicine and M s
position. Dual board certified
and focus primarily on medical
direction and emergency medicine
care in this
ladies, you can go ahead and
scoot up. Okay, Madam Sharon
representatives. My name is
Stacy Collier. Um, I work with
the communities to cruise
programs working with our
Albuquerque and regional, um
Areas and partners, um and our
students who are in our
community secures program. Good
morning, Madam Chair.
Representative. My name is
Roberta Zaius and I am
Uh, honored to serve as one of
the program managers within our
community, Madam chair and
members of the committee. I'd
like to go ahead and just give
you a little overview of the
communities to careers programs.
Having trouble hearing you Turn
off your bike and pull it off.
Madam chair and members of the
committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to describe our
communities to careers programs.
So our community to careers
programs are all about growing
our own diverse healthcare
workforce, a workforce that
reflects the populations that we
serve.
And, uh and, um, also, uh,
create and help the dire needs
that we have in a 32 out of 33
County Health Profession
Shortage Area state, um, growing
a diverse health workforce is a
key strategy for addressing
health disparities and improving
the health and well being of our
communities. So these programs
build on a 20 plus year track
record.
Of these communities to careers
programs. We work in communities
and with communities provide 12
highly integrated, high quality
replicable.
Pathway programs for health
careers in 45 sites across New
Mexico and across 12 regions.
We serve the northwest northeast
central, north, South east and
southwest regions of our state.
We serve over 650 students a
year.
And in the since 2011. We have
served over 3300 students in
these health career programs
across New Mexico and the
wonderful thing too, about these
programs is that all of so
hundreds of these students have
earned because these are K
through 20 programs. So hundreds
of these students now and that
history have earned their
college degrees.
And health degrees as well. And
many, many of these like Dr
Garcia here and have returned to
serve their communities. Um,
these programs are upstream
programs. We feel it's
critically important to offer
students as early as possible.
The opportunity, especially with
so many of our first generation
students here in New Mexico,
just saying Here are some of the
things you can be, and here's
how we're going to help support
you and help you achieve your
dream. These programs provide
stipends and scholarships
because we are looking to reach
her underserved and
underrepresented students across
the state.
And I just think it's so
critically important that we
have continued to sustain this
investment in our communities
and our youth. Um, and that we
continue to maintain the impact
in the momentum of these
programs. We've been funded over
the years by several federal
grants. The most recent one was
a five year $3.5 million grant,
and that's what allowed us to
actually increase.
Sorry. I talked with my hands to
increase and provide more of
these programs up to the 45
sites. So I think that you know,
one of the most important things
here is that
Our new Mexico students really
are key strategy to addressing
the health care needs of the
state and investing in these
programs like House Bill 35
wheel is critical for us to
achieve that, and I think it
really at the end of the day
helps us to continue making a
difference in our communities
and also to build a brighter and
healthier future for
For generations to come. Thank
you, Madam Chair will stand for
questions.
Remember to turn on the mic Just
warning for folks on Zoom. If
you would like to speak, We'll
go to the audience first, but
please raise your hand. So let's
go to the audience. Anyone in
opposition?
Anyone in support.
Okay. Now go ahead and come
forward, actually just speak up.
Now they have. There's a mic up
there. Um, so just speak up.
Wow. Thank you. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Um
Madam vice chair sponsor.
Um, something to really think
about is J e d h. Jedi. This
justice
Equity inclusion.
And sorry,
Thank you. Justice Equity,
divert diversity and inclusion.
Let's not forget to justice.
Peace. Thank you.
Thanks, Nat. Okay? Is there
anyone on zoom?
Okay, We will go to the
committee. I see. Oh, ok. Hello,
Madam Chair little bit closer.
I'm not sure how the mix work.
So Hello, Madam Chair and
committee. My name is Saviano
man for I am part of Josefa
chapter today representing the
Ask Academy and on behalf of my
school, which is a stem charter.
I would like to say that we are
in full support to reaching out
and supporting younger students
to get them into these 10
communities to build those
bridges and help support them in
their
Future careers because
Where it starts is where it
starts with the young students
and ask someone who has gone to
a stem charter for since they
were in the sixth grade. I
greatly feel supported by these
programs, and I feel that they
should continue to be supported.
Thank you for your time. Okay?
Representative Cates.
And then lowered.
Okay, Go ahead, Representative
Cates.
A tentative lord. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um
So I have some questions about
diversity. Can you explain to me
specifically what that is? What
is diversity what people would
fall under the umbrella of
diverse
Madam chair and members of the
committee. Thank you for that
question, and diversity can be
such things as racial, ethnic
rural first generation other
abled. Uh many, many things are
inclusive in diversity, and
that's what we look for here in
this state as well. And we want
to, um
People again to represent the
populations that they serve, and
they come with those
understandings and perspectives
and experiences.
Thank you, Madam Chair
representative Expert Would that
include white males or they're
not included in diversity,
right? Is that correct?
Uh, madam, Chair and
representative. Yes, they are.
And a lot of times we have our
Non Hispanic white, uh,
participants in students in
rural communities they can come
from a legislative communities.
They can be socio, economically
right, educationally
disadvantaged so absolutely as
well.
Okay, Madam Chair and
Represent experts without
include our crypto Jews.
Uh, part of the culture of New
Mexico, where they have included
in diversity be, uh, we don't
turn away any students in these
programs we have, um so I would
say this is an inclusive. These
are inclusive programs.
Madam chair in rooms and the
reason I ask those questions
because there's been so much
Jewish hatred that I want to
make sure that Jews of my
heritage or not at any
disadvantage and not included an
equity because I'm seeing that a
lot across the country,
especially in the colleges, so
as much as I love the idea of
diversity, equity inclusion I
feel like at this point
My ancestry is not because
they're done a lot of research
on what the colleges are doing
to Jews and the Jewish hatred
and pro Hamas, which I know is
another dude to build. What I'm
telling you is
It makes it hard for me to want
to vote for this when there's a
fear inside of me that if you're
a Jew, you're not equitable
right now, and it scares the
heck out of me. Quite frankly,
so that's was really my
statement. I wanted to make on
that so
We'll entertain a motion.
Oh, Representative Chavez has a
do pass and the 2nd 2nd
representative. Is there any
opposition? Okay, Um,
Representative Lord is a know
anyone else.
You'll be in? No, okay.
Okay, so by a seven to you know
what? Take take the role. I'm
sorry. Just take the role. Well,
do it cleanly presented
Thank you, Representative K.
Yes.
Representative Chavez? Yes.
Representative Ferrari.
Yes.
Representative Harmony Oh,
Yes.
For a job.
Representative Jones.
Madam chair. I know we have this
motion on the floor, but I need
to say this because I really
missed a chance to ask a
question. I'm sorry. Did you
raise your hand? I didn't. I
just didn't realize we were that
close thing at home on
That was very, very serious and
you'll find out about it soon,
but
So I don't know how to proceed
from here. But there's at least
one question. I would like one
quick question will. Okay, cause
on the thank you. Thank you. So
thank you, Madam Chair and I do
have a question, um, about the
program. And of course, I really
appreciate what you do. And I
know you do a lot of good work.
I have to preface it with that.
But
Um it looks like C two C has 12
programs under its umbrella and
three of those, which would be
1/4 25% of of your programs
specifically target African
American population, which is
only 2.7% of the population here
in New Mexico. Can you tell me
more about that, please?
Madam chair and members of the
committee. Thank you for that
question, And those programs in
particular are actually funded
by an R P. S P The building
outstanding stem students. Um,
and those programs are
specifically, um, for our
African American students as
well as other underrepresented
students, but it's highly
provides for those students in
those programs.
Thank you, Madam Chair and I'm
sorry I didn't catch who they
were funded by. There's a boat
from R P S P s. P s. We have
building outstanding stem
students in those, Um those
funds. Thank you. All right.
Thank you so much.
Okay?
It's it's I know life happens.
okay, we'll keep going on the
voting.
Representative Lord Oh, wait.
I'm sorry. No, she's a note, So
I'm voting. No, thank you. Okay,
now I got that I'm going to
vote. I'm changing my vote. I'm
voting. Yes. Okay. You're just
trying to throw the monkey works
in the first day. I'm new. I'm
new so no with an explanation of
why
Okay?
And after the after the last
question was answered from
representative Jones. I'm a Yes
Okay, um, representatives Pant
ski? Yes, Representative
Vincent.
Okay?
We're just trying to go in
order. Sorry.
Madam Vice chair. Yes.
Madam Chair? Yes.
Thank you.
Okay by a vote of 9 to 1. We
have a new pass, and I want to
explain my vote. Please getting
there, Um and representative
Lord to explain her vote, So I
remember the day when there was
no equity and diversity and
women's jobs were secretaries
and people of color were
excluded from most everything.
And I grew up in Los Angeles and
saw that a lot.
My issue is until I can be
guaranteed that there's gonna be
no more Jewish hatred on the
colleges or anywhere else.
Have to put my foot down on
issues and it's solely because
of that, because I'm getting
really tired of the anti EU
rhetoric, so it has nothing to
do with equal equality or
inclusion. I want my goal in
life is everyone
Level playing ground, and I hope
one day we get there. But until
that this is my stand on that.
Thank you. All right. We are in
recess until Wednesday at 830 in
