Representative Senna Cortez.
Vice Chair Herndon.
presents
Chair, Elizabeth Thompson.
Here, so, so formal.
Sorry.
That's OK. We do have a quorum,
hopefully our other members will
be joining us. So we are only
doing one bill today, just to
remind you to the committee
members, silence your phones,
please. Um, so we will be
hearing about HB 11 and
representative um
Chandler, Sarato, and Royal
Caballero, the floor is yours.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
we plan on being extremely brief
as all of you I know are well
versed in the bill, having heard
it on other occasions. Um,
first, my colleagues
representative uh Serato will
present, then I will and then
representative Royal Cavier. Uh,
thank you, Chairwoman. Thank
you, uh, committee for hearing
us today. As many of you know,
New Mexico has one of the
largest sandwich generations in
the nation. Uh, the Sandwi
generation is one that cares for
their parents, and also their
children. Uh, this is an extreme
burden, especially on our
traditional communities, our
families, and our working moms
and dads, um, and truly,
There is a real fear that exists
when you are part of that
sandwich generation. If I'm not
available to care for my family,
who will? And one of the pieces
that came out of the the
analysis that we've seen was
from um the early childhood
education and care uh
department. When they outlined
that what paid family leave does
is provide care in that gap of
service, care when, when, when
you are scared that you won't be
able to assist your family when
they need you most, that you're
able to do so. And it, it
provides that gap before kids
are even able
to go to school. Uh, paid family
leave truly is infrastructure
for our workforce. It is a
safety net for our workforce. If
we want to see our workforce
grow and attract new businesses
and be the on the front edge of
of industry, which we are
becoming, let's be honest here,
it's an exciting time. Uh, we
need uh uh programs that ensure
that our workforce is safe. Um,
as you know, I, I carried a
child while I was here in this
chamber, and I had to return
back to work within 6 weeks.
That's all that my nonprofit
could afford to give me, even
though they wanted to do more.
This is an insurance policy that
allows them to do more. I'm
gonna hand it over to my
colleague, uh, Chairwoman
Chandler.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
going to briefly describe the
program.
House Bill 11 creates the paid
Family Medical Leave Act, which
will establish a paid family and
medical leave program in New
Mexico to be administered by the
Workforce Solutions department.
Employees and self-employed
individuals can take up to 12
weeks of leave per year for what
we call family leave, which is
defined as leaf for new parents
or for a parent who has lost a
child under the age of 18.
Employees would receive 9 weeks
of leave for the employee's own
medical um reason or the medical
reason of a family member.
Those seeking protection from
domestic violence, such as
stalking or sexual assault.
And for a need arising out of
the applicant's family's active
duty service, which were called
exigency leave.
Medical, safe and exigency leave
duration is subject, it will be,
will be subject to adjustment to
12 weeks if the paid medical
leave fund is solvent in
calendar year 2021.
And with that, I think that
gives a good overview of what,
what the bill is about and I
represent Chandler, you said
2021.
2031. Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK, we will go to the bottom.
Oh, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm
getting ahead of myself.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
I'm here today, not only as a
sponsor, but also as a mother, a
grandmother. I've been a
caretaker of elderly parents,
and I've taken, been taken care
of by my working children.
Some of the most important
things employees look forward to
every day is knowing they have a
happy, healthy, secure and safe
workplace.
One that offers a living wage.
And above all, benefits, such as
a good retirement options.
But most importantly, paid
family and medical leave.
All employees come from
families.
And families have unforeseen
circumstances come up.
Often necessitating working
family members to help.
It is comforting to know.
Employees can do so without the
risk of losing their employment
or employment status.
Employers, I believe, having
been one myself.
Want a happy and thriving
productive workforce.
And they should always strive to
provide these quality working
conditions for all workers of
New Mexico.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I ask for your vote
of yes today, so we can make
paid family and medical leave, a
win-win for both workers and
employees. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Um, so we will go to
the audience. So first, in
opposition, please raise your
hand. OK, and how many of you
would like to speak. Obviously
I'm gonna have to limit the
number of folks who are
speaking.
Um, OK, hands down, the folks in
support.
OK. And how many of you would
like to speak?
Looks like we might be able to
get all the support in, um, but
we also have folks on, so if you
are on Zoom, um, and you are in
opposition, please raise your
hand, and we will take 10 in the
room and 5 on Zoom. So if you
want to line up, there is a mic
in the ceiling, um, and please,
please, if don't repeat the same
thing, and if there's more than
10, you, um, you can count out
and figure out.
Don't bother to stand in line.
Please don't repeat, um, we will
be very civil, there will be no
um casting aspersions or there's
more than 10 of you, I'm sorry.
So you have to kind of figure
out the 1st 10 will get to
speak, so we will go ahead. I'm
sorry, I'm losing my voice
today. Go ahead.
Yeah, it's up there and 2
minutes and I will cut you off
at 2 minutes.
I'm, I'm,
I'm sorry, um.
I don't think that the the.
The microphone is picking it up.
It's not. So, um, if you have
your mic on anybody, please we
we try and stick with one like
there there we have made
alternate arrangements, so, um,
we will have, hold on,
hold on,
hold on, guys, that
the, the, there will be a
handheld mic, so if you have
your mic on anybody, please turn
it off.
Well, good morning again, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Terry Cole
and I'm president and CEO of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. While the current
version of the House Bill 11 has
made some changes. The core of
the bill remains unfriendly to
businesses in New Mexico. I will
summarize our main concerns.
One, the scope of the bill that
allows such a large amount of
leave, 3 months for such a wide
range of reasons for such a wide
range of people will create.
incredible instability and
administrative challenges in the
workplace too. The bill imposes
a new tax at a time when we are
flush with cash on both
employers and employees. The tax
is likely to escalate in order
to maintain fund solvency. And
3, the bill as written would
require a massive new
bureaucracy of at least 200 or
more employees.
If if New Mexico is to compete
for workers and businesses, we
should not layer on additional
burdensome cost requirements and
regulations. We urge you to vote
no on House Bill 11. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, chair, and members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley. I'm the public policy
director for the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce. While we do
support the concept of paid
family medical leave for
companies that can't afford to
provide it, and we appreciate
the efforts of the sponsors and
for Representative Chandler for
meeting with the chamber, we
oppose this bill in its current
form. Small businesses are
currently struggling with the
inflation that's going on and as
well as hiring additional
security to protect their
employees and their property,
adding an additional payroll tax
could be the final
straw for many small businesses
in our community.
While we recognize that the
employers would not pay the
salaries of the employee on
leave. The real financial
hardship comes with finding new
employees, especially in those
hard to staff industries like
agriculture, daycare, and home
health care.
We believe there is a compromise
and we are open and willing to
work with the sponsors and
relevant stakeholders to find a
bill that supports families
without crippling small
businesses, but unfortunately,
we don't find that in HB 11 at
this time. We encourage no vote
and thank you.
Good morning. My name is Denise
Montoya. I'm the CEO of the New
Mexico HomeBuilders Association.
Over 90% of all businesses in
New Mexico are small and medium
size, and the construction
industry ranks in the top 5. The
construction industry is already
grappling with workforce
shortages, rising costs, and
intense demand for housing. New
Mexico must build 25,000 by the
year 2025, and almost 75,000 by
the year 2035. An NMHBA member
who is a general contractor in
Farmington had
20 employees before COVID-19.
During COVID, he had to. Now he
has 10. He's not only having to
uh find work for them, but he's
transporting housing and feeding
them. He's also turning away
jobs because he doesn't have
enough employees working in the
construction industry to meet
the demands on NMHBA member in
Santa Fe reported that employees
call in sick claiming potential
COVID-19 symptoms such as not
being able to taste food and
take government-mandated paid
sick leave for many days.
During such critical times in
Albuquerque and other NMHBA
member reports a contractor, has
grown in 40% business, but
continues to grapple and
struggle to hire workers to meet
the increased demand, and
Elmogordo, an NMHBA member
stated that they already offer
extended sick leave benefits,
and they would really like the
flexibility to customize their
own benefit packages to attract
and retain the talent for their
specific population of
employees. Furthermore, mandated
leave in private sector removes
the flex.
ability businesses need to adapt
to economic challenges during a
recession or downturn these
rigid requirements could lead to
layoffs, closures, or reduced
investments instead of imposing
mandates that a one size does
not fit all, encourage voluntary
programs and support them
through tax credits, offer
incentives by providing tax
breaks or grants for businesses
that have family-friendly
policies. Invest in workforce
development by addressing labor
shortages by expanding trade
education.
and workforce participation
amongst opportunity youth. New
Mexico can stimulate its growth,
its economy and support its
workforce by addressing more
carrot than stick, um, uh.
Suggestions. Thank you so much
for listening.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name's Art
Hall, I'm speaking on behalf of
every business client that I
represented in New Mexico.
I think it's important to
understand that earlier phrase,
uh, 90% of all businesses in New
Mexico employ 20 or less
employees.
They don't have major HR
departments to try to administer
something like this.
The big challenges for even the
large employers as well as the
small employers are the breadth.
If you'll look on page 4, line
14.
The phrase close association is
used to define a family member.
That would allow any person to
take this leave for anyone whom
they had a close association
with.
While we understand there are
many non-traditional extended
families in New Mexico. This
phrase close association opens
it up to virtually anybody that
you know or have had a close
association with in your
lifetime.
Other challenges are for the
large employers to get an
exemption, their bill would have
to be substantially similar.
Most large employers will
require their employees to have
some skin in the game, that is,
they would have to take maybe 5
days of their medical leave or
their sick leave before the paid
family would kick in.
They also on those larger plans,
don't have this definition of
close association. They use more
traditional means of identifying
family members, for those
reasons, they wouldn't be able
to be exempted.
So their employees will have to
pay into a plan that they can't
use while the company pays into
a plan that's even better than
what this plan is. There's also
concern around stacking.
That is, could the employees
stack and use their New Mexico
paid family medical leave and
then subsequently use the
employer provided federal.
A medical family leave.
We stand in opposition to this.
Thank you.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the committee. My
name's Mark Schier. I'm with
CARC in Carlsbad. I operate 12
group homes for individuals with
intellectual developmental
disabilities.
We at Clark, we call Clark, we
provide sick leave benefits
greater than what's required by
the state, vacation benefits,
some personal days, and we have
a really robust retirement plan.
Currently,
Partially because we're in
Carlsbad in the middle of the
oil patch.
Our vacancy in our full-time
positions in our residential
home currently today is 27%.
We have required federal and
state mandates to staff our
homes, and because of that, we
run a tremendous amount of
overtime and I have wonderful
employees who will step up and
work and they work hard.
This bill would put an
additional burden on trying to
staff our homes, and we're
already stretched to the limit
as to whether or not we can keep
some homes open because of the
short staff that we have.
And it's a big concern that
With this additional benefit,
which is much more lengthy.
That
More individuals will be gone
and more individuals will take
time off and I don't know where
I'm going to get staff to staff
it.
We're stretched to the end. My
staff retired.
They're committed and dedicated,
but they can't work much more.
We had the flute blow through
over the holidays that took out
some additional staff for a
while, and that was hard. That
was really hard. We had
administrative staff who are
trained working in our group
homes just to meet the
requirements. Couple of
questions about what's in the
bill. It says that an employee
has to contribute for 6 months
in the prior 12 months, is that
one hour a month?
One hour a week
There's no stipulation.
So at least put a minimum how
long they have to contribute
before they're eligible.
Also, if you look at the numbers
in the FIR and you just do an
average amount of how much
people pay in.
In order that the first year in
order to cover the
administrative costs, it will
take 53,000 employees in the
state of New Mexico to cover the
administrative cost. After that,
it's 10,000 to pay the payback
to the state. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. Thank you so
much for hearing us out this
morning. My name is Sammy Kyota.
I'm president of Millennium
Media out of Gallup and member
of the Greater Gallup McKinley
County Chamber of Commerce.
I'm here today to talk a little
bit about our situation. We have
a staff of 14 people that work
at our company at Millennium
Media, and we've been providing
a paid family leave for far more
years than we've ever considered
it to make it a law here in the
state of New Mexico, uh, most
recently we had a staff member
that we provided 14 weeks of
paid leave because of a heart
condition, and then he ended up
passing away, but we were there
for him and his, his family, um.
Uh, some of the points I'd like
to make of, of concerns would be
the uh lack of workforce to get
people uh to uh take these
positions. Uh, we don't have a
blessed, we're not blessed with
a far number of people that are
available at our disposal for uh
positions in Gallup, much less
skilled and specialized
positions. Another thing too, I
visited with my staff, uh, for
extended periods of time before
I came to Santa Fe today and the
discussion had to do with uh the
tax.
And uh you know, we're in a
welfare state, and if we want to
continue to shrink the
disposable income and the buying
power of New Mexicans, then like
we continue to do what we want
to do, but I think that's a real
concern and uh creates a loss of
buying power for the people.
The, the next big thing you
would be the uh administration
of this.
How objectively is this thing
gonna be handled, uh, have we
pursue the possibility of doing
uh, an outside party, a third
party to uh to take care of this
administration of uh of the paid
family leave, um,
Have we talked to the business
community about getting them to
come in at the table with us to
come up with solutions that will
take gray matter out of all
that's being presented.
The bottom line is if we're
gonna take this major step
forward for New Mexico.
We want to make sure it's in
black and white, that there is
no gray matter anywhere.
Gray matter is when things fall
and slip through the cracks, and
to go back and fix it.
He's gonna be very, very
difficult.
I say no
I, but I say no.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Howard Hutchinson. I am
representing the coalition of
Arizona and New Mexico counties.
These are primarily rural
counties with dominant federal
lands.
Therefore, low tax base.
Our counties do not have the
revenues coming in that would
support.
Hiring additional full-time
employees to administer this.
And not only that, but paying
the, the premiums that have to
go in to match for the
employees.
I'm also chair of the San
Francisco Soil and Water
Conservation District.
We have a very minimal.
Uh, budget
To cover our full-time staff.
Let alone having an additional
burden of paying these costs for
matching the
Employee contributions, so.
We oppose this.
And we hope that you will vote
against passage of this bill.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Carol
White. I am the CEO of the New
Mexico Restaurant Association,
and I'm here today representing
a coalition of over 30
associations and chambers with
thousands of businesses
throughout the state.
While our state enjoys
surpluses, New Mexico workers
and employers do not. The
proposed payroll tax would be
the largest increase in this New
Mexico history. This tax on
working New Mexicans is expected
to generate $369 million for a
super fund that is 4 times the
size of the unemployment fund.
For a state with a surplus, it
seems shocking to put this tax
burden on the few people who are
working in New Mexico.
Although paid family medical
leave's intent is commendable.
It poses unintended economic
hardships for working families
and businesses. We urge you.
To support New Mexico businesses
and their employees by voting
no. I also want to mention that
we have a survey of 347 New
Mexico business owners, 9, 95%
disagree that paid family
medical leave will help small
businesses in New Mexico with
87% strongly disagreeing. 95%
say paid family medical leave
with negatively impact their
business with 269 or 90%
since strongly agreeing that it
would negatively impact their
business, 85% have indicated
that they do not have enough
staff to cover employees who
take an extended paid leave, 93%
are concerned about employee
abuse of paid family medical
leave, 95% agree that paid
family medical leave will make
employee scheduling more
difficult and 79% say that paid
family medical leave could
potentially shut down their
business only 2.
% of the business owners
surveyed did not have concerns
about paid family medical leave,
potentially shutting down their
business. I just want to say.
Businesses are very concerned
about this, and we are not being
listened to by the sponsors.
They have heard us, but they
have done nothing with this
piece of legislation to make it
any different and address those
concerns.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Abby O'Connor and I
represent the New Mexico Cattle
Growers Association and our over
1200 members across the state.
As a pregnant mother with a 2
year old at home, I understand
where the hearts are of these
sponsors and supporters, as well
as anybody, but I also
understand that as a small
business owner and a 5th
generation rancher from this
state that this will kill small
businesses. We cannot go on with
more taxes and regulations.
on top of the agriculture
community. Um, who do we expect
to pick chilies and milk cows
and go out and harvest our crops
when our employees are out on
leave. Uh, this bill really
heavily relies on a skilled
workforce, which we quite simply
do not have in rural New Mexico.
We strongly urge you to oppose
this bill. Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee members,
Jerry Shallow, president and CEO
of the Rio Rancho Regional
Chamber. We stand opposed to HB
11.
Paid family medical Leave Act.
The bill raises serious concerns
about double taxation for
employees.
The bill requires employees to
pay their premiums out of their
net wages, not their gross
wages, net wages.
In addition to that, if they do
take advantage of this program
that is based on, they get taxed
on that again.
So example, they get $1000 a
week.
They get 67% of that, so that's
$670 then out of that $670 then
they get federal and state
withholdings.
Then out of that, then they get
benefits, which were pre-taxed
with the employer now because
they're responsible for them.
Now it's coming out of their
wages, their net wages. You're
looking at 30 to 37% is all
they're getting out of this
benefit out of paying all of
this funding for it.
In addition to this, this makes
us look just like Cobra on their
on their benefits.
So looking at this, you know, we
have a couple other concerns and
issues, one being on the
employer's side. Unemployment
insurance.
If this bill was to pass and
needs an amendment that says
that all employers are held
harmless.
For any employee that chooses
not to return after the 12
weeks, or that they have to hire
temporarily to bring in and then
they have to release them
because they had to save the
spot for him.
Another thing I would like to
bring to your attention is the
FIR and review of the FIR. The
FIR does not appear to be
correct. They only says that
there's 34,000 employees
employed by businesses less than
5. That is untrue when you have
over 90% of the businesses that
fit that case.
That being said, we stand
opposed to it and would love to
work with the committee and uh
find some amendments. Thank you.
OK, thank you so much. We will
go to Zoom and we'll start with
Carla Santag.
Go ahead, Carla.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Carla Santag. I'm the CEO and
president of the New Mexico
Business Coalition. I greatly
appreciate how much time and
energy has gone into this and
the concern. However, if you're
speaking, we can't hear you.
OK, I'm, I'm being told that uh
the other commu uh committee
that uses this room had trouble
taking public comment via Zoom,
so there may be a technical
issue. Carla, can you try again?
OK, we're gonna skip over
Carline and see if, if Steve
Hale has better success.
Go ahead, Steve. Carla will come
back to you if, if we figure
this out.
Go ahead, Steve.
OK.
Thank you.
Thank you
Oh,
OK, so I'm being told that the
folks on Zoom can hear you, but
the folks in the room, including
the committee, cannot hear you,
which is a bit of a problem. Um.
So hold on, we're looking at the
technology, um.
We may have to.
Unfortunately, skip over this
part and see if we can get maybe
somebody from IT.
Um, did they have any luck with
your meeting vice chair Herndon,
did they ever get it working?
OK,
that some
bad sign.
CV19 right now.
OK, so can we put the mic on
Steve.
Just to see if it's just Carla.
OK, OK, I know,
I now see a way please.
Yes, Madam Chair, can you hear
me now?
OK, we are not hearing it, um.
The, the top 5 if we do get it
fixed, it will be Carlos Santag,
Steve Hale, Daniel McGillan,
Fred.
She a petty, I don't know how to
say that. I'm sorry, and Vicente
Vargas. So if you find, if we
get it fixed, we will come back
to you, um, it doesn't sound
like they got it fixed before,
so I deeply apologize and we're
just gonna keep moving along,
and so that we can get through
this hearing. So now we will
hear from people in support, so
if you can uh 10 people line up.
And then we again will try with
5 on Zoom. So if you are in
support of this, if you are in
opposition, please lower your
hands.
And if you are in support,
please raise your hands.
Yeah
So those of you who were in
opposition, please lower your
hand if we can, if we get the
technology fixed, we will come
back to you, I promise. OK.
OK, go ahead.
OK, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, thank you for
scheduling the bill so quickly
and for members of the committee
for their support in previous
years.
My name is Lance Senna, policy
director for the Center Pacific
Policy and more importantly, a
stage 4 blood cancer survivor.
4 months ago, I was in the
hospital in Denver fighting for
my life during a bone marrow
transplant where I received my
sister's cells, which, being a
donor, is not a qualifying event
for FMLA.
My fellow New Mexican transplant
patients who did not have access
to PFML who like me struggle to
stand and eat were seen sitting
in their desk working while
struggling to survive.
Of the 6 New Mexicans in my
transplant ward.
Only one of us made it home in
time for Christmas.
Only one of us has not seen
complications, and only one of
us had access to PFML and is
standing before you today to
urge you to allow all New
Mexicans the ability to survive
while not struggling to question
financial destitution. I urge
your support of HB 11.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Alexandria Taylor, and
I'm the executive director of
the New Mexico Coalition of
Sexual Assault Programs, which
leads the statewide efforts in
the prevention and intervention
of sexual violence in New
Mexico. Over half of people
living in New Mexico have
experienced sexual violence,
which is why we stand in support
of HB 11. Paid family medical
leave that includes paid safely
for victims of sexual and
domestic violence, offers
important economic.
stability to families. In our
recently published victimization
survey, nearly 70% of survivors
report never receiving
professional help after an
assault.
Primarily due to the risk of job
loss or loss of wages. 60% of
New Mexican survivors indicated
that they, the experience of
sexual violence led to
significant problems with the
job, school work, their boss,
coworkers, or peers. PFML and
increasing economic security for
families is a a protective
factor in preventing sexual
violence from occurring to begin
with. As an employer who wants
to fully support those who I
work with every single day.
PFML is a much-needed benefit to
our workforce. Thank you.
Uh good morning committee. Diane
McCash will speak extremely
briefly. Hope you'll take an
11th person who also can speak
briefly. I want to point out
that legislation like this
supports families. It supports
particular families who don't
have access to critical support
such as paid family and medical
leave is public safety, public
safety is a priority this
session for all of us, and this
is legislation that is the kind
of thing that will increase
public safety for us, not
increasing sentences on already
existing penalties that will not
increase public.
safety, this kind of legislation
that supports our communities
will. Thank you.
Just, sorry, if you go uh it's
still 10, no matter what, so
just it's easier for
scorekeeping, thank you.
Good morning, Chair Thompson and
vice chair Hernon and committee
members. My name is Bernard
Hardy. I'm here with NM Native
vote in 2006, I was expecting
the arrival of my son, Lorenzo.
We had no paid medical leave and
back then my employer made it
clear that they would not hold
my position, essentially firing
firing me when I would leave to
have my baby. I was forced to
work until the day Lorenzo was
born. Soon after this, my mom
was diagnosed with stage 4
breast cancer, and his, I assume
the responsibility of caring for
her. Only 8.
of only 8 months after having my
son, I lost my mom with almost
no financial income.
My son and I were left homeless,
despite these challenges, I
managed to to graduate from UNM
and my son is now 18 and a
senior at Highland High School.
I share my story because
How many more families will left
will be left poverty stricken
before a change is made,
economic security for our most
for for our most vulnerable
points in life is imperative.
PFMLA will give our hardworking
New Mexican families. I
guarantee that they will never
have to choose between the most
critical times in their life.
And their job.
It's time to stop having to
start over and over again. It's
time to take a step into the
future. Hardworking families
deserve.
To be home with the child. Take
care of their family member.
Have a safe place to go if you
were abused.
Please vote yes.
For HB
11. Thank you.
Thank you so much for sharing
your story and congratulations
for
Your toughness.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Deborah Condon. I'm the owner of
Books on the Bosque. We're an
independent bookstore on the
west side of Albuquerque, New
Mexico, and there's a reason why
you don't see people lining up
to open up bookstores, you do
not make a lot of money. It is a
very hard business to be in. I
was also a single mom who a very
young single mom, and when I had
my daughter, I had to go on food
stamps afterwards cause the the
business that I worked for for 4
years when provide leave for me
to be in that business. So, so
on two fronts I
really support this bill because
I understand what it's like to
to be on food stamps and try to
make it every single day and it
was, those were dark days, um,
but on the business approach, I
have 10 of the most amazing
employees. They're very, very
smart and brilliant people. I
cannot provide time off for
them, uh, you know, pay time off
for them if something comes up.
I cannot afford it. And if
there's a way for me as a small
business owner to be able to
provide that, sign me up. I'm
right there. I did the number
crunch.
on this, and for my payroll for
the 10 employees this would cost
me a whopping $32 a month to
implement for my employees. So
if, if that's the cost, it's one
more book that I would have to
sell. I support this bill, so we
hope that House Bill 11 passes
this year and thank you for uh
for your support on this.
Good morning, members of the
committee and Chair Thompson,
thank you for having us today.
My name is Christina Kimball,
and I'm with the leukemia and
Lymphoma Society, LLS represents
thousands of blood cancer
patients in New Mexico and their
families.
House Bill 11 will directly
improve the quality of life for
our patients. It will help
ensure that cancer patients have
access to critical care without
having to sacrifice their
financial stability and their
future.
42% of all cancer patients
deplete their entire life
savings within 2 years of
treatment.
Undergoing intensive treatment
like chemotherapy is extremely
hard on the body and on the mind
and not having the option of pay
time off makes it even harder.
Cancer treatment also takes
time.
Because of this, we would
encourage you to pass this
legislation with the full 9
weeks of medical leave, which
increases to 12 weeks when
solvency is reached.
Patients need the option of
being able to take 12 full weeks
so they can access their life
saving care, recover, and then
return to the workforce stronger
than before. Please help us make
a difference for cancer patients
by voting guests on House Bill
1. Thank you.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, my name is
Brittany Poss, and I'm the owner
of Single Space Strategies, a
data research and communications
firm based in Albuquerque. I
never envisioned myself starting
a business, but 3 years in,
we've grown to 10 employees,
including our most recent hire
who is a lifelong resident of
your district, Representative
Kates. In 2024, we paid over
half a million dollars in wages,
that money funnels directly into
New Mexico's economy through
things like retail and
restaurants. HB 11 is an
insurance policy that will help
us to continue to live our
values.
To pay people well to offer them
quality benefits and to help us
retain the best and the
brightest. We implore other
businesses to join us in this
fight for our people and our
bottom line. Thank you, we
support HB 11.
Hello and good morning, chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Aweta Sarkash and I'm
the public policy director for
Small Business Majority, a
nonprofit that helps to empower
businesses across the state. I'm
also a resident of Rio Rancho.
Um, during my time conducting
outreach across the state, I've
spoken with countless small
businesses who struggled to
attract and retain a workforce
as a few people in the
opposition have also mentioned
and all those businesses have
said once we've actually
explained what the program does
and expelled the myths. They are
incredibly supportive of this.
In fact,
When we released um polling last
year, we found that business is
overwhelmingly supported this um
program here in New Mexico among
New Mexico's small business
owners. Um, we also know that
self-employed individuals would
benefit from the program and New
Mexico has a large share of
self-employed businesses earlier
this month, we had a small
business owner who's
self-employed who had a health
issue. She told me she would
have loved to have a program
like this so that she could
actually use her, uh, the paid
family and medical leave and be
able to get back.
Um, to her business just a week
ago, um, again, once we actually
understand and explain the
program to the businesses,
they're very much on board and
also one last thing, 66% of the
businesses in the state would
pay into the program, uh, would
not pay into the program and
benefit from the program. Um, so
this is a huge benefit to small
businesses across the state and,
um, I encourage you to vote in
favor of HB 11. Thank you.
Hi, good morning. My name is
Kellyakati. I am the I am from
the Pablo Zuni. I was an early
childhood educator for 6 or 8
years and was recently
terminated due to my health
issues in my heart. Taking time
off medical purposes was not
supported at my workplace. I
strongly believe and support the
12 weeks of paid medical leave
for all New Mexico families. It
will benefit me from being the
sole provider of my two
children.
I don't have any financial
support as a single mom to help
the three of us.
Nobody should have to lose their
job over the on this. Thank you
for and for the opportunity for
making me speak, please support
the paid medical leave.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and Committee, thank
you for a quick hearing and for
your support. I'm Megan Greene,
president of CWA Local 7076 and
a state employee myself. I am
speaking both for myself and for
my 5000 CWA union siblings
across the state. We are public
employees that provide essential
services to New Mexicans,
custodians, and maintenance
workers at our universities,
healthcare professionals, first
responders, telecom workers and
artists. Together we are asking
you to support HB 11.
As new parents, as chronically
ill and disabled workers and his
children caring for aging
relatives. We don't deserve to
lose our jobs, go unpaid, or
worry about putting food on the
table or paying rent while
caring for ourselves and our
families. Taking care of our
families in our time of need
should be a basic human right.
Well, workers are under attack
across the nation. When you make
skins do deserve is to have
lawmakers put our working
families first and pass the paid
family and medical leave Act
during the 2025 session. Thank
you.
Thank you all so much for
sharing your stories. Um, do we
have any success on the Zoom?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So can we go to Zoe Crack, well,
yeah, let's go to Zoe Kraft.
Good morning, Chair Thompson,
um, Vice Chair Herndon, and
members of the committee.
but we can't hear you.
Um, stay tuned. We have someone
working on it, so we may need
you to
To be our test case and so hold
on and.
Let's see if we can get this
going.
The joys of technology until
they're not, right?
No
It's OK to smile.
Or even laugh.
I guess I'll have to try hard.
OK, give us a minute.
When you need to.
OK.
I couldn't turn on my mic, that
would be helpful. So we, I think
we have it working, so we will
go to the, in favor of first,
since we're finishing that up
and then we'll go back to the in
opposition, so, um, so Zoe, go
ahead.
Thank you so much. Um, good
morning, Chair Thompson, Vice
Chair Herndon, and members of
the committee. My name is Zoe
Kraft. Um, I work for Earthcare,
and as a small grassroots
organization with a staff of
just 12 and many hundreds of
members. We stand in strong
support of the paid family and
medical leave Act. We work hard
to provide paid leave for our
team, and this bill would
actually make it easier for us
to support our invaluable team
members. Um, I am also here
today to share my story and the
story of my family.
When I was a young child, my
mother was diagnosed with breast
cancer. Her diagnosis required
many months of surgeries,
countless days spent in and out
of the hospital and weeks of
recovery at home. This meant
that my father um faced an
impossible choice whether to
keep his full-time job to keep
our family afloat, or to step
back from work to care for us
when we needed him the most.
Like many working families
across our state, we didn't have
the financial cushion or
essential protections that would
have given him the chance to
care for us without sacrificing
our financial stability. So
instead, he continued to work.
Um, he left us in the care of
his in-laws and even took on
extra hours for many months in
an attempt to support our
family, even as we took on
hundreds of thousands of dollars
of medical debt. Um, no one
should be forced to make these
impossible choices. Even the 12
weeks of paid leave or partial.
wage replacement provided for
under House Bill 11 would have
made a dramatic difference for
my family during this time. It
would have meant that my father
could take weeks of time off
during the most challenging
moments of my mother's illness
in order to care for her and
spend precious time with his
family when we needed it the
most without losing his job or
sacrificing our financial
stability.
HB 11 also recognizes the
fundamental importance of caring
for and valuing our workers
without imposing an undue
financial burden on small
employers like Earthcare. In
fact, the vast majority of New
Mexico's small businesses would
not be required to pay anything
into the fund for their
employees, which actually
assists small businesses,
ensuring that their workers can
benefit from the same critical
protections as those frequently
received by those employed at
larger companies.
The passage of HB 11 would send
a powerful message that our
state values its workers and its
families, and that New Mexico
recognizes their need to be able
to care for themselves and their
loved ones without risking their
livelihoods. Thank you. Thank
you so much. OK, we will go to
Tiffany.
Hello, Madam Chair and committee
members. My name is Tiffany Hero
and I'm from the Pueblo of
Aslera.
I also represent the coalition
to Stop Violence Against Native
Women as the executive director.
Um, I am in support, we are in
support of this bill and are
hoping that this will actually
gets passed this year. Um, we
primarily serve all 23 tribal
nations within New Mexico and as
you know, 4 and 5 indigenous
women do experience domestic
violence and
3 and 2 and 3 experience sexual
violence. I'm also a survivor
and if I had been given the
opportunity to um
Get the mental health at that
time. Um, I, I truly believe
that, um,
Things would have been a lot
different for me. Um, I've also
wanna share my story if it's OK.
Um, I was in a very abusive
relationship with my partner and
had just given birth to our, our
little girl and at the time, um,
it was very difficult for me to
quit my job or um
Continue working as a single
mother. Um, I did have to return
back to work when my, when my
baby was only 4 weeks old.
Thank you so much.
Thank you. We will go to Philip
Ramirez.
Or no, I'm sorry, Zoe Kraft.
Oh, we just, sorry, and it's
only our first real meeting.
Talk to me in 58 days. Um, so we
will go to Jonathan Juarez.
Oh wait, no, Philip, I'm sorry,
Philips.
I need someone sitting here in
my ear telling me who's next. So
go ahead, Philip, I'm sorry.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Philip Ramirez. I'm a
small business owner, and
strongly support paid family
medical leave. Um, during our
time, uh, when my wife had to go
on FMLA. It was an undid a
burden when it came to finances
within the house. Peyton paid
family medical leave is not just
a benefit. It's a necessary
component of a modern
compassionate workplace and
society. In today's fast-paced
work world.
We're balanced to work and
family responsibilities can be
daunting, providing employees
with the opportunity to take
paid time off to care for
themselves or their loved ones
is essential for several
reasons. First, the emotion and
physical well-being of employees
should be a priority for any
organization. When employees
have access to paid family
leave, they can attend to
critical life such as birth of a
child caring for ailing parents
and recovering from a serious
illness. Without these at its
Without the added stress of
financial instability. This
support not only fosters loyalty
and trust between employees and
employers, but also leads to a
healthier workforce. Secondly,
the economy economic argument
for paid family medical leave is
compelling. By investing the
employees well being, businesses
can reduce turnover rates and
the associated cost of hiring
and training new staff.
Moreover, paid family medically
promotes gender equality in the
workforce.
Women who traditionally bear a
larger share of caregiving
responsibilities often face
career setbacks when they need
to take time off for family
reasons, providing paid leave
levels the playing field,
allowing both parents to
participate in caregiving
without sacrificing their
careers. In conclusion, Pa
family medical leave is not
merely a policy, it is a vital
investment in the health of
employees, the productivity of
businesses and the well-being of
society as a whole. As we move
forward, it is crucial for more
organizations to adopt such
policies, and for policymakers
to advocate for broader
implementation at the national
level, embracing paid family
medical leave is a step towards
a more equitable and supportive
work environment for everyone.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next, we will go to
Jonathan Juarez.
Good
Good morning. Sorry about that.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Thank
you for the opportunity to speak
here today. My name is Jonathan
Juarez. I'm 22 years old, from
the Pueblos of Laguna and
Isleta, um, sorry, it said
something about, um, OK, thank
you. Uh, from the publics of
Laguna and Isleta, uh, and I
currently reside in Albuquerque.
I'm an organizer with Yucca
Youth United for Climate Crisis
Action, and while yucca strongly
supports House Bill 11. I'm here
today to share my personal
story.
and why this bill matters so
deeply to me.
In 2024, I tragically lost 4
members of my immediate family.
Two of my cousins, my older
brother, and my mother.
The weight of so much grief was
crushing. I was overwhelmed and
struggling to hold myself
together while also juggling the
pressures of maintaining my job.
Luckily though, I was blessed to
be able to take care of my
mother while she was on hospice
care, thanks to my employer's
paid leave. My employer who
employs less than 20 people, was
able to support me by ensuring
that I had ample time off
several weeks to grieve and to
support my family through these
life changing events, but I
often think about what could
have happened if I didn't have
that support.
What if I had been forced to
choose between mourning my
family, caring for my dying
mother, and keeping my only
source of income.
No one should ever have to make
that choice. And that's what
House Bill 11 is about. It's
about ensuring that no one has
to face those impossible
choices. It's about dignity and
humanity. It'll give workers the
time that they need to welcome a
new child, recover from an
illness, escape domestic
violence, support a loved one,
or grieve the loss of someone
who they loved without the fear
of losing their job.
Some here today say that this
will hurt businesses, but let me
ask, if an organization like
ours who employs less than 12
less than 20 people, 12 to be
exact. If we can make it work,
then what excuses do these
larger businesses have. As many
here today have noted most small
businesses in New Mexico will
not pay anything, yet their
employers will benefit from this
bill. And the truth is paid
family and medical leave
strengthens, not weakens our
economy and our workforce. It
improves.
Thank you, thank you.
OK. Next we will go to Jennifer
Raphael Goetz.
And she will be the last one in
support on Zoom.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Jennifer
Raphael Goetz, and I'm the
director of the New Mexico
Commission on the Status of
Women.
I want to speak to you today
about the positive economic
impacts of paid family and
medical leave for the women of
New Mexico.
Women face economic
disadvantages throughout their
lives, with unequal pay,
creating financial uncertainty.
As primary caregivers, they
often need time off for
childbirth or family care,
leading to lower annual wages
and increased expenses like
health care.
These inequities impact their
lifetime earnings and result in
lower retirement income,
including reduced Social
Security benefits compared to
their male counterparts.
Women aren't asking for a
handout. They're asking for a
fair opportunity to close this
gap through programs like paid
family and medical leave.
For these reasons, and so many
others, the commission on the
Status of Women is asking you to
support HB 11. Thank you.
Thank you. And I'm gonna ask the
folks on Zoom in support to
please lower your hands.
And I'm sorry we didn't get to
you.
Um, and then we will go back to
the, against, um, and if you
were one of the 5, please raise
your hands so it's easier to
find you.
Um, OK, so we will start with
Carlos Sante.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Carlos
Santag, president and CEO of the
New Mexico Business Coalition. I
greatly appreciate the concern
that is warranted from this
bill, but I've got to tell you,
as we work with businesses, you
have received and members of
your body.
Over 126,000 emails stated in
opposition to this bill. It's
not because we don't care about
our employees, we do. A lot of
these emails that you've
received have been from
employees that are concerned
about money coming out of their
checks right now during this
high inflation period we're in.
This is one of the highest taxes
we've considered putting on
employees.
And when you look at the
employer perspective, while they
pay a lower percentage, they're
paying that on every single
dollar of payroll. In addition,
they are going to be held.
Responsible for replacing that
employee when the employee is
out, so they're not paying the
salary of that person that's
out, but they've got to have
somebody to come in and to
replace that person.
The problem is we can't hire in
that short amount of time and
get somebody up to speed to do
the job, so it's for all of
these reasons and the reasons
that you've heard earlier, this
is not a concern just of
employers, but of employees as
well, and we can't make this
work, even your FIR is
indicating that New Mexico has
put itself in a tenuous
situation with the way this bill
is written, and it doesn't look
good for the future.
It looks like rates are gonna
have to be increased because the
fund will become insolvent
before people can even use it
after paying into it for a long
period of time. Thank you so
much for your consideration of
our comments. I think we really
need to vote no on this bill
today because it just doesn't
work. Thank you.
Thank you, Steve Hale.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I am a
retired, semi-retired builder,
uh, but active with the
homebuilders Association and
I've had the chance to visit
with many other builders. One of
the biggest issues I see up
front, uh, with this bill is the
fact that if you lose and
valuable employee, the time
spent to train somebody.
To make a replacement, uh, only
to then.
Have to let them go when that
other employee comes back, uh,
would really be hard to recruit,
said replacement. Another issue
I have which may have been
brought up earlier, is this
really should stack after
employee time off paid employee
time off is taken. This would
incentivize people to really
consider the resources a little
bit better if they need.
time off to care for somebody
that should first come out of uh
vacation or medical time off,
uh, and I appreciate, um,
Uh, that being put in place of
the bill. It doesn't seem to
offer any protection for an
employer that uh when he
replaces that uh person on leave
and doesn't have the ability to
rehire them.
Could be in a potential
liability situation to further
burden that employer. Thank you,
folks, and I do, uh, oppose this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Next we have Daniel.
Mc McGillan.
Again, if you are, if you are in
in.
If you are in support, please
lower your hands. We've already
covered that and we do have the
54, it just makes it easier for
a Zoom operator to find you if
we don't have a bunch of hands
raised. Thank you. Go ahead,
Daniel.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair and committee
members. Uh, my name is Daniel
McGillan. Um, I am opposed to HB
11, um, and I, I, I do have to
say, in general, I, I do think
the spirit of this bill is
positive, is, is very good, but
I do see uh some potential side
effects. And, um, the main one
is that it could, it, it could
be very um detrimental to the
economies in a lot of our small
towns. A lot of big box stores.
Um, they, they won't put a
location into a small town. They
won't put a location to the town
unless it's got a population of
at least 10,000 people.
Therefore, a lot of the
businesses in smaller towns like
Hatch, like Socorro, like Taos.
Uh, are, uh, our small mom and
pop businesses, and it's gonna
be much more difficult for them
to replace an employee to uh to
fund this.
Then it would be for a big box
store.
Um
Now, because of, now, because of
that, I see that, you know, that
it's very potentially it could
potentially create a situation
where
Uh, the small mom and pop
businesses in these small towns,
you know, go out of business and
simultaneously there's no big
box stores that will go into
business. I could see this
being, being very catastrophic
for a lot of small towns in New
Mexico.
I oppose this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Next we have um
Frank
And Frank, if you could
pronounce your last name,
please.
He
My name is Frank Chapetti, and,
and I'm speaking as a former
public school superintendent and
a current city manager.
Um, definitely oppose this bill,
um, as a parent, I'll also speak
as.
As a parent, um, my daughter,
um, went through 3 straight
grades with long term
substitutes.
This bill, depending on the
timing of the year would be 1/3
of the school year.
We already have a shortage of
teachers.
Nurses, law enforcement, fire
department.
Just general workers at, at mom
and pop stores. Um, we're seeing
businesses close up, but going
back to the education, my
daughter.
For 3 straight years had a long
term sub.
Um, that is education you do not
recover.
Um, even with me as an educator
helping her in the evenings, um,
you see the reflection in our
test scores and and her future
potential in higher education.
Um,
you know, it's just gonna push
the universities to go to more
online learning.
Which was wonderful when I paid
for a dorm room and a meal plan
at Western New Mexico
University, Burer have all
online classes. That's, that's
how absurd our education is
getting with the shortage of of
teaching. So with the shortage,
we're seeing the closing of
businesses. We're seeing
businesses struggling, um,
closing on different days
because they don't have the
workforce to even open that day,
especially in the restaurant
industry. We have a number of
restaurants who you pull into
visit and they're clo.
that day because a shortage of
workers.
Um
It's going to be tough. It's
affecting our economic
development. It's going to be
affecting future businesses
coming in to New Mexico and, and
it's just a worrisome portion.
As a as a parent raising 3 kids,
I did take advantage of federal
FMLA and did take time off with
each of my kids, very positive
thing.
But again, we already have the
federal portion.
So with all these, the, the
impact on small businesses, the
impact on worker availability,
the impact on economic
development. I do have to speak
on against the bill. I thank
you, Madam Chair and committee
members for hearing me out.
Thank you, and we have one final
um Vicente Vargas.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
My name is Vicente Vargas. I'm
the executive director for the
New Mexico Health Care
Association, New Mexico Center
for Assisted Living. Uh, our
membership includes 64 nursing
facilities and 7
Intermediate care facilities for
individuals with developmental
disabilities.
Those 6 foreigners, you know,
uh, homes have close to 6000
beds. If you were to walk into
any nursing facility in New
Mexico, 70% of those of the
residents in those facilities
are Medicaid, uh, beneficiaries
and for the intermediate care
facilities, there are 291 uh
clients in those facilities and
close and just about all of them
are Medicaid beneficiaries.
This bill and this legislation
does not take into account the
impact that Medicaid
beneficiaries in these uh
facilities will um will feel.
Many of these nursing facilities
depend and rely on Medicaid
reimbursement.
To operate for nursing
facilities, we have not, they
have not been re-based in order
to keep up with the cost of of
providing care since 2007.
Although the state of New Mexico
is mandated to rebase nursing
facility Medicaid rates every 3
years. It has been over 17 years
that that has been done.
They are now $90 million short
of what it based on health the
New Mexico Healthcare Authority,
there are $90 million short in
what it costs to operate and
provide care.
To residents in nursing
facilities. This legislation
will only add to those expenses.
We are asking.
The sponsors and the legislature
to please consider.
And offset or any other type of
assistance that can be provided
to Medicaid providers in order.
That
A piece of legislation like this
does not force providers to have
to take from uh the Medicaid
rate that could otherwise go to
providing care to a nursing
facility resident and
this benefit. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair and members of
the committee.
OK, and for um members of the
committee, I have requested that
we be excused from the floor to
finish this up. Um I haven't
heard back. Oh yes, you're all
excused, so don't panic about
the time.
But so with that, uh, we will go
back to the sponsor to see if
she has they, I should say have
any responses to what they've
heard.
Um
Thank you, Madam Chair, I, I, I
do not have any additional
comments at this time. Thank
you.
OK, thank you. We will go to the
committee if you want to ask
questions, raise your hand.
So we'll just start with
Representative Martinez.
Minority whip
Martinez, is that correct?
Representative Martinez is fine.
OK.
So let's not get too casual or
I'll be calling you Alan. So
please try and keep your
questions brief and your answers
brief.
And um, and don't repeat. So go
ahead, rep.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you, um.
Chandler and presenters, um, I
appreciate the time that you
took to
To
Bring this forward, um, I do
have a few questions.
Um
And it doesn't seem like a bill
that
was before this body last year
has changed much, so.
Um, I have a new line of
questioning.
Um
In the bill, it, it requires
workforce solutions to manage
the this fund. Is that correct?
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, yes.
So, um, is it possible to have
the Secretary of Workforce
Solutions answer some questions.
Um, Madam Chair, that's at the
pleasure and representative
that's the pleasure of the
chair.
That's fine. Go. Come on up,
madam.
chair, wrong, wrong business,
Madam Secretary.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Secretary, I appreciate you, um.
Taking some questions.
Um, how many employees is it
gonna take to run this?
This uh program.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Martinez, I think our estimate
was 219.
And what is your current vacancy
rate?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Martinez worried about a 17%
vacancy rate.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
secretary, how many
This is similar to the to the
unemployment insurance fund on
how you'd set this up.
Is that correct?
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Martinez, there would be some
differences uh in this fund
because it wouldn't be federally
regulated the way RUI fund is.
Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair and secretary,
and do you have an idea what the
vacancy rate is in that
division.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Martinez, I, I don't have that
for you, but I'd be happy to
provide it afterwards.
OK. Thank, thank you very much.
Those, those are the questions I
have for the secretary.
I appreciate you indulging me,
secretary.
Um, moving on, um, I'm curious.
I know last year there was a lot
of discussion about
Um, how many people were
At the table when this was
Be discussed
Uh, again, my question would be,
What businesses were at the
table this year.
Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative.
only one mic on it
I do not have a list of the
businesses with whom I or my
co-sponsors have met, I can tell
you that I'm in terms of of
trade associations who purport
to represent businesses, I met
with the restaurant association.
I met with the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce. I met with
my own local chamber of
commerce, I believe some of my
colleagues met with other
chambers of commerce as well.
Oh, Rio.
Joe Chamber of Commerce I met
with.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh.
Thank you, uh.
Madam Chair.
Um
Did, were any of their
suggestions incorporated into
this bill?
Over the years, many of these
many suggestions have been
incorporated that largely
represent input from those types
of trade associations. I would
note that there, I have a list
of about 25 changes that we have
made to the bill over the last
few years and I would say that's
manager, that's a high level
number. I, it doesn't go into
some of the, this is and that's
and ands and ors and that sort
of thing. Madam Chair
Representative.
I think man, uh.
But in general, they're
suggestions were incorporated
into this bill.
Many were, I, I can't say every
suggestion was we evaluate all
suggestions on their merits and
whether or not it adequately
serves the purpose of the plan.
Uh, thank you.
Madam Chair, um,
Was there a survey done?
On businesses across the state
on their support or opposition
to this, Madam Chair, um,
representative, I believe there
was a survey done by some of
those of us, some of those
who've been working with us, um,
and, um, yes, there was, and we
have found significant support
for the bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Would
you be willing to share the
results of that survey with this
committee, Madam Chair, yes, we
would.
Thank you Madam Chair, cause I'm
looking at a survey done.
Um
And it actually, I like this
survey because it breaks it down
by uh districts of members on
this committee.
So I'm just gonna cover mine.
Um, of, of my 340, I, I'm sorry
for one second. I, I, those were
offered to the committee, but
there is no um statement of
where the numbers came from, it
was not a validated survey, so
you can talk about, but people
are shuffling their papers
saying where is it? So I as a
chair made the decision that um.
That it wasn't up to standards.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I, I was informed that
you did not allow this to be
passed out, but
I'm, I'm
I think some of these numbers
bear um
Discussing. Like I said, I'm
only gonna cover those
businesses.
Um, in my district, which covers
uh the town of Brolio Sandovalt
County.
347 responses, 95% disagree with
a family medical leave.
Um, 95%.
Disagree that it will help small
businesses.
95% said it would negatively
impact their businesses.
85% indicated they do not have
enough staff to cover.
Um
Employees who take extended paid
leave.
93% are concerned about employee
abuse, 95% agree that it will
make scheduling more difficult,
and there, I mean,
I would like to, to figure out
who who.
If we can validate this cause I
think these numbers are
important for the committee. Um,
moving on, Madam Chair, um,
Do you know what the percentages
of, of worker participation in
the state right now.
Madam Chair,
No, we don't have that number.
And with regard to the survey, I
would point out we don't know if
it was scientifically
significant and how that all
those numbers relate.
The humanitarian. I agree with
you. That's, that's why I'm
gonna try to
validate the
The numbers on here.
Uh, but going back, if you
could, if you could figure out
maybe for a later committee what
the worker.
Participation is. Absolutely.
Um, apparently we have the
number, madam, Madam Chair
Representative, we have the
number. It's
Around 58%, uh, it's closing in
on the national average of 63%
or so. Um, yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative Cerrado, uh
or or newly minted er Serato.
Um, I heard the figure earlier
that it's gonna take 53,000
employees to cover the
administrative cost. Is that
been verified or validated with
workforce solutions.
Madam Chair, I don't know if,
uh, our secretary has an answer
to that.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Martinez, I think that was just
some straight math of how many
people it would take to fund the
estimated startup costs based on
uh the maximum amount of
payments that uh someone would
make into the fund.
But that number was not from us
and, and just real quick, Madam
Secretary, one follow-up
question to that, Madam Chair.
How many, how many people are
working in the state of Mexico
right now.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Martinez, we're at about
8,890,000 and some.
So this would be.
an insignificant number
according to those those
numbers, 53,000 employees to
cover the administrative costs.
Um, Madam Chair, Miss uh
Representative Martinez, I'm,
I'm not sure what that means,
but the general fund would also
be contributing to the startup
costs. I believe the LFC budget
contained a $35 million
appropriation.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that
leads me to my next
Uh
Line of questioning.
According to what the FIR shows
that 3 year total cost is gonna
be $235 million?
Is that, is that
I was what, what you've come up
with Madam Chair Madam Chair, if
you'd like to point me to the
page, I'm happy to read it.
Page one of the FAI.
OK. And what are you referring
to and what was the question,
Madam Chair Representative Madam
Chair, this, this is the total
number including um.
The taxpayer dollars that we're
gonna have to put up plus.
Um, employer contributions and
employee contributions, a total
of 235 million $185,000.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative,
that is what the page says,
correct.
And thank you, Madam Chair, and
how, how much of
Taxpayer money are we gonna have
to kick in?
Yearly on this, you have those
figures, Madam Chair
Representative, I would point
out that that represents over 3
years, correct? The the original
number that you pointed to, and
in terms of taxpayer dollars,
there's an original investment,
I think, which was just
referenced, Madam Chair,
representative of 35 million for
startup, but the bill provides
for a payback period of 6
million over 6 years, Madam
Chair Representative, meaning
the fund will pay back the
state.
So we'll be using taxpayer money
to pay back taxpayer.
Money, basically.
It will be the contributions of
the employer and the employees
into the plan, and those monies
will be used in part, of course,
to pay benefits as well as to
repay the $35 million initial
investment from the state, Madam
Chair and Representative.
So, the, the fun will be paid by
employees and employers would
who are taxpayers.
For basically, basically using
taxpayer money to pay back money
that was taken under the general
fund, which is also taxpayer
money.
Madam Chair Representative, I, I
guess I cannot agree with that
statement, in part because I
don't understand it, but wages
will be put into the fund. I
don't know how those wages
constitute taxpayer money,
unless you say every dollar that
were earned in the statement,
Madam Chair is taxpayer money.
I'm, I'm confused by the
question. Perhaps you could
clarify, Madam Chair,
Representative Madam Chair, I'd
be glad to clarify.
So
Wages are paid to employees.
Who are taxpayers. They might
correct in assuming that.
Um, Madam Chair, most are, there
are certain wage limits wherein
employees do not pay taxes, in
fact.
Low income people, for example.
Madam Chair, representative, but
they still pay GRT taxes.
You'll still pay sales taxes,
they'll pay property taxes,
they'll pay.
Other taxes imposed, am I
correct in assuming that, Madam
Chair?
Madam and Representative,
certainly it's likely that
people who purchase things will
be paying those taxes.
Madam Chair Representative in
general.
We can consider this taxpayer
money.
I'm talking about the fund.
Uh, that employers and employees
will be paying in two.
We can generally say,
That that is taxpayer money.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
you wish to characterize it that
way. That of course is up to
you. I would not characterize it
that way, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Madam Chair, I'd be interested
to find out how you would
characterize money taking out of
employee checks.
Money that is paid by
businesses, how you would
characterize that, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, I
would characterize it as
contributions from a wage
earners and um businesses into
the fund.
So we're, we're playing word
games, you call it wage earners,
I call it taxpayer.
We've agreed to disagree, so
let's move on.
Thank you, Madam chair, I'll
move on. Um,
Do we have an estimate of how
much
Taxpayer money, this is gonna
take out of the general fund on
a yearly basis.
Um, if the only answer that I
can say to that since we already
have a disagreement about what
we're talking about when we say
taxpayer. So I think we'll be
talking across one another,
Madam Chair, is that there will
be some um
I can't answer it until we can
come to an agreement about what
a taxpayer is, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, let me clarify
that.
How much general fund dollars.
Will it
cost on a yearly basis to keep
this.
This program going.
through.
0, Madam Chair representative.
Interesting,
um, because according to the
FIRs.
Still going to cost
Uh, rolling 3 year total of $49
million doesn't that money come
out of the general fund?
Adam Chair, I don't know what
you're referring to represent.
Madam Chair, once again, I'll,
I'll refer you to the FIR.
Which is the first page of the
FIR.
Oh, thank you for that
clarification.
I believe you're referring to
the startup costs.
Madam Chair and Representative
and as I think I indicated
earlier, those startup costs
will be repaid from the fund.
Over a period of time and that
is provided for in the bill
mountain chair and
representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and how long will it
take?
I mean, is there a set amount?
In the bill, cause I didn't, I
didn't read that part in the
bill. Is there a set amount
yearly of how much is gonna be
transferred from one fund to the
general fund.
Madam Chair, and Representative,
yes, it is in the bill it's $6
million over a period of 6
years, and I think I said that
earlier as well, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Madam chair, um,
I don't doubt that I got here a
couple of minutes late.
Um
11 last line of questioning,
Madam Chair, and I appreciate
the indulgence, um.
Representative, you, they're on
page 13 of the bill.
On line 13.
There's a provision in here.
Um, that allows for a waiver if
the employee is covered by a
privately run leave program
rather than a public plan.
Has there been any thought about
Allowing a privately run program
to administer the entire thing
instead of just carving out
Um, an exemption for them,
wouldn't it be more cost
effective to or has there been
any studies as to the cost
between a publicly run program
and a privately run program.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Make sure we're on the same
page. There have been
discussions about whether or not
parts of this plan or perhaps
even the entire plan could be
administered by what some people
would refer to Madam Chair as a
third party administrator.
Nothing in the bill precludes
that, um, as an option for
either parts or um the entire
plan and that will be open, that
will be um
Within the discretion of the
secretary, Mountain chair and
representative.
Thank you Madam Chair, so within
the provisions of this bill.
It gives that decision making to
the Secretary of Workforce
Solutions, whether she want or
whoever the secretary is wants
to run the program or hand it
off to a privately run, um,
Manager
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative gives is a is a
word I would not use. It does
not preclude Madam Chair
Representative, um, the
secretary from using um outside
contractors, which is
essentially what you're so
basically it allows
The secretary to make that
decision. Madam Chair, the
secretary is allowed to make
that decision, Madam Chair
representative.
Interesting, um.
I'm not sure why we just didn't
go to a privately run program, I
think, uh.
That might have been a little
bit more palpable. Um,
But we'll see, Madam Char,
appreciate the indulgence for
the long line of questioning.
Um
Both Madam chairs at the table,
I appreciate the discussion and
as always, I will, um,
sit back and listen to the rest
of the debate. Thank you, madam.
Just to correct, there are 3
chairs sitting at this table.
Madam's 3 chairs. Uh, thank you
for the indulgence.
So you better be afraid of them.
Madam Chair, I am now.
So I, I think we'll just, we'll
follow what we do and um the
interim health and human we'll
just go in order, so
representative, um.
Yeah, Senna Cortez, do you have
questions? OK, go ahead.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, good morning and
members of the public today,
thank you so much for showing up
to be part of the process. Now
whether you stand in support or
whether you are in opposition,
you have showed up to be part of
the democratic process. So thank
you. And thank you for sharing
your stories. That was hard and
that took a different level of
bravery. So for those of you in
the audience, thank you.
It means a lot.
I believe that we can all agree
in here today that our
experiences shape our lenses
that we look through things. It
shapes our perspective, and I
want to share a little bit about
my lens.
I'm a mom.
I'm an older mama. I had my baby
girl at age 40, and when I go to
her pediatric appointments. I
walk in those meetings and I
look around and I'm like, I'm
old enough to be everybody's
mama in here. Um, I am also a
double minority. I'm a female
and I am a Hispanic. And for
those of you that shared stories
about your loss, I also lost my
mother to cancer in 2018.
And just to give you a
perspective. I'm 42 years old
now, but we first found her lump
when I was in 3rd grade, so the
majority of my life, we fought
the Battle of cancer, and I've
been, I've had a job since I was
13, but I've been working full
time since I was 18, and we all
took turn took turns playing the
role of caregiver to my mother.
And the last roll that I'm gonna
share with you, I am also a
small business owner.
And I believe that paid family
and medical leave Act based on
the FIR and the bill, it is New
Mexico's largest proposed tax
increase ever.
And it not only takes money from
the employer, it takes money
from your paycheck. So think
about your bottom line lately,
inflation has hurt all of us, me
and my husband, we're a double
income family and it is
expensive to buy groceries. So
this is not only taking money
from the employer, this is
taking money from your paycheck,
your hard earned money.
It is hurting small businesses,
and my community that I
represent in District 62 is a
community filled with
entrepreneurs, people like Tim
Ryan, Yoli Clayton, Jesse
Molina, Sandra Berner, the
Cassese family, Heidi Burton.
Alberto Caballero and the list
goes on and this is a barrier to
entry for businesses to move
here and state regulation will
also pose harmful challenges to
economic growth and job
creation.
And I have one more comment
before I get to my questions.
Women in the workforce have
historically overcome
discrimination. I know what
that's like being a double
minority. I've worked hard to to
get a seat at the table, and
many of you in here, you have
also worked hard to earn a seat
at the table.
But hiring is a subjective
process and small businesses
would then be forced to pay this
imposed tax and it could easily
determine who they hire based on
their pocketbook and based on
their bottom line. This bill
encourages businesses to hire
single people.
People of certain genders or
ages and people who would be
less likely.
To use paid leave. So those are
my comments that would preface
some of these questions. Thank
you for indulging me, Madam
Chair.
So my first question is, could
you please explain the
calculation breakdown.
Of who pays what in a very clear
and concise way.
Madam Chair, I would like to ask
um Tracy McDaniel to address
that. She's our expert from
Southwest Women's Law Center.
OK, I was just gonna ask her to
introduce herself, but she beat
me to it.
Yeah, good morning, um, Madam
Chair and Representative Cortez,
um, the
The cost per employee for the
employee's contribution is
0.4% for 10%, I'm sorry, no,
a half% for the employee
contribution, so that's $5 for
every $1000 of wages earned for
the employer, it would be 4/10%
or $4 for every $1000 of wages.
So we already pay.
Federal tax. We already pay
income tax.
Many people are struggling just
to buy groceries because credit
card use is an all-time high. So
now we are asking New Mexicans
that are already struggling to
pay an additional tax. Is that
correct, Madam Chair? Madam
Chairs and representatives.
Madam Chair, representative, uh,
so this, so wages have been
increasing in New Mexico
rapidly. Uh, we're 17th in the
nation for our fastest growing
wages. Uh, this is putting for
an insurance policy. So just
like I pay insurance for my
car or insurance for my house,
uh, insurance for anything. This
is an insurance policy to ensure
that workers and employers have,
um, a safety net when inevitably
someone has a medical need.
Thank you so much,
Representative Madam Chair. So
we can all agree that this is an
extra tax on top of
Raise taxes for rent, raise
taxes for mortgages, raised
taxes for insurance premiums and
all of the inflation that we are
paying for is New Mexicans, so
this is an additional tax, Madam
Chair, representative, Madam
Chairs. Um, actually, those
things that you enumerated, I
guess I would disagree, our
taxes. I don't know what a
raised tax on rent, or raised
tax on those other things that
you were referring to, Madam
Chair and Representative, I've
got one more thing.
We have been cutting taxes for
New Mexico, Mexicans, these last
several years, our income tax
for a large, very large swath of
New Mexicans has, has been
lowered through restructuring of
our income tax structure. We
have dropped our GRT rate in the
last few years by 0.25 point,
Madam Chair, we have implemented
the working families tax credit,
which helps working low-income
people, additionally, um,
With the tax, uh, with their
taxes, and in fact often
provides for a rebate to those
individuals, and we expanded and
enhanced litter.
Which also is a way to get money
back to low income people. So I
think, Madam Chair, we need to
be looking at the entire picture
of the tax system here in the
state of New Mexico, and I think
we can agree that the
legislature as a whole has done
an extraordinary job of lowering
taxes for working Mexicans.
Thank you so much for sharing,
Madam Chair, Madam Chair
Representative Madam Chairs,
make sure we cover everyone in
here. Yes, the legislature has
done an extraordinary job and
just to clarify, costs have gone
up in general with mortgages,
rents, insurance premiums, um,
car insurance and with inflation
and my, my question just to
clarify.
With hurting families and credit
card usage that has been at an
all-time high to pay for gas and
diapers and the basic
necessities we are adding yet
another tax to struggling New
Mexico families.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair
Representative Madam Chairs.
I believe that's a statement.
OK, so, yes, is that the answer?
OK, I'll move on to my next
question. So what support of,
I'm sorry, representative, um, I
don't think that was a yes. OK,
she, she didn't hear a question.
OK, so the question is on top of
inflation and all of the
elevated costs and the struggle
to pay for diapers, food, rent,
gas,
unred cards, we are yet adding
another.
attacks to struggling New
Mexican families.
Recognizing all of the tax cuts
that we have provided New
Mexico and in the last 5 years,
and we will have an additional
opportunity to look at that this
coming year.
And, and I will just remind you
that it has been established
that there is a difference of
opinion on whether this is tax,
so let's not beat the dead
horse, OK? Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK, moving on, so what support
with this bill provide to the
small businesses that cannot
afford to pay this imposed and
mandated tax should it pass.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I would point out to you that
businesses with fewer than 5
employees will not be paying the
premium into the fund, so that
is, I think we need to set level
set in terms of what we're
talking about here. Thank you so
much for clearing, uh,
clarifying Madam Chair, but in
my hometown in District 62,
businesses that have 5 or more
are still struggling to pay
payroll and their overhead
expenses.
And at this point can't afford
to pay anything else extra. so
what support with this bill
provide for those that have 5 or
more employees that are already
struggling, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair and Representative, this
bill does not have any
additional, I don't know if
you're thinking of a fund or a
subsidy or what whatever you're
thinking of, but this bill does
not provide for that. We did
hear from a number of um
businesses today, which
that they can absorb the cost.
So, um, I think there's a
difference of opinion as to
whether or not the $4 per $1000
of wages, um, actually adds a
significant burden to
businesses, Madam Chair
Representative. Thank you so
much, Madam Chair. Um, I also
have an additional question, um,
regarding the small businesses.
Thank you so much for sharing
about all of the associations
that you did interview and get
input from, but what small
businesses
Did you interview and get input
from because I know the small
businesses from District 62.
None of them were asked, and
they're all hurting financially,
so what input did you get?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, representative, and I'm
gonna hand it over to Tracy in a
moment. One example I want to
give was I actually met with a
number of uh egg producers uh in
New Mexico, and I sat down for a
long conversation with one
dairyman in particular. We
talked about some of the nuances
with some of the hiring and
enroll in New Mexico, southern
New Mexico in particular. And
when we actually ran what the
numbers would be for his
payroll. He was surprised by it
because typically when people do
the numbers of 4/10 of a%. Um,
the, the, and I don't blame
anybody, the decimal place gets
misplaced. So we've, we
had this conversation a lot
because 4 tents, uh, 0.004 when
you're, when you're calculating
it 0.000. I started it every
time. And so, so this is, so
when he saw the number, he was
shocked by how low it was, and
then we went on to discuss the
surrounding issues around it.
With this particular bill, uh,
and I can show you actually, uh,
my mom is from another state,
and when I had my baby, should
have filled out this 5-page form
about what she was doing. Her
employer never had a look at it,
I never deal with it. She went
straight to the state. So that
administrative burden
of verifying when someone is
sick or something like that,
that a lot of small businesses
actually take care of very well,
um, would be out of their hands
now, and they would be out of
their cost. I'm gonna head over
to Tracy though to answer your
question about what other small
businesses were consultant in
this process.
Yes, um, thank you, Matt, uh,
Madam Chair and Representative,
uh, the coalition, um, that you
heard many of the the um folks
who spoke in support of this
today. You heard a few of those
small business owners, that's a,
that's a um small fraction of
the 53 businesses that have
signed on actively in support of
this um legislation and, and
they they range from
agricultural businesses to child
healthcare businesses,
restaurants, we have a number of
businesses that have really
gotten deep and tried to
understand what this means and
what it looks like and and I
will say that there is
geographic diversity in the
representation of this business,
not just in the sectors of the
businesses. Madam chairs and
representative, do you think you
could provide a list of all of
the input of those businesses
that you just listed.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I'd be happy to, um, we do have,
uh, handouts, I think we were
hoping to get to the, the
committee prior to this, but um
I will provide that afterward as
well. Thank you so much, that
will be handed out right now.
Wonderful, thank you so much,
Madam Chairs and
Representatives, um, and how
many of those businesses were
located in southeastern New
Mexico that represent my my
district.
Madam Chair, and Representative,
I actually can't speak to that
at the moment. Um, but I can get
that information to you. And I
just want to rep rep reiterate
the district that I represent,
the small business owners that
have reached out to me have
talked about how this will hurt
their small business, and again,
I'm, I'm here to represent the
beautiful people of District 62
and to be their voice and as
other minorities in here as a
minority myself, I know how
important it is to have someone
to advocate and to be your
and so I'm proud to represent
the people of District 62 and to
ask questions on their behalf. I
also have another question.
How can you assure that
discrimination will not take
place to women of childbearing
ages and to people with
preexisting medical conditions
with this bill, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, so as you
know, uh, variations of this
bill have got passed a number of
other states, our neighbors to
the north in Colorado
implemented theirs last year and
this year, Minnesota, Delaware,
and Maryland will be going into
effect as well. So there is a
body of work on this already.
Um, from what I've seen, there's
not been an
increase in employment
discrimination cases based on,
on, on health, on family care in
that sense, of course, you know,
discrimination happens for a
variety of reasons. So, but
looking at the evidence we have,
we've not seen that happen. OK.
Thank you so much,
Representative and Madam Chairs.
Um, I also have another
question, and this addresses the
people in this room that are
really concerned about domestic
violence. I am also concerned
about those, they're the
recipients of domestic violence,
my dear friend Gretchen.
She is the founder of the
Phoenix House back in Hobbs, New
Mexico, and she deals with this
day in and day out and.
It is a concern for me and my
question for you is, how can you
assure that the perpetrators of
those that are the recipients of
domestic violence aren't the
ones taking paid family medical
leave to take care of
The person that they hurt.
Madam Chair Representative, so
I'm gonna go back to that form
that my, my mom had to fill out,
right? You, you don't just say,
hey, I know someone who's
pregnant, Madam Chair, and I
wanna support them. This is the
detail with care that they would
be providing, why they do those
things, and this is just like my
personal, just held on to it for
like 7 years. I'm happy to show
you some of those details as
well. And so similarly for
domestic violence, a lot of
what's required is a police
report. And in that police
report, they would, they, they
specify who was the victim of
the assault.
And that is what that process
would play through, uh, for
workforce solutions to, you
know, verify the police report
and that that is the person
being affected to use the, the
leaf
representative and and madam
chairs, um, I know the stats
that Gretchen has shared with me
is, you know, those that have
been impacted by domestic
violence takes them up to 6
times to finally leave their
perpetrator and to finally
report, you know, and so how
many times will they be impacted
by?
Domestic violence.
Before they actually recorded
it's more of a rhetorical
question. I know you can't
answer that, but this bill
doesn't assure that the
perpetrators aren't the ones
saying, well, I'm gonna take
paid family medical leave
because I've now hurt the
recipient of my domestic abuse
in my house and have the state
paying for it.
Is there a way to
Protect those that are impacted
by domestic violence and their
perpetrators taking paid family
medical leave,
Madam Chair Representative,
there will be an administrative
process put in place that will
evaluate claims, and I'm certain
that there will be a mechanism
that will require some sort of
certification or um process that
will validate whether the person
is a victim or a perpetrator,
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair's representative, I
know that this is a tough
process and you're doing a
really great job. So thank you
so much for listening to all of
my comments and for ask for
answering all of my questions.
You're doing a really great job.
Thank you, Madam Chair's
Representative, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative N
Chavis.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representatives. I forget
there's a, there's an E and an
N, um, and thank you all for
coming today to show your
support or opposition to this
bill, um, while I acknowledge
that this is well intended and
that many New Mexicans would
benefit from this, um, one
being, if God's willing, my
daughter who's in her late
twenties, will be giving birth
to a healthy baby girl in April
and um I know that it would be
well needed, um, those of you
that shared your
Stories. Thank you for that.
It's always hard to share those
personal stories, um.
For those that aren't aware, my
son was murdered, uh, 9.5 years
ago and I was only able to take
4 weeks off of work after my son
being murdered because I had
unpaid leave, but I do know that
it was something that I had to
do so that I could support my
household and get back to work,
so I acknowledge that it would
help New Mexicans, but I have
significant concerns just with
the mandates themselves, the
stability of the funding.
And the timing of the
implementation, especially as
businesses continue to face
workforce challenges and just
staying operational. Um, so
being that this is the health
committee, um, and
That is what I know best, I
guess, and New Mexicans have a
majority of our providers that
are reliant on Medicaid funds
and revenue, so I know that
Medicaid, Medicaid operates
strict federal guidelines, um,
by CMS, including how federal
funds are spent, and this
proposal, which includes a tax
on Medicaid-dependent providers
to fund paid family and medical
leave program could be perceived
as redirected.
of Medicaid dollars to a
separate state initiative, which
may raise compliance concerns
through CMS and if CMS
determines that this state is
misusing those federally matched
fund dollars. New Mexico could
face penalties or reduction in
federal funding and jeopardize
critical healthcare needs here
in the state of New Mexico. Now
I don't want New Mexico to be a
target, especially with the new
administration to reduce our
funds. So I guess my
first question is, has CMS
formally reviewed this
legislation, and if so, has the
state received assurance that
this funding mechanism will not
violate federal regulations um
and put Medicaid funding at
risk.
Madam Chair, a couple of things.
First, Madam Chair and
Representative, I guess I
disagree with the premise that
you just presented. It is not a
tax on Medicare or Medicaid. It
is a assessment against wages
that are paid to employees. Last
0.1 Madam Chair Representative,
0.2 is this program has been
implemented in other states, um,
all of whom presumably have
Medicaid, um, providers.
providers who receive Medicaid
payments, it has not been an
issue, and there's no
requirement that CMS do any sort
of review to determine whether
or not it is in compliance with
that agency as it as it has no
impact there. Thank you, Madam
Chair, representative.
Thank you for answering the
question. So we have not ran
through this or we have assured
ourselves that we do not need
to.
Make sure through CMS.
that this is OK.
If the question is, have we run
it through CMS, Madam Chair, we
have not.
Other states have implemented
the program and presumably also
received Medicaid and I think we
feel comfortable that it does
not implicate any sort of CMS
slash Medicaid, um, compliance
issue, Madam Chair.
represented.
Thank you for the question. Um,
my second thought is just the
impact on Medicaid service and
providers. So I know that
Medicaid funding is already
insufficient to meet the this
has nothing to do with Medicaid,
um, so let's, let's not go on
down the Medicaid road because
it's.
Apples and elephants, Madam
Chair, I'm talking about
Medicaid reimburse providers, so
it does because that is a
majority of our providers in the
state, and right now I'm gonna
talk about the insufficient
funding and that they're already
paid at the lowest
reimbursement. So my question
is, is there any way that we
could subsidize these providers
across the state because we are
already at.
We are already at.
A very low rate for providers,
especially the rural population
and I think that this could just
further strain an already
unfunded system and our
providers because they are not
going to then be able to push
these excess costs onto their
patients. OK, I, I understand
that and I share that concern,
um, but this doesn't have
anything to do with CMS. It's
just that we underpay our
Medicaid providers, as you said,
and that is
not the intent of this bill,
although just as a, as a
precursor, I am going to suggest
an amendment to put something in
there, and I have talked with
the sponsor about it and she
feels like it doesn't belong
here, and I agree that it
doesn't belong here but we also
have no guarantee that the bill
that Representative Cates is
carrying um will increase those
rates. So rather than burden our
DD waiver providers.
Are um Medicaid providers. I
would like to suggest there was
a good amendment on the floor,
um, last year that
representative Dixon had done,
so just I'm throwing it out
there that when I get to my
comments, that will be one thing
I will talk about, so, so.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and that
was going to be my question is
because it is going to affect so
many of our providers across the
state and especially those DD
waivers, um, and because we just
received the FIR. We were all
sent home Thursday. Um, I was
just very concerned. I know this
is my first committee, but um
being that it is the largest tax
increase piece of legislature, I
just thought we didn't have time
for these amendments that we
have evidence it is the largest
tax increase, so I.
That's inflammatory language and
I would prefer we not use it
just and and and as the sponsor
has said, she does not feel like
it's a tax, so call it a a fee,
call it, you know, but let's not
use inflammatory language. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and so I
guess my question was, I know I
think that we needed 24 hours to
bring these amendments and so
you'll be speaking on that. And
so I thought, is there any way
that we can continue talking
about this or bring amendments
up before even voting on this
bill. Again, this is my first
committee, so I, I just wanted
to bring that up because there
are so many people here in both
favor and opposition and again
we're not able to
Bring any amendments in a timely
manner on this very important
bill.
Representative just as a
freshman, um, you can, you can
talk to the sponsor at any time,
um, in terms of amendments and
this is not the only, you can do
an amendment in the next
committee, you can do an
amendment on the floor. You can
do it, you have the Senate do an
amendment, so it's not like
it's, it's dead ended here if we
don't do it in this committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representatives. Um,
so then I guess my question
regarding those providers is
what steps have the has this
state taken to ensure that
Medicaid dependent providers
will not be um burdened by this
legislation resulting in
services to our Medicaid
providers across the state.
Could you read that question
again, Madam Chair, and
Representative?
Yes.
So I had asked what steps have
been taken to ensure that
Medicaid dependent providers
will not be burdened by this
legislation resulting in reduced
services for our Medicaid
beneficiaries because they're
not able to then push this extra
coverage onto the patients, the
cost.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, the legislature
has over the last few years,
been increasing Medicaid rates,
and I am anticipating that um
move will continue this year in
various budget um increases, so
in terms of addressing Medicaid,
I would suggest to you the way
to address it is globally
through other means, not through
this bill, because if you have
pointed out, it is an
issue that goes beyond just the
small cost that might apply to
providers who serve Medicaid,
um, patients.
Madam Chair Representative.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Those are all the questions that
I have.
Represent ranking member.
Newly married.
Injured foot, Representative
Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Yes, um,
shout out to my husband of 7
weeks who's down in Deming
working, um, in his business,
uh, he is a business owner, um,
yeah, happy anniversary, um,
poor thing.
Within 2 weeks of our marriage,
I'm temporarily disabled. He's
put up with that and now I, I
left home for two months, so
bless his heart, but yes, thank
you for recognizing that. And
he's still my biggest fan. Um, I
just wanna say I, I really
appreciate listening to both
sides of this issue, it's
obvious that we have
Um, very different perspectives
and, and I'd like to let you
know I, I also appreciate the
really good questions of all as
my freshman and and everyone
else is new here on the health
committee, um, but I would like
to let you know my perspective
as well. I have the good fortune
of um a scene just about every
side of this issue, and I think
many of us do. We're just people
and we want to get this right,
and I think it's so important
that we ask
All the hard questions, but I, I
had 7 children with no paid
family medical leave. I
remember.
Um, working through the
challenges of, of being
registered nurse on my feet all
the time, struggling through
that pregnancy to make sure I
saved every hour of paid time
off, vacation time, um.
And uh sick leave that I could
to be home with my babies. My,
my number 7 is actually in the
audience.
I might, I might tear up when I
tell you that I had to return
work. You may not even know
this, but Madam Chair,
Um
Um, I, I had to return work when
she was 5 weeks old and broke my
heart, and so I understand the
real difficult situation that
many of our employees are in.
Also as an oncology nurse, I
experienced that, the heartbreak
of my patients and their
families needing that time off
um to to deal with moving
through the the chemotherapy,
uh, treatments and so forth.
I also, um.
Took time off unpaid, and that
was hard with a big family to
take care of my late
mother-in-law and my late
husband as they were treated for
cancer and, and eventually both
passed away. So I, I do know, I
understand the hardships of of
employees that need help. And I
think that we all
Have the same goal to help help
New Mexicans have a better life.
I understand the business owners
who've reached out to me and
even my physical therapist that
I started with just the other
day here in in uh Santa Fe. We
are in polar opposite
perspectives on politics.
We mesh on healthcare. She's
about my age. We've been through
it all.
And she explained to me that her
business is suffering from what
the legislature has already done
in the past few years, with
increasing minimum wage with um
the paid time off, paid leave.
She can't get employees to
continue working. She's at a
place where she would love to
retire, but as so many people
who've reached out to me,
business owners, Madam Chair.
Even the discussing of this
bill, the way it's written right
now, in spite of all of the work
that's been done.
Um
It has been speculating about
whether they can continue.
And whether they can, can, um,
can move forward in their
business and and be bold enough
to expand and so forth, which is
what our economy desperately
needs. So
So I, I just, I just wanna know,
I want everyone to know that
that I, I think we, we do agree
on the goal, but we agree that
we disagree completely in many
ways on how to get there. I want
to clear something up, Madam
Chair, Representatives, um, I
just, you know, we're, we're
debating what the the definition
of taxes, and so I just did a
Google search, several options
when you Google search says the
definition of attacks is a
compulsory charge.
Or compulsory contributions
mandatory contributions imposed
by government. That's us, to
employees and business owners to
fund public service and
programs, and the courts manager
chair representatives. The
courts.
Legal interpretation.
Might classify the mechanism as
attacks because it is mandatory,
which it is, there's no opt out.
It is collected for public
purposes and involves government
administration.
So the courts would even
recognize this as a tax. I'm not
trying to be inflammatory, Madam
Chair Representatives. I'm truly
not. I'm really trying to focus
in on, on what we're dealing
with. I'm gonna take a
different, different course and
questioning and and just looking
at the bill.
And um
Say that it is disappointing
that I don't see.
Even in the title which should
uh should clarify what's in the
bill that employees and
employers are paying into the
fund a mandatory tax into the
fund. It is the heart and soul
of this bill, that it is a tax.
We can debate on if it's the
biggest tax in New Mexico
history or not, I suppose. I saw
numbers. I don't have them, so I
can't drill down on that.
But the heart and soul of this
is paying into the fund and it's
a mandate, so.
Um, to, I'm not gonna take it,
the title line by line, but you
can see that it focuses on.
A program that will pay.
The eligible applicants that
never mentions that there's a
mandatory charge on employees or
employers.
Um, I also want to say I think
that we're doing a disservice to
New Mexicans, Madam Chair
Representatives by
Hearing this bill, which is a
money bill, not a health bill,
in a health committee.
And I'm
I don't think there's any
I don't know how many of us know
why that is, but I know why that
is. I know why that happened and
we're trying to push this bill
through without it being
Carefully, carefully, um,
debated and discussed by people
who would understand attacks,
which this is.
Um, so I want to look at, I'm
gonna focus on Madam Chair, our
representatives, I'm going to
focus on how
Well, I'm gonna go through some
of some of the, you know, some
of these line by line and just
focus on how vague and um
How vague this bill is written.
We've already looked at the
title even, but, um, but the
other.
Um
Issues of the bill that allow
Abuse
And so I'd like to go to page
um.
And I have some questions mixed
in as well to page 2.
Um, line 22.
Through 25, uh, an employee,
these are just the definitions.
A person working within the
state who performs a service for
wages or other remuneration
under a contract of hire written
or oral express or implied in
including.
or includes a person employed by
the state or a political.
Subdivision of the state.
With this, you know,
specifically in health care,
would this
include many contract and
temporary workers that we have
in healthcare, you know,
workforce has been our, our main
focus that we have a desperate
need for for healthcare
workforce. So would this include
the contract physicians, the
contract nurses that we bring in
from out of state agencies, um.
That they provide our healthcare
workforce.
Madam Chair representatives.
Madam Chair Representative, if
that individual is
self-employed, they do not
necessarily have to participate
in this fund, as um
If they work for a contractor
that as an employee, they would
be an employee in the state of
New Mexico, and they would be
paying into the fund as with
their contractor employer, Madam
Chair, representative.
Madam Chair, thank you. Thank
you, Representative Chandler and
Madam Chair, Representative
Chandler, I think, well, this is
one area where I think we can
probably discuss the um
healthcare workforce in a little
bit more detail, maybe that you
all aren't aware of, but we have
currently many, many people who
come in from out of state, the
agencies themselves exist
outside of our state, they would
be the employers and the nurses,
physicians have contracted with
those outside agencies.
And those agencies provide for
our need for healthcare
workforce. So, so we have outs
outside the state employers.
And we have
People working, employees
working in hospitals all over,
hospitals and other entities all
over New Mexico that would be
employees if I understand that
right. So with all of with
those, those people, those
employers and those uh employees
be subject, would they be
defined as employees.
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
those
Companies that happen to have
out of state.
facilities are actually
employers in the state because
they are employing people here
in New Mexico. So those
employers, whether or not they
have facilities in other states
would be paying into the fund,
as would the individuals in the
state. I would
That's all.
Thank you, Representative
Chandler. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, so this is an
interesting, um, it's an
interesting look at.
This healthcare workforce. If
you have an agency that's
outside the state, and they have
to choose where to.
Where to put their employees,
where to employ their employees
and they can, there's needs all
over the the country for for
healthcare workforce. Why would
they choose a state that's going
to charge them and charge their
employees, and why would their
employees agree to take that um
assignment.
Madam Chair Representative, I
can't speak for why any company
would choose to do anything, but
I would point out, as I'm sure
you're aware, is um profits
certainly drive where companies
choose to do business, and it is
my understanding, Madam Chair,
at least with respect to some of
those companies, they make very
significant sums, as do the
employees that they assign,
actually, um, more than the
actual employees of those
hospitals. We hear.
a lot about traveling doctors
and nurses who do quite well,
Madam Chair, and those companies
do quite well. So I think uh a
uh a fee of $4 for every $1000
of wages and $5 for the employee
is unlikely to have a
significant impact on those on
companies that do quite well in
the state, Madam Chair and
Representative. Thank you,
Representative Chandler. I just
want to put out there that it is
one more thing, one more reason,
one more way that we are.
disadvantaged, um, in the, in
the eyes of anybody who's
providing or thinking about
coming to New Mexico to work.
Um, yes, they make a lot of
money, um, which, you know,
they're taking a percentage, so
the more you make, the more.
You take, or you give. Um, with
this employee also be considered
a seasonal farm worker.
We have a lot of that in my
district. We're in agricultural
district.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I thought you were talking about
healthcare workers and so little
confused by a question they
asked me whether or not they'd
be considered a farm worker. I'm
thank you, Representative
Chandler. I'll clarify. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I'm looking at
definition of employee, and I
want to know if the person
working within the state who
performs a service for wages,
um, or other remuneration under
a contract of higher written or
oral expressed or implied and
includes a person employed by
this.
state or a political.
Subdivision of the state.
With that
employee tell us page. Yes, it's
page 2, and it's 22 to 25. It's
just the definition of employee.
I'm trying to figure out who
is an employee.
And would it be a seasonal farm
worker. I have many seasonal
farm workers. It is the backbone
of our economy in my district.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, it would, but I
would point out to you before
benefits, um, would apply in job
protection would apply the
person would have to work 180
days, um, and contribute to the
fund for 180 days or more.
Thank you for that that leads to
my next question, which is, um,
Madam Chair, Representative,
both the healthcare workforce
and the seasonal workforce.
Likely will not even work 6
months out of the year, or they
may work 6 months out of the
year. But at that point, their
employment would end, and they
would be paying into, correct me
if I'm wrong, they would be
paying into a fund a mandatory
fund, a tax.
Um
Money that they would never be
able to take advantage of. Is
that correct?
Madam Chair Representative, um,
so, pardon my, my throat. Um, so
many, uh, temporary workers work
multiple seasons and so many
would be able to acquire that
over time. Uh, so for example, I
was talking to some uh ranchers
and farmers down south, and they
go and since a lot of these
temporary workers are through a
contracting agency. They're
hired for longer and they work,
not just one season for one,
you know, farms, but for
multiple.
And all of that contribution
would, would, would be
considered payment into the
fund, uh, before they could use
it.
Thank you. I guess I'm confused.
Can you, is there a place in the
bill when you, where you could
clarify that for me?
Madam Chair Representative,
what, what part, uh, do you
need? I'm concerned, Madam Chair
Representative about
People having to pay into a fund
for a benefit that they can
never receive. And although
you're you're telling me that
the farmers have said their
seasonal workers work more than
6 months. I don't see that in my
district.
Yeah, Madam Chair
Representative, so, uh, they
will just work one season,
right? You, you may work alfalfa
and one and then and then work
for a rancher in another,
another part of that year, but
many temporary workers are not
just working for 3 months. They
may work 3 months for a
particular employer, but because
these are portable benefits,
those 3 months are added to the
next employer that they go to.
And then, and then those can be
added together so that should
they need the fund later, they
are able to utilize it.
You just made me think of
another question.
If a if a seasonal worker or
anyone pays into the fund.
Over a 6 month period, is that
money isolated to be used in
that particular year. Does it go
away at the end of the year.
No, OK, thank you. So, so let me
clarify because I really am.
I'm, I'm very curious. I need to
take this back. People are gonna
ask me. They pay in for 6
months.
They don't use it, and then they
come back and they, they, they
work again for 6 months because
they're seasonal.
It is, are they still elig would
they be eligible the next year
or is that eligibility isolated
to one year.
Madam Chair and Representative,
it's as long as a person has
paid in 6 of the last 12 months,
they would be eligible for the
benefit. The employer would not
be required to hold a position
for them unless they've been
working for that same employer
for 180 days or more, um, but
they would still have access to
the fund regardless of the
length of employment with a
particular employer.
And and just to add, and you say
people are are putting into they
can choose whether to work more
or not. I mean, if you don't
want to lose your benefit, you
don't have to not work, so, so
it is an option for them to
continue to work in New Mexico
too.
Hold on to that Madam chair and
Representative, I think that was
a very good point.
It is a benefit that employees
um will find to be very helpful
and beneficial to them. So we're
creating an environment in New
Mexico, where workers Madam
Chair, uh, and representative
will want to come and work
because they know that they will
receive this the safety net.
So if they do have a serious
illness or they are about to
have a child, um, this program
will be available, so it makes
us competitive with other
states, Madam Chair
Representative. Thank you,
Representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair, um, we talk about
specialized workers, and when
you, when you mention seasonal
workers who pick crops and so
forth in the field. I if there
that is a specialty. I don't
know that I, I don't know, we
have a.
a lot of H2A workers on the
federal program. I think they go
home when they're not doing
their specialized work, and they
come back and they have to start
all over again. I think that is
the majority of people in my
district. I, I may have to, uh,
study that more to make sure I
can reiterate that to my
constituents. I'd like to go to
the next page.
Would you, it's the very end of,
it's very first line, political
subdivision of the state. What
is that?
I'm sorry, could you page 3,
line 1, it's the end of the
employee definition or the
continuation of the employee
definition, political
subdivision of the state. What,
what would that be? Can you give
me an example of that?
A city, municipality, OK.
put that in context.
Why are we, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative, why are we uh
exempting Title II Federal
Railway Labor Act. Can you
explain that to me?
Madam Chair, Representative,
because federal law preempts the
application of this law to those
that set of them.
At the bottom of that page 3
family member means an
applicant's spouse?
Or domestic partner.
Or a person related to an
applicant or.
An applicant's spouse or
domestic partner as I'm going to
stop there, Madam Chair
Representative, just to make
sure
I know, I understand this. Has
this changed since the last time
we saw this bill?
Tell me.
How this has changed, Madam
Chair, this definition has been
taken for the healthy Workplaces
Act.
I'm you know it as the earned
sick leave Act, and Madam Chair,
we felt it um made sense so that
employers would have the same
definition for family member
that's in the sick leave law
that they're required to follow
as this law, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair.
Are you referring specifically
to the part I just read or the
continuation of it, the entire
uh section, the entire.
definition. So the section you
read plus the section you didn't
read. OK, thank you so much.
Well, I have to say I wasn't
here to vote on that sick leave.
I wouldn't have voted for this.
I, I just want to read it
because I think that the New
Mexicans are listening and the
people in this room need to know
what this bill says. So
Just because I truly believe
this is why the businesses that
have reached out to me,
including my physical therapist
are struggling. This is so
open-ended that it allows abuse
for the sick leave, uh, time
that we put in place or that you
all put in place that we're here
and that we're trying to work
with in um this bill.
So the family member means an
applicants spouse or domestic
partner, or a person related to
an applicant.
Or
An applicant's spouse or
domestic partner as a biological
adopted or foster child, a
stepchild, a legal ward or a
child to whom the applicant
stands in loco parentis, meaning
they had at one point in time,
Parented that person.
Uh, a biological foster.
Step or a or they had.
been parented by that person.
Forgive me, um, a biological
foster step or adoptive parent
or legal guardian or a person
who stood in loco parentis when
the applicant was a minor child,
a grandparent, a grandchild, a
biological foster step or
adopted.
sibling, a spouse or domestic
partner of a family member or an
individual whose close
association, and this is where
it gets really vague and easily
abused any individual whose
close association with the
applicant or applicant's spouse
or domestic partner is the
equivalent.
Of a family relationship.
Completely open-ended. It's
totally subjective, and I'd like
to know, Madam Chair,
Representatives, who would be
responsible for determining that
this criteria was met.
Madam Chair, Representative, the
Department of Workforce
Solutions, who Madam Chair
Representative, also administers
the Healthy Workplaces Act.
I want to follow with um
Some questioning.
I think it was Representative
Martinez mentioned.
Um
The answer to that question,
Madam Chair Representative was
that workforce solution has been
or is 17% um uh they, they're
down 70% on their employees.
They're short that many
employees. Uh, how long has that
shortage of the workforce
solutions been in place.
Madam Chair, Representative, I,
I believe that the secretary
said the vacancy rate was 17%.
Vacancy rate is not necessarily
equate to a shortage, Madam
Chair. Many departments carry
vacancies. Sometimes those
vacancies are actually planned
to be vacancy. So I think to say
it's, it's a shortage is is an
incorrect statement.
Thank you, Representative. I
appreciate that clarification. I
did use some different
terminology. I, this was a real
concern last year, and I think
it sounds like there's been an
improvement, and they've
lessened their vacancy rate,
which is good.
How many employees, Madam Chair
Representative, will this the
implementation of the
administration of this bill
required.
I believe um the secretary
something said something on the
order of excess to 200, I would
refer to them as staff members
because the secretary has the
opportunity to contract out
certain aspects of the um
Um, implementation to use
contractors for things like call
centers. We know some states do
that, so I, I think a more
accurate um descriptor might be
staff and uh as, as there will
be flexibility in how those
staff positions are filled,
Madam Chair, and Representative.
Thank you. I know this seems
like
It doesn't, maybe it seems
petty, but it's not really, it's
not to me. Um, Madam Chair,
Representative.
How many employees do the 77 17%
vacancy rate represent.
Madam Chair, I can ask the
secretary. I don't know if she
said that she still here.
Oh
Madam Chair Representative
Jones, I'm just gonna do some.
Rough math for you here that I
can't do in my head, so.
We've got um.
590 employees times 0.17. It's
about 100 employees.
Thank you very much, Secretary,
I appreciate that. It's good to
see you too.
So back to this um this section.
S
From page 5 to page 6.
This this includes almost
anyone, and I'm, I'm afraid that
it's once employees find that
out, there are some, not all by
any means. Some employees who
will take advantage of that, and
it's a kind of a domino
situation in the workplace when
people do abuse this kind of a
um.
A benefit.
I, I put down an example here
and I want you to, I want you to
see if you can follow this with
me. This would be an example of
somebody who is um
Who is eligible.
For the benefit, a family
member.
would be a domestic partners,
former foster siblings, domestic
partners, child's spouse.
That person could apply.
For the benefit. I worked that
out and according to the way
this is written, so, so you
could say we already have this
definition. I'm just saying that
that's one of the reasons that
we're already struggling with
the small business people having
employees to work every day.
They're taking their sick leave
and their leave based on this.
Definition which allows abuse.
So I'll move on, um, Madam
Chair, representatives, uh, and
page 4.
Page 4.
Um
Yeah, I, I mis misspoke on the
page numbers. So page 4.
Line 19, Healthcare provider.
Means an individual licensed and
certified or certified to
provide health care in the
ordinary course of business, I
see that as very problematic.
That means that a healthcare
provider that's referenced later
on in the bill.
Could be a medication assistant
or medication aid.
A certified nursing assistant
who comes out of a certification
program after high school.
A nursing tech.
Those are all people we
desperately need in the
workforce, but as it's used
later on in the bill.
this should be a person who has
um
More of a, a background to be
Providing health care in the
ordinary course of business, so
we can, we can look at that here
in just a minute, but that's
very problematic for me.
Um
Of, of that section on page 4.
So to move on to page 5.
At least worker on line 2.
Could you provide an example of
a leased worker?
Yeah, uh, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Pardon me, there
are specific uh setups, uh, work
at work or arrangements that are
that are leased workers, so for
example, uh, they might have an
arrangement kind of like.
Similar to contractors, except
they're explicitly laid out, um,
where essentially you have a hub
that they all share a similar,
they all share a similar um uh.
Uh, LLC, the same LLC, but, but
they contract out and so it's
similar to that, that helps. I'm
happy to get you a more precise
definition of it. Uh, it's
already, it's also in statute as
well. And this definition
matches the definition of a uh
leased worker in, in, in that
already exists. OK. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
so another, uh, line 15 on page
5, it talks about a serious
health condition. What
constitutes
as serious, isn't that
subjective and who decides?
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
that is in the uh serious health
condition is, uh, on page 74.
I see that I have that um.
Circled as well, Madam Chair
representative, a serious health
condition, which means illness,
injury, impairment, or physical
or mental condition that
involves, and then the
definition continues inpatient
care.
Hospice or residential medical
facility.
Continuing treatment by a
healthcare.
By a healthcare provider.
Again, healthcare provider is
wide open and I know many of us
already regularly see a
healthcare provider for mental
conditions that would be
counseling, that would be just
standard everyday counseling.
How many people could.
could apply for this and qualify
based on just that vague is
subjective, it's easily abused.
I'll move on, Madam Chair, I
know this is long, but it, it
just points out how, how there's
so many.
Fine points that can be.
Can be the can undermine the
entire process and the benefit
for everyone.
Um
At the bottom of that page.
I'm gonna, I'm gonna skip that.
Um,
skip to, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
representatives skip two page.
No, I do want to, I want to go
over that. It's important the
pay on the creation of the fund.
The pay family medical leave
fund, this is on page 7. OK,
section 3, and this is new
material paid family and medical
leave fund creation.
The paid family medical leave
fund is created in the state
treasury and shall be
administered by the department.
The funds shall be held for the
benefit of the employees and
self-employed individuals who
paid into the fund and shall
consist of all revenue,
including any fees collected
pursuant to the paid family
Medical Leave Act in accordance
with department rules.
What are the fees, Madam Chair,
representatives, what are the
fees that are collected? That's
the first I read of that.
Madam Chair, representative,
this is, you know, pretty
standard language, it allows for
other ways to to fund the fund
in addition to the the monies
that are collected through
through payrolls.
Madam Chair, Representative, I
feel like that's really
problematic. If we pass this
bill.
Someone else can decide to
collect other funds.
That we haven't
had any input in, I please
clarify, Madam Chair, it says,
including any fees collected
pursuant to the paid family and
medical leave act in accordance
with department rules. So I
think that clarifies that it's
not just anyone can require
anyone to pay fees into the
fund. It has to be in accordance
with the law.
And
Department rules promulgated.
In accordance with the law.
I've written a lot of notes on
that because.
Because if we pass this law,
we're allowing a department to
promulgate rules that we know
nothing about. Is that correct?
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
no. Rulemaking is a standard
process in all state government,
there's a publication, there are
hearings, there's a whole litany
of safeguards to ensure that the
rules are consistent with the
actual statutory requirements.
OK, thank you for that. Would
this uh ability to make rules
and I think I, I don't know
exactly where I read this, but
there's a secretary who could,
as I understand it, a secretary
who could increase the amount
that is paid in by the
employees.
And by the employers on a yearly
basis. Is that correct?
Um, not precisely correct, Madam
Chair. I don't believe there can
be any increases to the
assessment until after 203,030.
Um, and there is also a
safeguard in the law itself that
prohibits an increase that's
greater than 0.1% a year, or a
decrease that's greater than 1%
per year, Madam Chair.
OK. Thank you for that. Could I
ask you to look at page 8. It's
uh D.
It's on line 14 to determine an
actuarially sound premium rate,
and the future premium rate
setting mechanism for the
program.
Um
That would be a continuation of.
Um
Who decide of deciding how the
fund will be.
Used so future premium rates
setting mechanism for the
program created pursuant to the
paid family Medical Leave Act by
January 1st, 2026.
It does that refer to what you
just mentioned, the 2030.
Potentially evaluating an
increasing the amounts.
Madam Chair and Representative,
this provision was placed in the
bill specifically at the request
of many stakeholders, including
businesses, it is um a
safeguard, um, that.
was asked for to evaluate and
ensure that the premiums that we
are setting will be sufficient
to sustain the fund that's
required at a level that's
required by the law, Madam Chair
and Representative.
Thank you, Representative. So,
Have any actuary studies been
done to determine if this fund
will be solvent over time.
Or is that something we have to
determine later and why would.
Why would that be?
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, the Southwest
Women's Law Center did
commission an actuarial analysis
conducted by one of the largest
financial risk assessment, um.
Companies in the in the world um
and that was conducted and
released in a press release last
Friday, and it demonstrates that
the fund as written, um, will
remain solvent and any small
fluctuations in those rates of
0.9, um, the lowest it will, it
will decrease in the next
10 years would be to 0.6%, the
highest it would go would be to
0.94%, evening out at 0.88%.
Of um of wages in the out years.
So we have conducted that we
did, we conducted that um with
Milliman.
Using population level data, the
secondary analysis that will be
conducted by January 1st, 2026,
we'll really use department
level data that the Southwest
Women's Law Center did not have
access to, but, um, we
anticipate that the the results
will be very similar. Milliman
has conducted similar analyses
for states that are considering
implementing this as well as
those states that have already
um implemented this program.
Thank you very much. Appreciate
that. Um, I don't know that I've
seen that.
I, I need to look for that and
study that.
Um
And another thing that I
mentioned, I'm gonna, I'm gonna
leave the bill right now and
just.
ask a couple of other questions
I had in looking at the the
possibility of abuse again. We
have many employers who already
give their employees 2 weeks of
paid vacation, and also uh sick
leave, which
It was 9 days, it works out to
be 9 days. And in addition to
that, I understand if they're
If they apply for this paid
family medical leave, that's
about 4 months off per year.
Um,
What would be the plan of action
for an employer if they, if they
have to deal with employees who
are consistently taking leave
for 4 months out of the year.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, be healthier
workplaces Act.
Requires um provides that a per
employee may accrue um one hour
of sick leave for every hour
worked.
So just to be clear, if one
annualize that, that would be 8
days or 40 hour week, so just,
just to correct some things in a
small way.
Um, I cannot account for what
vacation, um, employers choose
to provide their employees, um,
and with regard to up to 4
months a year. Keep in mind,
Madam Chair, um, and
representative.
The person has to have a serious
health condition, uh, the person
may be pregnant. It is not
something that is um that a
person can simply just walk into
their employer and say, I'm gone
for 4 weeks for 4 months or 12
weeks pursuant to the uh the
paid family and medical leave
act, that person has to
establish a need, medical need
or another healthcare uh child
adoption, etc. So, uh, you know,
I understand.
And we all like to look at worst
case scenarios, and that's
essentially what that your your
madam Chair, I would
respectfully suggest, but it's
not realistic. And, and Madam
Chair and Representative, I
would refer you also to page 23.
Uh, it outlines on the bottom,
starting there, that employers
have the right to appeal the
determination of the department,
uh, for 15 calendar days after
the receipt of documentation of
the appropriate leave
compensation request. So they
can appeal and say this person
You know, I don't, I don't
necessarily buy this, and this
is why and everything. In
addition, should a person uh do
uh present a fraudulent claim,
they would be denied from the
fund for 3 years. Uh, when we
spoke with businesses, they had
requested only one year, but we
actually put into place 3 years
to prevent fraudulent claims.
So, um, those are some of the
safeguards we have in place. Um,
yeah.
Thank you very much. That's good
to hear, because again, you
mentioned the serious health
condition that's determined by.
A workforce solutions employee
that we hope we have, and we
hope is.
Adequately informed to to
determine what is a serious
health condition. It, it's still
very it's tenuous and and very
easily abused, but I'm glad that
we have looked at.
Some guard reels.
Madam Chair, representatives, in
the meantime, with all of the
back and forth with a business
owner, uh, appealing and so
forth. They have no employee. I
just, I just feel like
Madam representative, no, they,
that is from, uh, the
determination. So, so, I mean,
truly a person could apply,
right? And, and it stipulates
that they should inform their
employer the whole process, etc.
um, that they will plan to take
leave if, if that's possible.
Obviously, accidents exist
beyond that. But should that be
possible, they have to inform
them. So truly well says 15 days
from receipt, they will have
known for much longer,
hopefully, than just those 15
days that that's the intended
purposes. And I, and I will also
note that the language in terms
of serious, um, uh, illness
reflects the federal FMLA policy
that exists across the nation
currently. So that's the, that's
copied as well.
Thank you very much and thank
you, Madam Chair. And I do have
to mention, since you mentioned
the the federal, um,
Family, uh, the FMLA, um, the
incentive here is we get money
for it and the incentive there
is no money, just time off, so
there's a huge difference.
Madam Chair, to be clear, time
off if you're sick or having a
child or adopting a child, so
not just time off, Madam Clay
chair. I understand, and that's
where why looking at the
subjective nature of some of the
language is so important because
that's what we want. We don't
want our businesses to suffer
and to close, um, I will add
that the people who've reached
out to me in my district.
We have, we have great
relationships in rural, in my
rural district. We have
businesses who want to give,
they want to reward their
employees with this type of um
benefit, but I see our job is to
create an environment where
they're thriving, businesses are
thriving, not a heavy-handed
government where we force them
to do things they cannot do
without closing or without.
Deciding that, you know, a kiosk
is, is a better option than an
employee because a kiosk can't
get pregnant or self checkout is
better than keeping that
employee who might have a mom
who needs to be taken care of or
a baby or whatever that
situation is, I don't want to
see us put our small businesses
in a position.
Where they have to close their
doors. It's it's been too much
to pay paid sick leave, the
shutdowns that were unnecessary
by government, all of the
government heavy handedness that
we're struggling with. I feel
like we need to take that off.
We need to look at this
carefully and not.
Not pass this through without
making sure that our businesses
don't suffer. Businesses aren't
in opposition with employees,
they work together and so there
should be none of that. We
should work together for a bill
that's good for everyone, and I
appreciate so much.
Your attention. I could go on
and on, but I won't, um.
I can't support it the way it is
though, but I do appreciate the
goal that we have in mind that
we share, which is a better New
Mexico for our constituents.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative E Chavez, do
you have questions? Thank you,
Madam Chair. I don't have any
questions. Representative
Herndon.
Vice Chair Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
wish to point out a couple of
quick things about the bill and
about some testimony that we've
heard thus far. We did hear
testimony regarding uh from an
employer who stated, well, if I
have, uh, if I already have a
pay a lead plan in place, and
now you have this plan under
House Bill 11. I'm gonna be
double taxed. Well, that's not
true. I want to look at page 12
and page 12 of the bill
specifically states that if an
employer has a plan that
is equal to or better than the
plan that's in place. They don't
have to participate in this
plan. They would apply for a
waiver. The other thing that we
heard, Madam Chair, and, and
members of the panel, is that
correct? Did I read that, that,
uh, part of the bill correctly.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Yes, you
did. Thank you very much. And
then as we look further at, at
this uh process where we heard
uh someone saying, oh well, we
have workers who have to pay for
diapers and they have to pay for
uh their food and their rent.
Well, what happens if they are
out of work and they don't have
any money. They would, they
couldn't pay for any of those.
So with a paid family league
plan, uh, presenters, am I
correct that they would then
have some access.
To paying for diapers and food
and rent. Is that correct?
Thank you, Representative
Hernandez absolutely correct,
and that's the whole intent of
why we want to add the added
protections and the benefits and
the insurances, so that that
They do not have to worry about
any of that, and they'll be
protected. Thank you. And thank
you, just two more quick points
with respect to this. We've
heard many, many questions and
comments about all the employer
is gonna be hurt. What about the
employees. These are individuals
who are helping the employer be
successful and whenever the
employee is successful, the
employer is successful. And so
we what we want to do is to make
sure that they are able to take
care of themselves when they
need to.
And that they are able to take
care of their families when they
need to, so this is a guaranteed
savings plan to help make sure
that there are funds to take
care of them, but you agree with
that, Madam Chair, members of
the panel.
Madame Chair, Representative
Herndon absolutely, that is
exactly we want to prevent
exploitation. We want to
maintain, as I said in our
opening statement, a healthy,
happy, productive workforce,
which also protects the employer
as it as we have stated over and
over. Thank you very much. And
then just one last point, madam,
uh, presenters, one of the
things that's most important is
that when employees take care of
their employees, employees
a very faithful and loyal to
their employers, and the more
loyal employees there are to
employees, the more the employee
and their business will advance
and, and grow and be successful
in the committee, in a
community. Is that correct?
Madam Chair Representative, that
is absolutely correct, and I
will point out particular cases
throughout COVID, we had small
businesses that kicked in, uh,
absolutely, and so they were
able to protect their employees
and the employees and the
businesses remained open because
of the safeguards that the
businesses prevent uh presented.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you members of the
committee. You know, Madam
Chair, one of the things this
state is known for is we have
one of the highest rates of
domestic violence in the entire
country, and if a woman is
consistently, I'm using a woman
uh hurt and they uh they have to
go to the hospital and they
cannot not longer work. That
would be a major injury for
which they could apply for paid
family leave, and then maybe
eventually have a basis for
leaving their abuser because
they would have money, they
wouldn't have to be dependent
upon an abuser.
To always take care of them.
One, they could lead this paid
family leave to take care of
them, and they could walk away
from an abusive situation. Is
that also a possibility, uh,
Madam Chair presenters.
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
And thank you very much, uh,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. We will go to
freshman representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
first, I want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this back
and bringing this back and
bringing this back and every
single time working with
community, sitting down and
talking with small businesses
across the state to make sure
that it comes back in a better
form each time. Um, I want to
thank you for making a lot of
substantial changes throughout
the years, especially when the
goalposts continue to move. Um,
so I wanted to start with that
statement. Um, I also wanted to
thank the folks who are here,
um, the folks who shared their
stories, um, and also
Those who have really lifted up
agricultural workers today, um,
because I do hope that we have
the same type of support in
protecting our undocumented
immigrant mixed status families,
um, as the new rules from the
administration come down.
Um, the second piece is thank
you for lifting up wages, um,
because as we know, um, workers
here um in our state, we need to
continually get um increases for
minimum wage and so I hope those
were most concerned about our
lowest paid workers will also
stand up in support of raising
our minimum wages here.
Um, the next piece that I wanna
talk about is the fact that here
in our um here in our health
committee.
One of the things that we hear
pretty consistently is our need
to attract and retain workers,
um, healthcare workers in
particular, I know we hear in
this committee, uh, but I know
y'all also here in your
committee is the need to attract
and retain workers across the
board.
Um, you know, we are in a new
age in a new decade of trying to
attract workers. And one of the
things that we really have to,
uh,
Face the reality about it is
that we have a lot of young
workforce that can very easily
just go work online somewhere.
And that's really what we're up
against. And so we have to be
competitive. We have to do our
due diligence as a body and also
in collaboration with and also
responsibility of business
owners to say how are we going
to attract and retain a new
generation of workers that we do
not have here currently.
Um, I wanna say one of the
things that has really um.
Made me sad in this conversation
is that we're talking about.
4 10%.
And we're saying that our own
workers can't even afford that.
That's upon us. That's awful.
Someone can't afford 4/10% of
what they make. Same thing with
businesses.
So that's one of the first
things I wanted to just say
makes me sad, but the second
piece is that is the way in
which we're talking about
workers as if they're just there
to take advantage of a system.
And I will say with the wages
that folks are being paid right
now, people are just trying to
make it work. They're just
trying to put food on the table
and so for us to look at those
folks who won't even get
compensated their full, um,
salary or their full wages in
taking off work. They can't
afford that.
So to say that somebody would
take advantage of a system that
doesn't even pay them a 1 to 1
ratio is pretty out of touch
with the people who are trying
to put food on the table.
Um, I do want to ask a couple of
questions now. Um,
One of the pieces that um I know
you all have touched on, but I
would really like for you to
explain to the committee,
especially as we're talking
about folks who could
potentially take advantage of a
system is how long does it take
to actually get through that
process, especially with the
appeal process. This was one of
the pieces that really stood out
to me when reading um this piece
of legislation now and in years
past.
Madam Chair and Representative
Anaya, um,
We the
Department has 20 days after an
application is submitted to
review the application and and
do the approvals and then there
is another opportunity again
that 15 days after the
determination is made for an
employer to um to appeal.
There's also an appeals process
for the employee, but it's, it's
a pretty substantial amount of
time and the employer does get
20 days' notice when the person
submits the application, so that
they can um manage their own
business operations and and.
Address any um any loss of, of
an employee for a period of
time.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, and
the last piece that I really
want to commend you on, um, and
ask that you please keep intact,
um, Madam Chair, um, as you move
forward, is actually the
definition of family.
Um, I know Representative Jones,
um, went through a list of what
is considered family, uh, in
terms of who can take this type
of leave, and I will say none of
the definitions fit until you
got to the other piece, uh, for
my family, um, for those of you
who are here on opening day, I
have 3 mamas. I have 1 who
actually gave birth to me, um,
but I have two mamas who raised
me, um, and I will say they took
me into their home. They never
got paid for it. We were never
recognized by
A judge or by a body or by
anything legal and they raised
me, and if anything were to
happen to them, I wouldn't want
to be sure that I am that me and
them are protected under this
language, so I, I will say I am.
I really hope that as this film
moves forward, we can, uh, keep
that language intact. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Kates.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and thank you very much for um
uh for everyone, for providing
the feedback. I especially am
grateful for the sponsors who
have spent the last year or two,
talking to my constituents,
whether there was the chambers
or I, I had a large auto
dealership in my and and just
for those of you who don't know,
I, I have run a small business.
I am self-employed currently.
I've run a on a Medicaid
provider nonprofit with up to
150 employees.
And would have to figure out
ways to accommodate uh employees
who were um uh using the uh
family medical leave or federal
laws. Um, I'm also a single
parent and the sole supporter of
my children as they were growing
up, their father died. The
grandparents were not capable
aunts and uncles are not
financially or physically able,
and uh took when I took the last
job of 150 employees did not
take a sick day for 3.5 years.
years so that I would earn
enough time in my sick bank in
case something happened, my
children had to be protected and
I was it. And so that was very
important to me, um, I, I wanna
let you know I'm, um, I'm I'm
gonna try to ask you some easy
uh or not easy, but a simple,
um, uh, yes or no questions, um,
and I, I just wanted to let you
know that I understand the both
sides of this aisle.
as well. Um, it is my
understanding that individuals
earning minimum wage are
receiving 100% of their pay when
they're on paid family medical
leave. Is that correct?
Madam Chair, Representative yes,
that is,
uh, thank you, Mr. So
individuals who are earning over
minimum wage, they are receiving
67% of their income up to uh, I
think it's $1000 cap. Is that
correct? uh, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, yes, up to
the I believe it's the median
wage in the in the state. Uh, so
it's a $1,106.
Uh, thank you very much. Um, uh,
and, and I do understand that
you need to work for 180 days
before you can qualify for paid
family and medical leave. Is
this set up a lot like
unemployment is where what if I
worked 90 days at one place. I
was unemployed for a couple of
months, but within the same 12
month period I started working
other so it is a cruel simply uh
uh uh uh similarly as
unemployment insurance.
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
So this insurance program is set
up a lot like unemployment
insurance, maybe even what
workman's comp insurance, um,
the, uh,
I wanted to also uh in in in uh
do are we using this the your
definition for employee is the
same as the Department of
Labor's definition for employee,
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
that's correct.
Thank you. Um,
I wanted to say that um I
Uh, I, and I, and this is might
be, are, are we able in this
bill, have we made any changes
that require that uh we take the
earned sick leave up to 8 days
if that's what I've earned
already, uh, before paid family
medical leave is kicked in, uh,
that's kind of just similar as
workman's comp, or is it you can
use it anytime in that time
period, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, in this bill,
those are separately, so you,
you when you take paid family
leave, it's for a very specific
reason.
um, that you've outlined and
that has been approved DWS for
sick leave, it's for a variety
of reasons. So it is not
included in this bill as it
stands. OK, thank you. And that,
that makes sense to me because
they are qualified under
different uh definitions. That
sounds great. Um, I also, um, I
just wanted to say just, you
know, I've heard uh uh with
presentations today that is also
very disheartening to me.
Employers
are not giving employees sick
time.
Employees have earned it.
And as an employer, I have had
to struggle with finding
temporary uh help with employees
who were on family medical
leave. Why I paid that
individual because my company
allowed them to earn sick and
vacation time that they could
use. And then I would also have
to pay anybody to help do the
work while they were gone.
This
Paid family medical leave
insurance sounds like a
wonderful opportunity for a
small business to not only
recruit against the big box
stores who can offer deeper
benefits, but also help me with
my cash flow why I helped to um
cover uh why I maintain the
relationship of a very valued
employee that I've already
trained and I've already valued.
Um, as an employee, I would like
to say I'm not sure why
employers think that.
If I have to go home and take
care of my dying mom, and I
don't get paid family medical
leave.
What makes you think I'm gonna
stay with that job.
I'm, I'm not going to stay with
that job. There will be other
ways that I will be able to find
funding and so I, um, I
appreciate your efforts and I
appreciate you listening because
we do need to sustain our
businesses, um, I, I will ask
one last question, uh, is that
so is there anything in this
bill that will require the state
who is to pay state contractors
and Medicaid providers to
compensate for them.
for the extra money in which
they're paying for this benefit.
Madam Chair Representative,
there is not, but you are
presenting a bill I know because
as I mentioned earlier, Madam
Chair and Representative, this
is a global issue that we should
be addressing collectively, and
I am certainly committed to that
working with every member here
to do that cause I do think it's
important, but this bill is not
the only thing that impacts
Medicaid providers. Thank you
very much, Ms. Madam Chairs, all
madam chairs. Uh, thank you very
much. Um,
You create HB uh 119 and I will
say that um, these are different
bills, so that needs to be
effective in the procurement Act
because whether or not it's paid
family medical leave or a state
minimum wage hike or 8 minimum
sick days, it doesn't matter.
This is a global issue and we do
need to protect our Medicaid
providers, um, and our state
contractors, so whether or not
you're mowing the grass at the
roundhouse.
through a state contract or your
Medicaid provider, we do need to
work on this, but not
appropriate just in one bill. We
need to work on it globally.
Thank you very much and thank
you, Madam Chair.
Representative Ferrari.
Madam Chair, I have no
questions. Thank you. So I just
have a couple of things, um,
just a reminder to the committee
that we are not allowed to
question the motives, um, and I
won't go into any more detail.
It, it, that's not allowed
either on the floor or in
committee to discuss why someone
may have done something else,
just, just a reminder of
protocol. So, um,
Represent chairwomen, um, so I
would, I, I will make a a
promise here today to Didi Wave
to
Medicaid waiver providers that I
will do my darndest to get uh
and and I agree 1000% that we
need to cover the whole, the
whole issue, not just in this
bill, but I think we can take
care of some of the opposition
if we put it in this bill, and
sometimes we have to do things
that uh in around
about way, uh, I'd prefer not
to, but there's no guarantee
that representative Kate's bill
will um will pass, and I don't
want to leave those as most of
you know, my son is uh in a DD
waiver group home and um and I
know that they, they have a hard
time staffing and that there
isn't, there isn't these folks
are not getting rich. The
workers or the, the agencies.
So, so I just have one question,
which I think sums up.
What I think of this bill. So,
OK, so theoretically, this bill
doesn't pass.
Is that going to stop people
from getting ill or from their
family members getting ill or so
we're not, we're not saying, OK,
now you can get ill, OK, you
know, all of you who don't who
didn't want cancer now we pass
this bill, you can get cancer
now. So is that a way to look at
it that these things are going
to happen and either we can deal
with them or we can cover our
eyes, ears, and mouth. Um, Madam
Chair, I think last year when I
was presenting before this
committee, I said.
And I think it still applies.
This bill does not get a person
pregnant. This bill does not
cause cancer.
what this bill does, Madam
Chair. It provides a program to
support those individuals with
partial wage uh um replacement
and job protection so that they
can deal with those issues
without the stress of being
concerned about unemployment
being unemployed and unable to
care for themselves or their
families. Ma chair, thank you
for that question. Thank you,
and we will go to Representative
Benaya for a motion, Madam
Chair, I move it to pass.
have a second, uh representative
E. Chavis on the 2nd.
Madam Chair, yes, I just have a
one very small question with
your indulgence.
Uh, with my indulgence.
Earlier you talked about the
actuarial being available.
I've searched for it online.
I've looked at your website,
I've looked at all the press
releases.
Nothing. Is it possible that you
could make that available?
Madam Chair and Representative,
absolutely, um, it, it should be
on the website. I thought it
was, but I will certainly, um, I
get that to you directly.
And, and if you could just send
it to to the committee assistant
and she will get it out to, uh,
I'm not one to read uh
actuarials very.
I, that's, that would put me to
sleep though, that might be an
idea. So we have a motion from
Representative Anaya in a 2nd
from Representative E. Chavis,
will you take the role?
Representative Anaya.
Yes.
Representative Cates, yes.
Representative E. Chavez. Yes.
Representative N Chavez, no.
Representative Ferrari Ferrari?
Yes.
Representative Jones.
No.
Representative Martinez.
No
Representative Senna Cortez? No.
Vice Chair Herndon.
Anne Chair Thompson.
Yes.
by a vote of 6 to 4, you have a
due pass.
Thank you, Madam chair. Thank
you committee members.
And for the committee reminder
of the committee dinner tonight,
and I was so um.
Logheaded, I guess, or wishful
thinking, we will be starting at
8:30. You can see these meetings
go along, so that 9 o'clock was
just in my dreams and so we're,
we're on 8:30, yes, so thank you
all and we are in recess.
