Representative Marian Matthews
here.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes hand bodies muted okay he's
having trouble I think but he's
waving his hand he's here okay
representative Louise that off
US president.
Representative Liz Thomas
present.
Education.
Infirmary president.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong
I'm here.
Where.
Yes I'm sure I am indeed here
invoice as well my mute button
was I don't know stock.
Thank you thank you thank you
without ever we've got everybody
so just to orient the audience
and and remind us we we heard
house bill twelve and seventeen
on Saturday the two cannabis
bills.
We heard all the public
testimony we will not be taking
any more public testimony this
morning.
we were part way through
questioning and I had on my list
when we stopped that
Representative Montoya had the
floor and then Representative to
rises
I had questions
and if and then Representative
Matthews and now is put her hand
up so we will go in that order
and we have Representative
Martinez had something else
going on so we have
Representative Romero Andrea
Romero is here on house bill
twelve and I think we have
Representative lu Han here on
seventeen
and so are we will get
started and for the audience we
will get through as much of our
agenda as we can but we have to
finish these built up
first so Representative Montoya
I'm sure if it is right.
Yeah I'm so I had chair just we
may if I may let our expert and
yeah yeah yeah yeah so yes no
that's that's all right my my
apologies Representative Romero
you want to give me your experts
first and then we'll get
representative Hans.
Sure it's DPA New Mexico.
That.
Make sure I have her name.
Just give me one second.
We have Emily and she's in the.
Okay great.
And I think we're.
I think we'll just stick with
that for now until I hear
otherwise thank you madam chair.
Okay so one we're getting ready
to answer questions if there's
someone else you want to me to
bring over we can do that okay
Representative lu Han.
Experts.
Can you hear me yes thank you so
I have been injured.
Good man.
And Ryan Gomes.
Still on.
Go mess.
I didn't see.
Okay I didn't see them please.
What it what it be under a name
of a business instead of his
name.
I'm not sure I mean find out on.
Chair woman this is been I'm in
your area okay there is I seem.
I'm there's many of us trying to
work the the attendees and that
so I missed that you can you can
then thank you okay
All right Representative
Montoya.
Madam chair and representative
role metal slash Martinez and
Representative lu Han thank you
so much and members.
In the interest of time I'd like
to keep my Madam chair today I I
believe that this these bills
will eventually find a unit a
unified vision
they are consequential the
implications for the state are
enormous.
There are so many pieces of both
bills that are really incredible
and I think that through time a
collaborative approach is best.
In the interest of the
amendments that I proposed as
many of you know I have a very
strong social justice protective
factors for you specifically are
very very important to me I'm
wondering if it makes sense and
I will ask for your good
guidance today in lieu of going
through the lines and making the
changes just folding in this
work into the collaborative work
that we are proposing it has
been agreed by both parties to
really roll up our sleeves and
do the work of the people to
bring the very best product
forward.
On this issue.
yes if the if the Sanchez are
okay eight
with you and you're okay with
working on those amendments as
they continue to probably make
amendments going forward that's
that's probably best to do it.
Are going for them to try and do
it today.
Is that I'm saying had not in
okay missing had not an arms.
Madam chair I completely agree
and accept that okay and let's
see you will see.
I'm bringing and highly.
Okay all right well that that I
think that that's good and thank
you for everyone for for working
together and if if you're
satisfied Representative Montoya
that that will get addressed
moving forward then I think that
that's probably best rather than
piece meal amendments and trying
to do that today.
Madam chair representative thank
you very much for this
consideration I do believe it's
the wisest most efficient use of
time at this moment I yield
back.
Thank you Representative
trusses.
Good morning Representative
Montoya.
I was expecting you to talk for
like at least forty five
minutes.
Jeez Sir.
Good morning good morning good
morning so you know what the we
all agree I think
This is a very bill.
Can you hear me there yeah
people.
Yeah you for us.
Yes okay you know what I mean by
you'll be dropped by it doesn't
again I'll turn off the the
video they would back to what I
was saying is we can all agree
that this is a a big bill.
And it's very complicated
and so I think madam chair of.
The express how complicated was
and and she's way ahead of the
curve on you know she's heard
things like this I'm sure this
is our first time and so
has for some questions and some
concerns I mean
I'm gonna be honest with you
just like every all of us here
every other it doesn't matter if
it's the the committee or those
who are for listening in to date
we all have reasons why we are
for and against it my personal
I have personal reasons that why
I'm very apprehensive of passing
this and and part of it is is up
as a fuel director and I'm gonna
tell you it's been it's I've
I've had a lot of
A lot of run ins with overdoses
and and and drug and so I've
seen young young young adults
teenagers.
Even older people that that and
throughout my career of thirty
to thirty three years and so I'm
always Raul apprehensive about
that and then we'll have I mean
I can speak for myself some of
in in the family we've had some.
Issues not my immediate
immediate family but.
Close enough that it that it it
causes pain and hurt to to so
rings we caution.
Start with first you know we are
the health committee.
And the last.
Week we.
And this is now a popular madam
chair.
Is that the week just trying to
blend and you start reading and
all that and we were very very
worried about.
Representative Ferrary is that
and and and so forth we're very
stern on tobacco.
And you know I read I read here
hello have some stuff right
additional research and and
cannabis.
Because of and I'm I mean I'm no
scientist but one of those.
Joint things or whatever can
this two and a half times
stronger than than cigarettes.
And so we want to keep those out
of the hands of of of of
children for sure and anyone
under under age and and so I
will call start with that first
question and I and I'm gonna be
honest with you I'd like to hear
from both both of Sanchez on
each bill how they intend to do
that and and and so
we we are taxing tobacco at over
eighty percent to make that
happen and so I want to
understand what the differences
of of you if our job is to I
mean this is health committee so
I'm not in tax I'm not all that
today I I want.
I want to see what we're we are
with those two things all at the
the Sanchez on both twelve and
and seventeen answer that if you
show me in their bill we're
we're the field they're going to
be able to to address that thank
you okay Representative Romero
do you want to go first thank
you madam chair thank you
representative assists
like you explain spinner just
money absolutely we want to
prevent on every possible you
know Joshua feed the ravages of
addiction in our community have
been immense
and we absolutely take that very
seriously that's why we have
worked with the at the drug
policy alliance and and having
those commonsense policies
applied to our
bill and you'll see that
throughout
that said madam chair you madam
chair if you look at section
four C. ND we designate a public
health and safety advisory
committee just to be able to in
Phil absolutely every excuse me
every single one of your
concerns that we discuss when it
comes to the safety and the
regulation of the drugs that we
are talking about course the
education component is so
immense that for us as far as
making sure that this stays out
of the hands of children we look
at prevention in a way that's
wholistic that doesn't based
strictly look at just absent
and only it education but what
happens when adult uses possible
that said madam chair
representative you'll find that
those those public health
components are throughout our
bill on including the the the
earmarking of funds to be able
to input into that public health
and safety fund
Madam chair representative out
also defer to my experts and we
Kaltenbach with that drug policy
alliance to info of the public
health and safety elements that
I missed.
Chair representative
Representative thank you and I
think it's really critical that
we.
Monitored impact that anything
on the help of.
In the health of the community
another aspect of hospital one
of the who
research indicating that.
Fund that is very important that
we continue to monitor the
impacts but I have
Representative Romero indicated
on any kind of prevention
education is critical for me to
move forward and how school
twelve right those components
I would also just mentioned that
meeting medical groups including
the a group of pediatricians in
the country have indicated that
the criminalization of cannabis
the more harmful from a public
health perspective then the
impact of the substance itself
nothing that there isn't any are
you using substances but what we
need especially for children and
families of the one part because
the criminalization that a lot
of leading medical experts are
concerned about that and on
individual children and on the
community so I I think also
having that decriminalization
component in the bill is very
thank you.
If I could add quickly
Representative rises there's
also in twelve pretty explicit
regulation or call for
regulation around packaging and
labeling so that it's not
attractive to kids and adults
child resistant packaging and of
course the the eight the legal
age is twenty one.
Thanks.
I'm Representative Luan.
Thank you madam chair
You the studies that we know
about the issue that we will
have this is correlated with a
reduction of opioid
opioid addiction a drop in
alcohol consumption and
reduction rate in violence over
also I think that.
Getting getting this legislation
passed in on.
Regulating this
regulating cannabis would affect
create those those those better
outcomes for public public
health for public safety but I'm
also going to ask my expert
witness stand to join in the
conversation here thank you.
Thank you madam chairwoman
Representative trust us
everything that Representative
Romero and.
Emily Kaltenbach mentioned I I
would also echo and
you know just to highlight that
opioid use disorder was actually
an approved qualifying condition
for the medical cannabis program
last year so I think that there
is some inherent value in
cannabis medically for treating
addiction and I think that that
would also carry over to a rec
program I think
you know kind of the the the the
stigma has always been the
cannabis is a gateway drug and I
I think quite the opposite I
think that we have actually seen
cannabis be incredibly helpful
for people who struggle with
addiction to to having drugs and
their there's never been a case
of somebody overdosing from from
THC so that's a completely
separate category of substance
than than what we see people
overdose on and and folks and
families that you probably seen
come into your business have
have overdosed from
So I I think you know if
anything legalizing cannabis
will create funding to help
treats addiction and under age
prevention from from other more
dangerous drugs thank you.
Thank you
some of you guys might be
surprised in honor of a smoker
of any of that stuff putting
smoke cigarettes but
you know I
That doesn't mean anything that
it might you know me just
stating that but.
I guess I'm gonna go a little
further here and and and there's
two different things were
brought up you're exactly right
no one's loans are you done to
see hundred percent you're right
but.
Do they do to other drugs the
lakes and stuff with with other
things and I have seen
A combination of their they've
done a combination of drugs that
are brought to our place
unfortunately
I will tell you I used to be at
one time probably twenty years
ago I thought you know what I
was going to I was one of your
advocates and so you know what I
think it should be legalized and
I felt that way because I felt
that if we did that we don't
mind we we we would make that we
take away this
Because remember I live real
close to the border so I see all
the worst of the worst and so
because of that I just wanted to
it wasn't because I wanted to go
for me or whatever I wanted so
that would kind of take away
that the market value out out on
the streets.
Since then I because of because
of what happened in two thousand
and two thousand nine it's very
it is strongly change my my
views and my mind on why and
that was because when.
I never looked at it as a as a
business before you look at it
as something that needed to be
that was a drug right madam
chair excuse me madam chair and
wraps and so what happens when
when one drug was the lost one
of the drugs all they did is
substituted for and I'm talking
about cartels and so forth the
just substituted with another
another another product.
And I never realized that until
till two thousand eight two
thousand nine when I mean I went
through all those drug wars and
it was terrible Mr chairman we
sought all come spill over into
into my into my area unit
twenty.
Well it would not exactly in my
district but real boring my
district
Into my into my funeral home
area that we we work as we heard
and saw a lot of harmful things
now some of the so some of the
things that that that were
concerning to me
all madam chair Representative
is.
Yes when we legalize it you
heard some of the confusion I
heard it yesterday even even
from the sponsors of the bill
when it came to
Purchasing fireworks yeah that's
legal there's a lot of confusion
what this means of what they can
and can't do and so one of those
to me is all of Stephanie handle
the the the fire and stuff all
can step back away from that
well stick more with parent teen
and and and and smoking I
personally witnessed our parents
smoking for other children
and and and so I'm very
concerned with the secondhand
smoke of of of cannabis and
children I know the babies have
been born T. H. C. in their in
their system and so those are
some of how do we I mean when we
legalize this might my question
is madam chair I guess where I'm
confused I'm gonna I'm gonna
really go get down to the core
we're I'm confused if we
medically have it already legal.
Why is it necessary to fully
make it.
Public.
Public user for national where.
And chair representative I think
back back to your confusion it's
it's not legal and it's not
regulated and it's fully in the
illicit market unless you are
cannabis medical patient
currently so what what you've
experienced in your committee
and and what's happened I think
with what that that
that recreational use that
you're discussing right now
doesn't have that sort of
parameter around unless they're
medical cannabis use in which
case we can we know the amounts
we know that potency we can
regulate the plant itself you
can look at all of those aspects
that's what you're describing is
exactly what we're seeking to
prevent continuing to happen in
our communities and as soon as
we regulate and license that we
have that control surrounding it
say we we deal with alcohol so
we were trying to you know make
sure that we can.
Honor every part of the process
within our communities Madam
chair representative
all of the deferred said DPA
further on on the at how that
how that works Madam.
Representative madam chair.
Yeah I think it was answered
really well right Representative
Romero I don't know that much
more to add but I think the most
important one of the most
important things that
legalization is around consumer
protection and so you brought up
this issue of not knowing when a
substance might have other
adulterants it thanks one right
argument to legalize it so that
we can protect user because
right now analysts are it's not
regulated it's not tightly
regulated and so
you know legalization would do
that and it would also come with
some stricter barriers for young
people to access that we've seen
in other states that actually
under eight non legal legalized.
See more kids accessing cannabis
then in a tightly regulated
state and we've learned a lot
from alcohol and tobacco and so
we can apply a lot of those
lessons of how to keep it out of
the hands of young.
My turn chair yes yes yes yes
Representative will not I
appreciate that thank you and
I would like to have a point
where you madam chair would it
be possible would you entertain
one round three professionals
that maybe we alternate who gets
to answer first sure that be
possible thank you.
I'm.
Representative dass we know for
reasons just stated and
Very well stated on standing
behind it controlling production
and testing assures the safety
of products the product and
going to the point of.
Regulating the pip counts
because as we know that that
type of insurance there that it
it decreases the chances or we
will decrease illicit market and
that is a big concern of why and
my piece of legislation that we
are very concerned with that and
not having
you know unlimited plan part two
please consider the and and
knowing that that's why we have
that in place and stand behind
it for strongly also you know
the concern with the growing
your own plants at home is been
a concern
as well on that not matter what.
General we use is going to occur
as we already know and so we are
seeking to control as in many
aspects and regulate this
the most responsible way and so
I would just ask if from what
you spend would have anything
else to add to that very well
you know the point I think we
all stand firmly here's the
regulation of this because there
is already an analyst at market
and we do not want to contribute
to that was to market or have it
grow and that's why we're coming
here
To bring this legislation for
thank you
at.
Yes Madam chairwoman
Representative process one thing
in particular that you mentioned
that sticking with me is you you
mentioned you know children born
with T. H. C. in their system
and I think
in addition to everything that
everybody else has mentioned
that comes with a well regulated
market that strictly tests the
product that's going out to
consumers in every state we've
seen funding created to do
public education campaigns and I
I'm not saying that this is
exactly what it would be like
but from my experience on the
appointed chairperson of the the
D. W. I. Planning Council for
Bernalillo county which is of
course our most densely
populated county and that
council takes money from the
alcohol excise tax and we
identify and support programs
that do prevention treatment
education in public schools and
you know a lot of that for for
these programs in particular its
for young people with risky
behavior with alcohol and drug
prevention and then also for
parents of parents of young
people parents of teenage
students helping them to talk
affected Lee about cannabis
about alcohol about other risky
behaviors so in addition to to
having a product that is that we
know is is safer and isn't going
to be laced it also creates
funding to run programs that
help to accomplish exactly some
of the concerns that you're
mentioning around education and
prevention and treatment.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Mr Luther is Luther
make pronouncing that correct
Ewing chair I mean sure and if
you want to just pretend like
you're saying jerk New injure up
well you know those guys of the
with the with an accent you know
I'm sorry
madam chair sooner
you know I think I think we're
I.
Again you know might might my
issues you know we're still
we're going to create a market
through the state and selling it
so we can
So we can make some some some
revenue so that we can turn
around and educate people after
the you know well we're selling
this and so I I would is there
is there's right now currently
do we have anything substantial
of the.
Will hand out here and there is
there anything substantial in
the state madam chair I'll just
go in and ask you Mr going here
since they went first our is
there anything currently.
The state is doing to prevent
the use of cannabis.
For younger and I'm talking
about as all all this is for
younger people queue for
educate.
Thank you madam.
Thank you for I'm sorry
Representative Lund did you want
to go ahead.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative appreciate that
so yes I mean.
That.
There exists some listen market
as mentioned before I mean what
we are doing now is is working.
To
Understand information the data
behind that and how that this
preventive measures can be.
Based in a regulated
Market to create the market this
regulate create to create the
laws that will that will give us
those protections and
regulations
That's where we are with that
right now Representative dass
madam chair and you you
mentioned band so I will ask of
vanity as an add to that.
Madam chairwoman Representative
process again my experiences is
in my County where we do have
several programs not
specifically for cannabis but
for any kind of substance
prevention and for prevention of
risky behaviors I know that
one of the items in H. B. twelve
is specifically a a mandate for
yearly evidence based prevention
and K. twelve public school
setting and I think that was in
conversation after Saturday's
hearing that was you know one of
the the things that I think
Representative Eli would
consider amending her bill
because we thought that was a
very strong things so these
these programs exist
legalizing cannabis and creating
a consistent recurring source of
revenue will only create an
opportunity to do more statewide
county wide municipality
specific programming to prevent
the underage use of cannabis
thank you.
Madam chair Representative the
only thing that I doubt is our
bill actually looks at educating
and regulating the entirety of
the industry so it's not just
about the U. which we absolutely
need the funding for it not just
for cannabis but which really
for every drug that is you know
has the potential to to realize
as we've seen Madam chair
representative but this is about
education at every level from
the distribution to those who
are growing to the effects of
and on and on every level of of
what we have in our bill on in
section ten a through C. we
explicitly talk about how that
licensing would work what the
importance is of that
educational process as well and
I'll defer to Emily on on
anything else but truly that
educational component prevention
is exactly why we're our bill is
so comprehensive to be quite
honest chair representative.
Madam chair and representative
house bill twelve also expands
the requirement for drug
education for young people so
currently in the state drug
education component is quite
then I'm in that high school
students get a semester of
health in which drug education
is just one part of and so this
would expand it all the way to
sixth grade because we think
that's really critical to
include younger people in that
Education component.
And we also did add under the
amendment to that curriculum for
the training for the servers to
also have some education around
responsible use and the harm
reduction for cannabis.
Sorry my phone keeps talking yes
no yes no to.
And I'm and I'm here
Representative trousers my
pictures there because my
internet is unstable this
morning probably knows so by the
way my video vixen madam chair
thank you for fixing might might
my name except I have no hello
in my name is sue
but I'm not fixed I'll fix it
now.
This is up madam chair so and
and and the sponsor of the bill
representatives let me tell you
something I hope you understand
that I am asking this I'm asking
is because insist surely feel
very strongly about this and and
and I know you guys put a lot of
effort and work into this okay
for someone tell you that so
please don't you know I I hope I
don't disrespect you guys with
that so I'm gonna flip again I'm
gonna ask you
Madam chair representative role
metal I think what will
additional student and then you
guys can ask your expert instead
of me asking them
Is it regulated in Colorado
because I mean that's.
Look when I when I open a
business I go study of business.
And I study really well before I
opened.
And so the only thing I I can
look at this study not another
in the state so let's just say
I'm sure you guys study of
Colorado so is it regulated
Representative Romero.
And I mean the in talking about
phone see in in the house you
know how schools are regulated
that's correct Madam chair
representative.
Okay so it's regulated one of
the one of the.
When articles I read is that
The traffic deaths were up
seventy seventy five per year
since pot was legalized there
are because if it I mean that
kind of stuff in the system this
challenging period number in
some way that leads to my next
question which is
Madam chair representative.
The biggest issue that I have is
how in in the in that was
brought up the other day.
How are they going to measure.
How do you measure.
When someone is under the
influence.
You madam chair Rep Andrea did
you want to go on no did you
want to go on that
Representative Romero.
Good.
Thank you Representative does
something we discussed on
Saturday thank you for for
bringing that up again and just
to let you know about yes it is
very it's regulated now Colorado
but we do have many many issues
you know continue to our work to
to services that they have and
why we take.
The considerations and I'm I
feel again going back to the the
pip count going back to
The growing up and I'm out there
so yes if you turned in I am
going to turn that back over to
but to add to that we can get on
Saturday because I I believe
your you were in another
committee or something
Representative that has to well
yeah.
The time change from ten to ten
thirty and I taking a flight in
the flight and was trying to get
on it as soon as possible but I
think I heard a little bit about
it but it okay.
In let's get into that not have
him update you again are the
rest of the committee as well
thank you so much.
Your able to take that
appreciate it thank you.
Chairman representative trusts
Committee members.
So there are several articles
that speak to the increase of D.
W. Y.
in Colorado and there's several
articles that speak to they're
not really being any.
I think the data that came out
of the working group in twenty
nineteen was that the increase
in D. W. Y.
around cannabis use a rose a
little bit of immediately after
legalization and then then was
negligible so I think you know I
would recommend using the data
that came out of that working
group that kind of specified
that the the increase in
substance impaired driving was
going to be negligible increase
if anything at all especially
you know months after cannabis
is legalized in terms of the
presumed impairment so there is.
you know for alcohol we have
this of **** level that is a a
presume threshold for impairment
and that kind of thing just
doesn't exist with cannabis the
the range of cannabis users
you know their mothers and their
ability to consume other small
amount or a large amount the
range between cannabis users is
much larger than it is with with
a whole users and there is no
good scientific way there's no
version of a breathalyzer no
version of a blood drop that
will determine if somebody is
actually impaired from their
cannabis use and further more
THC stays in a person's system
for you know up to six weeks
after after doing it so if you
were to do a blood test somebody
had ingested to use cannabis six
weeks prior there would still be
T. H. C. in their system so that
the right way to do this there
is a version of a standard field
sobriety test the tests
impairment from other other
kinds of influencing substances
and I'm not I'm not sure of the
number but I I remember this
number from several years ago
there's about three hundred
trained drug recognition experts
in New Mexico who were able to
do this
variant of a standard field
sobriety tests that would be
able to measure cannabis
impairment along with other
other impairments and I I would
say that with revenue coming in
especially for enforcement one
of the things would be to train
more law enforcement officers
across the state to be drug
recognition experts to be DRT is
so that they are able to perform
this version of a standard field
sobriety test and and look at
marijuana impairment but I I
want to again
you know stressed that the.
The the best knowledge about an
increased risk of substance
impaired driving from cannabis
says that it's negligible at the
onset of legalization and then
really negligible you know down
the road from that it's just a
it's really not fair to to
compare to compare cannabis with
alcohol or other other
substances because that the
behavior around cannabis use is
is not the same in the the risk
for D. W. I just you know isn't
the same as it is for alcohol.
Thank you.
You madam chair go go ahead
thank you can I address one and
then go back to the committee
that we I don't get all
convoluted is that okay
Representative Romero is okay.
I just wanted to sing responded
that we in our bill regarding
yes and then I'm gonna ask you
because it is not a gets all
Madam chair representative Han
was truly
I agree with them we should have
some then up and women trained
before we go out there we don't
you know.
When you a piece of equipment to
one of my employees the same by
the way altering afterward and
so that's part of my that's part
of my my my my.
Worry is we're saying Hey we're
gonna do this in the after we.
Legalize it that will educate
after we it whether it's just
you know Furthermore with the
children and and and people and
that and then you brought some
very good points a.
Madam chair representative Hines
and stronger that you know stays
in your system for six weeks
harder measure and and and we so
we have all these issues and and
some of those issues are.
Truck drivers some of those
issues are people that are that
work in in commercial industry
or that work in sensitive
businesses that are sensitive to
that and we're going to cause
problems with with our
Them possibly losing their job
or or whatever because we're
we're doing it right and because
there's no way to measure to
stop now
So so that's I guess.
A lot of what I've been hearing
is is is look I know that I'm
gonna be honest with you it's
going to be.
Legal at one point or another.
What is New Mexico.
Prepared for that are we do we
have our our infrastructure
ready ready for and prepared are
we prepared for
to legalize cannabis
are the pros and cons
financially going to cover the
the the cons of what it it it
causes and and I'm just right
now just on the on on the
On the measurement of impairment
and what it'll do I know there's
certain people have reached out
I did some homework and some of
the
commercial.
Transportation businesses are
struggling to find people that
will not that will pass.
Test.
I'm gonna go a bit further
Madam chair representative on
and Representative Romero in my
town reminding him so.
We work with big equipment.
And I mean we're talking about
monster stuff that there have
been accidents in the past they
literally have killed six right
then because they were up
troubles overall that is a looks
like a little gem gem of the all
and so they have had a
tremendous amount of problems
maintaining employees because
they're not testing properly and
we're losing I'm not legalizing
it will it.
I think legalizing civil legal I
didn't do it I did it last week
and I'm not working today I'm
working but I I didn't do that
last week and so those are the
some of the problems are that
are that are and I'm not going
to go on and on about those but
I'm gonna say I think it's
backwards I'm gonna be honest
with you I think we should
honestly have
education and training for law
enforcement and and tools
necessary of instruments
necessary to to measure that in
thank you so what do you what
it and and so I don't want to to
all Representative Romero I know
you had a statement also.
And all in all we need food here
you all the spot thank you madam
chair thank you Representative I
just wanted to say that
your points are absolutely will
take and explicitly in our bill
we have a public health advisory
board created to monitor
cannabis patterns and the
emerging data that you're
discussing from different states
as it pertains to road safety
they were even throughout the
United States where it's been
legalized or for medicinal use
there's no correlation between
adult use and T. Y. rates but
that said we want to be able to
have that advisory board
president in order to report
annually to the department of
health to include information
about access to cannabis for
youth about roast road safety
about the driving while impaired
working while impaired workplace
safety anything related to
emergency room visits outcomes
were involving cannabis use of
positive and negative and of
course just what what we can do
proactively to do that so that
board has been set up explicitly
to monitor absolutely everything
that you're discussing in the
ticket be ridiculous any
possible negative impact we of
course the dealing with account
of this is not new to our state
when it comes to impairment and
when it comes to safety measures
but you're exactly right we
absolutely need to ensure that
our public safety across the
board from health officials to
our front liners are educated
about what happens with that use
and I'll defer to Emily with
anything else that I may have
messed with that but it's
explicitly in our bill madam
chair representative.
Thank you madam chair and
representative yeah I think it's
really important when we're
looking at these the research
and the data to look at
correlation versus causation so
there might be a correlation
when you legalize in the state
you might see an uptick but is
that really conversation can you
make is it because of the fact
and so that's just important
when we look at these at
the studies in the data that's
coming out I also would just
reiterate that right now New
Mexicans can access cannabis
very easily in the illicit
market so you know our law
enforcement are ready dealing
with impaired drivers
potentially and so we just have
to remember that not much is
going to change with
legalization and the data also
shows that you know what we look
at Colorado and Washington which
is maybe legalized for a very
long time we haven't seen an
increase in treatment rates for
cannabis go up and so there
really hasn't been an up tick in
adult use as a result of
cannabis you might see an
increase and in the very early
days because it's not following
people think oh I'm gonna go out
and purchase.
Try this but you're not going to
see that long term increase for
adult use we haven't seen that
for young people we need to keep
our roads safe but right now
every day people are consuming
cannabis and they can get it
probably even easier in some
places would legal market so I
just want to stress that law
enforcement's are ready dealing
with impairment when it comes to
cannabis.
Thank you are you thank you.
I'm.
Representative.
Of course Representative no all
you'll so you can ask for of you
again at answer more to thank
you madam chair and
representative I just wanted to
add that you know players have
the right to have policies to
address the issues you're
talking about as well and are
there on drug tests.
Mr those into
They have the rights to protect
there are there are
Please and their business so I
just like to mention that
that's all I wanted to say about
that thank you madam chair thank
you very much.
Chair representative and and
back to what I was going to say
is is the difference yes they're
getting it right now yes the R.
here's the difference okay yes
they can purchase some from some
guy off the street the
difference is to date statements
was endorsing it is we're asking
the state of New Mexico Dorset
legalize it.
And that makes all the
difference whenever we as a
state are are recognizing that
as in public use and our state
our state employees were
government employees teachers
are law enforcement is then and
happy you know there are
employees to go up and forces so
the difference is we're seeing
yeah it's okay to use it but we
pull you over and and and I
think Representative work
brought this up he and that
person isn't trained and allows
that person to drive he gets and
gets an accident kills someone.
Where is that we're is that
we're is I just I I I I think I
want to stick very very strongly
on that point that we're not
ready I think if there was a
delay in your bill.
What I would say look we need
before we legalize this Madam
chair representative we need to
have all law enforcement
first of all the need to be on
board with how how the needs to
be enforced and what the C. is
right for them because I heard.
Last week there was some issues
and that's where I was going to
go with next is there some
issues with where they were
uncomfortable in entering the
home and and so forth how many
plants and that's changing which
indigenous subject but my point
is.
Why are we not doing that why
are we not training our people
first before you just it's it's
a scary madam chair excuse me.
Yes go ahead Madam chair
representative to Ross's in the
mid nineties
we started the drug recognition
expert training I brought it
when I was with traffic safety
bureau and I think it was
mentioned there's over three
hundred officers throughout the
state already trained in that
and if an officer makes a stop
because someone is impaired
they will not just let that
person go if they're showing
signs of impairment through in
other different things that they
call person number four they and
they have a PAC great hello
hello hello point of five or
something
then they know they have
impairments that it's not from
alcohol Representative jets and
it is most likely from some
other impairment either the the
medications or cannabis or other
drugs then they will call me in
a drug recognition expert to and
take them into
Meeting place where they can
perform the drug recognition of
tax.
And so that way you don't have
to worry about that they're
going to be on letting a person
go and and you know have
repercussions of you know
hurting or killing someone it's
just like any other traffic stop
thank you madam chair I just
wanted to clarify that we do
have the training there are lots
of officers and they will be
stepping this up and driving
while impaired is a stock or
whether it's they don't know why
and you know they make that stop
in there is assessments thank
you madam chair thank you
representative thank you
representative.
So I'm I hope that we all agree
that I would like to see my
notes here is Madam chair
representative is that.
I hope we can further up move
forward on this is I would like
to see us move.
With if if this is legalized
more two statute rather than
rules.
and and the reason for that is.
We would be stronger than them
getting different
administrations that later on
see it and there are a little
more.
You know you get administration
that what maybe is a little more
accepting another one that's not
in this in the rules.
Change back and forth and and
I've seen in here because look
it's it should be in the the
problem is madam chair
representative this is such a
huge comprehensive bill it's so
enormous that that that that
it's just a lot to to take care
of and cover all the bases and
so I you know I I see that one
OCD it looks to me just.
From what I've read that
One bill H. B. twelve is a
little more.
Structure in statute rather than
than seventeen is there a reason
for that.
Madam chair representative all
of the start with Representative
on.
Representative Representative
adventure Representative ****
yes there there is but it's.
Being that we as you said this
is a would in and madam before
and I'm sorry this is that we
are looking.
This is this is a flexible
structure that is necessary as
we are are creating this this
this industry and having those
conversations in the import like
we've been having over these
last.
He's out two days
But we continue conversation
over many many years and
understanding and watching the
growth across
the states that have
put that this into their laws
already.
And having a flexible type of
bill that might have allows for
for that occurrence of happy to
allow for our
Our state agencies have input
and that's why we created the
the.
The committee reports and having
oversight from R. O. D. and to
have the structure that we are
not going to have unlimited
counts I'm not so limited that
it itself helps with it was to
market which are concerned with
and helps are
law enforcement because we know.
We don't have this over
abundance amount of of forces
out there the train as mentioned
before I think Representative
driver bring that up is there
are the we've been tracking
these things in our state
because we've had these these
issues another issue is that
we have to we have to come
together police around this and
build this interstate in the top
up I'm brought up as I'm doing
neglect the way rather than the
top down and there are many
factors in this that.
You're saying that you know
Understandably that the house
bill are now house bill twelve
now the substitute we're talking
about.
Has a lot of those structures
that you're talking about those
things aren't really a problem
or they're not what we are
concerned or what we need to be
talking about are working
towards but in a flexible way
and I think that's what my bill
and I know that that's what my
bill provides on I'd like to ask
our
Turn this over to that to ask if
he has anything to add to that
thank.
Thank you
to your own Armstrong
Representative trust the
services on I think the the goal
in the last ten months was to
create a bill that puts more in
rulemaking than in statute
statutes are less flexible for
example when we dictate a
certain harm reduction policy
and it doesn't work it's then
more difficult to go back and
adjust that in statute where as
if it's in rulemaking the the
recreational medical or so the
recreational cannabis program is
more nimble and can make make
adjustments which is especially
important you know the first few
years of a new industry the
first use of a recreational
program are really trying to
fine tune this from New Mexico
we're taking that the best
lessons learned from how to do
it correctly and how to do it
you know the mistakes are made
and the things in other states
that really works for other
states in addition to the
lessons learned from our own
medical cannabis program and
really fine tune something that
is that's that's going to work
and actually I think if if it's
okay Representative lu Han I
would like lane Goodman to talk
a little bit about why this was
so critical in the medical
program to have you know that
flexibility in rulemaking that's
okay madam chair up.
banned it would would ask on
madam chair to approve that.
Madam chair representative may
speak was that approved this or
that.
Thank you.
Yeah historically.
Had we had statute of limit and
that statutory limitations when
we were developing the medical
cannabis program beginning and
that we first develop the rules
in two thousand and eight two
thousand early two thousand and
nine.
We would have been able to do
what we did and develop the
industry with the safety and
development that we were able to
create.
It was involving Representative
arises you're absolutely correct
it's a moving target it's
changing it's going to develop
in ways we can't really predict
at this time we needed the
flexibility and rulemaking to
change production levels from
ninety five plants two hundred
fifty plans to partner fifty
plans to seventeen fifty plants
to increase.
Producers initially one I got
licensed in twenty two thousand
nine in the first group there
were five of us that was slowly
increased up to the thirty four
we have now at we had to create
rules for Ted there was no
testing initially nobody thought
it was necessary because we had
regulatory process we're able to
put testing into the program all
of that was done through rule
making which was an ongoing
continuous process.
As the industry developed as the
consumers developed as medical
patients developed we had the
flexibility because rules and
rags to do it had to be done I I
think Emily from GPA can speak
to that as well she was very
active in that process as as
drug policy was we wouldn't have
been able to do it had the
statute with limited and what
this into particular procedures
and views the only way we had
that immediate flexibility to
respond quickly and accurately
and develop the program the most
successful one in the country
was through the rule making
process statute would have
hindered us so I appreciate your
your your comments
Representative USCIS you're
absolutely correct but I think
the best way to address that
we've learned to start please
through regulation right and
statute thank you madam chair
thank you representatives.
That being said madam chair
representative I'm just gonna go
through a few things of why they
give you an example of what
thank you by the way Mr Goodman
thank you for for expressing
that I appreciate that very much
madam chair representative so
here here's here's some of the
the big stuff okay.
And maybe maybe of what we've
got this right now using this
high level sheet
That I more call up in a service
so.
Advertising marketing is it
dressed in twelve but not in
seventy.
I keep going down
Limits on probation on on on use
position or transportation of
FDA approved cannabis or
qualified medical issue giver is
included in twelve but not in
seventeen.
Same thing for.
The actual not
have grounds for professional
discredited action and so forth.
And I'll mental custody rights
then we'll do.
Those are words gets pretty
great okay and somebody comes in
Stoneham screws out word and you
got your kids.
And it's included in twelve but
not
seventeen this is what so.
We provide some of the bigger
ones service the employer
protections I think Madam chair
representative I believe they
talk a little bit of employer
protections are summoned twelve
but.
Those nothing included unless
there's something that brought
up.
Our projections imports and
exports.
Are not included in in seventeen
whether this and twelve and I
have questions about that do we
have any negotiated agreements
already our.
Windows and so there's some
there's some things here that
are that are in important.
Our that.
One bill is silent and another
wasn't now there's things that
are good and the other bill that
vice versa.
I guess where I'm going with
this I would really have loved
to have seen and my question
will be madam chair
representatives.
Why can't you guys come together
put something together your best
ideas.
You madam chair
And Representative I don't think
it's
appropriate question.
It's not a question for a new
guy I'm sorry.
But you know what why didn't you
guys didn't you guys have the
same guessing right yes and why
they wouldn't come together I
and I'm not trying to be
disrespectful I'm just asking I
was just that you're going I
don't think we're at chair
representative if I may so when
you we talk about why so many
things are included in the
statute why this is such a
comprehensive bill when I cast
my first vote to legalize in
twenty nineteen in my first term
chair representative it was
taking all of the best ideas at
that time understanding that
we've learned from the industry
with what land is discussed
since the early two thousands
and have progressed and
understand what needs to be in
statute now madam chair
representative for that harm
reduction for the purposes of
education for the purposes of
ensuring that we're re purposing
certain funds for our government
and and for that safety
component that you're talking
about Representative over the
five years that we've been
working on this together and
since I've been involved.
Comprehensive nature of what has
been included in this bill is
why it's a hundred and eighty
pages but why it's so critical
that those those elements are in
there to protect New Mexican
families to protect children and
to ensure that we can have a
robust industry that's well
regulated but in statute we
don't want to leave it up to the
rulemaking process but there's
flexibility obviously built into
so many components of that where
we know the structures that need
to be involved whether it be
health and safety board that
reports back to department of
health things that need to be on
an ongoing basis as we continue
to learn but it is really
important that we are
comprehensive about that that's
why we made you read all of
those pages of information but
truly it's it's been a it's been
a it's been a have you left for
for over five years now of of
putting this all together and
making sure that it's in there
Madam chair representative madam
chair representative lu Han if
you wanted to add anything you
and I want to say that you.
Thank you
This is not just over the last
five years is that you longer
you know talking about this and
being involved in this and and
Marty to.
To really come together police I
think the from the work in the
conversations that we have to
this committee are really
emphasized that is that is
really where we need to be and
hopefully we will move into us
talked about no on Saturdays
well I am very open to.
Educations and working with
Representative role metal on
Martinez and the fact that I am
very open to that and and I'm
learning things into the right
the the process of this
very important and is it is a
comprehensive but you know
having an HR director myself and
working really what statute and
with what we we have to combine
those things together absolutely
and that's when you get a
comprehensive but you have to
have the flexibility within in
my bill it does create that tear
into about one year some things
that are included in this person
that we've put together.
The dialogue about the FDA
doesn't.
Well automatically we have to if
you're to a lot of those the the
federal guidelines
in many ways for them to include
some of that is is somewhat
supports a little redundant but
and I did because it's it's
already.
It's known that we're gonna have
to follow those things
and so absolutely willing to
work on these things and and
have this conversation that's
what this is about like I said
again and and I really you are
quoting Representative Martinez
this is a living breathing a
piece of legislation and
bringing this voices bringing
this components together is
really essential for New Mexico
New Mexicans to get it right we
have this opportunity in front
of us to do that at this time
and we need all of our our
voices including industry really
get the full comprehensive bill
to on the governor's desk and
our.
I'm sorry thank you thank you
madam chair and I just I just
like to ask
madam chair R. Representative if
I can ask
And if he has anything else to
address that thank you.
A terrible woman Committee
members I I think you know just
to to remind the committee that
there's a lot more in common
between these two bills then
there is a difference I think
that
you know that from from my
perspective the industry sitting
back the last few years and
watching how these bills have
played out in the legislature I
think that the big difference is
the difference of approach
Our our goal and and
Representative Luhansk goal is
to create a bill the walks that
fine line of being comprehensive
enough to do this responsibly
believing enough in a rulemaking
and and and rex to be nimble
enough to adjust quickly whether
you know to to make sure that
we're fine tuning this program
and also to be prepared when
cannabis is federally legalized
and that's the that's the the
difference the difference in
approach and the difference in
the length of the two bills so
you know you mentioned like
advertising and marketing to use
that is included in H. B.
seventeen it specifically says
that the the rulemaking body the
policy advisory committee would
address that and I think you
know the there there's so many
issues that are best left left
to a rulemaking process and
that's evidenced from our
medical program is Mr Goodman
mentioned and I think that's the
the big difference aside from
you know all for things that
they Representative Louis.
It seems to be there seems to be
a great willingness to to get
together and and collaborate on
on those issues.
Thank you.
Madam chair representative was
really your thank you
let me tell you why and why I'm
saying what I'm saying about
rulemaking in statute I had a
bad experience in my industry
this is what happened it and
representative I I hate to cut
in but we have three more for
more hands up.
All both I have some more
questions and I want to take the
whole for all all this this
question and I'll come back to
that some of the ones our waters
was still but but I'm just gonna
explain this on the rulemaking
madam chair representative
that the experience that I have
that experience that I had was
this we we all of us in our
industry were against some of
the bill that was for a purpose.
That was put out it's been about
six three years ago they put out
a bill that was going to be
totally undermined our.
Our industry there was holes in
it those problems it was however
you want to look at it was it
was Matt to it was met this bill
was met to loosen up on the
educational requirements and the
and and the requirements that
kept it as a strong
of industry.
You know what happened next this
is I couldn't believe it because
we don't do it in statute the
the they had an rules it was
always in rules and that's where
they have done it and they try
to make it statute these new
rules are gonna listen all this
up we all stood together in our
industry literally every fuel
rector was there said now we
don't want this is not good for
for industry and Representative
I I'm really sorry to have a.
Madam chair but let me explain
why why the rule making is is is
is that is it thank you I think
you've made the point if you
have questions was not okay the
point that I was making as Matt
madam chair is that they just
change the rules and made that
anyway and that's why I feel
that should be more in statute
and that rule because if you it
just depends on was on in in
their which is a rules madam
chair I have some other
questions all of obviously
there's a lot of people have
questions I have some water and
stuff and so all all you for now
thank you very much thank you so
we've already had five hours of
testimony so of the hearing next
I have Representative Matthews.
You thank you madam chair
members of the committee and our
presenters
So I'm gonna try not to be
duplicative but I did miss a
little bit of the last hearing
because I went to my other
committee hearing.
so with that and I also don't
have a ton of questions so the
first question is there is an
inherent conflict between a
situation where the state budget
from potentially harmful conduct
for example a lottery where we
encourage gambling in order to
support scholarships get tax
revenue from liquor my question
is and eight it's it's it's it's
it's essentially asking just for
fairly short answer what is the
balance your specific bill seeks
to strike between the competing
interest of and that inherent
conflict.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative I'll just jump
and within our bill what you'll
see it throughout is essentially
where we're responding to
exactly that problem that you're
discussing when we talk about
communities that have been
disproportionately impacted by
the ravages of drugs and
addiction and in particular the
criminalization of cannabis
madam chair representative we're
looking at the public health and
safety components of how to
respond to those needs I think
we've been saying throughout
this this debate and and and
prior to is that cannabis is not
new to our communities it's not
new to New Mexico what we want
to respond with though is a
robust understanding of how to
create not only an industry that
allows for diversity and
inclusion throughout the state
both urban and rural across the
board but also to to look at how
communities have been impacted
by drugs and and drug like like
cannabis and in particular how
we respond so with that then
madam chair representative all
Emily fill in some of the links
on the policy side of that.
I'm and members the committee
and Representative Matthews I
think I'd also just say I mean I
think it's clear that legalizing
cannabis is not gonna solve our
economic woes right we are not
necessarily the reason we're
legalizing is not to.
Final these funds into a long
standing
Fund unnecessarily what we're
trying to do is reduce the harms
of the criminalization reduce
the harms of
you're responsible use and so
that I think it's really
important which is different
than necessarily have playing
you know a lottery scholarship
which we hope goes off into
eternity that this is really
about repairing the harms verses
It solely for economic
purposes although having a
diverse industry is really
important in New Mexico and that
moment Estes he's but what's
more important is that people
will have good paying jobs from
the industry that will help the
economic health of their
communities so that's the only
thing I would with that thank
you madam chair thank your.
Representative Lujan hundred you
wanna.
Madam thank you madam chair and.
Those are mostly good things and
things that we you know I agree
with we agree with this it's
just that I'm.
To to really go back to with
what Senator asking about you
know what and correct me if I'm
wrong and chair representative
you're asking basically what we
can get out of this for and how
we can support things
like other like the last year
the lottery and what other tax
benefits we've seen is that
correct.
Madam chair members members the
committee representative on I'm
just.
I'm just asking what balance in
your act twelve your bill I'm
sorry your bill at it which is
twelve I think how do you
balance the fact that the state
is going to be encouraging what
is at least arguably potentially
dangerous behavior drug use.
And the state is going to
benefit from that.
And yeah that happens of liquor
that happens with lots of
different things and but it's a
policy question about have how
much do we push this damage
don't we
and
I'm just wondering if your
answer is different than of the
folks on on on the H. B. twelve
thirteen seventeen start.
Representative honest.
I'm sorry madam chair I was just
gonna clarify your bill is
seventeen yes ma'am.
Sorry I'm sorry.
Representative yes there's a
balance right there that we've
got the same thing in otherwise
known as syntax right and so.
That there isn't necessarily the
encouragement of and this is we
know that this is happening we
know that this is being used and
there's no was market and
responsibly goes back to us as
lawmakers to
put in the balance including
the regulation and the
components so that we better
protect our state Representative
protect the people of the state
and I think that
those components are all there
and it creates a revenue as we
all know I mean that's that is
this we have the upper are there
on.
And.
It's it's a component of this
and then we get to have that we
get to use those funds to to
really work on those issues as
mentioned and we had to let you
know I have and have working or
working on an appropriation bill
bill to addresses those needs
and what they are how that would
work.
Fortunately two what the needs
are specifically and
And public health issues as
mentioned so it's not that we
are in disagreement in any of
this I think that there's just a
balanced different approach of
how we're doing this and I don't
believe that we are question
this and anyway I think we're
moving in a very responsible way
by on the moving this this
legislation that is very
necessary four to have this
protections and have the public
safety issues addressed very
much so
both of these bills and not be
honest about that but I would
like to defer to ban
you injure tissue to ask if he
has anything to us thank you for
the question.
Madam chair.
Madam chairman Representative
Matthews
cannabis is legal to our
northern border for several
years now it's legal to our
western border in Arizona with
the first legal sales happening
in the last few weeks of the
Mexican Supreme Court has given
a deadline to legalize marijuana
so it's you know as soon to be
legal on our southern border and
Texas has legislation in the
works now to to legalize.
Go look at side of the fence if
they left it outside of the wall
I would say I kept looking and I
checked this morning but I can
go out you're on mute and madam
chairman women I think you're
off of mute.
I'm I apologize what was.
So I can continue and I I would
just say that you know president
Biden has made it clear that he
plans to decriminalize cannabis
but not to legalize but I would
argue that the next democratic
president would probably do
federal legalization of cannabis
so the the question in in terms
of balance the question is how
do we take this thing that is
already happening in our state
and all around the how do we
make it as safe as possible for
consumers and how do we you know
use the revenue to reduce harm
related to cannabis and other
drugs instead of just going into
the illicit market thank you
Chairman representative thank
you Representative
madam chair at.
And presenters I really
appreciate your answer to the
question
my next question is
advertising will there be
television advertising internet.
Advertising
what will be the restrictions if
any deprivations again I don't
not looking for super duper
detail but in general
in terms of
In terms of the program.
Representative lu Han you want
to go first thank you I think
that it.
Those advertising questions I
think I think we we really have
we are to look to what is been
put in law through the cigarette
use cigarettes tobacco use and
you off of Ali and regulation
there's those commercial
settings and that is absolutely
a must and I think it's it's.
It's indicative of what is
through the process of this and
we are we can be more
restrictive with it is very
possible eight we could be but
we do have regulations set in
place and in those regards and I
would argue for again to to back
to add to that thank you very
much mmhm.
Madam chair on Representative
Matthews again that those are
things that H. B. seventeen has
mentioned and specifically left
to rulemaking body to determine
the best advertising
prohibitions relating to
advertising to young people
thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative are built
explicitly discusses advertising
and marketing restrictions we up
in we don't want to leave it up
to the rulemaking process
because we know our communities
are going to be seeing these
things and so we prohibited on
TV radio public transit except
to adult subscribers an only
adult subscribers so we know
that the audiences if anyone is
over twenty one in order to be
able to see that solicitation we
also explicitly talk about false
advertising deceptive or
misleading advertising we
absolutely do not want that to
be published as regulated and
recognized by the FDA and then
finally madam chair
representative there's an
absolute ban on predatory
marketing and practice start
practices targeting minors so
cartoon characters things like
that that could be caught up in
that advertising we explicitly
look at making sure that
children are not exposed to
anything in that regard so with
that manager we're very serious
about how we want to do that to
make sure that the this isn't
being
exposed to anyone and I'll defer
to and eight I left anything out
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative no I
think you covered all the bases
on that one thank you and we are
sorry the only thing I and that
is we learned a lot from some of
the other states so that's why
this language is a specific.
Thank you madam chair thank you
and presenters thank you very
much for that answer
my third question
do under your bill are there any
special programs aimed at
pregnant women.
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative absolutely we
already are building upon a lot
of that awareness that we're
talking about currently but as
far as the public health and
safety elements that goes with
the educational component that
we're talking about we've looked
at some of that your marks in
our
I'm bill that talks about the
public health and safety
component even looking at home
visitation and being able to
discuss that from zero to three
three to five and and and and
tied in with some of our early
childhood programs already so
absolutely madam chair
representative this is something
that's very important to our
public health initiative within
our bill.
Representative
Madam chair representative yes
Again we are we are leading
these these are into rural and I
just like to say and.
This opens rule I think it goes
back to having a discussion are
recognizing that within those
those are guidelines flexibility
that we have an administration
right now.
It is fully on the page of of
these ideas and these in this
information we're talking about.
And that is why it is really
important to integrate that
perspective and that aspect here
that I guess is not being
discussed but we talk about
rural maybe understanding that
was at the table we're talking
about will who's coming to to
bring these efforts for and that
is our that is our executive and
I like to just have an
understanding of that because.
With that we know that these are
very important issues and that
they are being seriously
discussed and integrated into
law as we speak on different
bills that we know that are
coming point so I think that
that is a component and into
this discussion needs to be
addressed because it does leave
that opportunity to have
Have inputs and I would just say
that I have the highest respect
for our executive and what
what would be brought to the
table and and that perspective
and I think that that is a that
is a very important component
here and so absolutely we would
be talking about pregnant women
and in all aspects of public
health yes absolutely I think
that that is
That is the intent of of of why
we we have the executive we do
so I just wanted to put that out
there that you know when we put
things into your to what as
we're talking about and to
statute that it's harder to get
those things done as we all know
as as lawmakers here would have
the flexibility to really
integrate your further
conversations and input is very
important as well and I just
wanted to add that commit to all
these things will be addressed
and like I said to and you can
do that appropriation aspect of
it how we actually want to move
those funding would be
absolutely addressed through all
this and so thank you for for
the question and I would defer
attached to an expert witness
see if there's any more to add
thank you.
Thank you chairman Armstrong
Representative house bill
seventeen specifically tasks the
cannabis policy and regulatory
advisory committee with
developing best practices and
guidelines that promote the
protect public health and safety
while ensuring a a regulated
environment for for commercial
cannabis and I think that some
you know one of the hallmarks of
HB seventeen is really leaning
into a fully empowered
rulemaking advisory committee to
determine the best path forward
in terms of of public health.
Thank you.
Thank thank you madam and madam
chair and thank you for those
answers
Is there anything it explain to
me if you can the relationship
between legalize cannabis and
the laws relating to child abuse
and neglect is.
it our parents to smoke around
their children just as an
example on I'm just using an
example children who use
cannabis smoke cannabis around
their children.
Would that be in your mind of
grounds for a claim or a charge
of child abuse or child neglect.
And we'll go first to
Representative lu Han but I I
assume Representative Matthews
you're asking in context of what
is or is in the bill.
At.
Yes madam chair what what is or
isn't in the bill yes thank you.
you madam chair thank you
Representative for the question
and and.
Madam chair is is just within
the bill of those those those
charges that that information
are I would think it demand for
attention and respect but would
be
what the gadget to.
Two words were belongs and and
how we address that to the group
making and really concentrating
on on the.
The concept of of all the
charges and there are the.
Proceedings that would have to
be addressed through that it's
it's a whole the whole scope of
information there that if
included in your whilst will
still have that attention needs
to have you addressed in that in
that manner as far as I see it
and I would again defer to see
if any my expert my expert
witness would have something to
thank you.
Chairman Armstrong
representative I would just say
the negligent behavior by
parents would not be tolerated
anymore than it is today in this
bill so you know a lot of the
specifics are are left to to
rulemaking but it does not
specify in HSD seventeen that
you know parents are able to use
or not use cannabis in front of
their children I I think that
they're they're already rules on
the book relating to child abuse
and child endangerment that
prevent negligent behavior by
parents and again
those duties have been
specifically tasked to the
policy advisory committee to
develop rex if needed.
And Representative Romero thank
you madam chair thank you
representative your question is
exactly why the health and
safety components of our bill
and what DPA has been studying
for since their existence is
looking at the difference
between responsible use and
irresponsible use and your fears
and the and the education
component that's that we're
we're tying to our bill is
exactly what I think you're your
concern is regarding parent and
child safety and all let DPA
felons and she's absolutely the
expert on that safety component.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Matthews if in
the house bill twelve it's
actually on page fifty four
paragraph see there's very
specific language that includes
protections for
for minor children that and it
and I'll read it it says a
person shall not be denied care
and parental rights or custody
of or visitation with the minor
child by the state babies or
local government based solely on
conduct that's permitted by the
cannabis regulation Act unless
the person's behavior is such
that it creates an unreasonable
danger to the minor child that
can be established by clear and
convincing evidence that's
really important it's important
that we have that language in
the bill especially since
cannabis is illegal federally
and until that point I am it's
really important that it based
on what is made legal you can
not take a child away from their
family based on that based
solely on that and less again
clear and convincing evidence
that there is a danger to the
children that's why and I'll
just reiterate what
Representative Romero said I'm
educating on what responsible
adult use is is critical we have
to be if we're gonna be
legalizing as a state we also
have to be educating what is
responsible use and what isn't
just like we would do for apple
you know its I would imagine
that if the child is in a car
and that a parent is impaired
regardless of the substance that
is harm to that child so again
I'll just reiterate that in
addition to this there are some
other protections that are laid
out in house bill twelve that
goes beyond just custody it's
about the north health care and
other factors but this bill does
address that.
Madam chair and members at
presenters I thank you very much
those those are really helpful
answers my next question related
to the regulatory scheme
and I've been involved in the
statute and in which we first
made a very strict statutory
scheme and this this session
we're loosening it up.
and my question to you is to
provoke rupes is is there based
upon the hearings and the
process that you're going
through now is there anything in
your bill that is currently
either left rulemaking or not
left rulemaking is actually
specific in the bill that you
would move from.
Where is now into the statute or
into rulemaking that is active
clear what I'm asking I just
wondering if if you identified
anything you'd like to move from
will making to statute or from
statute to rulemaking as you've
gone through this process and
again I'm talking about big
topics not releasing Act.
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative so because we
establish a brand new division
the cannabis control division
where we've basically laid out
those types of rules that need
to be promulgated within that
division and and within the
state department regulation and
licensing and how that works
together were actually quite
specific about what why we need
certain things in statute and
where the rulemaking takes place
so we feel really confident
chair representative that that
we're that that comprehensive
pieces there as far as you know
line by line if you wanted to
talk about a specific role that
needs to be in statute we we
feel strongly that we're in that
place with our bill you know
we're with what we need to to do
to to meet to be sure that what
is left rule is not left to
chance and that's why we're
really specific with especially
the public safety elements and a
lot of the health you know
components to our bill are are
really explicit so that said
Madam chair representative you
know I I if there was a specific
rule or or statute that you were
speaking to would be happy to to
say it but that's that's where
the bill is laid out currently.
Representative will haunt.
Thank you I would say thank you
that's a really good question as
as we're moving through this
process and getting the
information we need I think that
it does record balance and I I
am a person that good it comes
to these conversations and and
the separation balance and I
think that that that really
strikes a place for us we we we
should continue to work on for
reasons it is the stated having
further input
As we're moving through this
process from that from the
bottom up to make sure that we
are addressing things are not
moving to complete statute
immediately I think that that
deserves the the conversation
and I think that that that what
we have in place now provides
for those conversations and and
we're building together with
this I think that
there still more to be had as as
we know this is this is this is
the built this is at the start
of a of an industry that
we we are learning from we will
continue to learn from and we
need to have the flexibility to
two regarding those parameters
and like I said previously as
well it's not to take those
elements out from this process
is not to say they don't want
her I think they're very
relative and and and you but
it's in the amount of their
project how we do that and I
think respectfully I I am.
I have knowledge a lot of that
is coming from
Are the other bill and would
like you know what move to some
of those things absolutely
representative Matthews and
madam chair I think that that is
important I think it discussion
of but striking a balance and
understanding where the why we
need to have that the balances
here is in some important
And I would I would ask my
expert witnesses it has anything
more to add to that thank you.
Thank you chairman Armstrong
Representative following the the
discussion from the committee
hearing on Saturday and and
following this discussion today
looking at specifics I think
that I think there's probably an
opportunity to be a little bit
more specific with the
advertising restrictions where
is HB seventeen.
Specifically science that to the
division for rulemaking I think
there might be some room there
and then you know one thing that
we spoke about was amending the
school code to require annual
evidence based drug education
three six through twelfth grade
and and the concern that came up
Saturday from another committee
member was that that would then
become an unfunded mandate but I
I think that based on the
discussion that that would be
substantial enough the thing
that Representative Eli may
consider moving that from from
rulemaking to statute I I do
want to take the opportunity on
on this specific topic is one of
the benefits I think probably
the the strongest difference
between HB seventeen H. B.
twelve is up production
management
HB seventeen specifies that
based on a yearly independent
study
the state would have the ability
to move production management
implement best practices for
production management in terms
of the number of licenses and
the number of plants that
producers are able to able to
grow and I feel like that is the
single most important thing that
absolutely needs to be and rex
and not in statute because we
need to be able to adjust adjust
production to maintain market
equilibrium it's really
important we don't have
undersupply and equally
important that we don't have
oversupply so those are some of
the things that we consider
moving from rags to statute but
also the single thing that I
would argue is the most
important thing that needs to
leave the left to rulemaking is
production management thank you
Chairman representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
thank you for that and I would
just add to that and that it's
the components that we're
talking about as far as it our
our social issues and and our
education and all those things
are very commendable very
important but we're we're
talking about what what then
just mention to you is is.
We are talking about an industry
we're talking about how that how
those components are very
important and they can't be
the you can't fix those things.
And the elements of of how they
need to to progress in having
you to grow and how they need to
be addressed and so I think that
that that is in itself a very
important issue that we need to
monitor and really a look at as
well thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative.
Madam chair thank you for this
answers
I found it hard to follow.
Which regulatory agencies are it
the R..
Let me say that better.
Some of the bill the bills talk
about creating some regulatory
agencies they also talk about
using some existing regulatory
agencies and I.
Was wondering if you could each.
Kind of give an overview of
which existing regulatory
agencies you plan on using what
and what you're proposing to
create and just a touch the
subject matter of the regular of
the of that agency what that
agency would be responsible for
either the existing one or the
other one just I I I just had a
little real trouble trying to
figure out who is going to be
responsible for what and what we
were creating and what we're
going to do with existing
agencies.
Thank you madam chair I I guess
we'll go first thank you madam
chair thank you representative
so just to kind of lay that out
for you we create a brand new
division within our LD the
cannabis control division and
that request that's all of the
state regulation that we're
looking at the high level
so what that so we can to I'll
let Emily talk about what that
means but I just want to clarify
that we have local jurisdictions
and local jurisdictional control
as well so counties me out of to
four percent of what of the tax
and things like that to take
care of what's going on locally
so we want to be able to to let
you know that that we want to
maintain that that local
jurisdictional control and
that's where at the local
jurisdictional level they can
prohibit license sales
manufacturing cultivation of
prohibition of certain
consumption of cannabis
transport delivery and a
personal home grow but that said
Madam chair representative the
statewide sort of elements for
how that framework works and
what gets purpose is what the
cannabis control division will
promulgate and how how they'll
sort of oversee that process and
all the M. and family go into
more of the specifics thank you
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative so currently I'll
start with the medical program
because I think that's an
important change so currently
Department of Health oversees
both the licensing and the
registry the patient registry so
under house bill seventeen the
license licensing component of
medical move over to this new
control division and R. LD but
the registry the patient
registry will stay with delays
because that's their expertise
in managing supporting medical
patients given that the medical
licensing and the commercial
licensing are very much similar
it made sense to combine those
activities under one division
the control division also will
consults with other agencies in
state government including the
department of agriculture
because of their expertise
around for for example water use
and that's really important that
they weigh in on those pieces
for the department of
environment for example
testing and packaging
requirements because we know
that they have that regulatory
expertise and as you'll see
department of health also
maintains oversight around the
public health uses so for
example the public health
advisory board would be stood up
by the department of health the
Investment fund that includes
the reinvestment back into
committees that have been harmed
also is not the oversight lives
with the department of health as
would the patient subsidy
program Medical substation
subsidy program would remain at
the department of health so
house bill seventeen really
looked at we're across the
executive the expertise remained
but it didn't bifurcated are
separated so much and that you
don't have good regulatory
oversight that's why it's so
important that RLD maintains
that big picture and the
licensing peas because that's
what they're really good at but
consults with all these other
departments thank you madam
chair thank you Representative.
Madam chair and representative
excellent question and I think
that we're we're we're pretty
much aligned with a lot of
those.
Just have the structures are in
we'll get into the structures
but it really eight.
You know when you're including
always agencies like I
previously mentioned again deal
DOHC PS ages State Farm and R.
culture and and all of those
those agencies that have to come
together for the.
It makes for the argument of the
flexibility that was needed was
built because this is a growing
industry this is this is a new
round of the foundation we what
we're doing in the bill my bill
is creating that grounding
cations we have to our work and
come together and bring all
those things this components
together again that's why you
have this flexibility because
they're going to bring and their
best ideas as we.
You know they have your other
legislation that we are we are
going through and bring and and
bring in those bring in those
perspectives that are very much
needed we need to understand
what their what their needs are
so far as your FTE we need to
understand that the different
provisions that require and why
we have been very specific in my
bill as well to really hone in
on
I count and and monitoring on
how this how this issue will
grow and not have to crack out
because House DPS going to
address that.
What the how many more how many
TV's are they going to need act
meaning how many more positions
that they are going to need to
oversee if we create our the
unintended this market because
we have this is what this
program
no hope no hope are on
production so we have to really
the elements that are in my bill
really hone in on that and.
Representative if I could just
interrupt to be really clear
since the election was on the
regulatory structure you.
Both create you both create the
division are all day but you
have regulations coming out of
multiple departments correct.
Right and I will have
then come in and talk about that
but I just wanted to emphasize
the reason and you know how does
all those things come together
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative it is
very close to
how it's handled in H. B. twelve
with the cannabis regulation
Division being developed in our
LD up everything related to the
medical cannabis program with
the exception of the patient
registry coming out from under
the O. H. and moving into our of
the their specific new material
in H. B. seventeen relating to
DPS in the department of health
and then on
on the policy and regulatory
regulatory cannabis the cannabis
policy and regulatory advisory
committee there are names
positions for from membership
from the department of ag
and the department of
environment.
Thank you madam chair thank you
thank you thank you.
The weeds a little bit there but
that just discussed
madam chair I thank you.
And I just want to be really
clear to because I it was my
impression that you have
Department of Environment
regulating packaging and
labeling department of
environment regulating
manufacturing research and
testing so you have multiple
they carry direct regulatory
authority as opposed to twelve
which has all the regulation at
our LD
with that in that division was
consul from the other
departments correct I just want
to that that was a question I
just want to be clear madam
chairman Representative that is
correct okay thank you.
Representative Matthew saw the
for thank you and thank you
madam chair
My last question relates to
money.
and as a couple parts first of
all are you seeking in the
probation in connection with
your bill and
if so the is that appropriation
currently in H. B. two.
and then I second part of it is
The proceeds from.
The income that the state
receives from.
the sale of cannabis are there
it it my understanding is there
are no your marks and the money
would go to the general fund and
I just want to confirm that that
is correct and if not please
correct me.
Madam chair representative did
you go at.
So yes madam chair
representative we do create
a cannabis regulation Fund so
that talks about the regulatory
needs of of how we appropriate
based on what we understand to
be happening we also look at
community grants and
reinvestments we earmarked
specifically for education for
public health for road safety
for essentially all of the
things that we're trying to
prevent from happening from a
negative perspective of impact
to our state we won't be really
cognizant of of making sure that
we're appropriating funds
directly for that purpose Madam
chair representative and so what
we're looking at how we've
appropriated we want to respond
directly to the actual
legalization process and that's
why you'll see those your marks
in there and then again for the
equity social justice and
inclusion campaign that we want
to be tied to ensuring that the
industry is not only robust but
accessible to all throughout the
state and with that madam chair
representative all the Emily
talk about some of the the
specifics of that appropriations
that we're talking about but
there's no direct appropriation
in the bill to answer
Representative Matthews question
there's not an appropriation
currently in this bill just
direction about how it would be
appropriated or earmarked in the
future that's correct Madam
chair representative thank you
for the clarification.
Madam chair and members
committee met Representative
Matthews so when that the funds
are distributed this is just for
the excise tax of the nine
percent excise tax thirty five
percent would be appropriated to
the community reinvestment fund
twenty percent to the low income
medical patient Fund and the
rest would go directly back to
the general fund but also just
notes that any G. R. T. that the
state receives does not is not
your marked and then also the
local excise taxes that are laid
out those four percent for
county and three percent for the
city those are not your March
and counties and cities can use
them as they see fit thank you.
Representative lu Han.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative and I
think we have some similarities
that we do not have any earmarks
as far as that we've included in
this bill
but we are looking at the the
cannabis regulation Fund
protecting that so I will again
ask
injure to talk specifically to
thank you.
Thank you madam chairwoman
Representative Matthews H. B.
seventeen has an overall twenty
percent cannabis cannabis sales
tax at the point of sale with
thirteen percent going to the
state and seven percent going to
county and municipal and that
the intention was to let the
appropriation process to what
what it's supposed to do and
determine how to best spend
those funds would allow for the
freedom for counties and
municipalities to be able to
spend the money is as they see
fit so know your marks or
appropriations specifically in
HB seventeen.
Thank you.
Okay and then shared that.
Members of the committee and
presenters at I just wanna be
clear there's no request.
There's no request for funding
in H. B. two currently is in my
mind did I understand it
answered correctly.
Madam chair representative
that's correct.
I think that's correct okay
okay.
What thank you all if this is
just a huge topic in a huge
undertaking
and like I think some of the
other representatives who have
ask questions
I I probably would be I would
like to see a fair amount of
discretion in particularly in
the economic side of it and a
growing to production side I
certainly understand why you're
trying to figure out how many
how many plants and how you do
this and that is also going to
absolutely depend on the
availability water and I serve
on a committee that does a lot
of water and I can tell you that
the outlook is not good for the
next.
Their number of years I don't
know what that's going to do to
this incipient of industry
on in the area of public health
and so forth I lean much more
toward some pretty strong
guidelines yeah when I'm so
detailed that you can't make
changes
but particularly on advertising
and things like that would
really like to see some controls
on the that kind of thing
the other possibility is to put
some things in the statute and
sunset it.
Of it into a three years and and
then you can you know I just
statute does you need to you you
required to adjust statutes and
that's sometimes and what a way
to do something anyway I I
really want to commend you all
for your just an incredible
amount of work on a very
difficult topic
and
it it it and I hope that and as
you say you're continuing to
work together to try to maybe
put together a single bill I
don't know that that's going to
happen and I think we are going
to be voting on each of the
bills
but I I appreciate your effort
in this I know I know how hard
it is to prepare these kinds of
statutes.
Hi everybody a big strong hug
and Pat on the back for your
efforts and thank you very much.
Thank you next summer to go to
the members who have not had an
opportunity to ask questions yet
so I'm gonna go to
Representative bash.
Thank you madam chair and I move
to table house bill seventeen.
I will take that
when it's ready we can't cut off
debate for tabling motion but
that will take that up when
we're done.
Thank you at any cost anything
additional.
And I would be moving to pass on
house bill twelve okay thank you
we'll we'll take those up when
we're done with debate thank you
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair I am here
madam chair all all of.
One of the just information
madam chair I've been in and out
on it on another committee but
could you just check quickly
remind me what do we do on
amendments of this morning are
they under consideration are
they passed or we're not
considering that we are not
considering the amendments this
morning Representative
Representative Montoya is going
to work with the sponsors as
either one or both of these
bills move forward thank you
madam chairman of many of my
questions and concerns this
morning have been addressed by
by the excellent discussion
we've had of it as we as we look
at some of the details I'm
always pulled back to broad
question which I'm not satisfied
of the sponsors of either twelve
or seventeen.
Have answered at least when I
heard that and and that is to
them I say we'll start with
seventeen of how does.
How does your bill benefit New
Mexico benefit New Mexicans.
If your bill passes how will
this budget our state.
I think that's to seventeen
that's to Representative lu Han.
Thank.
Representative thank you for
that question and.
It was we had talked to this I
think
Discuss bills I think that this
is a this is a huge opportunity
for New Mexico to take on.
The regulation of legalized
cannabis adult use of it I think
that this budget our state and
and respects that we we move
forward those regulations and
recent market that we now are
living with I think that.
This creates
revenues for our state much
needed revenues in our state
that we are diversifying from
other other sources out there in
fact you know as we've talked
about the gas and oil and.
And the dependency there I think
that we.
It does so with so many things
that
but most importantly in and I'm
creating.
regulatory system so that we do
we do decriminalized and
The past use of cannabis and our
society I think that this
provides this the the ability to
create the access to those
states that need it correct
before like I mentioned we have
an opioid.
Epidemic in our state and I
think that we and we know based
on on research that when given
the opportunity to use our so
I've substance that is that it
is safer that is that is that
would be legalized that those
those rates go down as a public
health we are looking at public
health
issues here as well as the
failed war on drugs I think that
this is what this provides I
think that as we noted that so
this will provide and in doing
this in a responsible way I'm
going back again to the the the
public health
and public safety issue of how
we're doing this in my bill and
that is to to.
Calm down to to monitor how this
industry will grow and how how
we do that
and monitor that and that is
that is essential for addressing
those issues do this they're
realizing cannabis I think that
thank you right that that
opportunity here thank you.
Thank thank you very much
responsive we could have a
response from a house bill
twelve same question and the we
need to have short answers
please.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative this is my Miss
America moment perhaps for this
bill this up from for the most
part chair representative why I
got involved in this is about
the social equity and the social
justice component to what has
been ravaging not only our state
but across the United States the
harms of criminalizing not only
addiction but use so this gives
us a proactive opportunity to
actually respond to the harms of
the drug war look at the
communities that have been
adversely affected by this and
see how we can improve that
process on this is a this is a
smart legislation piece this is
about how we are proactively
respond to what we've learned
over the decades of of
criminalizing and of course
it's stigmatizing so many
communities so this gives the
opportunity not only for the
equity but inclusion within
house bill twelve is very
explicit about responding to
those problems from just a
blanket Revenue standpoint Madam
chair representative we're
looking at fifty to a hundred
million in revenue for our state
in the first year and thousands
of jobs and so that's just an
estimate and we've seen how this
is really take and get caught
wind and and other states and
the opportunity is my right here
now being the fourteen state to
opt into this opportunity the
third state that would have a
legislative process that would
push this forward Madam chair
representative so as far as what
the wholistic approach would be
whether it's the dollars and
cents or the social justice in
importance to your community and
money about what it is that we
are looking to to do with this
is responding said that that the
the horizontal needs across the
board in our state Madam chair
representative and all that and
only Asselin to to some of that
wow.
Representative all right I
think.
Such a good job I don't believe
that will be necessary because
want to move to my next question
if I could and I appreciate that
answer in my next question is of
really one of of to to boast
Sanchez please short answers of.
I I should think okay New
Mexico's public policy is to
legalize marijuana that is an
important decision it's a
massive undertaking we've talked
about aspects of it today in
both bills so I said okay what
is our objective in this new
public policy is to deliver
adequate marijuana supply to New
Mexicans.
This is a call high quality at a
cheap price is that our goal.
Question Sanchez please.
Madam chair representative
Representative yeah go ahead
Representative Romero thank you
I'm trying to do the alternate
alternating thank you madam
chair representative so first
and foremost our bill protects
medical cannabis patients not
only for those this is medicine
this is accessing that so that
first and foremost we want to
ensure an adequate supply for
them and that's the the sort of
the way the framework takes
place and then of course looking
at the the recreational market
as far as affordability and
everything else goes first and
foremost we look at the medical
patients and then when it comes
to the recreational side we a
lot of the market forces will
determine what that price will
be but of course with the the
additional tax in the way that
we look at revenue coming into
our state we we board obviously
trying to strike a balance on on
the improvements that we can
make in our state with that
revenue Madam chair
representative thank you very
much for that of.
I'm the same question shortage
thank thank you I think that was
what well stated I think that
that is everything that we're
doing I'm doing my bill first of
our most protective patients
that are using
medical cannabis right now that
is that it's always been you
know the principle here and also
on the recreational side is is
to understand what with that
resource state in the
opportunities that we're we're
mentioned before and and what we
can do better better built that
a better build up that
responsibly the industry
responsibly and
absolutely I think we're we're
very much aligned on the same
thing here thank you thank you
very much for that I of from
from of seventeen and and twelve
both I didn't hear cheapest
marijuana price and that takes
me to taxation I understood
earlier that twenty percent is
the maximum tax rate of
seventeen on twelve I'm a little
confused what what is the top
tax rate of twelve all in the
state and local Representative
Romero please thank you madam
chair I'm gonna defer to Emily
on the tax structure.
Madam chair and representative
Anderson there is a nine percent
excise tax
on top of that is regular G. R.
T. this is for the commercial
side I just want to be clear not
the medical nine percent excise
commercial the G. R. T. and then
if a local jurisdiction wants to
apply a local excise tax it
would be up to four percent for
the county and up to three
percent in the city and when you
add those together your the
ideal president percentages
around twenty percent because
what we learned is you know
that's the right percentage to
undercut the illicit market but
also not too high so that you
increase use so.
Thank.
Thank you very much for that
because it it it's really what I
was hoping to get and that is
the tax burden of both bills and
twenty percent is about the same
Madam chairman of and
that that's what I was trying to
get out there in the to follow
that
a list should grow I hear that
that's a component in our tax
policy consideration and I
reject that I think it's wrong
that New Mexico provided tors
madam chairman invest any
thought to need we've got to
react of because the alleged
grow would would start up and
they wouldn't be taxed and
therefore we should lower our
tax rate I think our tax rate
should be competitive and I
believe it should cover the cost
of of legalizing marijuana and I
think it should also fund were
causes which would suggest
you're more and all the
earmarked madam chairman I'm
gonna leave it with the Sanchez
simply that earlier this year
Representative Warren I had a
bill to put more money into
lottery scholarship which is in
of great need of additional
money to educate New Mexico
students in higher education so
that bill course was tabled
sadly what there is no other
lottery scholarship revenue idea
out there and I am very keen on
proposing to the sponsors of
both bills that they consider a
a pension more this is a our
governor once said in her state
of the union just a pension
additional two percent tax on
top lottery scholarship and I
don't expect you to respond to
that today I want to leave that
I.
Idea because I do think that
will spread the benefit of
because we all know home and
heard evidence of the cost of
legalizing
of marijuana there is a has dire
effects on the young adult.
LP of brain and I think that's a
great concern quite frankly I
wish we talked about it more but
that's not and that's not for
today I am of willing to go
forward but I very much want to
see the Sanchez consider two
percent more for lottery
scholarship madam chairman thank
you very much.
Thank you Representative
Thompson.
Thank you madam chair and I
apologize but I did get a
unanimous do pass on my special
and but then in education so I'm
I am very sorry if this has been
asked and I promise it's only
one question so I've been
hearing a lot about
plant count versus non point out
and so can both both sponsors
just give me a one minute to
have.
Rundown on why you think your
way to move forward with this is
better.
Representative lu Han you want
to go first.
Thank you.
Production with that leads to a
surplus of support surprises
drive prices down in the short
term in the market as more
producers will have the
difficulty competing with the
large producers because larger
producers will always for larger
quantities and that's having
greater economic economies of
scale producing a less
expensive.
It would be in may which allows
them to create greater greater
profit margins
then the prices continue to fall
profits again to create smaller
producers with less financial
reserves like our mom and pops
that we're we're talking about
what we driven out of market
larger produces with deep
pockets will then replace the
smaller producers are you'll be
left with the market that is it
has a small number of large
producers to compete against
each other because the smaller
companies could not and did not
survive so if you want to
present you know the policies it
that we are looking at those
things that to help that the
dish disadvantaged little guys a
little little our businesses
This with this or do that
because it allows me to be
twelve a allow for the unlimited
reduction just like Walmart kind
of comparison our economy and.
Having the over production
Supports it was market whereas
my approach is to have
I would choose a reduced at two
two.
Monitor those markets and have
the functionality of of Mexico
as we grow grow as we go and
that is really where I'm at with
that and we have to really
consider those things and what
market like that with with you
to our economy with this isn't
it thank you Representative
Representative Romero thank you
madam chair thank you
representative so the the in our
bill we have an unlimited plan
count for the second tier of
licensure so we have two tiers
of licenses a micro business and
then large scale business we
differentiate that based on
production all we feel strongly
why there for the to the larger
businesses when you went we've
heard a lot about profit margins
and what you what Representative
will contact about and that's
why I think there they want a
strong regulations surrounding
that market opportunity what we
feel and and understand based on
the the data and information on
the illicit market is that when
you cap plant production for a
large scale operation the
illicit market steps in to take
over that market share that's
now where the demand is not
being met and this is why it's
so critical is that when we're
talking about that expansion in
the opportunity to be able to
fill in the gaps on what the
illicit market is currently
doing is to be able to regulate
that side of it but not limited
in a way where you're limiting
the market potential and
allowing that illicit market to
fill in we have the opportunity
to regulate that we've seen how
it's done so the artificial sort
of fear that that somehow going
to create problems for us is
just not true Madam chair
representative and that's why we
thought fully looked at that and
the differentiation between
licenses and being able to allow
that production and all let and
only fill in any sort of reason
why.
Any additional reason what.
madam chair and representative
just as we could be concerned
with the over supply we have to
be concerned with undersupplied
as we've seen in Canada when you
have undersupply that also can
fuel the illicit market so
people will go to less than
market they can't assigned
enough supply I'm house bill
seventeen also includes language
to make sure that that supply
and demand is being monitored so
that recommendations can be made
back to legislators on whether
that needs to be changed in any
way there's also really strong
language to make sure because
medical patients come first in
house bill seventeen so their
specific language that monitor
supply and demand and can make
changes according accordingly on
through the regulatory process
to make sure that there's enough
supplies for medical patients
because what we saw in Illinois
when they legalized on the first
week they they didn't have
enough supply to meet the demand
and we're concerned that that
will happen and then medical
patients will not be able to
access their medicine but I
think you know it's really
important that supplying demand
gets monitored you know you
don't want to have over supply
and you don't have undersupplied
and so I think that monitoring
by the regulatory agencies
really important and then the
being able to make recommended
recommended Jean Act provided.
Well my expert witness weigh in
on this as well.
Briefly please thank you that
may have you speak to us thank
you madam chairwoman committee
members I I think this is
probably the the biggest
distinction between the two kids
legislation and we have seen
that unlimited supply or at
least the the lack of a
mechanism to impose some kind of
limits on supply has had huge
negative consequences in terms
of the illicit market this is
what drove the beeping Crisis
two years ago this is what costs
the state of Oregon to last year
implement new legislation to
actually create that mechanism
that we're talking about and if
you're talking about equity in
terms of real New Mexicans
really Mexico businesses getting
an opportunity to enter into
this industry which is supposed
to be the fifteenth largest
industry in the state
not having any mechanism to
responsibly do production
management is potentially the
most dangerous thing to having a
competitive market and our state
within this industry thank you.
Thank you.
Representative Thomson was that
was at a thank you madam chair
okay Representative Lord
enterprises I'm going to circle
back to because this is a really
important and I think ultimately
it's the job of this committee
to pick out which bill if either
and so and we're doing to it
once which I understand is a
struggle but please if you could
try and be focused in your
questions and and is as brief as
we can because we've already had
over six hours of testimony on
these bills combined so
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair totally
understand I'm gonna make this
super brief as it has been a lot
of discussion and really good
questions I appreciate all the
questions that come forward to
make bricks restated but
something I said the other day
and then I'm just going to ask
my question which is a listed a
very very brief answer I want to
make sure I'm so I had a lot of
interesting commentary on social
media this weekend and it's
unfortunate I did have a bunch
of people come forward to tell
other people to lie about their
use of marijuana said just
wanted to point out something
really briefly to the gun owners
that statute thirty dash seven.
Yes for two does say you cannot
be under the influence and carry
guns as one make sure that they
understand that there's a state
law which hopefully maybe I'll
get amended if this does pass
like in Oklahoma they did pass
bill over there that people can
carry a gun and still possessed
marijuana I just on my to read
at the federal level.
I'm after found this is where
the problem payment smoking or
possessing marijuana so crime
twenty one even has warning that
possessing or having more one on
you is a federal crime I just
want to make sure people know
that if you buy on that.
it is section eighteen USC one
thousand and it's ten years in
prison and so it's it's this is
not something to be messed
around with I also understand
that if you do process and I
will give you a statutes that is
five years in federal prison I
just want to make sure that
people why because I did have a
gentleman come forward and in
another general we're telling
people to slide on that form and
they put that on there on social
media which is going to be
really bad for them so I just
wanna make sure everybody knows
that it is still federal delay
decriminalizing on the federal
level which I was hoping maybe
Obama or trump would have done
that at some point so you would
have this issue but we're here
with that so going back to the
one question I did and did
either one of you have any
amendment in there that maybe
part or some of the applications
are growing or selling would be
on native Americans Hispanics
people of color minorities women
veterans with any of that added
and if not would you consider
that a friendly amendment makes
might bring up on the floor if
it wasn't having.
Representative Romero thank you
madam chair thank Representative
absolutely we we explicitly
discuss about diversity
inclusion in the we that we
outreach for the industry itself
and we've heard we absolutely
consulted with the public and
tribes of our state on their
sovereignty and the negotiation
that they require with the state
that they would like to see
happen for the for that market
opportunity as well madam chair
thank you representative on.
Madam Representative yes
absolutely I've talked to
Representative lu Han you're
gonna ask you I'm I want to ask
very explicit is it in your
bill.
And and I believe Madam the
question is if we entertain that
that that would be something we
would consider about I don't
care I just want to be clear
that you're you're Claire's a
because the first question I
think
it.
That that that that has been in
discussion and and
entertained in would be a
friendly amendment thank you.
Thank you so much for internet
or for me thank you thank you
madam chair from I would have a
second turnaround thank you
Representative trousers.
Brief and focus please.
I'm gonna focus on these are
gonna be more later but focus
I'll focus that ma'am I'm sorry.
Yeah.
Asking good questions everyone I
just have to say everyone has
asked really good questions so
going to tell you we appreciate
your patience and everybody on
the committee and and I'm not I
got to make the statement
number.
You know this is a hundred
eighty page built we've got
three other bills and it's it's
taken an hour to do that this is
a monster and it's it's
important that I think it's very
important some of the decisions
we make today could affect
adversely somebody out there and
in a bad way only because we
were hurrying and so and I'm
gonna dress couples whose number
one.
The end of this can you they can
this.
Madam chair representative Madam
chair representative yes that's
one form of it.
Is that Madam chair
representative that addressed in
your either of your bills.
Madam chair representative not
understanding what portion of
that but yeah well to
Representative little baby to
vaping and self Madam chair
representative because last week
again like I said we heard a lot
of testimony about the the the
harm of the building and and
tobacco and I want to have that
same level of I would appreciate
if you would
Also we consider friendly
amendment of increasing the
same sorts of restrictions and
and stress that is building on
the tobacco industry on on
campus and that's not all there
as I read it it's not the same
would you either of you
Would either be a doctor so the
same language Madam chair
representative.
Representative lo Han.
Madam chair representative there
are very different sent elements
in regards to cannabis and
tobacco so we have to look at
those those instrumental
with data driven information and
with researching different
information and so the
discussion would be open and I
I'd be happy to have a
discussion with you but these
are very different
substances and and but yes we
can have those conversations.
Representative sure
Representative Romero Madam
chair representative it's very
strongly already stated in our
bill about use use and and and
in particular the re purposing
I'm not just on vaping but
literally across the board on
all marijuana use all cannabis
use we have been following the
trends as far as the public
health and safety nationally as
what's been done with with
vaping thankfully we've seen a
tree a downward trend and
marijuana use among the youth
and we want to be able to
obviously continue that effort
madam chair representative of
that monitor it closely and
ensure that again with the
strong educational components
that are involved in what we're
seeking to do and
again birth to through a high
school perhaps even looking at
some of the revenues for we've
heard that lottery scholarships
and otherwise we want to make
sure that that information is
clear and that the public health
and safety element to our bill
is is well received.
I'm sure Representative the
reason I'm bringing it up again
I'm gonna bring it up what I
read smoking a single money want
to join the public to smoking
two and a half to five
statements that's why I want
that we're trying to help
children and this committee so I
just ask would you be would you
be willing to increase the taxes
to buy maybe I.
Small percentage of small act
Representative Anderson said
three percent maybe for us to
help us up invest in the lottery
scholarship would you be would
either of you
be willing to Madam chair
representative the willing to
add another two percent in it in
taxes to help clean up our with
role based just litter litter
clean up and it would go to the
the road Department because
everybody smokes up the window
would you be willing to take any
sort of tax increases on those
to help our state either one of
the.
Representative.
Representative chair
representative I think that that
that just speaks to how we
strive structured this bill and
have the flexibility to have
those conversations as we move
forward with the will making and
I think that that actually
provides the opportunity for
more of these conversations are
this information and inputs in a
very
open my and I appreciate your
questions thank you madam chair
thank you representative.
Madam chair representative I
think when we're talking about
the the earmarks that were even
proposing that argument needs to
be made to the Senate side of of
what we're hoping for I we
agreed that anything to help New
Mexico in a way that this
industry can promote that is an
open an open discussion so that
Madam chair representative I
think is is not only already
proposed a proponent of our bill
as to why we're so specific
about and public health safety
and the reinvestment in New
Mexico but I think that that's
going to be the real challenge
on the other side of the chamber
thank you madam chair
representative madam chair
representative I know you guys
of the conversation would be
taken but would you you never
asked me what you would be
willing to take an amendment
that would actually do that for
state we're gonna make this a
positive thing it the worst case
scenario would be bought would
you entertain those two tax
increases to benefit the state
roadways clean up for later and
the second one to help our
students lottery scholarship
fund.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative because we're
looking at the specifics I would
love to see that in writing if
we could just sort of
proactively understand where
abouts you would like to make
that determination or
distinction we would love to
entertain that at a future date.
Chair representative of the
basically putting three percent
of the of the of the total sales
into the lottery scholarship and
I'm as far as the the roadway
two percent of it would go to
the the New Mexico road
Department New Mexico highway
department excuse me and and and
specifically your market.
It's just a question
Representative Representative as
a co sponsor I'm gonna jump in
and and say the amount of tax on
this has been carefully thought
about so as not to drive the
illicit market by having it too
expensive but both have
funds going to the general fund
so we're of house bill seventeen
all goes to the general fund
with an ability to use those
funds however the legislature
sees fit and in house bill
twelve there is a significant
portion and debt at community
reinvestment and local control
for counties and cities to
address any of that and as well
as a significant portion going
to the general fund but the
balance of how much tax on this
particular item has to be
weighed against what would drive
analyst at market because the
taxes to hi and a black market
would be significantly cheaper
so I think what I hear is that
everyone is conscientious about
those issues being important
whether the right thing is
taxing this specifically for
that is a whole nother question
but appropriations from it is
certainly open to the
legislature to to do that's
that's my.
Answer thank you madam chair
madam chair you bring up a good
point because that was my exact
argument last week when tobacco
what we're we're we're taxing
them eighty three percent and we
said no won't drive them out to
out to Mexico and and and and
and up to the reservations this
is exactly what I was saying but
eighty three percent was.
Was not well I don't know maybe
not enough and and today twenty
percent this too much and that
and and I say that respectfully
because I'm I'm I'm trying to
I'm trying to find a way madam
chair representatives to have.
Balanced in my in my decision
making I'm listening to you guys
and one is okay once not and it
throws me off because I if it's
going to be good for what it
should be good for the ball and
that's just my statement to the.
Madam chair.
Thank you and I'm going to did
I'm sure both madam chair and
representatives you you read
the.
The report of from.
From the.
Of public safety.
And these are I'm just gonna go
over the also earlier I was I
was I was full.
That they're already have they
have a large number of trained
uniformed officers.
Yes I'm reading here says that
there's approximately a hundred
forty seven commission uniform
officers to complete this A. R.
I. D. E. training programs that
are actually completed okay I
was told it was three hundred
the only services for one forty
seven because they're concerned.
So
do if you read through this part
of the bill which I think is
super important Madam chair
representative we're asking to
legalize under in the something
that's illegal right now but
we're putting our men and women
who are law enforcement out
there in the streets to try and
enforce it okay someone want to
different the so the significant
issues when I read it from them
they're they're saying they're.
They need.
R. fifty seven total D. R. ease
which was forty eight additional
offers that officers that
require this training.
I don't see it seems to me that
they're not prepared for this at
this time I'm gonna make that
statement there.
On the other significant issues
and and this is what I would
hope that they would take some
Madam chair representative that
they would take some
Possible amendments and
discussions I would love to see
Madam chair representative.
The DPS.
Give a recommendations and so
the ones are gonna be out there
in the street there already we
saw what happened two weeks ago
to one of our officers in a drug
in a drug related incident it
cost him his life I've in my
career Madam chair
representative I've seen a lot
of that is so therefore I'm very
strongly a at.
Moved by by this situation and I
hate to see another officer Paul
to to that legislation that
passes Committee without being
true fully vetted and I
understand madam chair
representative so we're trying
to move this on and and if we
need to roll this over I
respectfully for for the
conversation I've I'm I'm fine
with that because I'm.
Reading through pages here of of
a lot of things so I'm gonna
give one of them here they said.
Are in the complete committee on
H. P. twelve.
Composes professionals with
expertise in number of areas
does not include a county
sheriff it does not include not
even one EPS member on the board
are either of you
willing to allow them to be
actually part of that
conversation.
Madam chair representative
madam.
Go ahead thank you yes.
They would be I would that would
that they would have three they
do have a voice and have a voice
and and be proactive in what
you're talking about why again I
I keep on reiterating and
driving the point that we have
to grow as we go and we have to
look at what's
What components could create add
on to an illicit market in and
that goes back to the the the
regulation around the number of
plants we would we would
regulate in my bill an
understanding that public safety
is is is that that is exactly
what you're up there in the list
of things for us to address and
that's this is why.
Really importance exceptionally
important way of doing that
again driving the issue that you
talked about yes I would just
say yes that I would cannot
again going back to the
flexibility of how we need to
address.
within within the structure of
building from the bottom up into
addressing these things on again
why I think thank you thank you
thank you for no.
Yes so we have a cannabis
regulatory advisory committee
proposed in our bill that
explicit we works with the RLD
on her promulgating rules and
looking at the entire enterprise
of cannabis in the market so we
have the chief public defender
district attorneys a county
sheriff's members appointed by
the director of the
superintendent RLD so again we
look at how government needs to
respond to again the overall
approach and how they work
together and they're all
proposed to be part of this an
advisory committee to make sure
that we have the rules necessary
to maintain health and safety
and do exactly what you're
talking about making sure
they're well trained and well
resource for the the task at
hand.
Madam chair representative
Representative Representative
trousers you've had answers from
both it can you are you wrapping
madam chair.
I'm finishing my question on
this last part for law
enforcement not madam chair and
and and I didn't get an answer
because exactly what they're
saying is not what I'm reading
in this that they put a
significant issue in section
four half of HB twelve
requirements the department of
health to a point this committee
and they specifically say that
they've been left out so even
though they're saying that it
does and it just using it does
include account sure I correct
myself but it doesn't include
the GPS number of of the on the
board I apologize so I did get
that wrong.
It's evident that they won't be
part of that madam chair
representative.
The other the other thing is
they have the significant issues
and this is super important
again because we're trying to
ask them to to to force these
laws and we're asking them to.
Take care of our us out there in
the streets
it says on this is section eight
do is B. twelve us is forced
recent denial of application
engage in commercial cannabis
activities if you read a little
further says this means also a
C. section eight G.
significantly a prior position
use of manufacture distribution
or dispensing of.
Dispensing.
Conviction is not limited to
money wanna this means that
about a felony conviction for
position use manufacture
distribute or display dispensing
heroin other opioids opioids or
methamphetamine would not
disqualify one from owning are
engaging in commercial cannabis.
These are things that this is
what I personally would like to
see are you willing to amend
that part of your.
Let's just of your legislation
madam chair representative and I
guess for Representative
There's more its role metal
well thank you Madam I'm so I'm
sorry I'm not understanding what
amendment you're proposing for
that specifically well then
they're saying that apparently
the way that you the way it's
worded there that of in section
eight G. it's is basically the
way it's worded it's saying that
if you had a proposition for you
Matt manufactured distributing
this before you've been
convicted of this that there's
no limitations that you can go
ahead and start selling of of.
This I'm gonna read exactly this
means of felony conviction
conviction for possession use
manufacture distribution or
dispensing of their own other
opioids for methamphetamine
would not disqualify one from
eighteen a license to engage in
commercial cannabis.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative I I think I
understand what your question is
and all response to why that is
and and of course within the
regulation and licensing
department they have the ability
to accept or deny any licensure
any.
Cert cert in any regard that
said madam chair representative
why it's so specific in this
legislation is because of the
criminalization of the sale of
cannabis for the folks that have
been in the business a very long
time Madam chair representative
that have been able to that I
have unfortunately been
criminalized in that process
madam chair representative we
want those to break good rather
than breaking bad into the
obviously the regulated market
for being part of that
opportunity we felt strongly
that if you understand the
business that you know what it
is that has gone on and in these
communities that you might be
well equipped to do that however
Madam chair representative we're
not making those decisions the
regulation and licensing
department are making those
decisions but we didn't want it
to be prohibitive of those who
have been adversely affected by
criminalization in the past
chair representative at all it
I'm only Phil and I see sheet
that she knows what what we're
talking.
Madam chair representative says
I I would also direct you that
if someone was selling to a
minor they are not that does not
make them at all so I just want
to clarify.
That doesn't make him
applicables correct is that what
you said yes correct and so
that's in our opinion really
important but I also would
direct you to the language that
says the sole reason for denying
a license there could be other
reasons that the license the
applicant would not be so.
Thank you.
The the Madam chair
representative the thing is
you're you're all both right
okay first of all I'm gonna
remind everyone it was illegal.
and and so we can say well you
know I know that I need I got
busted for a thousand pounds of
money one of the now that it's
legal we want to go retroactive
I mean we could all have stories
like that my my my thing is this
Madam chair representative the
value doesn't specifically just
say might you want to so
therefore if you did that with
methamphetamines or if you did
with heroin or something else
you're still able to engage in
commercial cannabis activity we
can't say look they have.
I hope I understand it right
open with misunderstood it
sounded to me like you said
they're experts in this business
of manufacturing and and and
transporting drugs we need your
expertise is that what I
understood I hope not.
Because that's it just it it
shocks me.
So the the the bottom line on
this work for law enforcement
just a horrible thing I'm gonna
tell you this I've gone to a
seem to pick up a phone officer
horrible State.
If these guys are asking please
can you clarify that so that we
don't have to deal with some of
this why would we do that Madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative let
me just clarify absolutely a
hundred percent on board with
what you're talking about we're
talking about the idea that when
we're we're looking at cannabis
use think about it in the terms
of alcohol prohibition and what
was happening at that point in
time and and what it what
essentially resulted because of
that prohibition in the illicit
market and so madam chair
representative what we're
talking about converting and the
convergence of the industry
opportunity we don't want to
remove someone that from that
opportunity because it was
criminalized as the with the way
that it is now and and so what
again RLD is in charge of that
real promulgation we don't want
anyone to have to carry a
license in any industry if they
don't obviously qualify and
believe that they are met up to
the demands of what the RLD
would be part of I would be able
to promulgate as far as roles
go.
Again I'm just gonna ask one
more time Madam chair
representative would you exclude
final given to the money want
to.
Opposition.
But the opioids methamphetamines
and other heroin and other other
things that they've been
convicted of.
Doesn't allow them to be part of
that is that what you're saying
I mean excuse me allows and to
still be licensed and it's not
specifically named out that's
what they're saying.
And that's I mean again we're we
we talk about rules and statutes
Madam chair representative and
so would be nice to have in
statute that says look you've
been convicted of some of the
things is all kinds of crimes
Madam chair representative we
can't just say well you know
what it was the act actin was
wrong but today it's right
towards the right correct you I
get some of that and and I I
know Representative employer is
has developed because I don't
want to ruin a kid's life he was
in possession of a joint I get
it a hundred percent I want kids
to modest but also there has to
be some restrictions especially
if the PS is asking for the.
All those we won section eleven
E. let's go ahead move on.
Yeah I need Madam chair
representative up they say that
the a person under twenty one to
to the point of of what one of
the expert witnesses present
under age twenty one.
we have a permit excuse me to a
person procedure provides
provides that lets you Mr over
trying to hurry down up section
eleven G. provides a canvas
server who sells cannabis to a
person under twenty one years of
age have their permit suspended
or revoked however there's no
criminal criminal penalty
is also inconsistent with
section sixty seven sixty dash
seven B. dash one which provides
a still walk all well Miner by
Sir Sir but server.
First for personalization is a
misdemeanor is it is a
misdemeanor so I just think that
that was an issue to them and
then should be revised that of
provided a sale sale of
marijuana to someone pure than
twenty years your is it of age.
By a server is a misdemeanor so
they're just trying to get it I
guess on the same thing I don't
know I I I would maybe you are
are you that but
It's just I guess what I'm Madam
chair representative my point in
all this and I know this is been
a long drawn out thing and I
apologize but at the same time.
I feel strongly about what's
going on with the with and I
have more questions here
because there's a lot of things
I would be super comfortable to
know that EPS endorsed.
Even reluctantly one of the
bills with some of the
provisions are asking and that
I'm gonna I'm gonna I'm gonna
say thank you very much for
listening to me I would really
appreciate it that I think
because I think they're the ones
we're gonna put out online and
and and madam chair thank you
for your patience I'm sure I've
rented to the to.
Over the top today but you know
this is near and dear to my
heart because of of of the
scenes that I've been on and you
know I actually feel strongly
about the points that I made and
I appreciate both of you because
it takes a lot of courage to do
what you've done
Office thank you very much thank
you representative and I would I
would encourage you to speak
with the Sanchez if one or both
of these move forward whether
you vote for it today or not
I'll raise your issues with
them.
so we are at that point thank
you everyone for your patience I
know it's been a really long of
hearing
a double hearing and which was a
challenge in and of itself and I
appreciate everyone's patience
and cooperation with that but
there was so much similarity and
the questions would be so
similar I thought this was
probably the most effective way
to do this so I appreciate
everyone's tolerance with that
so taking house bill twelve
first we have a motion on the
table four do pass do I have a a
second.
I'll second.
I just want to clarify that
we're on the committee
substitute yes for a do not pass
for thank you I do not pass for
house bill twelve in a do pass
for House Bill Committee
substitute twelve.
Madam chair this is
Representative Anderson I
thought is the motion for a do
not pass on seventeen or a
table.
we are the motion.
So what we're going to take one
of the time there is already a
motion provided for by
Representative bash on both of
them do pass for twelve and a
table for seventeen what we're
going to take twelve first and I
have a motion for a do pass and
the second and so will be voting
on twelve
first if I Torrez if you could
take the role.
Thank you Representative Phelps
Anderson.
No.
Representative.
Armstrong.
No and I'd briefly would like to
explain.
Representative Britney but.
Yes.
Representative Karen bash yes.
Representative Stephanie lord
no.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Yes.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Your muted Sir.
And having trouble with that but
no the.
I vote yes thank but with I'd
like to explain my vote later
thank.
Representative Reese.
No promises short explanation.
Representative Liz Thomson just.
Representative vice chair Joanne
J. Ferrary yes.
Madam chair Deborah A. Armstrong
yes.
Okay.
One two four okay
you have a do past seven to four
on committee substitute for
house bill twelve very brief
explanations of your vote
Representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair my explanation
for voting no is that it still
needs more work I keep passing
legislation out of the committee
to another committee that still
has issues thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative
Montoya.
They would like to vote.
I do pass for both bills because
I believe that there is a
commitment to work in a unified
manner some gonna hold that I
believe that yes.
Passing it on to the next
committee is a challenge but
time is running out and I
believe that these process these
are the time that we can do this
this is what we're supposed to
do is work collaboratively to
find the best product so I'm
going to be voting.
A new path for both bills thank
you Representative Terrazas
briefly.
Thank you madam chair
representative thank you for
bringing it up I think it's
premature the needs that they
obviously we we have a lot of
conversation and I don't believe
it's ready for the next
committee thank you thank you
and now we'll go to house bill
seventeen we have a motion to
table of a second.
Have a second
Torrez would you call the roll
please.
Representative Phelps Anderson
to the table.
Yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative.
I would also like to pass come
back to me I'm sorry.
Right now you come yes thank
you.
Representative Karen batch yes
the table.
Representative Stephanie lord
no to table.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes the table.
Representative Roger Montoya.
No table.
Representative the blue path off
us.
No to to.
Representative Liz Thomson yes
to table with an explanation
madam chair.
Vice chair joined Ferrari.
Yes to table.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong
would you please first call
missing votes sorry
Representative Gail Armstrong.
No to table with an explanation.
Representative Rick Brittney
budget hostage.
Yes to table.
So that is and all the yes the
table sorry.
That is one.
To the table and for not to.
So you have at house bill
seventeen is tabled and our
representative Thompson you
wanted to.
Thank you madam chair I'm
there's good parts in both bills
my tabling motion was in hopes
that they could data be combined
and I I apologize to the
sponsors but I think we we need
to streamline and get one moving
forward and I hope that they
will be able to take take the
best from both and and then
everyone be a co sponsor thank
thank you madam chair.
Thank you and I'd also like to
say and think of bows Sanchez I
I do think it was the
responsibility of this Committee
to try and
narrow this down and and not do
the same thing all over again in
the next committee of
it and so that's our
job appears to and to do it both
together so a preference for
twelve that doesn't mean in my
opinion also that there are
really good stuff in seventeen
and absolutely opportunities are
going forward and you have a
more on this on the Senate side
of us continuing to need to look
at how to bring these two
together so Representative lu
Han good job and as stay in the
fight.
Thank I'd like to explain as
well yes I have Representative.
Thank you madam chair a lot of
my sentiments exactly either
they both both bills have really
good things and and things that
I have issues with and I I
encourage Representative lu Han
to work with the the other
sponsors to to get some of your
great.
Issues that you have in your
bill into the other one and all
I will say there is no reason to
streamline because this is what
we're supposed to do we're
supposed to talk about what
we're doing in the legislature
making laws for the state of New
Mexico and this is a big one and
we talked about it for a lot of
years but Representative lu Han
you were not there and I I
really appreciate a lot of good
things in your bill thank you
madam chair thank you and thank
you to everyone and to
to the audience so next are we
are going to go to house bill
one ninety.
And I believe Representative Eli
is in the
The waiting room.
And
We get him over Representative
Eli and the.
Representative Eli you want a
David Scrase is a
as your expert.
Yes Madam if you could have
greater.
Please leave your.
I'm just
which promoted him to panelist.
Okay.
Representative
Representative Eli go ahead to
House.
Thank you very much for waiting
for me I
sure I.
Share Ivy Soto and Senate rules
that was an interesting
experience on election law so I
appreciated that took a lot
longer I apologize to you to
commit
just we just finished the
business before you so the
timing was perfect so this is
house bill one ninety does have
a beer bill and Senate bill one
forty it is a bipartisan effort
that surgeries graces approached
us with I'm gonna let him do
most of the talking but what
it's trying to do is to
modernize child support and it's
doing three really critical
things or at least the three
critical reasons for it is to
increase the collection of child
support payments by the non
custodial parents are comply
with federal law that requires
certain things so secretary
special talk about and then
allow HSD to provide employment
opportunities and job security
for non custodial parents to
increase our accountability so
with that
I think secretary Scrase has a
slide show that's possible
We are not doing slide show
share screen but we do have I I
believe we have sent the
handouts around so we can can
follow and secretary Scrase did
you just say you you wanted one
of your staff to join us yeah I
will need at the time of the
queue in a these carry army
hello Jeremy to loose and Paul
Ritz money to bring them over
you can go ahead but all okay
overs panelists thanks very much
it's madam chair members of the
committee thanks for your time
today Human Services department
is bringing forth a bill to
modernize a child support this
is a requirement of the federal
government actually and up we
were informed in writing in late
February of last year after the
session that the federal
government intended to tie in
the hundred thirty million
dollars of ten of funding
temporary assistance to needy
families to our state getting up
to speed in modernizing child
support legislation and so
that's what we're here for today
we did have a set of five
different bills last time and
decided to wait and consolidate
them into one to come to you
today and so the law will
actually as proposes bills
proposed will ensure that we
don't lose the hundred thirty
million of tan of funding as
well as another seventeen and a
half million in federal funding
to support our child support
program here in New Mexico and
the thrust of this is really to
move from an older way of
looking child support most of
the numbers and amounts that
people have to pair from
nineteen ninety four and
updating some of those but this
changes in this law will do
three things one it requires the
courts consider the noncustodial
parents.
The lady to pay as a primary
factor this is a federal
requirement second as requires
modifica cation a child support
order or creation an initial
order yes our medical support
health insurance that is is
needed that's also federal
requirement and then lastly the
changes the look back period
from twelve years to three years
look back meaning that when
someone has a child support
order we have an ongoing payment
to make and then also Senator
rears payments currently ninety
sheen sorry eighteen point nine
nine percent of all child
support orders have an arrears
yes we beyond three years
greater than three years where's
the remaining seventy one point
one percent I actually have it
within three years or no arrears
at all I'm in in your hand out
if you have that you'll see a
couple graphs of the top one
shows how much we collect as a
function of how long that look
back period is and so you can
see in the graph that there's
about forty five and a half
million dollars collected with
us very short look back period
the drops to twenty two point
six million up to three years
once we get greater than three
years you see a continued drop
off a very up additional small
amount of money and it turns out
that if we were to chardonnays
look back periods would actually
increase the amount of money
that is secured for children in
New Mexico we work out to about
thirty point nine million
dollars overall money to
construct your parents to take
care of kids and that works out
to about two hundred twenty
dollars per year per household
for two hundred eighty four
dollars per year per child.
Up and basically we did this I
put this bill together and come
in as as a outcome of a long
consultation with the courts to
try to find out there their
views on how we can modernize a
childcare and we think that this
actually enhances
accountability.
For noncustodial parents other
states who made these changes
have seen at increase in the
flow of money and art and then
lastly we have some evidence
from a pilot in Rio Rancho which
is the second graph you have in
the lower right hand corner of
your hand out it shows that when
we focus on making noncustodial
parents employable getting them
to work getting them so training
and then a steady job that
they're obviously much more able
to send those child support
payments and have those earnings
from their wages in order to
make regular payments are
increase in Rio Rancho was
eighteen point five percent
increase
in up in money's per child I
think the other thing that's
really important here that you
might not see as closely as you
read the bill is that when up
nine additional your parents
can't pay their child support
obligation they are often create
a distance between themselves
and their own children and
that's something that many
scientific studies have shown is
not good for the kids in the
long run and so this bill also
helps to preserve the
relationships and enhance the
relationships between those
parents not living in the home
with the kids and their children
so that really is a Maria and
with that madam chair members
the committee like to turn it
back over to all of you.
I'm sure we will stand for
questions.
Thank you first we'll go to the
audience and
do we have a poll can do on
this.
There are a so a full for those
in the attendance if you are
here in support or opposition to
house bill one ninety.
You madam chair with your
permission like to point out
that I believe Secretary Blalock
I'm from CYFD and secretary
Elizabeth Groginsky are here to
speak briefly in favor of the
bill as it relates to their
their.
Children served by their
departments okay thank you so I
think we can stop the poll
there's no one here in
opposition we've got thirteen in
the audience in support we will
go to those who wish to speak
including the secretaries if you
would raise your hand.
And we will start with
secretary Groginsky.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee it is wonderful
to be here with all of you today
my name is Elizabeth Groginsky
and the secretary for the early
childhood education and care
department and I stand in strong
support of house bill one ninety
for three particular reasons out
one modernizing our child
support system in implementing
the best practices outlined by
secretary Scrase is essential to
ensure that we retain our ten of
funding and that we are better
able to serve New Mexicans
second loss of the tent of block
grant would be devastating for
are very low income families in
New Mexico many who I know
utilize our child care services
and our pre K. services and
third ECECD annually receives
approximately sixty four million
intent of funding to support the
critical services of home
visiting pre K. and child care
services that's why I am very
pleased to be here today and to
stand in strong support of this
bill and the work that we will
do moving forward to improve the
lives of New Mexican families
and young children thank you.
Thank you secretary and I think
we have Secretary Blalock also.
I see you.
Yes thank you so much madam
chair members of the committee
this privately lacked the
cabinet secretaries CYFD also
standing strong support of the
bill to reiterate with my
excellent colleague secretary
against you just mentioned it
really boils down to thanks for
CYFD the first is.
The modernization of our child
support collection here in New
Mexico will help us strengthen
families and will help us better
engage noncustodial parents with
their children this welcome
children be able to stay in with
families in the least
restrictive setting where we
know they are best off and then
of course second the impact on
the pandemic grant would be
profound for CYFD if you
currently has a housing programs
for older youth that are
directly of preventing those you
spending almost expecting right
now during the chaos of the
pandemic and they are funded by
tenants funds and so not passing
this bill would would lead to
those programs the minimized or
even being nominated altogether
which would be disastrous for
young people so early support in
this bill and I greatly
appreciate the Sanchez and HSD
for bringing it.
Thank you I don't see anyone
else who wishes to speak so
we'll go to the
the committee Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and I
think you representative Ely for
bringing this bill forward I
just want to ask did we lose
funding or did we lose funding
from twenty sixteen until now
are we on the watch list from
the fed saying look you need to
update your
law or you will lose funding.
Madam chair representative let
me turn the receptors Graeser
thank you for thank you very
much Representative Daymon madam
chair and out thank you at
Representative Armstrong the
answer is the latter recapped at
the the chance of our
modernization pass at the
federal level in twenty sixteen
states were given a period of
time to comply we received that
letter in October of last year
and we have not lost funding up
to this point.
Okay thank you madam chair and
and Representative Dr Scrase for
that I just want to say Dr
Scrase is office and others who
reached out to me personally on
a Valentine's Sunday morning to
make sure that I understood this
bill what it was going to do
even though they don't need my
vote to pass this legislation
they took the time to reach out
specifically to me to explain
and I really want to say how
much I appreciate that I don't
really have any other questions
and just want to again say how
much I appreciate it thank you
madam chair Madam chair
representative I just wish they
called me to remind you
Valentine's day we're gonna have
a lot of trouble.
Well I did remind them to make
sure that they the US happy
Valentine's in order so thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee at and
all the the secretaries here I
didn't get a call yesterday
morning and I'll try not to take
that personally.
But I do have a couple questions
Back in the nineteen nineties I
had a lot of Bob and with child
support and I just wanted to it
our child support guidelines are
court you're still using those
is that is that correct Madam
chair representative on the
internet if it's OK so I keep
doing that Mr chair on the train
these questions over instructors
Scrase that's that's fine go
ahead.
Yeah Madam chair representative
Matthews answers yes we're still
using those guidelines and if
you want more detail Jeremy
Toulouse's happy to provide it
but we all to keep this brief
given how much time you've
already spent this morning will
answer them quickly and then you
can just fall questions also
want to point out that we would
have sent flowers on Valentine's
talent building state but our
special appropriation request
for that was denied.
If this thank you thank you Mr
secretary madam chair
and are are these changes going
to affect those child support
guidelines.
Madam chair and I Representative
Matthews yes they are and I will
turn that over to Germany to
briefly respond to reiterate why
and how the those changes will
occur particularly in the renter
arrears.
So madam chair and then a
committee Representative
Matthews it to be increase the
the all guidelines that were
instituted in nineteen ninety
forced a linear progression part
of the new rule changes that
went into effect in two thousand
sixteen require us to take into
account labor market data on the
Costa Rio child so we contract
with the communists she
presented her recommendations to
a guideline commission in two
thousand eighteen which made the
recommendations to change the
guidelines that are in this
bill.
And and at madam chair Mr to is
thank you for that answer
Are are these nation wide
guidelines are the specific to
New Mexico they're specific to
New Mexico madam chair and
Representative Matthews.
Thank you and madam chair I was
looking at the map the maps on
your.
Handout.
And it looked as if.
If I'm understanding it
correctly I just wanna be sure
I'm understanding what we're
doing we are reducing.
The amount of child support.
That lower income people will be
paying.
Madam chair representative that
is correct.
And and how are we going to I'm
sorry madam chair and how are we
going to make that up to the
families who have these
children.
Madam chair representative the
use of the study showed you of
the child support one the
federation's require that shots
were being based upon actual
income of the not so party and
and other parents so.
Right now with fifteen little
over fifty percent of our cases
paying by making this obligation
right size for their actual
income is more cases will be
receiving payments is the goal
of these changes.
And madam chair Mr to listen
will there be any additional
TANF benefits paid to those
families or will we actually be
reducing I under I understand
what you're saying but for the
people who have been receiving
the benefits are actually going
to start to receive a reduction
and are we making up that income
to those families and anyway
that's my question.
Chair and just interject one
thing and Representative
Matthews we actually believe
that the NMED that up amount of
money going to families will
increase with these changes and
even individual families it's a
great question now about what I
think what you're asking is what
an individual family as a result
of these got this guideline
decrease starts getting less
money and the and out in that I
think that's what you're asking
and I believe our believe really
is that that's less likely to
occur on the federal government
requires us to consider ability
to pay in these are situations
and so reducing someone from
paying a low income person from
paying forty one percent of
their income as a requirement to
twenty five percent actually
doesn't have much impact if
they're only paying twenty
percent to start with.
Madam chair at it shake Senator
scars thank you for that answer
though.
I.
I'm not sure it answered my
question which is.
It is again the numbers and is
going to go from five hundred
nineteen dollars to three
hundred fifteen dollars into a
poor family that's a significant
amount of money and so I'm just
wondering is anything on to make
that up or are these families
going to be required to.
Have a reduction in in in their
income Madam chair
representative Matt let me let
me make it clear that the
numbers you referred to the five
eighteen and the three fifteen
are guidelines are not the
amount that people are actually
paying.
Right now the fact is that I'm
not destroy a parent can rarely
if ever afford to pay forty one
percent of their income so these
are guidelines not amounts being
paid at the present time.
The guideline moves from twice
as much and someone can pay to
you know a hundred ten percent
of what someone can pay it what
they're paying is unlikely to
change so I'm I've I feel like
I'm not explaining this well
enough that maybe carrier meals
one of our our deputy
secretaries in Human Services
Terry do you want to say
anything more about this.
Sure madam chair and thank you
secretary I think
yeah we what we can't assume
that people are actually current
with their orders right so these
guidelines are imputed with
income that they don't actually
have their based on imputed
income and so the people are
actually able to pay that five
hundred eighteen dollars that
you're looking at you can see
that compared to other states
New Mexico's guideline for low
income.
Scenarios is much higher it's
disproportionately higher than
what other state guidelines are
and so that is the federal
requirement is to come into
compliance and be more on par
with what other states scenarios
are considering all of the
economic and child rearing data
as well so you can kind of see
that if we move the guideline to
the three hundred and fifteen
dollars.
Guidelines scenario we will be
much more on par with what other
states would have as their
guideline for low income and so
it doesn't actually have
secretary Scrase change the
actual payment amount because
the five hundred eighteen
dollars is unaffordable and
that's really that federal
regulation which requires that
those orders be affordable.
And madam chair at.
Thank you for that answer I it
is really just I I understand
it's not always collected I
understand those things I
understand that the federal
government is required we do
this and my question is really
very simple I'm just wondering
are we going to have some low
income families who because of
these changes are going to have
less actual money coming in and
if so do we have any kind of a
plan for.
Helping them deal with that
situation that's requires.
Madam chair representative sent
me up try one more time with
our director of child support
and Jeremy to lose
Madam chair representative
these.
So I'm just going to circle back
to those two changes that make
up the difference between the
five eighteen three fifty you're
the first one is the child
support guidelines changed you
know goes at that income level
goes for three twenty nine
currently to three fifteen the
big change from the five
eighteen two three eighteen
three fifteen is that we also
can no longer automatically
impute full time minimum wage so
that's why they goes down to
answer your question.
Yes if it if somebody's apply
for SantaFe in their incomes
last they may be eligible for
more time but I you know I'm not
I'm not eligibility you expert
but it is less income if the
receiving which then would you
know impacts like any kind of
eligibility determination.
Madam chair and thank you for
those answers I'm.
Thank I guess what I'm hearing
is that there are going to be
some families who may have less
income
but
and I'm not blaming anybody or
pointing fingers or anything I'm
just trying to understand if
we've got some low income
families are going to have
reduction and if so is what
impact that's going to have on
them and their children that's
the source of my question but
thank you for your answers out.
Quiet.
Madam chair representative these
I think it's a great question
and I and I've asked my team to
go back look through our data in
C. how many people this who had
even affected there is anybody
who is somehow able to pay a at
a transfer payment that's far
beyond their means and so I with
that I I really like the
question will come up and will
also get back to you
individually about that one as
well get look at the data thank
you.
Thank you next I have
Representative dresses.
Okay thank you madam chair
representative so.
That was one of the things that
I was also.
Worried about
Madam chair representative was
exactly what I'm glad that
Representative Matthews brought
up.
Who's to say that the person
that is is paying child support
at.
Fine it's a guideline five
hundred fifteen whatever it is
who's to say that they won't
turn back and say you know what
I've been making my payments but
you know what now I can I know
that I can reduce those payments
which is going over there get
reviews that can push back and
and then and then the
And because of that who hurts
the child hurts the the the
custodial peer hurts really more
than I mean.
It's just it's I think I don't
believe it was addressed
properly I didn't get the answer
sounded to me like there is no.
And I'm not saying that you guys
have the fun of it maybe there
just hasn't been anything there
to substantially answer the
question
concrete Lee.
To the point of what I
understood what Representative
up message expressing that there
is a issue they're gonna say Hey
I'm paying this much money and I
can go in and get reevaluated
even also if keeping up that
that isn't being addressed and
moreover she saying well wait a
minute what happens to that gap
that they're going to have in
that gap that they're going to
have is a decrease for some of
these families are poor
obviously this is what we're
talking about.
Under fifty dollars a hundred
dollars is a lot of is is a lot
of money for the and so I don't
believe that that was addressed
and maybe you don't understand
her question maybe my question
was a little clearer I hope.
Madam chair.
Madam chair representative
alternate General researchers
Graeser fight I think you're I
could say I think I understand
the question the question is are
there are families out there
that are receiving
greater than the amount that
we're talking about.
What's going to happen with
those strange and I think the
short answer but I don't want to
speak researchers Graeser and
staff is that are there gonna
find out the answer questions
when I'm assuming but madam
chair of turnovers.
For.
Yes madam chair and I represent
dresses presheaf follow up
question and up.
We will have our staff.
That data we think it's unlikely
that there are very many people
in this category the scenario of
someone who's.
You know has a monthly income at
the poverty level be able to
send forty one percent of that
amount of money to.
Kids especially when twelve
two thousand twelve fifty and
monthly income is pre taxed
that.
The five hundred eighteen
dollars plus tax very very
unlikely we can quantify that
out of our database we've been
using up sample databases from
Rio Rancho Albuquerque and Los
crucis to to look at some of
these questions but we can look
more broadly as will do so a
great I'm I'm really glad you
all brought up and it's a
question that we can answer.
This is not right we don't have
our database program open and
can't run that did not but will
be able to answer that for you.
Madam chair representative can I
ask you so are there federal
guidelines then the what you
said the federal guidelines
what are the in comparison to
what we have here in the state
of New Mexico we're we're the
differences.
Because you're trying to bring
it up to parts standards are
right.
Madam chair representative to
rises there aren't specific
federal guidelines for amounts
those are determined on a state
level on our economists look at
surrounding states to give us a
more of a regional
sense of where we stood I will
ask a.
Mr Toulouse VS additional
comments in that regard.
Madam chair and Representative
tries us as a.
So there's several different
models models of child support
you know guidelines that go on
throughout the country in New
Mexico we use which is called
income shares model which is
your both parents income you if
there are one household your
many you know based upon you
know each parents proportion of
the total income of the
household and they pay that
proportion what the guidelines
in the table you pulls in New
Mexico you know it's I think
thirty three states use the
income shares model your New
Mexico's you know as I explained
earlier the the new federal
rules require issues labor
market data which is not been
previously used in the
calculation I guidelines and the
real difference between New
Mexico's guideline in some other
states it's just the price
parity you know the economics in
the state so ours is a little
bit lower because workforce say
if that answers your question.
Yes Sir this madam chair
representative it can answer my
question but someone pushed a
little further
is this premature knowing that
there's a good possibility that
minimum wages and go to fifteen
dollars an hour we're based in
this on on on on this day to
day.
With legislation that's the
request for our committee just
not too long ago when one of my
committees that could affect
that how would that have to.
How that affect what you're
seeing today if knowing that
that.
Suggesting that fifteen dollar
an hour minimum wage passes on
how are you I understand it's a
it's a percentage right now.
What.
It would be one of the council
let you answer that.
Madam chair and that
Representative dresses sent
another good question I think
that when someone's wage went
fifteen dollars an hour their
annual income would go up that
would bring them up
automatically to another
category in that.
In the guidelines for care I
think also we're.
Under a letter of advisement
from the federal government that
if we don't pass this bill R.
tenants funding is unlikely to
be at risk and so one that's a
certainty as opposed to whatever
may happen with the minimum wage
bill which is still I think
Lee's conjecture maybe maybe
something will happen.
In in it's really out we feel
like it's our obligation to
update these guidelines and
according to federal law so that
we don't lose the funding we
have Kerry also has a remark as
well yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee and
secretary Scrase and
representative to access just
want to make a point that in the
bill there's actually in the
establishment of a quadrennial a
child support commission so
every four years we would be re
calibrating those guidelines
based on the economic indicators
of the state so rather than
following guidelines from
nineteen ninety four which are
kind of hard wired in statute
today we would be updating those
every four years based on
economic in the in the economic
impacts of the state in the
bill.
Madam chair representative thank
you by the way up here you reach
out to me I really appreciate
that so much Madam chair
representative my next question
is so you bring up that we we
are at risk of losing those
those those federal funds what
is that deadline.
And madam chair and
representative we've been told
that they expect the state to
take action in this legislative
session.
Madam chair representative you
tell me that in give your
deadline they're just expecting
something were passed.
I don't have a letter right in
front of me
but I I will live in Florida.
Mr to Lucerne ms army hello
which everyone like to answer
that.
Sure thank you madam chair
representative to access we did
receive a letter as a thing
secretaries Greece mentioned to
the federal guidelines and
regulations change in two
thousand sixteen.
we.
You know did not update the
statute accordingly in New
Mexico and so we received that
letter at the end of February of
twenty twenty notifying us that
we needed to take immediate
action and the federal agency
that oversees child support
recognizes that the statutory
changes required and understands
the timing of our legislative
session here in New Mexico so I
think has been anticipating that
we would be making that change
this this year.
So we switch gears here
Madam chair representative so I
when I understand this and I
think you and I have a quick
conversation but I want to make
sure that I understand
everything are
and we briefly talk about Madam
chair representative and I and
and I spoke to Mrs economy hall
W. secretary about this issue
was explain to me if a person is
in arrears want to make sure I
understand this right you said
that you can go up a P. bacteria
twelve years.
Does that mean that they have a
standing order mom gets pregnant
she goes out there you Miss
America goes out there goes to
court they don't stay together
they move move part and the
standing order from the court.
He goes one way she goes another
he's kind of on and off the and
he falls behind because for
whatever reason
and.
Ten years goes down the road is
going to and or whatever.
She wants to get our money and
takes them to court.
Are you saying that my
passengers let rip of
legislation that should only be
able collect three years.
Know that madam chair and
representative up dresses that
would not be correct this the
guidelines is proposed with our
referring to the initial court
proceeding and so actually if.
The baby was born they went
their separate ways on the
babies
Date of birth and that was
processed in court quickly there
be unlikely to be much in the
way of arrears at all so my
understanding is when when it's
initially set up by that where
we talk about arrears I think
the example this would apply to
more would be
somebody who same situation as
you parents go their separate
ways no action is taken twelve
years later
mom decides to a test paternity
gets all the father he's found
to be the father at this would
change this bill would change
the guideline it would permit
the court the judge at
whatever's make determining this
to go back as far as they felt
like was reasonable so they
would still have to with the new
law
base the the amount that was to
be paid on the noncustodial
parent the father in this case
his ability to pay but this is
not something that can be
involved later to deal with the
prior our readers it was created
by the court many years ago.
And I believe this is actually
designed to be a going forward
sort of a activity with new
cases come to court and does not
really applaud to a previous
cases at all.
Let me ask you a question she
doesn't do appurtenant work in
Trinity excuse me paternity test
but his name is on the birth
certificate they never go to
court to go separate ways he
promises that he's gonna pay he
doesn't this you finally get
sick of it tired of it I don't
know she's a very patient woman
she takes ten years to finally
do this she's more money because
of kids going to go to school
need to choose a support take
picture takes him to court he's
already been the the yes on the
birth certificate.
What happens and is James G. go
back all the way or can she say
Hey enough is enough.
Or is it only three years back.
Yeah call on Paul respond
general counsel to answer that
question he's been very involved
with the crafting of the
legislation and can address
this.
Good afternoon
Committee chairman and
Representative process the the
situation that you're talking
about
it would not relieve the
noncustodial parent of those
careers what it would allow the
court to do is to take the last
three years of arrears for the
calculation of what would be a
vote on a monthly basis the
child support that would go
forward on a monthly basis would
not relieve them of that that in
the past the court could do that
but the court could say you all
for the last twelve years but on
your ability to pay right now
I'm only going to go back three
years so that we get payments to
the kids now but you still have
a big that that is of thank you
do that they could say you only
owe a debt for ten years or
eight years gives the court an
enormous amount of flexibility
but that that would still be a.
It may not be paid but it would
be on the books as a.
Madam chair representative so
let me get this right if it went
if there pate if there payroll
went up then it would reflect
the last visited there making
more money the last the original
judgment was on a lower rate and
the last three years of is a
higher rate are you telling me
that Madam chair representative
they would be over average of
the last two years but even if
it's greater than what they had
originally been
Subject to.
Madam chair representative to
rise us I may have misunderstood
your previous question but I
thought this scenario you had
laid out was someone for whom
ten years later this was an
initial judgment and that there
wasn't a previous judgment so I
think we've been answering the
questions based on this scenario
is the way I heard it which
could be wrong and so just to
clarify is is still that mom and
dad separate she needs money for
clothing ten years later that
would be the original I'm court
case it is.
I so yes Sir madam chair
representative you did and and
secretary of state Scrase you
did answer correctly I changed
your joining sorry okay I want
to new scenario and that's why I
asked that I guess what what you
know I'm always concerned with.
almost gonna say firmly I've but
children now worked up to eighty
hours sometimes make sure my
kids have what they need and I
think it's our responsibility
very parent to do what is right
to sustain our children if you
as a father you your father
child and it is absolutely your
responsibility to make sure that
you're doing everything you can
just to support that child there
are abuses and and this is
really where I'm going with this
a German what are the centers
and I'm more interested in this
in.
Our.
I know people that have had.
Children with multiple women in
a shorter time initially well I
can't afford it.
And and and that's that's not
right that's not right and so in
in what I've grown going with
this is.
Trying to get anybody in trouble
but you have to you have to hold
accountability and
responsibility to the actions
that you took at that time
you're running around doing
those type of things at the
expense of a child I am
absolutely and I'm gonna.
Do
you know increase I'm not going
to to be a person that's going
to say all the poor guy you know
he doesn't need you know what
the guy.
Whatever that person needs to
take responsibility for their
actions so I I think that's
that's where I am a little bit
sketchy on this on this
legislation and that I'm going
only because maybe I understand
it is in the building that
you're doing it wrong.
Madam chair representative and.
Senator Scrase that's not right
yet it's more that I just want
to know that we're not using it
to the point that you say Hey
you know these guys Senator all
you have to do is is go out
there and say Hey you can't pay
your bill now I just have to
work less hours now I get to
finally get past we want to get
spoke
German responsibility that's
what I don't want to do what we
lower the bar and I if I'm
misunderstanding that in any way
shape or form the show me where.
We're and wrong.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
Draws as we I mean we agree with
you were actually bringing this
bill forward in a manner that
enhances parental accountability
in on constructs for parents for
paying as measured by how much
they pay on there are lots of
ways of measuring accountability
but our way of measuring
accountability in child support
is our does the person is are
they actively employed and are
they paying and this bill will
enable us to enhance both of
those based on data from other
states in that graph on that the
hand of that we gave you on the
top shows if we can move people
back from the left to the right
will actually increase our
collections are calculation sure
that can be as much as four
hundred and twenty dollars per
year per family and sent to us
this is actually about
increasing accountability but
it's increasing accountability
based on actual dollars
collected and based on
employment yeah and Madam chair
representative will be added
that we're in no way trying to
let people off the hook the
attention of this this is to
make people accountable but in a
street smart way not necessarily
an empathetic way just street
smart the current system clearly
is not working you know it's
it's generate we're trying to
get there but it's not working
for families we're not talking
about the the person that owes
the money we're talking about
everybody in which we are trying
to make this work and it's clear
that what they're doing is
they're basing this on data that
we don't do this the system will
continue to be broke.
Madam chair representative and
and and please bear with me
because I'm new new to this
subject of course and.
You for chair puts up with me
every Monday Wednesday and
Friday with my fifty questions
and four and I just ask you to
focus.
All right so my question is is
is there any enforcement
currently with this change the
enforcement of someone saying
Hey I want to
rears.
Does the court or or or.
Or I I guess some of us might.
Your.
Representative I think I can
answer that question it's the
courts your resource center yes
of course I guess what I'm
saying is does it keep on top of
them Representative
that we're three months they can
get a letter again it's going to
be enforced in some way that
does our driver's license they
can get thrown in jail does that
in any way shape or form that's
cyst legislation to the Senate
we should perform I I madam
secretary Scrase speech that
madam chair representative but I
don't think so
but and we also have our judge
levy is on in the in attendance
not a panelist and she could
certainly address that as well
she does these cases so if you
need that kind of help she's
yours well.
And up this bill the thrust of
this bill is in no way to look
at the ways we enforce at the
present time I can let
Mr to loose COVID briefly on
that as well and at if the judge
could be promoted we can call on
her as well to.
To comment.
Yes we've promoted a judge levy
thank you.
Go ahead judge.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
representative so in answer to
your question the
The enforcement is in
coordination child support
enforcement does track and
assess any arrears and does file
cases and the judiciary cases
very seriously we sat our
dockets in accordance with the
CCD case schedule in order to
make sure that these are
enforced that is not going to
change the reality is that there
is a quite a bit of difficulty
getting people to pay a larger
child support arrears but we
take this very seriously and
will continue to do so and there
will be no remedies that change
on that front.
Thank you.
Jeremy did you want to add.
Yes madam chair and and
Representative trials of.
The answer story during answer
question no if if somebody owes
child support and a certain
amount and they haven't paid.
It doesn't automatically change
you know they're gonna they're
gonna have to go back to court
you have to bring up the
evidence of why their incomes
changed and you know part of the
evidence that we produce is to
show that you know whether they
do or do not have the ability
to.
Three zero said does not change
any of our enforcement tools
that we have like license
suspension you know though
primarily you know most for
payments come from income
withholding so you're really a
big part of a modernisation is
is also a collaboration that we
have with the department of
workforce solutions this call
with a program which under the
work requirements in the
statutes knocks of parents if
they're not employed or not
paying are required to work with
us to help them find employment
and improve their employability
so that the money can be taken
out of their paycheck but you
know there's there's no instant
actions you know for fair pay
you know your big part of this
bill is is allow us to dig
deeper in gathering what that
evidence is of what their
situation is to be able to
present that in court you know
what for contempt or for or for
whatever action you know we're
gonna take you know against not
so apparent I hope that answers
your question.
Yes or no all right I'm not
putting anybody down here Madam
chair representative I just it
just interested in in in making
sure in all.
I don't know maybe I'm taking it
too serious but I I I really
really care about everything
that goes through your and
support from you know that I'm I
go back to my constituents and
everyone else in explain the
able to vote on this property
and stuff Mr
but you know I I think that was
those most of my questions I'm I
was looking at your all kind of
going through the
the scale here are the.
Receive the of incomes and
children and stuff and so what
we're following this it's not it
does go down some but not
significant I think I think
chair representative
Representative Matthews had a
very good point was one of my
points and I'm so glad you
brought it up I think we're all.
What seem like she's chair and I
are both.
Only some other members here are
concerned that you know a person
that is already making so much
income from that are is it going
to do it is it is it means
doesn't mean that they're gonna
be able to go back and change
that to lower the deal and will
they do that will at the
university.
Without.
With that intention of doing
that would you know are we going
to see
other other families also hurt
yes collections I mean I can I
can prove my collections as a as
an accountant very simply say
saying what the we're taking ten
dollars a month and will call
you current and and young giving
everybody.
Money but the same time is not
doing justice in the in so that
that's I think the real question
here
Representative I let me just say
to you questions been asked
number times we are we're going
to try our best searchers
rations texting me to get those
families you know get you
numbers of those families that
might be affected by reduction
okay so that Representative
Matthews should ask that
question I think it's a fair
question and we want to see what
kind of data we can get shortage
that data reported support.
Matter Madam chair
representative she is not a
matter of you know reducing it
to nothing that's not what we're
talking about no no talking
about reducing it to a realistic
number so that people actually
start paying child support and
that's not happening the system
clearly is program.
Madam chair representative I
agree with you I just I think
you've built a way to say Hey
look see for all I think this
might make you feel better
number one
If anyone has already is is is
current.
How this works the could get
themselves other complaints but
if anyone has any standing
orders that the that those would
be affected by this new
legislation that's already been
sat in the keeping up I yeah I
think it would be nice to see
that on this legislation would
be maybe sunset there is some
sort just so they can say Hey is
it really working or what we we
wrong and and and since it maybe
like
Madam chair representative like
the secretary W. get its express
that every four years the
valuation maybe that needs to
happen with this too we also
sunset this we re evaluate or at
that's just my my my opinion and
I think you I believe you guys
that's my questions but again if
we're not too careful and and we
lower the bar yes more people
will be spent
some money.
If it affects our families in a
positive way and especially the
children
if if if Water Street.
I'd like to which we're dressing
that thank you so thank you
madam chair representative for
all your questions and it was
then a probably a long day
longer for my chairman and we
get.
Thank you and so there was some
hands that went up and down I
just want to double check
Representative Anderson did you
have a question.
Representative Anderson.
Madam chair.
The committee made.
Okay he had a he was he had
switched to a phone was moving
around but his hand was up for a
while and Representative for
R. as years went up and down did
you have any questions.
Madam chair thank you I believe
my question was answered that's
why I lowered it but just to
confirm I heard a drive street
see that it does not apply to
prior cases so just to clear
this up for me it does it is
wouldn't change anything for
someone who's already already
has backed the the child support
is that is that how I'm hearing
this.
I'm sure Representative alter
researchers creche.
And I think I think I'll turn it
over to Paul for its more
journey.
Past past the but.
On the ground.
If we could just kind of Niger
look at somebody but you you
know support is somewhat of a
out I'm a living breathing
phenomenon that can go your case
will back to court multiple
times and so we've been speaking
to the intent of this bill today
but there are three reasons and
some of the ones that we put in
such as going back to court Jack
cover health insurance expenses
should that become a need is an
example of how this can
sometimes school so this call.
Yes at madam chair
Representative as the bat
buckets been passed to me.
But it shouldn't affect previous
orders in cases for things slide
you know how much they owe and
rearers how much their dad is
out obviously there's always an
opportunity for people to go
back in court and have the
amount that they pay per month
adjusted based on their income
it could go up it could go down
it could it could depend on the
custodial parent's income it's
kind of a fluid system from that
standpoint but.
Was judicata in the past the
arrears and the amount of over
the idea that child support is
our own insurances
Should be pretty much sat except
for if there's a change in
circumstances and that's why
they go back into court have
things that just.
Got a I appreciate that all
thank you madam chair if if the
timing is appropriate I would
like to move a.
That's you don't get to do it
because you were just talking so
we'll move
you rural.
Madam chair I'd like to Madam
chairman that.
Representative Anderson are you
back on did you have a question
before we close.
There are we going to make the
same motion Representative
Ferrary make sure the house all
right good okay let's call the
roll Torrez.
Okay Representative Sanderson.
Anderson both do pass.
Representative Gail Armstrong
yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Karen is excused.
The lord yes.
I.
I
want to get a little more than.
Also you need to.
I'm here to them.
All.
Marian Matthews yes.
Roger Montoya.
Your view Sir.
Representative Montoya a need to
you.
Representative Montoya we can't
hear you you need to on mute.
Okay come back Representative
Louise.
Yes.
Louise that awesome he said yes.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Rep
Joanne Burley yes.
going back to Representative
Roger Montoya.
Hello yet.
Okay I'm sorry all the loan this
button has not been working I'm
so sorry I vote yes thank you.
Madam chair Deborah A. Armstrong
yes.
That is.
One excuse.
Okay I'm Representative you have
a do past ten to zero on house
bill one ninety thank you very
much thank you madam chair and
and can I just say something as
the rules chair for the freshman
since I don't get to see them
the rules don't often make sense
so you just learn from
experience don't beat yourself
up it'll all work out thank you
madam chair thank you.
Okay Committee members I think
that
Thank you.
I think that's the last bill
we're gonna do this morning I
worry that all of the next ones
may go on a little long and I
don't want to I I hate to split
our our discussion of a bit of
bills so the ones we didn't get
to today will roll over to
Wednesday and and then we'll we
will
us we look about adding anything
on to that.
Because of what we're going to
be meeting more and more on the
floor I will tell you and it's
taken a time to get through some
of these big bills we will more
than likely meet Saturday.
So I'm going to I'll work with
the other committees and
schedule about what time and how
much time depending on what else
is going on but count on
probably a Saturday in all
likelihood a Saturday Committee
meeting.
particularly since we're going
to be on the floor on Friday we
miss our Friday meeting so we
will be meeting on Saturday I'll
just say that firmly will meet
Saturday and and
so that's it for this morning I
want to thank you I want to
thank everyone particularly for
the cannabis discussion I think
we had a really good discussion
and really good questions and
so I want to thank you for that
in particular so that's it for
this morning and we'll see you
on Wednesday morning thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
guys see you later let's see
what.
And our thoughts are with the
parents has been.
Mr.
