Okay so I my.
I will yes ma'am.
Okay the.
Morning all.
The committee does and now the
audience will item quarantining
with COVID as it is
representative Ferrari.
So if you could be promoted to a
panelists to that would be are
are to be in contact with her to
figure out how to do that so
we've taken the role is clear
but.
Representative Kate here
Representative habits here
Representative Ferrary.
Representative cut me out here.
Senator John here Representative
Lord.
Representative pants Gainey.
Representative is here.
And vice chair Herndon.
And madam chair a little late
yes I'm here okay.
I believe we have a whole I hope
for.
The sponsor after the funds
request.
Use me for eighteen at the
father's request.
Okay.
So we will start with
Representative Kate on three
ninety five madam chair can I
say thing before we go forward
we just received another
committee set up a point five
version for House Bill ten this
morning so I think we.
Raul that.
That will be rolled.
Hey.
Representative Kate.
Representative is.
Thank you very much madam chair
and Committee I'm presenting a
three ninety five H. B. three
ninety five.
Is of us that the department of
health complete a cost study
survey every two years using the
workforce development data as
well as there other data that
they've been collecting we also
want the.
at the D. O. H. presents the
cost of services for individuals
with disabilities on the waiver
we would like that data
information is presented to the
legislator to be as if the
direct care support person was
making a hundred and fifty
percent of minimum wage whether
or not they are being paid that
are not but that's really what
they should be this is our first
incremental step in
professionalizing the direct
care staff that provide services
for individuals with
disabilities and then also other
care facilities
they already have are required
to take many the department of
health
of certification programs and
we're trying to move them into
that professionalization as well
as making sure that they are
getting the adequate rate that
of of follows that the bill
clearly states that that funding
has to be available for this two
year study and funding has to be
available you know obviously
once we get the data
we will make those decisions on
whether health to fund it but as
legislators and as the governor
but we want to make sure that we
get clear data on really what a
living wages to provide this
profession I have two expert
witnesses here and I'd like them
to introduce themselves and make
a brief statement.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Adrienne
Smith on the president and CEO
The New Mexico caregivers
coalition and I'm also a member
of the workforce development
council of the Federal Reserve
Bank system I founded the New
Mexico caregivers coalition in
two thousand nine to train an
advocate for direct care workers
throughout New Mexico for all
the systems so you know these
people as an by a number of
names personal care assistants
home health aides nursing
attendants orderlies it's
somebody who likely has cared
for somebody very important to
you or will care for somebody
important to you.
In the developmental
disabilities waiver program
there called direct support
professionals our DS peas they
do they do got to work that's
what they do every single day of
their lives this bill goes to
the heart of what they do we are
asking for a couple of things
that I'll have my colleague talk
about but I want to give you a
little bit of background with
the number of supporters
involved in the creation of this
bill over time we started in
June of twenty twenty one to
work with the association of
developmental disabilities
providers and eight co eight
organizations of the caregivers
coalition statewide who included
advocates immigration rights
workers New Mexico Center on pop
lover Law and Poverty numerous
organizations advocates and
employers as well to come up
with the essential components of
this bill the essential
components of this bill being
number one we don't have data
collected on this direct care
direct support professional
workforce in New Mexico and we
could and it would be hard it
would not be difficult we need
workforce data on this.
On this workforce to tell us
more about what's going on with
employers with providers so that
we can better finance this
system raising the both of of
all people in this system we
care about our organization
cares about direct support
professionals and caregivers
like them you'll hear from I
hope our employer
and provider colleagues and
allies and the number of people
today I hope that also support
this bill for different reasons
thank you thank you very much
madam chair and representative
of before I have Pam Stafford
speak I just want to clarify for
those of you who are unfamiliar
with the waiver program as all
the what the Adrian was
referring to is such an enormous
amount of group that really
worked and support this bill so
just see is so I'm not gonna
give you their titles I'm gonna
tell you who they are there's a
the employers that the
regulators and their the funders
as well as the representatives
of the deck direct care support
people so that's what she's
trying to explain that this is a
really first time endeavor where
they've all been able to get in
the room and be able to come up
with something that the canoe
Creon and present to this
committee set and I like to
introduce a Pam staff.
Hello my name is Pam bird I'm
the organizing director with New
Mexico caregivers in action but
before this position I've worked
about thirty years in New Mexico
and the DD waiver failed in a
variety of positions starting
out as a direct support
professional.
I want to thank Representative
Kate and representative Thompson
for sponsoring this bill this
bill is about direct support
professionals who provide the
direct care to individuals on
the DD waiver system and it's
about making sure that
legislators who decide
priorities and funding are fully
aware of the vacancy rates
within the systems and the costs
to fully fund the systems with
an adequate workforce
individuals to receive support
in the under the DD waiver
systems are those who qualify
for institutional or skilled
nursing home services but select
to receive services in their
homes and in the community while
there are many components in the
DVD system including therapists
nurses and case managers it is
the direct support professional
who provides the day in and day
out supports to individuals they
assist with males for Paris
special men's prepare specialize
males a company people to
medical appointments report back
to the team and other medical
specialists the results.
Plus under CMS standards they
are responsible for community
inclusion activities and to
teach skills in a way that is
similar to a parent educator
such as an educational
assistance and in the schools
often they work with multiple
individuals.
They currently are required to
take eleven classes before their
first ninety days which amounts
to about thirty six hours of
training in addition to that
they have to take individualized
training for each person that
they assist for instance that
there's two people with seizures
they may have very different
plans related to what is a
seizure emergency and how to
respond to that so the person in
care has seizures diabetes a
specialized mail time plan and
augmented communication device a
behavior therapist and a
physical therapist that is six
plans they have to be trained on
they work in a group home with
four people and some of that
another group home with four
people then that's forty eight
individualized plans that they
have to receive training on yes
the nap according to national to
statistics the direct support
workforce in all fifty states
are paid less than the janitor
and the issue is that for at
least the last twenty years the
rates provided to providers have
not kept up with the inflation
rate increases to minimum wage
and the other costs associated
with service I came into the
field as a DSP earning three
dollars over minimum wage ten
years later without a single
provider rate increase the way
to continue to be the same but
it was barely above minimum wage
temporary art the money has
increased the wages to about
fifteen dollars an hour
currently but some agencies are
reporting fifty percent vacancy
rates as we eliminate the wait
list for services there are
nineteen counties with no
providers in supported living
able to accept new people and
there are in counties where
there are providers there are
eighty five percent of the
providers cannot accept new
people we are requesting that
data be.
Collected annually on the DSP
workforce to include vacancy
rates retention rates wages and
benefits there is an
organizational organization
called national core indicators
which collects data it has been
doing that for twenty nine other
states this bill doesn't require
the department to use that
specific tool but they both
those providers and the DST have
talked within CI and did not
believe that there needed to be
in the additional appropriation
for them to be able to collect
that data.
Separate from that is the right
study peas and right studies are
conducted by outside vendors to
recommend rates for providers
CMS requires those every five
years the current state DD Act
requires them every two years
contention on signing the bill
we enter eight said every two
years contingent on funding but
changes the bounty of the espys
two hundred and fifty percent
minimum wage.
This change would result in
recommended rates that doesn the
sept thirty to fifty percent
vacancy rates in the work force
really seeks to tell the
legislators
who might want to fully fund the
system what the cost is for
instance in the in the current
budget in house bill two there
is a ten million dollar increase
for provider rate providers
requested an additional seven
point six million dollars which
was tabled in in house
appropriation the reality is
that legislators often don't ten
million seems like a lot of
money they may not have the data
to understand what the providers
really need that's what this
bill is about.
Thank you for questions.
Thank you what will
help with this hard so we'll go
to the audience if anyone in
opposition.
Nobody nobody an awful
on anyone in opposition.
No man.
Okay.
In support.
Okay what did you want if you
want to speak please come
forward to use the microphone.
Hello my microphone.
Okay state.
K. R. E..
This.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Jim
Copeland I'm the executive
director of the association of
developmental disabilities
community providers and as you
have heard already you the
association has been working on
trying to get this legislation
you know introduced in and
passed through the process and
we stand in support at cap
stands in support of this
Representative this legislation
we represent twenty seven
provider agencies around the
state of New Mexico and all the
regions of New Mexico and we've
talked about this and talked
about this and talked about this
and we're happy that the
legislation is to this point and
we stand here today requesting
your do pass for this
legislation.
Thank good morning madam chair
ladies and gentleman of the
committee my name is Chris Lori
on the public policy officer for
the ark of New Mexico with our
New Mexico we represent an
advocate for people with
intellectual developmental
disabilities throughout the
state of New Mexico we are
believe the care givers or us
support staff are the life blood
of people with disabilities
unfortunately over the past
decade or two because of poor
wages we've seen attrition rates
of over fifty percent per year
with care givers as much easier
and much less stress for them to
take jobs such as fast food
services and it is to left and
care for and take people with
disabilities to appointments and
find their everyday care we
stand in strong support of this
bill it's a stepping stone it's
the first step in the process to
hopefully get her givers be paid
more and have more data as far
as what's is being paid by the
different provider agencies
thank you very much.
Good morning my name is Bridget
come and I was a caregiver for
my mom for fifteen years while
she succumbed to Alzheimer's
I've she lived with me in my
young son for ten years she
ended up breaking her hip going
into a nursing home I can't tell
you the relief I felt when a
family was ram professional
caregivers to help me take care
of my mom it was life changing
for me having been since I have
Alzheimer's in my family tree
I think about what happens to
the days when I have to go into
the nursing home to be cared
for.
It's going to be devastating for
me and my family so I'm here in
support of care givers they need
a raise they need to be able to
do their job and.
Ultimately going to help them
today.
Thank you all to have people on
zoom in support.
I cannot.
The first one is Jim jacks.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee transaction
here for disability rights in
New Mexico and advocacy legal
rights centre for people with
disabilities and we also
strongly supported this will be
recognizes the important role
address service direct support
professionals in this field it
does all work right
recommendations that would be
reflect an adequate salary for
those people and whose
organizing their of the real
professional statistician have
the reporting requirement in
this bill is important so that
you all of the as the data and
information about the current
state of the system what people
are getting paid what kind of
vacancies are are turnover rates
and so on in order to make a
better policy decisions in this
area and we urge your support
thank you.
Representing the disability
coalition we advocate for the
interests of persons with
disabilities all types including
those with developmental
disabilities and we stand in
support of this bill the bill is
a very basic one calling for
data reporting and including
some policy assumptions in the
it is a operations relating to
these workers as Mr Jackson said
these workers are absolutely
essential to the needs of our
people with developmental
disabilities and their ability
to live in the community of the
bill has two goals one is to
recognize how important those
orders are today are essential
and in order to make sure we
have an adequate workforce of
them we need to preserve the
right and that's not happening
now better wages better of
training all a whole lot of
things that could be done to
bolster this workforce and the
data collection and this bill
will help the state policy
makers to achieve that goal and
the other goal of the bill is to
ensure that there is an adequate
supply of workers health to
serve the people who do that we
were all thrilled after years of
scandalously long wait times to
get services on the EDD where we
were thrilled when federal money
became available through the
American rescue plan act and the
state is using that money to
eliminate the weightless for the
winter the only way that can
work is that there are adequate
workers to serve those people
and at the moment there are not
which is a huge barrier to
getting people served this bill
is just a first step but it is
important to do good policy
making to have at a hello all
and we urge your support of the
bill and we wish madam chair and
representative for are you the
recovery thank you.
Thank you.
One more Stephanie Welch.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Stephanie Welch on an attorney
with the New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty.
Senator supports this bill
because of the people doing this
important you're giving work
deserve to be paid a fair wage
yet to many of these jobs
provide local Hey and as you any
benefits.
The state funding right now
contributes to suppressing wages
by sending the amounts that are
paid to providers.
These low wages are consistent
with this is the Senate
consortia undervaluing of here
and undervaluing Health Care
workers.
Most read support professionals
are women most of the people of
color.
They provide for others in their
activities of daily living yes
often are not compensated enough
to have the security of knowing
that any of us can provide for
their own families.
The address is it is I
generating data about wages and
working conditions.
And supporting future
reimbursement rates.
Introduce caregivers wages that
are more fair are more
competitive the reporting
requirements of the bill would
help the state does sound
policies to ensure the workforce
is adequately supported the
legislative these important
services thank you that
communities of Hasidism.
We have one.
Okay go ahead Angelique to for
a.
Thank you
members of the committee I'd
like to thank all of our
Representative Thomson engage
schools offering the sale I am
the executive director at all
care specializing in services
and I represent many families
and yes he's in the greater
metro area and I stand in
support of the sale we have seen
a significant decrease in our
once very robust list yes he's
also the seventy seven on that
are COVID there was a time with
their families would call with
no out of network because of
their own asking for support
from agencies like culture at to
support their children and
adults that you have the people
and then we used to be able to
give them up a pretty good list
of names they contacted you for
the call to the who fit in there
with their needs and those times
I feel are are now online so we
definitely are impeding part of
the sale I'd like to also this
September's comments about
increasing rates we are one of
the agents are also increased
our rates in large parties are
funding and asset and very
little to accord  yes he's
joined this profession so I
agree that data collection is
key to emigrating what's
happening in the field so that
we can provide you with a more
detailed outlook on what's
occurring with the waiver
services effectively we
appreciate the amazing work that
our test fees provide and we
know the important role they
play with our agencies most
importantly the the role they
play with participants and
athletes are being supported so
I thank you so much for your
time and I urge you to the
hospital so.
Thank you madam chair I'm sorry
Madam chair representative I do
have an amendment that was
provided to the committee a
couple days ago.
Do I have a motion to discuss
the amendment.
Okay so okay go ahead
Representative Kate the changes
to the amendment is just to
clarify that whether or not the
person the director support is
an employee or contractor we
want those labor hours and
the labor rate to be rolled up
into the right study.
And we stand committee questions
any discussion on the amendment.
Please.
A motion to adopt the amendment.
I just would like madam chair I
I just like for you to repeat
that I'm sorry sure.
Thank you very much madam chair
and representative the amendment
all we did was every place where
it says employee we say employee
and or contractor.
so we want to just make sure
that we're getting all the labor
hours and and that's what the
rate would be for that labor
hours no matter what the
classification is of the direct
care support person.
Okay I have a motion to.
Second.
Opposition.
Okay seeing and you have to opt
you have been amended bill and I
will go to the committee for
questions
anyone have questions if you are
a little small on the three of
you do you might just find.
All right I see you.
My gosh.
With the.
Okay thank you madam chair and
Representative says I have a
couple questions just for
clarification kind of.
Alright so walk me through this
so who is reporting all this
data and to whom.
So thank you madam chair and
representative.
The providers are reporting so
providers can be
organizations that provide
services for people with
disabilities they can also be an
individual family member that is
also providing services with or
with in the home the idea is of
twenty five years ago the state
of New Mexico decided we didn't
want to institutionalize or
individuals with disabilities
anymore and we also understood
not only a dignity of care but
also it was less it was cost
effective to keep people at home
as long as possible and so this
prop protocol this process.
Became the the primary way to
care for individuals
Kommentar Representative who are
they reporting to one one of the
I'm so sorry thank you very much
Mr madam chair and
representative so the role those
data up into what is called a
cost analysis or rate study and
DO eight Department of Health
receives it when the department
of health says.
Provides us especially on human
and the the health and Human
Services Committee
in internet provide us
information regarding the right
to that will inform their budget
for the previous year we want to
this bill wants to make sure
that we are getting accurate
data that actually is not it is
what we should be paying these
individuals and how many hours
whether or not their employees
or contractors that it's
costing.
Chair representative so how are
we going to get that information
out to families so that they
know they should be submitting
this thank you madam chair and
representative so there is a
very great process three
department of health.
All of the state I'm so sorry
Madam chair representative the
stakeholders that that spoke
today and and favor they also
are part of the network through
the department of health to get
set information out to make sure
that everyone including families
still.
Okay Madam chair representative
this I'm trying to make sure how
do you get the most bang for
your Buck and make sure that
everybody sends those since you
can send a form letter or what
what is a good part of health
going to do to get that
information family say Hey the
more information you get the
better it is for us thank you
madam chair and representatives
so the individuals in this
provider group Representative
are familiar with providing this
information on as as requested
our state has in in it it is
asks for it to be every two
years but the CMS which is the
center of Medicaid Medicare they
ask for it every five years so
individuals providing services
and organizations providing
services are already aware of
this process and they've been
gathering it for minimum there
hopefully every five years we're
asking if there's funding that
we can be able to gathered every
two years because you know that
workforce changes so drastically
okay chair representative of
that is the money that you're
asking for because I'm at from
understanding quicker that's
going to be more work on the
department of health because now
they have to compile this data
the bi annually or annually
Madam services thank you madam
chair representatives you are
correct if they are going to go
from five years or whenever they
feel they have funding because
sometimes they've gone as long
as seven years in the past two
two years which is really what
the state statute is
recommending anyways but this
bill further clarifies that it
will be here it is but the
providers that's why we and and
and miss Smith was so clear
about how all the stakeholders
are agreeing with this letter
including the department of
health and DDS di which is an
agency within the department of
health for disability.
He's.
because they said they're
gathering this information
anyways they have together for
their board of directors they
have to gather it the anyone for
their building they have to so
they are saying that they are
not asking for an appropriations
within this bill because they're
gathering the state anyway it's
it's just a matter of being able
to collect it and clearly
communicated back to our
legislators thank you madam
chair representative this gonna
be my next question Do�a two DD
and DTS the felt about okay
that's all the question I have
thank you madam chair
representative thank.
The questions.
Hello I have a question around
yes all.
Yeah thank you madam chair and
representative Kate's so someone
in the public comment mention
Alzheimer's disease and so with
that with this include those
family providers for someone a
family member with Alzheimer's
thank you madam chair and
representative it is individual
direct care providers that are
receiving funding through a
state program such as a waiver
program there's a or Medicaid
program I will allow my expert
witness to clarify further
thing thank you madam chair and
Representative Jones this bill
goes to the heart of the direct
support professionals that is
people who serve those with
developmental disabilities.
You raise a perfect example we
do not know how many people with
developmental disabilities.
Have Alzheimer's so no this to
this bill does not address
people with Alzheimer's unless
they're in the DD waiver system.
Thank you very much and so madam
chair representative how would a
person with Alzheimer's ever
qualify for that is that a
possibility someone who's be at
home being cared for thank you
madam chair and representative.
and then I clarified what you're
asking Representative Jones are
are you asking for a family
member to be able to find who's
caring for an individual
disability to provide data in
the part of this cost study or
are you looking for an
individual who's a family care
provider for someone with the
end of it with the disability
with with Alzheimer's to receive
some sort of support and that
care.
Yeah it's deeper than I I
thought.
What I will I was just wondering
if first of all.
Is it possible for an
Alzheimer's patient who's been
cared for at home by family.
To receive an outside source of
help.
From the program.
So thank you now so thank you
madam chair and representatives
in this program is going over
the developmental disability
waivers there is a criteria and
an individual can have
Alzheimer's and meet the
developmental disability
criteria and so if they do so.
The test they're participating
in this in in this program the
bill itself is not a
participation the program it's
gathering the data of people who
are in the program.
All right.
I'm in right now and and and.
make it is a little more clear
so developmental disability have
to have occurred before the age
I believe eighteen there are
state law and it all of the many
people with down to the ground
and that having Alzheimer's but
if you have not had a
developmental disability and
develop Alzheimer's later on in
life you will not qualify for
this program you had to have a
developmental disability
diagnosed before the age of
eighteen.
Very good thank you for
clarifying that everyone.
it.
Thank you madam chair you sound
a lot better today.
It comes and goes okay.
Well I hope you get well.
Madam chair representative
what's the current rate of
reimbursement for the direct
support provider agency.
I'm not madam chair and
representatives Representative
Vincent that is a complex
question because we have five
different right waivers and we
have a different rates for
different types of services
within each one of those we as
representatives to receive and
and and they're I think they're
in
the spiral notebooks some
information about what we have
received in the past as the cost
analysis for that.
Okay.
What is the current rate of
direct support professional
vacancies.
Thank you madam chair and
representative that is one of
the reasons why we want
comprehensive data for the
entire state now my individual
provider groups and they can
tell you like some of the
residential programs are at
fifty percent.
Yeah it's very it's terrifying
right now Madam chair
representative but that's why we
want this bill to pass so that
we have a comprehensive idea
statewide.
Madam chair representative.
Representative I'm just going to
jump in here real quick my son
is in a group home and they have
they they have the right at
fifty percent of their front
office people who inject it in
the group homes.
Okay.
And madam chair representative
what what does that look like
fifty percent vacancy when
you're trying to take care of
those people like that what what
does that look like can you get
it done.
Can you take care of them a
hundred percent when you're only
operating at fifty.
Thank you madam chair and
representative.
thank you Representative for the
for the question I would welcome
a couple coffee with you
sometime to talk about how how
difficult it is been did
somebody say this is been an
issue as someone said on this
panel those for decades but I
will tell you really since two
thousand eleven when our economy
tanked
the the under funding of the
costs information that this
program the waiver program.
We've been providing cost
information through a cost study
that is funded by the state and
and managed by the state and it
has been consistently under
funded and now it is so under
funded we have huge vacancies so
these are individuals who are
mission driven and their
employments but that doesn't
mean we should be balancing our
budget on their backs.
And I will be in the and I'm
sorry as a as
The basic care is mostly handled
about people are given just
hours a need and they definitely
don't get outings at eighty and
if that the quality of life for
people in the group homes have
has decreased a lot.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
How does your recruitment
looking at why it why are we
fifty percent I know everybody's
fifty percent down all over the
state but why why this field
right here is it just is it
tough work we're not paying them
enough what's what's the problem
so thank you madam chair
representative this is why this
is our first step is being able
to make decisions that our
database and and to help inform
the legislature of what's really
going on so it is very difficult
work as I'm sure most peoples
are but it is mission driven
work it's it's it can be highly
satisfying for those individuals
who want to do it eight but if
we need to we can't pay the same
as of fast food
and and somebody said you know
janitor I I think custodians do
awesome jobs and they are
professional and they have a
process and and they are very
great at their jobs but their
job is not to
of it depended on someone
staying alive and so the the
direct care for support is for
the quality of life and for the
safety and we want to be able to
make sure that they that we can
address those workforce issues
but we want need to start off
with real data for so that we
can inform and work with our
stakeholders to be able to fill
that fifty percent gap.
The lower.
I really do wish you good
looking and madam chair
representative just because I'm
a money guy we're where will the
necessary funding for the
services come from.
So thank you up and madam chair
and representative so the waiver
program is currently funded
between a of federal and state
dollars for every one dollar the
state puts in the Feds put in
for.
So that is how the waiver
programs are currently funded.
There is no funding for this
bill which it really is just a
data collection bill.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair I would move it to
pass.
House Bill three ninety five as
amended.
I'm sorry your talking and
talking and I'm on the.
So we have a motion and a second
or did you have on.
Was there any opposition.
We have to do tax.
Thank you madam chair
representatives.
Thank you.
The representative that I would
also be more than happy to visit
with somebody over and ICT and
explain one one what is it after
that just because it's really
One thing in the.
For.
For those of you who may not
have heard we role I hope for
that I will and for he began of
the sales of this
Representative Romero whenever
you're ready thank you madam
chair
Good morning house bill four
eighty eight is in partnership
with our AG's office to clarify
the fact that we don't have data
protections on health data
currently in our state as we've
seen with the rise of telehealth
providers through COVID and
prior what we don't have right
now we're strong protections on
how that data is collected
managed and sold on and
currently those in particular
who cannot access
insurance often go to the open
market to provide these types of
products and unfortunately this
data today is is very much
unprotected very much sold at a
price and so with me state is my
expert.
You madam chair members of the
committee my name is James
Grayson I'm the chief deputy
Attorney General's office and
this is an issue that has become
an issue of national prominence
there was recently an article in
The Washington Post about this
and legislatures around the
country including Congress are
responding and attempting to
protect this particular mental
health data that has become more
readily available for sale
since that telehealth and
therapy apps have come into
existence and their rise during
the COVID
this is a particular problem
particularly for checked
children's mental health data
but also mental health and and
health data across the board for
adults and children
and this bill would help protect
that while still allowing for
the transmittal of health data
upon an individual's affirmative
consent for when lawfully
allowed.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee with that madam
chair will stand for questions.
Okay we'll go to the audience
for it in opposition.
Please raise your hand.
Is there any are there any hands
raced.
Okay.
Zoom for opposition.
Thank you madam vice chair okay
let's go to the audience for
support.
Okay
In support.
Okay thank you we'll go to the
committee representing her did
you want to take over this part
because you can see it better so
all just listening.
Thank you madam chair I always
have questions have
Representative so walk me
through this please because I'm
unfamiliar with that so.
There is data
that is being sold.
Hi this is getting past that but
so can you explain it to me what
data is being gathered is that
the name and the data are just
the data.
How's the by passing hippa and
who's being sold to how's that
for a package thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
so a couple things one is that
there is there's not a uniform
way in which this is being
handled so typically what from
my understanding and from what
we've seen nationally is that
it's typically in a package of
information can be sold with
thousands of people's state all
at once to understand perhaps
trends and you can just buy it
you can buy an open market
how this how the state is being
aggregated or are capped
and then when it comes to
individuals personal information
that does get subject to help us
so it is much trickier to sell
an individual person's data so
these are cash As of multiple
persons data again children
under the age of twelve children
aged six to twelve so you can
sort of package it up and and
and get it receive it in that
sort of way but the individuals
data like you said we have
strong federal laws that protect
against that and all that Mr
Grayson Phil and from what I
understand.
Yes madam chair Representative
Lord my that's my understanding
as well
And it's in addition to that
with with the rise of of
telehealth and therapy apps
there are searches of
information that reveal for
example diagnoses and things
like that that are not protected
by hip of because they're not
involved in the medical
Eradication.
And so those are our searches
done by individuals themselves
and so there are data brokers
that are able to obtain that
information.
And you can get information is
detail those who has a black
card in your when your
constituents kind of I was
shocked at how much information
I can get they're not on the
people themselves but on the
data so I imagine that this is
going.
These are people that are making
money off of collecting the data
they're doing data mining
information and then selling it
to whatever I mean any even if
you.
Well who are wanted by the day
is that correct chair
representative correct madam
chair representative okay and so
what we're looking to do then
Estes drive in from the cell.
Sure sure yes that's correct
madam chair okay and what is the
okay some looking here chair
civil penalties it can recover
by the train Jennifer all
willful violation cases they
have to show intent of willful.
And the amount not exceeding
five thousand dollars is that
correct manage is what I have
this whole summer here may be
wrong madam chair representative
and we were actually upping the
ante on the civil penalty to not
less than five hundred dollars
and not more than ten thousand
dollars okay and I think the
last question I have is how
mentors and you talk about
expert please sorry for name
right I apologize my has kind of
fallen this point
So how the data mining look like
are you talking about are going
to like a health app in the.
You're talking about terrorism
in short yes madam chair
representative that's correct
okay thank you appreciate
walking through that because.
This is.
I'm actually madam chair
representative a couple things
personal story my my fiance is
an immigrant and actually can't
because he doesn't have a social
security number cannot access
open interest in health care and
when trying to find providers
again you have to go into the
open market and it tends to be a
bit more of the wild west out
there than just being able to go
through an insurance provider
and with that started learning
about some of these on data
breaches that are happening
we're not bridges per se but
just that being brought this
information being bought and
sold legally and then coupled
with that the AG's office
reached out with this
information and seeing this sort
of stories matter a smattering
of stories nationally
understanding that the state is
being bought and sold without
any sort of
input any sort of regulation et
cetera so it's a really good
effort for the AG's office to be
the office that put you know put
some arms around all of this to
ensure that consumer data is
protected and that folks that
are in those eight different
exchanges or receiving this type
of health that they're not being
subject to potential predatory
activities potential
consequences for something that
they don't even know they were
on their that their information
is being sold so many reasons
but definitely for what we've
continued to see sort of
broadening across the country.
Madam chair representative in
the the attorney general's
office has a consumer protection
division and our division
enforces any violation of the
uniform
unfair practices act and that's
that that's what this would fall
under is.
Second.
Thank you members.
He's going so why don't you just
only take over from here.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee for this I have with
me today Tommy Hernandez who's
my experts he is the governor of
public policy director at the
Alzheimer's association and so
I'm gonna give you a quick
history because I realize
there's a lot of the folks on
the committee but two years ago
we passed into law the long term
care dementia training act and
what we did was he brought
together folks from ale TST the
aging and long term Services
Department if folks in D. O. H.
department health folks in the
Alzheimer's association also
focus on the long term care
facilities and we agreed upon
these
it this training for dementia
care for those interact with
patients who may be susceptible
to dementia and in practice when
we got when they're using it
that we felt we we thought a lot
of the stuff we clarified rules
it did not and so we did with
the kids came back again this
summer and we all talked again
primarily between also
Association myself and long term
aging associate long term aging
facilities we'll talk again
include hospice care individuals
as well to make sure that this
bill is being implemented as
intended which is to ensure that
the folks that interact with of
people in long term care
facilities had some amount of
dementia training because the
signs of dementia can be
difficult to spot and so we we
did with with this is we made it
more specific to make it very
clear that it's four hours of
training ones on there is a
continual care effort it
clarifies what specific things
on page three towards the top
you can see all the specific
pieces that are part of that
care one of the things I think
is very important is if you look
on page two section D. and for
no other reason this is a very
important piece of legislation
passed that unintentionally have
very short term of medium term
and long term care facilities
the median care facilities the
intermediate care facilities
were included to require this
training which meant the care
facilities for individuals with
intellectual disabilities were
included as well that was never
part of the intention of this
bill you know we we discussed at
length we want to make sure that
they were not having to do
training that doesn't.
Part of the so we've discussed
this bill at length to really
get you know tone in on it the
fight you know as you all know
this is a the process one of the
bill in the amendment to care
most of the other language
issues there is a spoke small
question about continual Care
length again that will literally
be a possible three word you
know change if necessary at a
later time but this overall we
feel very strongly in our
conversations with everybody
who's involved long term care
that this training that these
updates to what is already law
will make it more effective bill
because people can actually
utilize it but also ensure that
it's not too much of a burden on
those who are already providing
so much care to our our elder
family members and friends and
with that and tell me would you
like to say a few words I just
madam chair members of the
committee I think the sponsoring
representative of your did a
fine job of explaining what this
bill aims to do in the
perspective of the Alzheimer's
association is that it it really
brings a more narrow focus which
we feel is going to improve the
workers as direct care workers
who this bill applies to so the
Alzheimer's association
understands is built some
something that's really refines
the the well intended a proposal
and policy of this demonstrating
Act recently passed in twenty
twenty will stand for any
questions the chair members
committee.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Ian Bryce I
am a volunteer advocate with A.
R. P. New Mexico we would like
to think Representative Serrato
for bringing this bill forward
A. R. P. New Mexico stance in
support of this bill.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Carmen plus
the state long term care
ombudsman for New Mexico I'm
here on behalf of aging long
term services department as well
this is I've heard that this is
takes it a fair bit of
collaboration among many
stakeholders and we stand in
support of this bill as we
believe that it addresses some
of the inefficiencies are
created in the original act
while still requiring that there
is
approval and standards in in at
Alzheimer's and dementia care
training and long term care
thank you very much.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Senator I
guess I'm with the New Mexico
health care association in New
Mexico Center for assisted
living representing nursing
homes and assisted living
facilities in the state of New
Mexico we thank the the sponsor
and stakeholders for the
collaboration in hoping refined
and better target this bill and
act so that it does focus on
those care givers that do that
they do require and and do need
this training we definitely
support that that aspect we do
appreciate the the Sanchez well
for mentioning the continuing
education section that was and
that was included as an
amendment
in house how C. pack it is
section to see number two.
It's a new section it probably
won't be in your bill but it's
in the amendments in context we
do have a concern with dad and
appreciate the sponsor being
open to inserting language that
would limit the continuing
education for dementia care to
one hour please keep in mind
that it will be four hours
initially of dementia care for
anybody that walks in the door
as a care giver or a contractor
with the facility however
In conversations with the
regulator it could be
interpreted that the continuing
education also has to be one
that asks also has to be four
hours
and that has the possibility of
cutting into existing
administrative rule which which
requires twelve hours of
training so you could it be they
could be misinterpreted to
require for hours and we we
would support one hour of
continuing education after the
initial phase of a of four hours
so we do appreciate your time
and for considering this
legislation and thank you again
at the Sanchez stakeholders.
There is one.
An expert I just have a.
Having had two parents with
also.
So on this testing on patients
don't have the amendment to
context.
Stance to questions so the
training can be online or and.
With the training of.
Will there be a task that they
have to pass afterwards as well
like did they pay attention they
sleep to the online training
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for for the
question overall of we try to do
some of that to be able to see
to determine some of the
specific elements however what I
will say is that if it doesn't
fit than they have they have
time to fix the concern of it
going on but I believe overall
it is specifically for training
directly is that.
yes madam chair representative
thank you for the question I I
believe if I understood
correctly as how can we
determine if the person
receiving the training does yes
does pay attention and what's in
this and ultimately the into the
goal is to to ensure that these
direct care workers of this bill
place to they are competent in
the core areas of this dimension
training so yes as part of the
certificate program there's a
gate would be earned based off
demonstrated competency for
completing the training and so
that way they truly are
absorbing that information
rather than just you know prep
sitting in front of a screen and
walking away saying Hey I've
completed it I got to the end
screen all is well and done so
yes that's a very important
essential part of this training
is to ensure that there is
competency learned not just time
spent thank you question chair
representative because I know
most people are good natured at
heart and there's something just
gonna.
Okay so they do this for four
hours how long after they start
their employment or one does it
like this let's say this bill
passes windows everybody start
doing the testing general as our
time frame and how long for a
new person when they get hired
on before they have to do this
yes chair thank you madam chair
thank you Representative it will
be extended to ninety days to be
more in line with what's
realistic within the the care
facilities and then and madam
before this is already been
going on I think a new broader
scope than anybody was really
intend so you know the new folks
will come in we'll do it for
nineteen within ninety days.
It's Madam chair representative
handling some of.
You have to know all the.
Understand if there's when
they're agitated or when they're
saying they're not thirsty.
That super important chair
representative just to the
continued eight education I
don't have that in here and what
what what is it continued
education look like madam chair
representative expert thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative so as the long
term care facilities
representative mentioned earlier
they already have on going
twelve hour training that's in
code it's not in statute and so
we couldn't amend anything to be
very clear about in putting it
into that in our initial
discussions we've had with
Alzheimer's association L. TST
the care facilities we believe
that something like and you know
an hour or so you know would be
logical we're concerned that we
don't it's such a balancing act
I think we all have which is one
to be prescriptive and one to be
open in the statute and so we
want to make so we're we're
confirming with the O. H. what
is the interpretation of the
amended language which calls for
continuing care because I don't
believe anyone anyone
anticipates doing four hours
annually for every individual or
every employee however how we
balance that in statute is the
question is going on right now
and what that would could
consist of is again we've
already outlined here and then
and that's part of their overall
training you know that they have
annual and how to care for
individuals in assisted living I
think I'm in terms of what I've
looked to see even if it's just
an.
Here's a refresher remember all
the staff and you know and we.
And here's some new research we
just found this is what we just
what I would love to see that
Madam chair representative I may
I believe we're all we all agree
on that yeah okay
Thank.
I think that is all the question
that was my main concern about
the training thank you.
You madam.
Representative I just wanted to
briefly say how much is support
this and a long call with the
constituent the other day whose
mother is in a memory care
facility and you know she had a
lot of concerns about what's the
training required of the staff
how much are they being
compensated you know so I I feel
this is a piece of the solution
and I think long term including
like with our DD provider staff
to we need to look at what we're
paying how much training is
required what kind of
certifications are required and
you know these are some of our
most vulnerable residents and.
State so I just want to say that
thank you very much madam chair.
Yes ma'am.
I thank you madam chair of rooms
at my other quest that was when
I just was I knew it would mark
growth rate down so what this is
covers for in a facility is
there any to.
Working with people at home even
something about people that like
I took care of my parents at the
house it would be nice to.
Things are going to happen so
that the public bold anybody
doing home care right now Madam
chair representative madam chair
this bill is not have I'm happy
to try to expertise explain some
of the support those are
cessation does provide for
absolutely thank you madam chair
thank you Representative for the
question home health aides and
and other people who do the in
home care still very much a a
very lesser than regulated
workforce that's a piece of
legislation we hope to visit in
the future we feel this is truly
most people who are living in a
long term care facilities over
fifty percent of them by our
data shows that they have some
degree of dementia whether the
Alzheimer's disease or some
other form and that the state of
which that disease progressed
you know on their mind is also
very different when it comes to
home health aides a lot of these
people who are receiving those
services maybe begin to show the
early signs and symptoms of
they're not quite to the point
where they need to be placed in
long term care for around the
clock care of perhaps a loved
one moving someone into your
home for example but that is an
industry that we have had some
discussions over the summer with
some representation that
industry and they certainly are
agreeable at that is a policy
that does need to be brought
forward however we felt at this
time this is that bill we need
to focus on for the session but
I believe you and the committee
will certainly be hearing back
from us again and sessions come
to address that as well.
Future for people because it's
very important especially when
you're taking some.
Training support and other
things you know that not ma'am.
For people that are employed yes
mandatory and for the people who
like us to take care of their
parents some optional training
online.
Percent Madam chair
representative I may have one
less thing is that it
independent living is certainly
a staple philosophy of the
Alzheimer's association we want
people to be able to remain in
their homes for us so long as
they're comfortable they are
safe and as the representative
also mentioned there stream the
vulnerable wondering is a very
common issue so I definitely can
offer the shirts as to the
committee that we will certainly
be revisiting that policy years
to come thank you thank you
madam chair greatly appreciate
thank you.
Is are there any other questions
that I have to I'd like to just
so who is keeping the records
showing the people who actually
had the trading where those
being kept thank you madam chair
thank you Representative so this
is that this is kind of fun
detail we worked on the
amendment but essentially each
of the care facilities have
track that they're individuals
of taking this training the
training has been approved by
LTSE the all that's happened now
a lot of times these long term
care facilities will contract
with a hospital hospice sorry
hope hospice care facilities for
individuals to come in and help
with those individuals towards
the end of their lives we made
it in the amendment possible if
the carefully chooses they can
stay in the contract this this
if you know in the contract
everyone here has underwent all
the training required ended
dementia training act as well as
federal state requirements so
all that information essentially
is house by the long term care
facility however it might also
be it might be through a
contract and clarified there is
no so thank you very much of
Madam Representative and who
audits these and how often of
the records audited to determine
that everyone as a direct care
giver is actually completed the
training thank you madam chair
thank you at committee and that
would it's an annual reviews
would be part of their and.
This.
Both of services provided annual
review.
To delete.
We believe the surveyors madam
chair committee through the O.
H. the survey research and to
delay so the O. H. will go in
and do an audit of the records
and compare those with the
individuals who provided the
direct care service thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative Representative
yes to ensure compliance and
this is actually why we felt it
was so necessary to update this
we did not would be overly
onerous annually for these Care
care giving facilities.
Well I just want to make sure
that once you implement this
that it really is been checked
out to make sure compliance is
occurring so thank you no other
computer questions all right I
will accept a motion.
I'll make a motion for do pass.
All right have a due pass on the
house bill four forty six as
amended is there any objection.
In the you have a do pass and
thank you.
There are yes ma'am.
Just introduce the rules with
the Representative George will
have to be there anyone could
you go ahead and move Senator
Padilla Representative Jones
last.
Okay we'll do Representative
Jones the last and of are you
okay.
As we will proceed to that
choose Representative to put I
mean Senator Padilla.
Yes okay yes.
Representative Matthews is in
the air and Representative but
the is on his way.
Senator Padilla is on his way.
I'm sorry it was in the room.
When I can't see.
They they apologize.
We are on
Committee substitute for Senate
bill eighty nurse nested this
role.
And do you have an expert
Senator Padilla you know I do
madam chair but they're sort of
going to chime in and they know
that one's online
but if we.
Move in and see if I need to
call in all right who's your
expert online so we can look for
this so I do have
committees will give the exact
names here thank you I just ran
over from.
Finance lose my breath here.
And I have
Do do do thank you adult miss
Angela freak she's a C. R. N. A.
and a former chief and and this
and this fall and this the G. R.
with anesthesiologists and
former N. M. A. N. A. executive
director I also have a lot of
dances who's the Medicaid
medical officer from the
department of health and I have
a few others that are going to
chime in if we need them so
Madam chair of begin presenting
if you'd like all right would
you please proceed thank you
madam chair thank you probably
this bill is going to sound
slightly familiar to you Senate
Bill what eighty is very similar
to house bill forty eight which
I move through this committee we
did have to have and do quite a
bit of work to this bill as well
as the anesthesiologist
assistants Bill SB thirty five
I convened a couple of meetings
madam chair members of the
committee to find a solution we
did find a solution right as the
session was beginning so I
signed on to Senator Hickey's
Bill Senator Hickey signed on to
this bill and we decided to
carry the legislation through
committees on the floor
generally at the same time
depending on what yours out
yours would schedule the
legislation essentially the big
difference was who can can
perform their services and where
in the state you know we have a
class distinction for the size
counties and so we decided to
find a friendly working
relationship that way as we
proceeded forward I made some
changes to the legislation but
the the crux of legislation
pretty much is it is around
providing significant and some
of the only health care in rural
parts of New Mexico and that's
what the C. R. N. A. certified
registered nurse anesthetists
build us it also provides
certainty if you're in the C.
are in a field so for about
nineteen years back to the
Johnson administration the
governor Johnson's
administration and executive
order was signed that actually
allowed nurse and just this to
actually work in the manner with
which they're working today this
simply codifies and makes it a
little more certain so it's
going to help those individuals
that might have.
Practices in different parts of
the state it's going to help
them to keep their practices
moving along just fine it's also
going to make the state a lot
more attractive for C. R.
entities that may want to come
into New Mexico set up a
practice and maybe our rural
community and provide some
health care that way it also
updates antiquated language
that's all the way back to the
nineteen and twenty two year ago
language in the in the executive
order this ensures that C. RNase
can actually practice all the
way up to not be on but all the
way up to their there's their
training and their skill set it
includes that they can find
independent services based on
how it's designed in the
executive order that's in place
right now it also facilitates
you know choice in in in the
composition of anesthesia teams
and so that's essentially what
the legislation does we did have
some amendments along the way as
I mentioned based on the work
that we did with with these the
S. H. B. thirds are SB thirty
five the end of
anesthesiologist assistants bill
who I am the co sponsor of on
that one I do have support for
this legislation that you're
listening to right now from the
New Mexico board of nursing
they've adopted it as as as as
as sponsoring or supporting it
The New Mexico Hospital
Association the New Mexico
association of nurse
practitioners by myself some
really good classes chair
New Mexico State University the
head of their program their
nursing program there and
multiple others and so
essentially what this does is it
allows the C. R. needs to swim
in their lane and provide their
services the asus women their
lan provide their services
codifies all the language so
that there's no you know issue
with regard to what they can and
cannot do and ensure certainty
so that the folks want to
practice in this field this is
some of the only health care in
certain parts of New Mexico now
stand for questions.
So we'll go to the audience
first is there anyone here in
opposition to this legislation.
I see no hands we are going to
the.
To those so.
This is I see no hands but.
Races will go back to the audits
is there anyone here in support
of this legislation please come
forward and you will have one
minute and the.
This system will time you.
Thank you madam chair members of
committee Linda Siegel I
represent the nurse practitioner
Council and nursed New Mexico
nurses association etcetera
and I I don't I and also
represented the C. R. nature's
occur when we got the
interdependent language as a
compromise with the
anesthesiologists this is the
practice of siRNAs there would
be no surgeries in the rural
areas were it not for C. R. N.
A.'s because they are the only
providers that will go to the
non urban hospitals they have
always been a safe providers
they are highly educated and.
This this is one of those turf
wars that happy happens along
scope of practice issues but
this is a provider that should
have the independent practice
where wherever they are and
that's the compromise made with
this bill thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair crystals on on the
register lobbyist for the New
Mexico association of nurses
anaesthetists and I just wanna
let you know that the membership
want to express their no
gratitude and support you guys
have supported this year and ace
have passed this bill and
previous session and we
appreciate that this is going to
help us with retention gonna
help us with the recruitment as
well CNA's and continue
providing quality honesty just
services and will New Mexico
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Ilana dances
on that Medicaid medical
director so as a member of the
Human Services Department were
not in support or opposition to
the bill I just but I'm happy to
answer any questions and
personally I'm a nurse
practitioner I'm in a position
of leadership and I moved here
from Philadelphia largely
because of the autonomous
tractors opportunities in the
state and my opportunities
professionally so I can
definitely talk about being
advanced practice nurse and what
it's like to work here thanks.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you okay we are going to
zoom up is there anyone else who
would like to speak in support
of this legislation.
I see no hands of zoom I am
going to the committee.
Is that.
Thank you madam chair and
senator okay so we do have some.
Because I I know that are
certified registered nurse.
This this is thank you for the
other states are just the to the
a twenty five times and often
people out.
Homes here in just right yes
okay so I I I know that they're
trained so I have questions on
some things that are going to go
back to malpractice insurance so
right now and anesthesiologists
is a PhD with four years of
training and the C. R. N. A. has
a master's degree do they have
training beyond that master's
degree for just that CPAS I see
heads nodding out there for just
that specific and how much
training do they have for their
madam chair and Representative
so yes they do as you saw behind
me but also they have to you
know much like a teachers do and
others they have to re up and
and continuing ed classes all
the time whenever something
changes in their industry they
have to go through
certifications on various items
so that's other kept current and
most up to date on how they
provide their services okay
mentor to the person on in their
head back there can you can the
answer question like how much
training they have above and
beyond for their specific.
We also have your your of your
expert on the line if you would
like to call upon.
Yes thank you yeah.
There she goes a little.
My name is Angela there any.
Las Cruces New Mexico has a
president.
just a disposition.
Education master's degree
required level most health
providers to have continuing
education every year when a long
with that we reserve every four
years and our national
association and we are board
certified every eight years so
I'm
You know that we are are
starting with asco there's a
number certification and every
eight years where we actually
request.
So madam chair and
Representative so in New Mexico
eighty percent or more of
practicing C. RNase have six or
more years of training you heard
about the eight every a year
point certification and more
than eighty percent of them have
gone on to get their Ph.D is as
well okay thank you madam chair
representative so let's get down
to the malpractice part because
I've been in some of the
committees were discussing
malpractice cosmetic your higher
rates and some doctors.
Thanks.
No longer get insurance because
they're saying you know seven
million there is no such thing
so how does this work what is
the anesthesiologists have to
have for coverage as far as like
let's say.
Versus the C. R. A. what what
level.
Representative Lord I don't
believe that this bill has to do
with malpractice.
At thank you madam chair it's
respect that's actually what I
was gonna say first is thank you
madam chair this bill has
nothing to do with any changes
to any of that lay out for how
these professionals operator and
any insurance is they have to
Yes so I I I don't want to this
really get into the weeds are
but the other thing I would say
is that wherever they're
practicing if it's in a hospital
and you heard the hospitals as I
mentioned the Mexico Hospital
association has endorsed this
legislation they would adhere to
whatever the hospitals requiring
them to have or whatever the
hospital has for their portion
of liability.
Madam chair and senator I it's.
Practice at the end of the day
so
so they can get that question
answered I can at least in limbo
so thank you madam chair and
senator thank you madam chair I
just wanted to know that the
Senate passed the legislation
thirty five to three so that
that's a was a pretty good
showing and then a lot of debate
early on which is what you might
be seeing that we made a turn
the bill into a substitute when
I was in Judiciary and Senate
because I wanted to be clean
before I came to see with the.
Representative thank you
Representative Kate's manager
I'd like to make it to pass
second.
Okay is there
any objection to the passage of
the bill.
Seeing no objection you have a
do pass the committee substitute
to Senate bill eighty thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee.
So we are going to
Representative Jones now.
And we will be hearing house
bill four forty two unpaid child
support the court for.
Thank you would you please
yourself and your ex yes hello
madam chair thank you and
members of the committee.
this is a Elisabeth Johnson
Attorney and she's here to help
me if I have any legal questions
to answer but we are here to
protect present a house bill
four forty two it is the purpose
of it is to waive court fees and
filing a motion for unpaid child
support
this the motivation for this
bill was brought up my
constituents
primarily single moms but could
be single fathers as well single
moms who are struggling to make
ends meet and not receiving
child support and in order to
file a motion to have to come up
with a hundred thirty seven
dollars to to go to the courts
and and it's and I believe in
operational
feed but but that can be
Prohibitive if there is already
there issue is that they are not
getting the money they need to
raise our kids so so that's why
I brought this and and this
Elizabeth has anything to add
on to for questions.
I thank you.
We will go to the audience is
there anyone here in opposition
to a house bill four forty two.
We're going to assume it's there
anyone on the set up position to
this legislation.
Seeing no hands there we've gone
back to the audience is there
anyone here in support of house
bill four forty two.
I see no hands here we're going
back to soon is there anyone
here of the in support of four
forty two.
Sandal hence there we are going
to the audience Representative
Vincent.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for bring in this
form of legislation because I
know lots of people that this is
going to benefit and I've just
got a few questions for you to
be.
Is this going to benefit single
mothers and their kids.
Yes and primarily single moms
Madam chair representative
primarily single month because
they're usually the custody a
parent but but I also know
single dads who would benefit as
well and hundred thirty seven
dollars may not seem like much
to us but it really it can be a
lot when you're raising a family
so yes it would.
Thank you and and madam chair
representative.
Whether it's the mom or their
dad are or the dad how far do
they have to get behind before
this.
Goes into effect.
And will there be punishment.
Driver's license.
EMT Lysons anything like that
will be revoked.
I you know what I'm not sure
what the penalties are for for
not paying child support I
honestly don't I don't know that
And and I don't know if there's
a certain period of time that.
child support.
Has to be.
On page before you can file a
motion I honestly don't know
that I just know that if it's
unpaid there is.
Thank you that's all of the.
The is there anyone else.
Like to make a motion for do
pass and thank you
Representative for bringing this
for a second.
Yes I I do have a question okay
thank you please it is on the
FIR and maybe it's not a
question about more of a
suggestion on page two of the F.
I. R. it is HSD analysis
identifies a few possible issues
including that of the bill does
not state that the type of
motions eligible for fee waiver
or provide guidance for.
Legible early so I just wanted
to give the sponsor heads up in
case that and another committee
might might find that I don't
have but I have no.
Thank you madam chair yes thank
you madam chair I appreciate
that input and I do plan to
address that one issue which
would clarify the on the line
sixteen of the bill who a person
is and and we think it should it
should be clarified as the
custodial parent for custodial
guardian.
So I appreciate that and we will
do that.
Thank you very much so yes there
were actually.
Six please that war.
Alright.
So my question to you is we have
another bill that would
absolutely do away with the with
a fees but not funds is there
any conflict between this bill
and that one is this duplicative
Mr Johnson answered you madam
chair and.
And check chair I'm this is my
first time in this committee
I saw that bill I don't believe
that this was covered in it so I
don't believe there's a conflict
I'd be happy to check.
And get back to you that's okay
but I my memory says that there
isn't a conflict and that this
is necessary as well all right
thank you all right we have a
due pass motion with the second
and that is there any
opposition.
Sen no opposition you have a do
pass thank you thank you madam
chair committee.
Madam chair that includes the
agenda for today is there
anything else that you would
like to share with the
committee.
Were you asked.
Everyone we will of we will
recess now until Wednesday
morning at eight thirty.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam speaker.
