Forum, and we also don't have
any presenters, unfortunately,
um.
I'm sorry.
No.
Um, so Representative Herndon is
waiting for her expert to fly
in.
Um, Representative Chavez is
waiting for her experts.
Um, Herndon isn't here.
Do you want to get started?
OK.
Ferrari is presenting a bill in
another committee. It's early in
the session, but we're already
at that point. So if you just
hold on for a second till we get
a presenter here or someone's
experts, we will get started.
So in order to expedite our
time, I'm gonna go ahead and
present um
House Bill 117, which is last on
the agenda. It's representative
Ferrari's bill death certificate
by physician assistant.
So, um,
Yeah
Who wants to play cheer.
OK. Representative Chavez,
you're chair for now, and we
can't take any official action
until we do have a quorum, but
we can present bills, so thank
you.
So thank you, Madam Chair. House
Bill 117 is a
Very simple bill, but I do have
an amendment that's being passed
out. So what the bill does
basically it allows physicians'
assistants to um
Sign a death certificate.
And so the, the only, the
changes are well Madam Chair, I
moved the amendment for for
discussion.
I'd like to meet.
But
The, um, we have a motion, uh,
to hear the amendment and a
second.
OK, so, um, you all have it in
front of you.
It's uh
It's one of those that maybe
should have been it.
A sub, but it's not, so, um,
You can
So on page 1 line 12, after
patient insert amending the
requirements for referrals to
the state medical investigator.
And then on page 4.
Line 24, strike 10, and insert
in lieu thereof 180.
And then on page 4, line 24
straight treated.
And insert provided a medical
examination, medical advice, or
a prescription for medication.
So that's just um basically
defining what treated means in
this.
On line 4 before physician
insert primary care.
And then on page 5, no, still
page 4, line 22.
Line 25 after the comma, insert
physician assistant or nurse
practitioner, and again, it's
just being clear.
And what we're trying to do with
this law, and then on page 5,
line 2.
Insert if a physician physician
assistant or nurse practitioner
is unable to certify the cause
of death for a decedent by
reasonably ascertaining the
cause of death from the
decedent's medical history, the
case shall be referred to the
state medical investigator for
investigation to determine and
certify the cause of death.
So essentially the amendments
are just to clarify and and um
get rid of any ambiguous
language.
So we can't um adopt the, the uh
Amendment, but I think I'm ready
for public comment and to turn
my phone on silent like we all
should.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair.
We're gonna go to Zoom first. Is
there anyone in support on Zoom,
please raise your hand.
Anybody there? None on Zoom, is
there anyone in opposition?
In the room, is there anyone in
support?
If you'll come forward and uh 2
minutes, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representatives hold on for the,
the mic.
Can everyone hear me there? OK.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
Representatives. My name is
Keith Romero. I'm the registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
Academy of Physicians Assistant,
and they stand in support of
this bill and just wanted to
extend the thank you to
Representative Ferrari for
carrying it, uh, long overdue.
Thank you very much.
Is there anyone in the room in
opposition?
No one is in opposition already.
Questions from the committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, this bill
has been presented in previous
years, is that correct?
Venture and Representative
cases, yes.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair, and,
uh, and the issues for why it
did not progress have been
resolved.
Madam chair and Representative
Kates, I believe so.
Thank you.
It's hard to sit for someone
else's bill, but any other
questions from the committee?
You can
take and vote on it, uh, someone
want to make a motion?
We could make a motion, we just
can't vote I'll make a motion
for a due pass as amended, as
amended.
A second.
Is there any opposition?
You have a due pass when we come
back in full committee, Madam
Chair, OK, and I think we have
to wait again. Oh,
representative, we'll, we'll
switch places.
As you can see, we try not to
waste any time, um.
Because we have no time to waste
in this time.
So Representative Chavez,
whenever you're ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, House Bill 72.
is a bill that would um
establish a committee, a
statewide committee to address
the issues of staffing ratios,
nurse to patient staffing ratios
and included in that are also um
tech um ratios, and when we talk
about texts they referred to um
in in different titles in in
hospital settings, sometimes
their patient care techs,
sometimes they're the CNAs, but
they are the unlicensed.
personnel who are very important
to the functioning of our ends
and their care of um patients.
The health, the health authority
would be responsible for
establishing the statewide
committee and what we have done
in this bill is created a
process whereby both uh rural
and urban hospitals would be
represented, and workers from
those hospitals would also be
represented.
The other piece that I think is
significant in this bill is that
um we would also require
hospitals to provide training to
our ants when they're moving
from one unit to another. So for
example, if we have a situation
where a hospital is in need of a
um nurse uh to go to a different
area that that person has not
been oriented to the hospital
would require, would, would have
to um provide that kind.
Of orientation and training.
Um, as the committee, um, begins
to take shape, we anticipate
that, uh, the committee will
look at what's happened around
the country, um, and also across
the state in terms of staffing.
One of the states that we have
used um to look to in in our
formulation of this bill is the
state of California. They have
had staffing ratios for a number
of years already, 20 to be
exact, and um the there's
Much research that's been done
on California in terms of the
kind of uh improvement in
patient care, the kind of
improvement in their
satisfaction. And, and the other
piece too is there are fewer
complaints from uh hospitals in
California because they're
getting much better patient
care.
One of the other things that was
really very um interesting to me
when I was doing some research
for this bill is that there was
an article last year in the LA
Times that talked about
California and the fact that
nurses are actually moving to
California from other parts of
the state to work there because
of the staffing ratios. We have
spoken to nurses who have worked
in California and they described
the situation as one where one,
their license
is not at risk, and again they
are much more satisfied in terms
of uh their working conditions
and again, nurses are trained to
provide patient care and having
nurse to staff ratios does
actually do that. It allows them
to care for the patients in the
manner in which they were
trained.
Madam Chair, I have 2, expert
witnesses with me, and I'm gonna
ask them to introduce themselves
and they also have some um
testimony to provide to the
committee in terms of why this
bill is so important.
So, I'm gonna ask um what.
Good morning. Uh, my name is
Jessica Mali. I am a registered
nurse working at Presbyterian
Downtown Emergency Room in
Albuquerque, New Mexico. I'm
here to talk about how current
I'm here to talk about how
current nursing staff ratios are
affecting nurses and the safety
of patients.
Nurses are burning out. There's
little to no support in the ER.
This leaves the nurses to
transport patients, clean rooms,
clean up patients, ambulate
patients to the bathroom and
pass out trays.
In addition to all the other
nursing responsibilities.
I am usually at a 1 to 5 ratio,
and in most cases with no tax.
We are required to complete
hourly rounding on our patients
when at a 1 to 5 ratio, I get 12
minutes an hour with each
patient. On a recent shift, it
took me 2 hours to see all of my
assigned 5 patients.
Each room I went into required
20 minutes of help.
Uh, many patients who come to
the emergency room are not
medically stable. It is also not
uncommon to have a patient
assigned who suddenly takes a
turn for the worse, and I am in
that room with them sometimes
for hours trying to stabilize
them.
This means the other patients I
am assigned to, I'll go without
anyone completing hourly
rounding. Other nurses in the
department are also assigned by
patients. They do not have time
to take on more patients.
And because we do not have tax,
patients can sit in their filth
or in pain until I'm able to
check on them again.
The exhaustion I feel at the end
of a shift is indiscernible or
indescribable. By the end of my
3 shifts, I can barely function.
There are days I leave the
hospital and I feel like I am
the worst nurse ever. I have
patients that are scared. I have
families who are afraid and I
don't have time to comfort them,
to provide any hope.
There are days I am so afraid
I'll miss an early warning sign
that a patient is about to code,
or I'm afraid a patient in
another room will decline at the
same time I'm frantically trying
to save another patient. This is
why we are burning out. The
hospital knows we need help.
But because we are uh we have no
staffing requirements. They burn
through nurses. They know most
nurses will stay about 2 years.
The ER is now functioning with
many new graduate nurses.
There needs to be a requirement
for hospitals to provide safe
staffing for the patients coming
into the hospital. They need to
provide safe staffing to
preserve and care for the nurses
that are already there working
in a profession they love.
Many want to leave nursing. Many
do leave. If they would just
respect their nursing staff
more. Many would stay.
Thank you.
Hello. My name is Edith Elsner
Ridgeway, and I'm a nurse on a
progressive care unit also in
downtown Albuquerque, um, I
wanna talk about how it is
important for having good
staffing, um, to keep nurses to
attract nurses to New Mexico,
um, and to have a safe work
environment, um, last fall, we
did a in fall of 2023, um, we
did a survey to find out more
information about staffing and
why, why nurses are leaving and
what they need to stay.
And um some of the results were
shocking and kind of predicted a
big mass exodus of nurses that
we saw this fall. Um, so in
2023, the results said, um, a
majority of the respondents
stated that they would stay
there one year or 1 or 2 more
years, um, with only about a
quarter saying that would stay 5
or more years in the hospital.
So that's 75% of nurses that
don't plan on staying in the
hospital very long. And one of
the myths is that there aren't
enough nurses, um.
We just can't hire enough
nurses. There's not enough
nurses out there, and that's not
the reality, um, the reality is
that qualified nurses are
leaving bedside nursing, um, to
find jobs outside of the
hospital because of the work
environment is so, um,
stressful, and they're burned
out.
Um, nationally, 60% of nurses
surveyed said that they plan on
changing their job in the coming
year, um, 40% of the nurses that
we interviewed in our survey,
um, said that they plan on
leaving bedside within a year
and another 35% said they were
gonna leave in 2 to 4 years. Um,
so that's again, 75% of the
nurses saying that they would
leave and um one of the
questions we ask is what is the
hardest part of your job?
85% said that short staffing and
the nurse to patient ratio was
their biggest issue with the
work environment.
And so fast forward, um, now to
2015, what actually happened is
that our unit actually did lose
75% of our day shift staff with
14 nurses leaving in the last
two months. And the saddest part
of this is that most of these
nurses hadn't been there, um,
longer than 2 years. So these
were new graduate nurses that
came into nursing excited to be
there, excited to do patient
care in the work environment was
so stressful that they found
other jobs, you know, in
clinics, they found other jobs
doing um
Desk jobs, you know, anything
but working bedside nursing. Um,
and so this is very scary if
we're thinking about how quickly
we're losing our new nurses, um,
and this is why we need safe
staffing, um, House Bill 72, um,
to provide an environment that
actually is gonna attract nurses
to New Mexico, um, that we've
seen around the world and around
the country that places that
have safe staffing laws actually
attract nurses, um, and bring
them, you know,
There's a lot of people in line
to get nursing licenses in
California because it's a
desirable place to work, um,
because of the staffing ratios.
And we don't want to, um, have a
vicious cycle of burnout, which
just causes more staff to leave.
Um, we wanna keep our nurses,
um, and keep our patients safe.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
There were a couple of more
things that I that I um wanted
to mention that I had forgotten
to mention, um, in doing our
research, we also found
interesting that that there is a
state in um Australia, um,
Victoria, I think it was, um,
but they also um instituted a
safe staffing ratios and what
they are finding is that that
um.
Passing that law has basically
created a situation where there
are no vacancies in their urban
hospitals. We have um one nurse
that we know of who is from
Albuquerque, who actually went
to work in Australia and um came
back home, of course, but um she
found um that that environment
was also um.
Much better than than what it is
here. The other thing that I
wanted to mention too is that
this also impacts um nurses who
have lots of experience. There
was a situation in a hospital a
couple of years ago and then
newborn ICU unit where the
working conditions were so
difficult, the um staffing was
so difficult that many of the
experienced nurses left, uh,
leaving, um, the nurses who
hadn't been there for so long,
um, sort of in a
difficult situation because what
what they were expected to do
was train the even newer nurses.
So that really created a
situation that was untenable for
everybody, the nurses and the
patient. Um, Madam Chair, with
that, we'll stand for questions.
Thank you. So first we'll go to
the audience. If you are on Zoom
in opposition.
Please raise your hand.
And we'll come back to you.
Anyone in the room in
opposition.
Uh, if you'd like to speak,
please come forward and
hopefully our mic.
We figured out a good job.
Notice I didn't offer to help
because my check is uh
Not all. Yo, hold on, OK, thank
you.
Good morning.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is JD Bullington and I am
speaking to you today on behalf
of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce, which
respectfully opposes this
legislation. The chamber
appreciates the goals behind
this bill. However, the reality
in our state that is that we
have a severe nursing shortage
and the number one consequence
of this legislation, the chamber
feels will be actually to have
less healthcare for New
Mexicans. Hospitals in New
Mexico will be in a quandary
when there are patients more
patients than.
nurses.
As prescribed in this bill and
turning patients away is an
unthinkable scenario. Our
hospitals cannot have
predetermined cut-off points for
how many patients they can serve
and expecting hospitals to be
able to quickly hire more nurses
or any medical professional is
unrealistic. This is the main
reason why the Chamber of
Commerce is supporting all of
the multi-state medical compact
bills so we can shore up our
provider ranks. This bill also
adds a new responsibility under
the healthcare authority that is
better managed.
at the local hospital level,
hospital directors and chief
nursing nursing officers are
much better equipped to
determine the appropriate
staffing for any given unit or
facility at any point in time,
as they know firsthand the many
variables that go into providing
nursing care for that day. So
mandating staffing ratios when
we are facing a staffing crisis
is not the best move right now
for New Mexico's hospital
patients and turning over
staffing decisions to someone
who is far removed from the
patient and staff environment.
Disregards the complexity of the
healthcare environment, so it's
for those reasons that the
greater opposite you oppose this
bill, thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name is Sloan
Johnson. I'm a 2nd year medical
student at the Borough College,
uh, with me today is, uh, Wu
Quan, another 2nd year, uh, we
stand in opposition as a future
physicians and uh professionals
who've worked in healthcare for
a long time, a big proportion of
our career, we know how
important nurse to staffing
ratios can be, however, the
reality is the deficit of nurses
in the state is just too great
to fulfill the need, uh, and
like the gentleman before said,
it could lead to uh mandates
where hospitals have to close
beds.
Given the lack of care we see
in, in uh the current state,
closing beds is the last thing
we need.
And uh just to um uh alliterate
this really is an important
matter. We really believe that a
higher nursing to patient ratio
is good, but at the same time,
at this time, the speed of the
implementation is what we are
most worried about. So, um,
thank you so much for your time
and um if you have any
questions, we'd be more than
happy to answer. Thank you so
much.
Morning Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Mike Chiarelli. I serve as the
chief operating officer at the
University of New Mexico
Hospital. I'm also a registered
nurse for 27 years in the state
of New Mexico practicing an
emergency and flight.
Um, UNim Hospital is opposed to
this bill. I'm not gonna repeat
some of the things that have
already been said, although we
agree with them.
Our biggest concern right now is
that uh staffing decisions made
by committee limits hospitals'
flexibility and staffing based
on acuity.
That's a really important point,
because not every patient is
treated exactly the same, right?
Critical patients require more
staffing than non-critical
patients.
We felt that we make pretty good
decisions when it comes to
deciding at bedside what's
important for our patients, and
we feel that decision made by
committee may not take that into
account.
We recognize the argument of
patient safety and also
recognize that we have a safe
harbor law passed in this state,
um, and know that that covers
that that um safety issue quite
well.
Thank you for your time today.
Hi there, good morning, Madam
Chair. Uh, my name is Julia
Ritten, and I'm the senior
director of government affairs
with the New Mexico Hospital
Association, and I'm here to uh
respectfully stand in opposition
on behalf of our 47 hospital
members and their uh nurse
leaders. I won't be labor the
point about um access to care
and the potential to reduce
care, um, but that is our, uh,
number one concern that we are
hearing from nurse leaders. Um,
we do want to thank the sponsor
for her um dedication to
addressing the concerns that
hearing from front line nurses
as well as taking time to meet
with us and hear our concerns
about access to care, um, as our
state is nearing nearly 9000
nurse shortage, um, the, uh,
policy decisions are uh very
weighty and uh any negative
impact to access to care is one
that unfortunately we can't
support at this time and we
would ask uh that you vote in
opposition to this bill today.
Thank you.
Thank you on Zoom, um, we have
April.
Good morning.
Madam Chair, Mitty.
Um, my name is April Heidenrink.
I'm the chief nursing officer at
Three Crosses Regional Hospital
in Las Cruces, and I really want
to speak on behalf of um our
community, um, it's very
important that we are able to
take care of the patients in
this community. We already have
um facilities that are unable to
be open to capacity due to the
nursing shortage, and this would
just create less care that we
are able to provide for the
members of our community. We
focused on um
Our, our staffing ratio is
dependent on the acuity of our
patients, and that acuity system
allows for flexibility um hourly
even at times to make the best
decisions for our patient care,
our ability to staff ours have
resulted in outstanding ratings
and patient feedback. We're in
the 90th percentile and have
been able to accomplish that by,
by being able to staff for
acuities.
Um, we've had to, in order to
grow, bring on some contract
nurses, which as we know, are
are triple the rate of our
regular nurses and is not
sustainable. Um, there are
multiple facilities that are
relying specifically on that
and, and how long can we keep
doors open and help to keep
taking care of patients in that
situation. So we ask that we
vote in opposition of this bill
in order to be able to continue
to take care of our patients in
our, in our community and also
to be able to care for them in
the way that
We have the facility to like um
the needs are at any given
moment. Thank you for your time.
Thank you. Now we'll go to
support if you are on Zoom and
support, raise your hand and
we'll come back to you. Let's go
to the room, um, a show of
hands, who was here in support.
OK, if you would like to speak,
please come forward and we will
take 10.
And just count yourselves off if
you're number 11, sorry.
Go ahead. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Gloria Doherty. I'm a
PhD prepared nurse practitioner,
been a nurse for 35 years and a
nurse practitioner for 25, and I
practice in rural critical care.
I'm still a true nurse
practitioner, past president of
the New Mexico Nursing
Association, nurse practitioner
counsel and government relations
for both of those organizations.
I'm here on behalf of the New
Mexico nursing Association,
speaking in support for this
bill.
Our national organization, the
American Nursing Association
supports and enforceable ratios
as an essential approach to
achieve appropriate nurse
staffing.
As you know, we have a
healthcare worker shortage.
There's over 6300 job openings
for nurses right now. So with
the opposition, you have heard
that it's impossible to kind of
do right now, which is true, but
this bill starts the
conversation and it creates the
planning.
And it has an emergency clause
in it. So nobody is immediately
required to have mandated
staffing ratios at this time.
Nurse staffing is in crisis, and
it will take a multiple
strategies to take care of that.
Evidence shows that appropriate
nurse staffing improves outcomes
and satisfactions for both
patients as well as the nurses
themselves.
This is a tool for retention. It
is a tool for recruitment. We
can get our nurses here, we can
get them here and keep them here
and keep them happy.
Nurses consistently need to
provide safe, high quality
patient care, and this is one
way to achieve that.
As the largest sector of health
care nursing, we are a target
for healthcare cuts. We take up
40% of the budget of most most
health care systems.
Staffing levels are critical,
and we have to reduce morbidity
and mortality, length of stay,
and preventable events such as
as infection and falls. And if
we do not have appropriate
staffing, that does not occur.
Instead of experiencing, I'm
sorry.
2 minutes goes, goes fast.
I'm sorry. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. I'm Deborah Walker, a
registered nurse educated as a
family nurse practitioner,
currently serving as the
executive director for the New
Mexico Nurses Association.
I appreciate, uh, the sponsor
and original co-sponsor's
efforts to address our issues of
safe staffing by using what I
consider to be a public policy
approach to the issue.
Um, tying the advisory
committees to the healthcare
authority as well as the
provision about reporting
proposed rules to the
legislature prior to enactment
should provide for a very much
needed thoughtful consideration
of the issue.
Uh, this is
Then put aside far too long.
Uh, Colorado and Connecticut,
interestingly enough, chose to
go along a similar public policy
approach, creating committees
that are tied into
They respective governments, uh,
structures.
The difference there was it did,
they did not have emergency
clauses, and they continue to
have issues around uh staffing,
but they did put those in place.
There are states, interestingly
enough, but do not have nursing
shortages.
We are an outlier. We are at a
tipping point. The state, our
communities and our nurses and
our patients deserve this issue
to be addressed and not
continued to be put aside. The
last thing I want to say in
terms of public policy.
Um, is that this bill as
currently written,
will not have a negative impact
on the safe harbor for nurses
Act, which was um hard fought. I
just please pass by.
Artison bycameral fashion.
And if anything, this bill will
only serve to strengthen safe
harbor for nurses. Thank you.
Thomasson and Representatives.
My name is Lisa Leading, and I
am the New Mexico Nurses
Association government relations
chair. I'm also a nursing
faculty, and I work at the
bedside in the emergency
department, and I have a proud
New Mexico nurse in my 31st year
of practice.
Since 2021, there have been
close to 17,000 papers and
studies published on the topic
of good patient outcomes and
quality care associated with
nurse staffing. One particular
study in Illinois looked at 87
hospitals. They found a medical
surgical units that each nurse
averaged somewhere between 4 and
7 patients, and these numbers
are pretty consistent with what
we're seeing in New Mexico
currently. What they found is
that for each 16% increase in
nurse workload over 4 patients.
was associated with higher links
of stay and higher odds of death
for the patients. Increases in
length of stay, increases risk
for hospital-associated poor
outcomes, falls, infections,
discharges to long-term care and
patients who return with 30 days
after discharge. I support House
Bill 72 for safe nurse staffing.
Madam Chairwoman
representatives. My name is
Teresa Hasse. I'm an attorney
and I represent injured patients
who are hurt by the
multi-billion dollar
corporations and the insurance
companies who cut costs,
including nursing, in order to
increase their profits. The
result is harmed patients. Those
are the people who I represent
this bill will improve patient
care in this state and it will
reduce the number of patients
who are injured who then seek
relief from people like me in
order to get compensated. I
stand in support of the nurses.
in this bill because I know from
my over 10 years of experience
doing medical malpractice cases
that the nurses are the eyes and
ears of the medical providers in
the hospitals and that they are
the first line of defense for
patient safety, and we need to
support them in the state. We
need to subsidize our nurses and
our providers and stop
subsidizing multibillion dollar
corporations who are hurting
patient care in our state.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee. My name is Lauren
Rice and I'm a progressive care
registered nurse here in our
state. I would like to share my
experience about how the chronic
understaffing in our unit and
across the state has compromised
patient care and that I've
experienced myself on many
shifts, I've often faced the
difficult choice of whether to
take a lunch break to or ensure
that my patients receive the
care that they need. There's
been days where I've gone
without eating simply because
there is no availability to
cover my patients. This isn't an
inconvenience. This is a direct,
this directly impacts my ability
to provide safe and effective.
care to my patients. Oftentimes
patients lack basic hygiene,
like showering. I've come onto
ships and found patients who
haven't been bathed in over a
week, not because nobody wants
to help her do it, but because
we simply don't have the time
and then step down ICU unit. We
manage life saving medications
that must be monitored closely
and unfortunately, these
critical tasks take priority
over fundamental patient care.
I've experienced times where
I've held off on drinking water
for hours because I knew I
wouldn't have time to use the
bathroom. I've gone over 6 hours
without a break putting my
patients first.
Neglecting my own needs. This is
not only sustainable, this is
not a sustainable or healthy
practice for any nurse in our
state. The consequences of
understaffing ripple through our
patient care as a whole. I've
had patients wait over an hour
for pain medication simply
because we didn't have enough
staff to administer them
properly. Others have waited to
be assisted just to walk around
the unit for days, which is
critical for their recovery.
I've even had to leave
incontinent patients sitting in
their own waste for over 30
minutes because I've had to
prioritize patients who are at
risk of going into lethal,
deadly.
Rhythms. The impact of the
staffing shortage is
significant. There's delayed
response to patient needs,
increased risk of pressure
ulcers from infrequent
positioning, inadequate pain
management, potential for
medication errors, the high risk
of infection due to improper
hygiene practices, but more the
lack of time through outpatient
education delays discharge
planning, affecting the overall
recovery process. I had a
conversation with a travel nurse
who worked here for a short time
and went to Australia. She told
me that she
was losing faith in medicine
while working in the US and in
our state, but found it restored
during this time in Australia.
She planned to return to
Australia as soon as possible.
Thank.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair, and
good morning members of the
committee. Um, my name is Jane
Yee.
And uh I am, um, currently a
member of the Environmental
Justice Caucus of the Democratic
Party and Cobio, both of these
organizations are um deeply
concerned with the health of our
communities, and today I'm here
really speaking um as a former
member of uh the hospital
workers union 1199. I was, uh,
honored and privileged to be a
uh a member of that.
that, um, a union, uh, back in
1976 through 1980.
And you may think that's a long
time ago, but uh, let me tell
you that the reasons that the
nurses organized back in 1976, a
little bit before that.
was because of scheduling issues
and staffing issues. Yes, those
were the primary drivers of
their organizing now. I mean
then, and that was at Saint
Vincent Hospital and they were
successful in organizing and I
think, and I believe, and I, I'm
pretty sure I have to look this
up, but their staffing ratios
are probably better than the
hospitals in our state that are
not organized, but
To the point of House Bill 72. I
would like to say that the
economic forces in charge of our
healthcare system, namely, the
American Hospital Association
and the American Medical
Association and their local
versions of these
organizations have failed us.
They have had at least until 19
and since 1976 to fix these
rations. They're telling you
today, oh, trust us.
We'll fix it. Well, they haven't
fixed these problems since 1976.
Um, when the economic market
forces of so-called free market
forces fail us, that's when uh
we in our communities come to
you are esteemed elected
officials are legislators to
help us, and in this case, we do
need the structured solution to
these issues of literally life.
And death.
Thank you, thank you.
That reason,
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee. Thank you for time to
speak. My name is Lindsay Hurst.
I am the executive vice
president of CWA Local 7076 in a
current state employee. My local
represents members at several
agencies that would be impacted
by House Bill 72. We represent
members at DHI in the new
healthcare authority that would
be responsible for implementing
this program, we also represent
nurses and direct care staff at
Miner's Colfax Medical Center in
Raton.
The New Mexico rehabilitation
Center in Roswell, Sequoia
Adolescent Treatment Center and
turquoise lodge.
We stand in support of House
Bill 72 because our members
deserve to work in safe
conditions where they are given
the best chance to help their
patients. We also know that we
have a vacancy rate crisis
across many of our state
agencies and research shows that
improving the staffing ratios
positively impacts the number of
employed nurses. We believe that
better working conditions would
decrease the attrition rate of
our members in these critical.
positions.
As one DOH retired member
recently told me, to put it
simply, we can only do jobs well
when we have time and people to
do it.
Our clients deserve our best.
We are asking for you to pass
House Bill 72. Thank you.
Good day Madam Chair and other
members of the committee. My
name is Jacob Smith and coming
from a tech who's worked over a
decade in healthcare, but now
doesn't anymore, I will say that
this bill is emphatically
needed.
This is not only a a thing of
life or death, however, it also
goes home with you as well.
These nurses are overworked.
They are underappreciated, and
if we wait until the health
until you and MH higher up
executives or even other COOs do
anything about this, it will be
too late. The reason why we
can't recruit nurses to our
state is because our ratios are
so overwhelming. I also speak as
a as a husband to a nurse who's
actually in education.
So I, I can tell you that when I
say that this is emphatically
needed on the tech side too.
They do need the support of
their techs, and they need to
stop watching their bottom
lines.
This is not, this is, this is a,
a human issue. It's a right to
live, and these nurses are doing
everything they can.
And not getting any
appreciation, and every time
that they go around asking for
more staff, the staff comes on,
but they all leave right away
again. You can't recruit nurses
on your floor if you're so
overstaffed that when they come
to you as travel nurses, they
immediately want to leave.
It goes home with you, you
become sick, you become ill
because you know you can't do
your job the way that you want
to do it.
That's why I would say, please.
Vote in favor of this bill.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Excuse me, and members of the
committee. My name is Roger
McNew. I am a member of Ber uh
I'm a resident of Bernalillo
County, and they, uh, a health
healthcare consumer there.
I stand in support of House Bill
72.
I believe it's a good idea.
That will address the nurses
shortage as a tool.
Or recruitment.
Uh, ask you to refer to the
statistics from California.
And the uh and the survey that
was presented by Miss Edith
here.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Now we will go to
Zoom and we'll start with Carter
Bundy.
Madam Chair, can you hear me?
Yes.
Great. Hi, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Carter Bundy
with Ask Me. We want to thank
Representative Chavez for
bringing this incredibly
important bill. As me represents
uh nurses and techs in the TRC
Veterans Home.
Fort Bear Medical Center, Las
Vegas Behavioral Health
Institute in the Los Lunas
Community Program. All 4 of
those facilities have 24 hour
care and all 4 of them are badly
understaffed, as others have
noted, the turnover rate is
incredibly high, and it's not
just because pay could and
should be better, it is largely
because it is nearly impossible
to do the job in most
circumstances to do it well and
to serve our patients. Not only
is that terrible
for the workers, but most
importantly, it's terrible for
the patients and for our health
outcomes.
You've heard some opposition
that will say, well, now is not
the right time. The problem is
it's never the right time, and
there will always be excuses for
why they can't do it, but
they've got this backwards. If,
if we have safe staffing levels.
We will keep and recruit more
nurses to New Mexico. We will
improve our ability to
adequately staff. And one other
point I want to address, um,
that the opponents brought up is
that they say that, oh, if
there's high acuity, we need to
be able to have flexibility to
do this. These are minimum
standards. This bill does not
impose any maximum standard of
nurse to patient ratio. So if
the hospitals do feel the need
to take best care of their, um,
that they need more nurses,
they're certainly welcome to do
it, but a very minimum at a, at
a minimum, it's been 40 years of
understaffing in our nursing
profession in this state, and we
have to start taking this
seriously. Please pass HB 72.
Thank you.
Next we have Deirdre.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you for the opportunity to speak
today. My name is Deirdre
Murphy, and I'm a resident of a
senior assisted living facility.
Due to a botch surgery 15 years
ago. I've been left permanently
disabled paralyzed. Over the
years, I've been in and out of
hospital care. I've seen
firsthand how critical it is to
receive the care every patient
deserves.
I'm here today to voice my
support for House Bill 72
because I believe everyone, no
matter who they are and where
they come from, deserve the
highest standard of care.
Safe and adequate staffing is
not just a technical
requirement.
It ensures that patients like me
are treated with dignity,
attention, and compassion during
some of the most vulnerable
moments of our lives.
I've witnessed overworked nurses
and stretched thin, thin stack,
struggling to meet patients'
needs. For example, there was a
time when I required immediate
assistance.
But the staff was so overwhelmed
with too many patients. It was
heartbreaking to see them try
their best under such pressure.
It's not their fault. It's
they're doing the best they can.
In an impossible circumstances.
House Bill 72, will ensure that
hospitals are held accountable
to provide safe staffing levels
needed to care for patients and
safely, safely and effectively.
Resear research has shown that
adequate staffing not only
improves patient outcomes, but
also enhances staff morale, and
retention.
This bill is crucial step
towards creating a healthcare
environment where both patients
and providers can thrive.
I urge you to pass this bill to
protect patients and support the
dedicated healthcare providers
who care for us. Thank you for
your time and your
consideration.
Thank you for for sharing your
story. Next we'll go to Nancy
Novak.
OK, sorry, members of the
committee, it looks like that
picked me up. Is that OK to move
forward?
Yes, please just tell us your
name. OK. Thank you, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Jason Blumer. I am a
master's prepared registered
nurse, and the vice president of
the New Mexico Nurses
Association and a certified
critical care nurse of 11 years,
having practiced in Las Cruces,
Albuquerque, and in San
Francisco, California. This bill
is needed to protect our current
nursing workforce, and I hope
ultimately increase recruitment
and retention efforts of nurses
in New Mexico. 30 years ago, the
patients I care for in the ICU
today would have died.
That means my patients today are
sicker than ever and require a
nurse that can critically think
and intervene to address their
needs. The complexity of my
practice is impacted by short
staffing and increased patient
care loads. When I have 3 ICU
patients instead of 1 to 2, that
means each of those patients now
gets less of my time, less of my
critical thinking and fewer
nursing interventions. Short
staffing has led to nurses
taking on additional roles and
responsibilities. I am a nurse,
a nurse's aide, a housekeeper, a
phlebotomist, and
Case manager.
Each additional responsibility
takes away time from patient
care and only adds to moral
injury, stress, burnout in the
depart.
This is from the profession
within the 1st 2 years of
practice. When I have a student
or a novice nurse orienting on
the unit, I must further divide
my focus so that the student
isn't shortchanged so the
clinical education experience.
We have a running deficit in our
workforce related to burnout,
retirement, and we can't train a
new nurses fast enough. It is my
hope that legislation like this
will help nurses practice in the
manner in which we have been
educated and trained and
hopefully retained nurses in our
delivery system. I urge you to
consider a pass of this bill.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Now we will go to John Lipshitz.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, John Lipshutz
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor AFL-CIO, uh,
representing our over 40,000
members across the state. We we
stand in strong solidarity with
our nurses in support of this
bill and thank you for
considering this measure. Thank
you very much.
Thank you, John. Let's go back
to Nancy Novak.
Hello, my name is Nancy Novak.
I'm an RN and I too worked in
California. I worked in
behavioral health here in New
Mexico. Um, I have feel like I'm
living in a combat zone as an
army men that I can speak to
that. I was working the other
night in our crisis triage
center. I had 13 patients to 1
nurse and one tech. When I was
in California, they're the 5 bed
crisis triage center. There was
one RN.
And 1 LVN. So the other night
when I was on my shift taking
care of the 13 patients. We had
one patient who's known to put a
nurse in ice, in ICU who's no
longer practicing nursing and
assaulted numerous staff.
She came after uh this person,
I'm sorry, came after me and the
tech. We radioed for help. It
took
5 minutes for the house
supervisor to come get to us in
10 minutes for the security
supervisor. Thank goodness we
retreated ourselves back into
the nursing station. Otherwise,
I have no idea what she would
have done to us. I'm sorry, this
patient would have done to us.
On top of that, we had a patient
on this unit that was on oxygen
and another medically
compromised patient in a psych
unit.
So we were
We didn't have any eyes on
anyone else other than that
patient. This is like so
dangerous. We're not talking
about extra staffing. We are
talking about safe staffing and
safe standards for our patients.
One of my nursing instructors
decades ago said the most
important thing, sorry, you can
never do for a patient is be
their advocate. It doesn't
matter all the skill you have,
whatever, it's you need to
advocate for your patients, and
that's what I'm doing cause this
is for my patients. I'm
semi-retired, so as a nurse,
this really is not gonna affect
me professionally, but as a
patient it will and as for the
future nurses, we can't keep
losing nurses in California
also, one of the nurses I just
started working.
She said she just came from
there. She applied for an
externship that had 40 positions
open. They had over your time is
up.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Thank you. So, going back to
representative Chavez, do you
have any closing thoughts before
I go to the committee.
Um, Madam Chair, thank you.
Yeah, I think that
From the testimony that you've
heard, um, from nurses and from
the community that this really
is a very important issue, um.
We need to figure out how we are
going to keep and attract nurses
to New Mexico. Uh, recruitment
is important. Retention is also
important. You heard the
testimony that that Edith gave
in terms of the numbers of new
nurses that left. So if we are
going to, um, improve healthcare
in New Mexico if we are going to
keep an attract nurses, this
bill is very, very important. I
think the other piece that's
important to point out too is
that.
You know, do we really have a
nursing shortage, or do we have
a shortage of nurses who are
willing to continue to put their
licenses at risk and work under
the conditions that they've been
asked to work under for so long.
This bill proposes to create a
statewide committee
representative of both
management and frontline workers
that will come up with some
solutions that we can all live
with. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I will go to the
committee.
Uh, how did I know?
Anyone that um
OK.
OK. All right. So I have um
Representative Jones um
Minority whip.
Martinez, a representative in
Chavez, Representative Senator
Cortez and Representative Anaya
in that order. So go ahead
representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Chavez and
Jessica and Edith, appreciate
your uh testimonies and, and
those of, of all of everyone
here, because I think.
We're all on the same page with,
we have a really big problem,
and uh listening to your stories
about your nursing experiences
is, is really hard for me, and I
know those of us who love
patient care.
We struggle with the, the huge
challenges of caring for our
patients and, and at the same
time, you know, trying to, to
strike that balance, really
wanting to stay in the field and
yet knowing that it's just so
difficult for many, many
reasons, but um,
Yeah, as a nurse, I, I can
empathize with, with all of
your, your stories for sure. Um,
and it, it was, it took me back.
Um, I, I had a love for bedside
nursing, and I, I work bedside
until I was in my 50s and one
day I realized I looked around
and I realized, wow, everybody
else here is like they're 25. I
could be their mom. That's how
much I loved it is I just
endured all of the the hardships
and, and it is very, very hard.
We have to figure.
this out. There's no doubt about
that. So, um,
I
I would like to
I'd like to, I, I, I really need
some input on this because I
wasn't here when we passed Safe
Harbor, for instance, and I
wasn't here when you began, uh,
Madam Chair, Representative,
when you began introducing this
particular bill. So I really
have tried to comb through it
and done a lot of searching or
researching as to what's going
on in the rest of the nation,
um, some of the things I heard
on both sides this morning have
already been incorrect based on
my research, um, but, you know,
I just have to say that, um,
Madam Chair.
Representative, um, is it true
that California is the only
state that actually has ratios
in law.
Madam Chair Representative,
there are other states that have
passed um safe staffing.
Legislation such as this, they
all vary in terms of what they
look like, um, most recently,
uh, I think Oregon was the most
recent state to have passed um
staffing legislation, I believe
they do have ratios Washington
state also recently passed
legislation, and I'm not um
I'm not real, I don't remember
if they have ratios. I.
I, I can't say for certainty
that they do. There are a couple
of other states that have also
passed um safe staffing, um,
laws to really, you know, figure
out um this issue, um, and in
terms of whether or not they
have ratios or not, I can't tell
you. I would have to, I do have
a summary of those states, but
I'd have to uh open up my
computer and and look it up. One
of the things that that we do
know though is that California
has had ratios in there in as
law for more
20 years now, which is why the
research that comes out of
California is so important
because we have again, you know,
20 years of experience and we
and we're able to point to, you
know, what staffing has really
been able to do what staffing
ratios have really been able to
do, um, in California, and those
I think have been mentioned one,
patients, patient outcomes are
much better, um, uh, risk of
readmitmittance is less and then
also they are seeing a boom in.
terms of the numbers of nurses
who want to work.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
understandable, you know, as a
nurse, I would definitely want
to know that I had safe
staffing. Uh, that's not, um.
You know, that, that the whole
picture looking at the whole
picture and how it affects
everyone is my concern as
somebody who really enjoys
statistics too. I, I wonder.
Let me back up and just say uh
about California. From the
research I did, there are
several states that are looking
at staffing, of course, it's
across the nation, it's a
problem. Um,
But I think California was the
only one who's actually
implemented the ratios. Other
states like um most recently
Massachusetts passed a safe
staffing um law, but it, it, I
believe, has to do with
committees and uh
And so it would be a different
look at the solution to have
just committees. So in, in
knowing that this is so
important, I, I think we, we
really, really need to come
through it and make sure we do
the right thing that we don't
actually end up hurting us
ourselves on the other end.
Um, if we do the stepping ratios
for, oh, I know what they did.
I'm sorry, Madam Chair, I
remember they did have ratios,
ICU ratios, and that's it. So
they didn't have ratios for any
med search for any other units
for no for behavioral health or
rehab or, or any other nursing
units that you might find.
Out there that are in need. Um,
So yes, they did have ratios. I
do remember that and a lot of
states have, have looked at
committees, which um I think
Under certain circumstances,
certain types of committees
could definitely be helpful in
finding solutions.
Um
So
I have too many notes, um, let
me just ask you, Madam Chair,
uh, Representative.
Uh, I want to, I wanna kind of
take a look at what is
potentially
Um
No, I'm gonna wait on that. I'm
gonna go back to this. I know
both of you, Edith and Jessica,
you're, you both work here or
here in, in the metro area of
New Mexico. You work in
Albuquerque, where we have most
of our population and more of
our healthcare facilities. I
represent rural New Mexico, so I
have a different perspective on
how this kind of a bill would
affect my patients, nurses in
general.
When we talk about um the, the
improved
Patient outcomes, which we all
want, the happier nurses, we all
want that. Um,
And and we're talking about a
select few, which would be,
according to this bill, um,
Rural areas could opt out or
rural hospitals could opt out.
Is that true? Madam Chair
Representative, um.
The language basically says that
rural areas and, and let me just
say that this came about this
language came about, um, in our
conversations with the hospital
association specifically, they
raised some concerns about rural
hospitals, right? And so we
agreed to put this language in
there, um, and so what would
happen, could you, I'm sorry
refer us to the page in line
it's page 5
line tube.
it speaks to waiving staffing
ratios for uh rural hospitals,
um, and basically there's sort
of some conditions, they just
can't opt out, but um, you know,
it would be waived the ratios
would be waived if it was needed
to increase their operational
sufficiency, but we also don't
want um the health, safety and
well-being of patients to be
compromised either. Um, so we do
want the the rural hospitals to
also, you know, maintain, um,
so that those patients, I think
that they also deserve um
adequate and quality patient
care as well, and I'm sure that
the nurses in the rural settings
would love to, um, would love to
have um extra um nurses on staff
if, if they were needed.
Of course we would. I guess the
conflict remains that will this
bring extra nurses into the
field and at what point would it
do that? You have your, your,
um,
Sorry, Madam Chair. I'm just
talking to my friend over here.
I need to go through you and I
will continue to try, Madam
Chair, Representative, um.
Whether or not that would happen
in what period of time? You've
got California that we look at,
it's been 21 years, um, and so,
yeah, it's taken some time for
them to have these outcomes that
we're looking at it
statistically, um,
In New Mexico, and we are
definitely not California for
many, you know, population, just
the dynamic.
Uh, demographics are different.
Everything is different.
Um
So, so, you know, we need to
make sure we're looking at that,
but I know in rural New Mexico,
which is a great deal of New
Mexico, it appears that we would
have a domino effect.
When
The nurses in Albuquerque, um,
who have had ratios implemented
and these hospitals in the rural
New Mexico that have waived
those because they just don't
have the nursing staff.
Um, we have good outcomes. It,
it would seem to me, Madam
Chair, representative.
And so I'm, I'm curious to know
how you, how you address that
issue where you see that domino,
you've got some nurses that are,
are able to care for their 4 or
5 patients on a med search unit,
and yet you have, um,
Nowhere to send patients from my
rural hospital because you've
got closed beds at your
hospitals in Albuquerque.
There has to be that interim at
least, even if what you say is
true, Madam Chair,
Representative Chavez, even if
this did bring eventually nurses
back into the the workforce,
where would we go in between
from now to then, how would we
How would we address what would
be
What it looks like to me would
be a disastrous situation in my
rural hospital, where we would
have
Madam Chair Representative,
patients in the hallways, um,
and ICU that's.
and an ER that can't even that
has to go on version, um, that,
that's what I see happening if
you, if you limit the number of
patients on a regular basis in
the bigger hospitals here in
Albuquerque in this area, you
just, you have nowhere to go.
You've got maybe out of state,
which is not always good for
patient outcomes, nor is it
financially feasible or even
doable sometimes. Have you, have
you really thought through that
and what's the answer to that
representative.
Man chair representative, I'm
going to try to answer your
question because there was sort
of a lot of questions in that
one,
but there isn't any intent at
all to close beds. I have not
met a nurse anywhere who says
I'm not gonna take care of a
patient, even if it means I
might have to take additional
patients. Um, I think the
situation now is that you do
have um
Beds that you can't feel because
you don't have enough nurses.
And that's what this bill is
trying to do. We're trying to
address the fact that we cannot.
Recruit and retain the nurses
that we have now and nurses who
have opted out of nursing, uh,
we know that there are many more
licensed nurses who are
inactive, um, because of the
fact again and and we stated
this before that they don't want
to put their license at risk and
they don't want to work under
these horrible conditions, you
heard a few stories today about
that, um, when we talk to nurses
and we, when we had in the past,
um, you know, surveys that we
done. The number one issue is
safe staffing. I have never
heard again a nurse say that
they're not going to take care
of a patient. They do that.
That's probably why they're
burning out because they
continue to take care of so many
patients. Um,
I don't know if I've answered
your questions, but I don't see
a situation where we're going to
be shutting down beds where
we're going to be shutting down,
um, emergency rooms are going on
divert as you mentioned.
Hospitals go on divert now.
And that's the reality. They go
on divert now. Um, so we're
really trying to to address this
issue, um, utilizing our ability
as lawmakers to make public
policy, and that's what we
really need to do. We need to
move forward, um, we just need
to move forward so that we can
give the nurses hope that
there's a.
Light at the end of this
horribly dark tunnel.
And the other piece too is that
you know there's there's also
going to be um some time for
everyone to adjust and implement
this. Uh, we're not going to
have a situation where we say,
OK, we're going to agree on some
ratios, and this is really for
the committee to discuss and
that's why we've set up a
committee to really look at all
of these, um, you know,
questions, um, so there's gonna
be a period where I'm thinking,
uh, where, you know, the
committee is going to recommend
in terms.
Of, you know, OK, how do we
implement this so that it's not
going to be, you know, boom,
this is done tomorrow, you gotta
have this.
If that makes sense. Madam
Chair, thank you. um.
No, I understand what you're
saying, and I think we're still
we're agreeing to disagree on
this because I, I think the
reason I bring up the domino
effect is we only have so many
nurses, and we, and we continue
to have more and more patience
and mathematically, it just
doesn't add up if you, you limit
the number of patients.
That a nurse can have, and this
is just one perspective. I want
to go on and address another
perspective here in a moment,
but, but if you limit the number
of patients that a nurse can
take care of. Like you said,
you, it doesn't matter how many
beds you have. It's it's, it's
all about the nurses, right? Um,
You, you have to close beds, um,
and if you close beds and this
happens to us all the time, like
you said, cause we already have
a nursing shortage. We limit the
number of patients those nurses
can, can actually care for, um,
And we legislated and we
Punished
Institutions or units or even,
you know, Jones, I think you've
covered this. Can we move on?
Yes, we will here in just a
second. I'm, I'm sorry, Madam
chair, yeah, um, then we will
have a problem in rural New
Mexico, whether we wave or not.
So I, I just, I don't see any
mathematical way around that.
But what I wanted to, to
To go on a little further about
was was the the variety, um,
where do we, where in the bill
do we address um
Patient diagnoses and acuity.
Can, can you point me to that?
Madam Chair representative, if
you will look on page 6.
Um, it starts at
Leins it's, um,
Yeah.
Yes, Madam Chair.
Line 6.
I don't think that was what I
was um referring to, but, but uh
just in general, I know that
acuity, acuity is an issue when
you staff. So I think a lot of
folks don't.
I don't understand.
When, when a person has
diagnosed a particular
diagnosis, you, you can't just
look a committee can't look at a
diagnosis and necessarily say,
OK, that person has diabetes. So
they're X level of acuity there
cause diabetes can be somebody
who's perfectly stable on oral
meds, or they can be, you know,
in a crisis. It can be in a
diabetic coma or that sort of
thing. So there's, it could be
one on one.
They could be perfectly healthy.
Um, well, not perfectly, but on
good stable, let's just say
that. So there's a whole, you
can't look at diagnoses like a
committee would do necessarily
and decide if this is an issue
that has to be dealt with on the
floor by uh by a nurse who's who
is um
Invested in what's happening on
the unit at that moment, and
that can change, so, so quickly.
So I'm wondering how you think
that a committee who's
legislated and has specific
rules and guidelines.
And it has possibly never even
worked on a medical floor or a
nursing with nurses because that
is possible according to this
committee. How would they deal
with, with acuity.
Madam Chair, Representative, I'm
gonna let each of my expert
witnesses addressed that issue.
Uh, so I currently work in the
ER, um,
acuity, I don't know if you're
talking about, you know, getting
some patients per nurse or per
floor. So acues are are deal up
that way as well. I personally
in the air we are not
necessarily assigned patients
per acuity. I will have ICU
patients and 4 other patients.
So I'll have somebody on an
insulin drip to use your
diabetic um example which
has to be titrated, but then I
have 4 other patients as well.
So we're not necessarily
assigned patients per acuity,
currently, so I'm not sure what
your questions really responding
to other than if you mean by the
floor, they're going to be sent
to after the ER.
Um, uh, chair and uh
representative Jones, um, yeah,
I think, um, a cutie is
definitely an important issue
that we currently deal with on
the floor.
In general, um, I'm also a
relief charge nurse, and that's
definitely something that we
take into consideration when
we're making patient assignments
and that's continue that will
continue to be the case, um, but
it makes it extremely hard when
you have, you know, several
acute patients and high, you
know, total care patients, um,
very tasky patients, and you
still have, um, not enough staff
and you're passing out, you
know, 5 patients with trachs and
total cares and all these stuff
and you don't have.
The nurses to really divide up
the cutie and um so I think
acuity is something that's going
to continue to be um assigned
and, you know, flexibly managed
on the units with the charge
nurses and the nurses there, um,
but I think it will help to have
these um committees, and it'll
help to have nurses that are
actually working on these
floors, being part of the
committees as well as um
administration, because right
now, um, you know, it, it's not
really up to the nurses, you
know, how many patients we get,
um,
And, and there's administrators
making decisions who have never
come visited our floor or we
haven't seen them in months and
years, um, so I think the
committee will be important
because it will be a teamwork,
um approach between people that
are on the ground and people
that are making bigger decisions
above, um, and I think that's
where we can have these
conversations about acuity.
Um, and otherwise it'll be
managed as it always is, as it
has continued to be managed by
the um nurses that are making
the assignments charge nurses
and such like that.
And I'm gonna ask for questions
and answers to be brief. We have
a lot of bills left, so.
It's easy to get into these
nursing conversations. I was
really into that answer, but
we'll try. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you, um, Edith,
I appreciate that. And ideally,
you know, acuity is always an
issue, I guess according to this
bill.
Um
If you had a situation where you
implemented this bill.
And you have
You have 4 patients, so you, you
receive your um your assignment.
You have 4 patients and, you
know, it's a manageable
assignment. And so you don't do
safe harbor, right? You accept
that assignment and then in the
process of that, you know,
patients change acuity
throughout your shift. Somebody
crashes, um, somebody else needs
an ICU bed and there isn't one.
you, you end up
question, please. OK, you have
those variations that are not
addressed.
this bill, and really I believe
cannot be legislated. Are you
going to be in violation.
If you go over that staffing
number, that ratio number.
Um,
Madam Chair Representative, I
think I, I don't think that.
Legislation is the place to
anticipate all of the what ifs
because there are so many,
especially in a healthcare
setting, right? Um, there, you
know, again, these are
conversations that the committee
would have in terms of um, you
know, a situation that might
come up, but there's also
language in here that defines
what you an emergency is, for
example, COVID would be
considered an emergency. Would
you go over?
shopping in that sort of a
situation, probably.
Would you get fined? I doubt it.
But I don't think again that we
can, we can put every single um
possible scenario in a piece of
legislation. That's why we set
up the committee so that they
can have conversations about
what to do and what ifs.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Chavez, and
that is exactly why I think
legislate this legislation goes
too far because you can't.
Um, you can't, um, look at what
possibly might happen on any
given shift.
And, and so committees might be
good, in fact, I think
committees are good. I think
when we get everybody together
and we talk about solutions,
that's good. Um, I'd like to
look at the committee, uh, the
committee is, I thought I had,
OK, here it is right here.
The committee
is appointed by the authorities
Jones, could you give us page
and line, please page 2.
The very last line it starts,
uh, staffing advisory, well,
actually a.
Um
Section 2A says staffing
advisory committee, and then you
go create it for the purpose of
advising the authority and down
on 25, 25, the authority.
As follows.
Appointed by the authority as
follows, so the committee
appointees are 2 members shall
be from a private hospital.
There's a lot more focus on
private and public than there
should be on.
Who from the hospital is
actually giving input, in my
opinion.
Um, so, 2 members should be
private hospital administrators
or chief nursing officers, and
then the next 12 members public
hospital administrators, chief
nur nursing officers.
Two members shall be
non-managerial and
non-supervisory employees of
private hospitals involved in
involved in patient directly in
patient care may not be a nurse.
Just be a tech, which is fine. I
mean, techs have their
perspective, no doubt, it's very
valuable.
Uh, 2 members should be
non-managerial, non-supervisory
employees of public hospitals
involved in direct.
Patient care. So you got, that's
4.
Members, patient care, 2 members
shall represent labor
organizations.
OK, so you've got your unions.
And uh then you have a
non-voting advisory member from
The authority.
OK, so, so it's possible,
according to this legislation
that you have no nurses on this
committee, which is very
disturbing to me. I think the
majority of this committee need
to be nurses like Jessica and
Edith, who lived this every day.
They're gonna come up with
solutions, and, and they, it
needs to be balanced with people
like, you know, they have to
look at the entirety of New
Mexico and what's good for the
whole of New Mexico, um, it
doesn't
put hospitals out of business
because we need them.
We, that's where we do our work
and is good for the happy
nurses, um, and it's great for
our patients. So I have a real
problem with this. I'm gonna
I'm gonna move on and let other
people ask questions, but this
is my favorite bill in this
entire day, maybe, maybe you
could have lunch with Chavis and
you too can't
can enjoy Madam Chair
Representative, I would hope
that you would vote for your
favorite bill
OK, next we have um
Excuse me, minority whip
Martinez.
Thank you, madam chair and thank
you, uh, Representative Chavez
from bringing this forward. Um,
I'm not a nurse, so.
I'm gonna have a lot of
questions.
Does this
Bill include all levels like.
CNAs
Um, would they be included in
this ratio?
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
So it uh
Can you explain to me what a CNA
does.
Represented Martinez, um, I, I'm
not sure we need to go into that
kind of detail. It's, it's kind
of important because I'm, I'm
trying to see if, if CNAs are
basically somebody that shows
up.
Uh, does very minimal stuff. Why
would they be included in the
ratio? I, I'm, I'm trying to see
how
All of this
Deals with patient safety. And I
understand that you could, you
could ask how, how the CNAs will
be.
Figured in, um unfortunately on
this committee, we're gonna be,
we're gonna be discussing things
that you don't, that a number of
us, if not all of us, don't
understand in any great detail,
so we don't have time to kind of
do a healthcare 101, so, so if
you could just ask the question
in terms of the bill, not in
terms of who does what and what
they get paid or whatever. Thank
you. Well, Madam Chair, I
wasn't, I wasn't asking about
pay scales. Um, my
My question is if CMAs are
included in the ratio.
How does that affect patient
safety?
Um, Madam Chair representative,
um, CNAs are very important.
They do, uh, most of the on the
ground work they take patients
to the bathroom, they change
patients, um, they give baths,
they walk patients, um, a lot of
times CNAs have, you know, 12 to
24 patients, um, at a time, so.
You would hope that not two
people need to go to the
bathroom at the same time, such
and such, um, so they do a lot.
They almost do, I would say more
work than the nurses as far as
running around and being
spending time in the patient
rooms and with the patient, um,
and so they also are part of the
eyes and ears. They check on the
patients, they're in there, they
should be in the rooms every
hour. Um, and, um, that, yeah,
that contributes greatly to
patient safety and care.
Thank you for that that's
exactly what.
I was trying to figure out.
Uh, CNAs are extremely
important.
Um, so this isn't just about
Um, LPNs.
This is about everybody down the
line.
Um, so they're the ones that you
said, Madam Chair.
That takes care of the
Daily stuff
Uh, going to the bathroom,
taking a shower, doing all this
stuff so the nurses that
complaining that they couldn't
take a break because they're in
charge of that.
Is or CME is not in every
Uh, healthcare facility. Um,
yeah, we do have CNAs in every
healthcare facility, but
unfortunately we're very short
on CMAs as well, um, an ideal
patient load for CNA is maybe
like, you know, 5 to 8 patients,
8 patients is what we're, what's
our ideal staffing, um, usually
we're down 123 CNA's a shift,
and so when a CNA is taking a
shower with somebody or changing
somebody that can take up to 45
minutes. That leaves 1216 other
patients on their.
call bells waiting for someone
to come in there and help them,
so CNAs are very important.
They're there, but they can't be
in 5 rooms at the same time.
Save as nurses. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you for that
answer. Um, we'll, we'll move
on.
Um
Uh
Can you tell me there was a lot
of talk, Madam Chair, about.
This is the way we're gonna
increase.
Nurses in the state, can you
explain to me how that's gonna
be done.
Because it, it, it doesn't seem
like California's fully staffed
either.
From, from the research that
I've done. Um, Madam Chair
Representative.
Uh, California is not
experiencing a nursing shortage
from what we understand, there
are so many. I, I had referenced
and I don't know if you were in
the room, maybe you weren't in
the room yet. I referenced an
article from the LA Times that
came out last summer, that
basically indicated that nurses
from around the country were
actually going to California
because of their staffing
ratios, because their working
conditions had improved so much.
Um.
There's other research that
shows, and I believe it might be
on the handout that you um that
you received, I don't have a
copy here, but the number of,
there's been an increase in the
numbers of nursing licenses, um,
in California, nursing licenses
um that have been um
I don't know what you call them.
Nurses that have been licensed,
um, those numbers have increased
in California and they've been
increasing steadily since the
law went into effect.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, thank you, representative
for that.
Um
I noticed that there is a
waiver.
For, um
Rural
General acute care hospital.
Can you
I, I'm thinking
I have family that live in, in
rural.
Parts of the state.
And I'm more worried about the
care they receive.
Because they don't have the
Specialties that don't have a
heart doctor, they don't have a
lot of times an internists, they
don't have all the stuff that
The metro area has why
Why are we not seeing shortages
in the rural hospitals?
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair represented
shortages in terms of what?
And nurses, I mean, that's what
we're trying to solve here.
Probably
Um, and I think that, uh, again,
this bill will help recruitment,
um, and hopefully that will
include the rural hospitals as
well. Um, we know that it's much
more difficult to get healthcare
professionals into the rural
settings, but again, their
conditions and situations, uh,
sometimes are very close to what
urban hospitals are experiencing
with regard to um patient care
and.
Totally agree with you, and I
would say some of the rural
parts of the state, the, the
Uh, problem is worse.
So I'm, I'm just trying to
understand why are we, why are
we exempting the rural
hospitals.
Madam Chair Representative,
because this is one of the
things that the um hospital
association approached me on
when when we introduced the bill
in 2023, uh, we, uh, amended the
language to include that, um,
and, you know,
That's the ration, that's why
it's in there.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
representative. I, I just
If this is about
patient safety in about
recruiting nurses.
I'm just not sure.
Um
It's kind of like the rural
parts, the people going to the
rural hospitals aren't as
important as
I'll, I'll move on.
Um, my next question.
Um
Can you tell me what the
targeted ratio is?
Madam Chair Representative, it
depends.
On what unit you're working in.
Madam Chair representative so on
different floors, the, the
required ratio will be
different.
Madam chair representative, yes.
So let's just talk about the
emergency rooms, Madam Chair.
What would be the targeted ratio
in the emergency room.
Thank you representative, um,
the emergency rooms, um, we're
currently at like a 1 to 5
ratio, I think a um 1 to 3 or 1
to 4, um, I know Oregon just
passed laws. My brother is a
charge nurse in the university
hospitals in Portland, um, they
do a 123 ratio up there. Um,
they also mandatory breaks,
which we don't have here either,
so.
So, um, as for the other floors,
I'm, I will let Edith speak to
that. I mean, I think the idea
behind the committees was also
to determine what the best ratio
would be for each unit, um,
because it's not written into
the bill as is, but that was for
the committee to decide as well,
it depends on how, you know, how
sick the patients are and how
much care they need.
Representative.
I get that. I mean, some
patients are gonna need more
care than others, um, I, I just
think that if
We're just leaving it up to the
committee to pull a number or
their studies that are gonna
support this or, or the studies
out there now that we could look
at.
Or is the committee gonna do a
study? I'm, I'm not quite sure
how we're gonna arrive at that
number and hold these.
hospitals beat to the fire and
and threatened to find them.
If those numbers aren't met.
There's quite a lot of research
out there on patient uh ratios.
So there's, there's a lot of
stuff. Why wasn't
Why wasn't the number included
in the bill?
Don't forget to go through the
chair.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
because we wanted to leave that
up to the committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, OK,
on this, on the committee.
noticed that there is uh
Two member slots for the unions,
why, why are we having to
include the unions.
They should be
Involved in negotiating
contracts.
With a hospital, where are we
gonna allow them at the front
end to set those those uh
Standards, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
they will be an integral part of
this committee, uh, they have
been very active in terms of
attempting to negotiate safe
staffing in their uh union
contracts, um, and as you heard
the individual from UNMH, they
don't support it. They haven't
supported it, um, and so again
they represent members in New
Mexico, uh, both in rural and
urban settings, uh, you heard
the person from CW
WA speak about uh the fact that
they represent the workers at um
the hospital in Raton.
And um we just believe that I
believe that they are in
integral part of um solving the
problem. Thank you, Madam Chair.
You referenced.
CWA, what does CWA stand for?
Communication Workers of
America, Madam Chair
Representative communication
works Madam Chair,
representative.
The communication workers are an
integral part of what happens in
the hospital.
Um, I'm not,
I'm not quite,
representative they in that they
represent workers in healthcare.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair,
I'm, I'm, I'm not too
Uh, read up on, on the on.
How the unions work, but
Not sure what the communication
workers have to do with it. Uh,
I'm just not
I would rather see um 2 more
slots allowed for nurses.
Instead of just union reps. I
think if these are, if this is
gonna affect
Madam Chair, nurses.
And, and
Healthcare workers down the
line.
I'd rather see those two slots
be given to
Nurses that will represent
The interests of the nurses and
not the interest of the union.
Um, but I'll move on. Um, Madam
Chair, can you tell me what the
current CMS standards are for
staffing.
Madam Chair Representative, I.
I personally cannot. I don't
know what they are.
Madam Chair Representative, do
either of your experts know what
the CMS standards are for
nursing.
Madam Chair Representative, we
don't have that.
And Representative um as we've
discussed at length.
There's, there's like no hard
and fast. It depends on the type
of patient, it depends on the
setting, it depends, it depends.
It's one of those, it depends
questions.
And Madam Chair representative,
it, it varies quite a bit across
the country as well, different
states and different places.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So there
are CMS nursing standards set by
the federal government.
Madam Chair Representative, we
can't answer that question.
Interesting. OK, uh, CMS does.
have standards uh when it comes
to nursing. Um,
My last, my last question, Madam
Chair.
What exactly are we trying to
Solve with this bill.
Madam Chair Representative, we
are trying to solve a problem
that has existed for
Many, many years in terms of the
number of patients that nurses
are expected to care for. Um, we
are attempting to improve
patient care. We are attempting
to improve patient.
Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative. I uh.
Uh, I'm, I'm kind of torn with
this bill, to be honest with
you, Madam Chair Representative.
Um
I, I'm just afraid that we're
gonna end up.
Losing patient beds because.
It's gonna take years to ramp
up.
Uh, some of the numbers if we're
requiring.
Uh, 3 patients to 1 nurse.
In the emergency rooms, are we
gonna lose?
Emergency rooms are we are, how
are we going to deal with that?
And I'm just
I'm just very, very concerned
about the unintended
consequences of this bill.
Um, and if it does make it down
to the floor.
Um, I'm gonna, I'm gonna have a
very difficult time.
Deciding which way is best.
In general, not just for.
Um
Urban hospitals, but, you know,
what, what happens to the rural
parts of the state.
Represent
reminder to the committee, these
are for questions, these are not
for philosophical, um, speeches
and not, I'm, I'm sorry, I'm
trying to keep us, I see some of
our other um sponsors waiting
and, and just if we could stick
to questions and questions that
are direct. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I don't
think I've ever been called
philosophical, so I'm gonna rack
that one up as a win. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Madam, no disrespect to anybody
who's waiting, but this is an
extremely important bill. And so
I think it deserves
representative. I, I agree
that's why I want to stick with
questions as opposed to
philosophy statements or belief
statements if you would like to
explain your vote after you make
it during this committee, you
will have one minute, so we will
go to representative in Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. And first,
I want to sincerely thank the
incredible nurses in the room
that did testify and that didn't
testify, but take care of
patients each and every day with
your dedication and compassion.
Um, I'm very thankful for that.
This should go by faster because
there were a few questions that
the other representatives
already asked, um, well, it
seems none of the testimony
really spoke to the contents of
the bill, but really speaking on
issues um that the
staff could or should address.
Um, I just believe that we must
maintain the standards, um, for
accreditation requirements, so
And let me just look, I do have
the CMS standards that you had
asked about earlier and the
standards for CMS is um med
surge is 1 to 3 or 4 ICUs is 1
to 2, um, and that is CMS
guidelines. So my question on
this bill, um, it's just looking
at the penalties, which is
section 5, so page 9, section 5,
line 14.
I want to know, um, here's where
it says a new section of health
care codes enacted, um, line 18,
a hospital shall not deviate
from any staffing ratios
established by the authority
pur pursuant to the section Act
more than 6 times during rolling
30-day period.
The unit manager shall notify
the staffing advisor committee
An authority no later than 10
days after each deviation, and
then each subsequent deviation
during the thirty-day period
constitutes a separate
violation. So my question is,
how would this affect a
hospital's accreditation, if
this did happen.
Um
Madam Chair Representative, um,
number one, I wanted to say that
the hospitals, as far as I know,
are not following the CMS, um,
staffing ratios that you just
read out, um.
Right? No. Yeah. They're not
following them. Um, so I'm not
sure why it hasn't already
affected their accreditation.
I know that they do have to be
JO accredited, um, and they go
through that. I, I can't speak
on hospitals administration, but
um how would this affect
accreditation was my question.
Madam Chair representative, if
it's not affecting accreditation
now in view of the fact that
they're not following CMS
standards, then I doubt that
this language would either.
So we really don't have a
response to how this would
follow accreditation,
representative, she did have a
response and, and let's not uh
get.
Ticky tacky, please.
Madam Chair, I'm not getting
ticky tacky. I'm, these are
written in the bill and so I was
writing on how this would affect
accreditation, knowing that
access to care is a huge issue.
You stated that yourself, and I
know that my question is, I
believe this would even truly
affect our behavioral health,
and I know all of us on this
committee, it's our priority to
expand behavioral health, but
when there are more people
waiting in the lobby or waiting
for care. I believe that this
bill.
would affect behavioral health
as well, um, and not a question.
As opposed to, we're we're not
discussing our beliefs today.
We're, we're asking questions.
OK.
So let me go back to my
questions and just make sure
because I believe I asked, I was
gonna ask what other states, but
you, you stated that was
California. He talked about CMS.
guidelines, sorry, there was a
lot of notes. Um.
Oh, Edith, I believe you stated,
people think that there's issues
because you stated there's not
enough nurses, but you don't
believe that's true. My question
is, do we have a vacancy rate in
the state for nurses.
Anywhere
As anybody have that.
I don't have the number, but
yes, we do have vacancy. OK, I'd
like to look at that vacancy
rate, um, again, I'll, I'll
probably look at that bill. I
believe it's coming to my next
committee, so, um, those are all
the questions I had today. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Representative
Senator Cortez.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I just
wanted to thank the nurses here
today and for those that gave
their testimony, that is
incredibly brave to do in a room
full of strangers. So thank you
for sharing your heart and your
story with us. Um, I do have
several questions and the first
one is Madam Chair
Representative, can you describe
the personnel required for the
healthcare authority to
implement and to operate the
program and its associated
costs.
Um, madam chairs representative,
I don't. I think that that's
contained in the FIR and one of
them.
Um, I don't.
Let's see.
For the healthcare authority.
Um,
It's minimal.
And Representative just to
remind you, this will go to
appropriations, so we try and
kind of stick to the health care
part of it because we have
plenty of work to do without
doing appropriations work. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. It's still a
question about
How, if you could describe the
personnel required for the
healthcare authority to
implement and to operate the
program and if you could just
tell me what the associated
costs are with it. Yeah, the
associated costs are minimal.
In this FIR.
Um, and I know that I saw in one
of the FIRs the numbers of.
Um, individuals.
Of
Oh, for the um.
Health Authority, they're
anticipating 16.5 additional.
At a cost of a million to
support implementation.
Um, and that includes
administrative staff to survey
the hospitals as well. Wow.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative, and do you guys
know what the current um nursing
shortage, shortage is in New
Mexico.
Representative she already
answered that. Would you mind
repeating it?
She stated that they weren't
sure of the numbers. There are
openings, but she's not sure of
the numbers. OK, thank you so
much, Madam Chair
Representative. I spoke with the
CEO of the hospital in my county
last night, and he didn't have
an exact amount, but he told me
around 5000 in the state of New
Mexico, and my fear
Is that if hospitals already do
not have enough staffed beds,
rural hospitals have to find
alternative hospitals in
surrounding states and the CEO
in my county had to send someone
off to Wyoming just recently in
the current nursing shortages
have already impacted the
situation again at the hospital
in my county, we had a
critically ill patient in our ER
that had to wait days for a
hospital with enough staff beds
to accept them. And so I have a
question and a comment to
preface.
The question is forcing staffing
ratios will exasperate this
problem and leaving critical
patients in rural areas, waiting
for transfer for a higher level
of care and these extended
weights ultimately impact the
care of these patients. And so
my next question, it always has
to do with the rural part of the
state, because that's who I
represent. Can the healthcare
authority grant a waiver to the
rural facilities if the hospital
can document reasonable efforts.
To obtain staff.
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair Representative, that
language is contained in the
bill and yes, under certain
conditions. OK, so my next
question, Madam Chair
Representative, what's
reasonable and who determines
it. Madam Chair Representative,
based on the the circumstances.
OK. And so I'm asking for the
rural part of the state. What
about an urban hospital, can
they obtain relief, Madam Chair
Representative. Madam Chair
Representative, no.
Madam Chair Representative, I
believe this bill will be very
detrimental to access, to care
for rural New Mexico residents
around the state and so I am in
opposition to this bill. Thank
you, Madam Chair Representative.
Representativenaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
actually wanted to point to the
same language on page 11, um G.
I really want to appreciate this
sponsor. Um, if you could just
clarify, uh, Madam Chair,
sponsor, if the hospital is able
to only document reasonable
efforts to obtain adequate
staff, they would be, um,
exempt. Is that correct, Madam
Chair? Medi representative, yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
wanted clarification on that.
It's not um as if they're able
to obtain that stuff, it is if
they tried. So I really
appreciate you including that
language. Um, second, I wanted
to address a previous concern
specifically about med surge,
um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, I'm actually receiving in
real time uh text messages from
um uh nurses down south on
medsurge saying that their
patient ratios are 1 to 7.
Which is sick. It's more than
double, um, what we talked about
a little bit earlier. And so I
just wanted to bring that to
light. Um, Madam Chair
Representative, um, have you
heard of other, um,
Narratives around this building,
both historically, Madam Chair
Representative, I know you've
been here a while, um, that
doing something that will help
workers will also close beds or
close hospitals and or close
businesses. Madam Chair
Representative.
Madam Chair Representative,
you're asking me if I've heard
that.
Yes, not just for this bill, but
for other bills previous.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, and
Representative, I bring this up
because um we pretty
consistently hear this when we
hear, um, any sort of bills that
have to do with workers' rights
and improving, um, quality of
the workplace environment. So I
just wanted to add that to the
mix as we're considering whether
or not we're going to vote yes
on this legislation is that, um,
pretty consistently we hear that
narrative and each time um
things do not close. And so I
just wanted to bring that up.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, another question, um, I know
that um as folks were coming to
talk to me about this bill. If
I'm not mistaken and help me
with this statistic, um.
mortality rates for patients and
or injury rates for patients
rises, I believe it's anywhere
from 25 to 30%, Madam Chair
Representative, would you, um,
give me that figure if you have
it, and that is for um patients
who are cared for by nurses who
are overstaffed, and for each
person, I'm sorry, understaffed,
and for each person you are
understaffed by the mortality
rate rises. Can you help me with
that, uh, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I believe it's a 7% increase um
risk in a thirty-day hospital
mortality for each additional
patient, um, that a nurse takes
on in med surge. Um, I'm not
sure what the base, like if
they're going on 4 or 3
patients. OK, thank you. Um,
Madam Chair, I know that uh we
pretty consistently here in this
committee that medical
malpractice is an issue.
And to me, if we are talking
about medical malpractice, and
we're talking about the ways in
which we can start mitigating.
Medical malpractice in our state
generally to make sure that
insurance rates are not inflated
and or overinflated, then I
think we really need to start
addressing things at the root
cause. If we have a workplace
environment in which there are
less mistakes and or negligence
to be made, then practically
speaking, we are addressing.
Um, medical malpractice at its
core, because I know so many
times y'all are just
overwhelmed, and it doesn't mean
that you're, you know, um, doing
things on purpose or harming
patients. That is not the truth
at all.
What it means is that you are
put in an environment where you
are overstaffed to the point
where people get hurt.
And so to me I I will, Madam
Chair. All right, I will just
move on, but I do believe that
we need to come back to this as,
as we move on, as we talk about
medical malpractice as a whole.
Um,
Let's see here. All right. Um,
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
do you know of any other efforts
right now that are happening
with employers to attract and
retain medical professionals in
this state.
Madam Chair Representative, um.
So I do know that there are
efforts by um I can't remember
his name and his organization
right now to attract.
Um, healthcare professionals to
New Mexico.
Um, I do know that the
legislature has um invested uh
in building the capacity at
universities where healthcare
professionals are educated as
another way to increase our
numbers.
Um, those are the two that come.
To mind immediately. Thank you,
Madam Chair Representative. I
asked this and maybe I needed to
clarify, but I meant efforts by
employers.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for the clarification.
I, you know, the only effort
that I know of, um, by employers
is supposed to.
Job noticed that there's a
vacancy.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I asked
this, um,
I've been to the emergency room
several times, unfortunately,
um, within the last year and I
was pretty floored to see that
even at 3 o'clock in the morning
at an ER that I unfortunately
frequent. I asked.
Why are you guys so happy?
And it turns out that these
folks were actually folks that
exited a very large private
equity hospital, they formed
their own, and now they say the
reason I was given as to the
reason they were so happy is
they said, we're overstaffed.
It's great. So they had the time
to spend with me. Um, Madam
Chair Representative, um, as we
are talking about um not having
enough staff and the problem
with potentially not having
enough staff, um, Medicare
representative, do you know of
any efforts to either acquire
and or expand, um, the number of
beds and or the number of
clinics in our state currently
right now.
Um,
Madam Chair Representative,
there have been a couple of
expansions that I know of in
Albuquerque, uh, UNMH has just
built a huge um
Addition, tower, um, and I think
that Presbyterian has also built
a tower.
Um, those are the ones that I
know of since I haven't had the
opportunity to really look at
other places.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I bring this up
because um I, I, it's pretty
clear to me that we actually
have an eye for expansion. We
have an eye to attract or
orientate more people, and I
actually believe this is really
critical moment for us because
as we saw with abortion and
gender-affirming care when we
expanded and allowed to protect
the, um, the practitioners in
our state to be able to perform
to their full, the full extent
of their training. We actually
saw people from other states,
practitioners, wanting to come
here.
And I believe this is the same
case, Madam Chair
Representative, I will close
with this, um, but I actually
believe we're at a tipping point
right now where we can decide
whether we are going to be that
state that says absolutely come
here, we stand behind you, you
can practice the full scope of
your ability, and we are going
to protect you while you're
here. We're going to make sure
that you have a uh an adequate
life work balance. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I am finished work
to do. I know we all have a lot
to say. Um, so I will entertain
emotion.
And I'm sure I'd like to uh move
forward to pass. So we have
a motion by Representative Kates
and a second by Representative
Anaya, um, Jennifer, will you
call the roll, please?
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative N Chavez. No.
Representative Ferrari.
excuse.
Representative Jones.
No, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Representative Senna Cortez? No,
Vice Chair Herndon.
Yes.
Chair Thompson, yes.
By a boat to 5 by a vote of 5 to
4, you have a due pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members.
And so next we will go to um
Oh, I'm sorry. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you so much for the
conversation about solutions to
this critical
Problem that we have, um, I
would love nothing more than to
give.
All the nurses in New Mexico, a
huge gift of saying you have a,
you have a job to do that you
can leave and you can feel like
I really did, I did my job and
people are better for it. I
would love that, but I don't
think this bill would accomplish
that. I think ratios are, uh,
you know, common sense, they're
mathematical relationship
between two numbers. We've got a
shortage and there's no way
those ratios can work.
Legislating them, I think, would
be harmful rather than helpful.
A committee would be a good uh
step.
forward, but it needs to be
mostly nurses who know what they
know boots on the ground, what
has to be done to fix this
problem. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. So we're gonna jump
back a little bit. We started
with HB 117, um, and we didn't
have a quorum, so now we will
first I need a motion to accept.
The amendment.
Madam Chad in the second.
I'll say in the opposition,
Madam, can we have a copy of the
amendment?
You should have a copy of the
amendment.
They were passed out when we
were doing the bill.
Yeah, I'm sorry, madam, I didn't
get a copy.
So, um, I have a motion in a
second.
I'm sorry, one second. Let, let
me check on the amendment.
Do you have it now?
OK.
Unfortunately, we've already
moved on from discussion, etc.
So this is just a um
To, but I will give you a second
to look at it.
OK, so we have had a motion in a
second to accept the amendment.
Um, Jennifer, will you call the
role?
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E Chabas.
Yes.
Representative N Chavez, yes.
Representative Ferrari.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Senate Cortez,
yes.
Vice Chair Herndon.
Yes.
Thompson. Yes. Yes. OK, so I
need a motion, um,
For, for HB 117 as amended.
Madam Chair
A Du pass or sorry, uh, I move
it to pass as amended. Thank
you.
I second that. So we have a
motion by Representative Anaya,
second by Representative Cates.
Um, for a due pass on House Bill
117. Jennifer, can you call the
roll? Yes.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Cates, yes.
Representative each of us.
Representative N Chavez. Yes.
Representative Ferrari.
Representative Jones. Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Senna Cortez.
Vice Chair Herndon. Yes.
Terry Thompson. Yes.
So by a vote of 9 to 0 House
Bill 117 as amended.
is past.
OK, so we will go back to House
Bill 53, um, Representative
Herndon and her expert
witnesses, if you please come
up.
Just while they're getting set,
I spoke with the speaker
yesterday. Our committee is
going along and asking if we
could be excused and, and he
will text us or, or have someone
get in contact with us if we're
needed, but um we're gonna work
through and so we missed, we
missed the entire floor session
on Monday and we may again
today, but we are excused.
Whenever you're ready,
representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, before
you at this moment is House Bill
53. It relates to reimbursement
for vagus nerve stimulation, and
Madam Chair, uh, I will have my
Experts explain exactly what
that uh that process is, but it
is important for me to let you
know that today we have with us
because of the importance of
this subject, US News Health
highly recommended Doctor Aaron
Lyn Corden, who is an assistant
professor of neurology and the
director of pediatric epilepsy
in the division of child
neurology at the University of
New Mexico. He is one of only 2
pediatric.
Neurologist in the state of New
Mexico, that just tells you how
important this topic is and for
this committee to consider this
subject. I will let my, uh,
I will let my experts uh
introduce him themselves to you
personally, and then, uh, talk
about what this is before we go
to committee for and the
audience for questions.
Excuse me, I'm, uh, madam chair
and representatives, um, yes,
I'm Doctor Aaron Carton. Uh,
thank you for the excellent
introduction. I'm one of two
pediatric epilepsy
subspecialists. We have a few
other pediatric neurologists in
our state, um, but, um, treating
epilepsy specifically, that's
what I do. That's what I train
to do, and um that's why I'm
here, um, to represent, uh, that
community and to, uh, represent
the appropriate care of that
community. Um,
I introduce myself more or I'm
gonna ask you to keep it.
Brief.
Morning, Madam Chair
Representative. My name is Dave
Weinberg. I'm a senior manager
of government affairs and market
access for Livinova, the company
that manufactures the vagus
nerve stimulation or VNS therapy
for patients who are suffering
from drug resistant epilepsy,
also known as DRE.
And Madam Chair, I'm proud to
say that I'm co-sponsoring this
bill with the amazing
representative, uh, Jennifer
Jones, who is also a nurse, and
this shows that urban and, and
uh urban and rural uh New Mexico
is working together to make sure
that health care is taken care
of in our state.
I didn't know if I needed to
introduce myself, Madam Chair,
um,
I'm Representative Jennifer
Jones. I'm glad to be in
supportive, full support of this
bill, and my colleague
Representative Herndon's, um,
presented presentation. Thank
you for being here as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I'm just gonna make and on
an aside, this was in our
packet, but I did not approve
it. I'm not saying I didn't, but
I'm just, just reminding folks
that before things can be handed
out to the to the um committee,
the chair has to approve it.
Go ahead.
Uh, uh, doctor, would you please
explain what this is and why
it's important for the
reimbursement request that we're
asking for.
Thank you.
Uh man representative, um, uh,
The they nerve stimulation is a
FDA approved and one of the best
treatments that we have for
patients whose epilepsy um does
not respond to medication, uh,
well, that's what, um, uh, we
mean by drug resistant epilepsy,
um, about 1/3 of patients, um,
uh, with epilepsy will not have
their um uh seizures controlled
and get their quality of life
back in that context, um, uh,
despite, um, uh, multiple
medication trials despite the
best medications that are
available. Um, I think that it's
worth taking a moment as I said
before, I will try to stay brief
from uh the, um, it is worth
taking a moment to remember the
context of this, which is that
epilepsy is a devastating and
lifelong condition, um, and that
it is more common than on most
of our constituents and many of
our representatives might um
appreciate on a day to day
basis. It affects 1 to 3% of the
population, um, and, uh, as I
said before, I'm, uh, 30% of
those patients are medically
resistant, um, so I have some,
uh um some rough numbers on how
many patients that ends up
affecting.
Um, but,
um, I'm not here for the
numbers. I'm here for, um, uh,
um, representing those patients
and speaking about um uh what
can be done for them. So right
now, um, we do not have
appropriate access to um drug
resistant epilepsy treatment
through the state, not only
because of the lack of um uh of
some specialists, but also
because of the reimbursement
approach and the reimbursement
policy of some uh that um are
just the nuts and bolts of how
um uh um the, that medical.
actually gets paid for. Um, so I
came down to our, to um uh speak
in support of this bill because
I think that it um fills that
gap um in a very tangible way
and uh and highlights how that
is not happening in a um
completely rational and I'm not
completely upfront uh way that
we're getting this paid for for
those patients that need it.
I can answer any other
questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We have
on Zoom if they would bring up
Kim Silver, who is a mom who
utilizes this process for her
child.
And Kim, if you could raise your
hope, they found you, never
mind.
Kim, would you please uh go
ahead and tell your story
quickly.
Hi, good morning. Um, my name is
Kim Silvers, and I am a mother
of a child who has um
been
Just challenge with this
epilepsy condition since uh her
birth, basically, um, my
daughter was born, um,
regularly, um, no complications
until a few moments after her
birth, there was always some
Um, staff that notice seizure
activity, um, on her part after
delivery, so she spent the 1st
15 days of her life in the NICU
at UNM Hospital, um, just kind
of under observation for further
seizure activity. Um, after none
was um no notated. She was
released to me and we continued
our daily lives until
About 11 months when she started
having an increase in febrile
seizures, and then the febrile
seizures turned into seizures
with no kind of um illness or um
Other sickness, um, attached to
it, which became, which is
really unusual. So at that time,
um, my, my child's pediatrician,
um, worked with another doctor
at the hospital who um suggested
we send her for a um a study uh
uh seizure disorder study at uh
at the Children's Hospital in
Phoenix, so at that time, my
daughter was about almost 2
years old and um
She got the uh study done at the
hospital and was diagnosed with
having a seizure disorder. Um,
she got put on medications to
help um counteract the seizures,
uh, but it seemed like every few
months we were either increasing
the medication or needing to add
other medications and one of the
medications that she started on
was phenobarbital and
And she's been on that for the
um most part of her life. She's
now 19 years old, but um
Uh, just having to deal with so
many medications and the side
effects from them, it was really
hard and her seizure condition
was uncontrolled even by the
medication. So, um, her doctors
started looking for other
options as to how to best treat
her and one of the um
Options that became available as
the VNS device and so from prior
to the VNS device, we were in
the ER almost 3 to 5 times a
week and I couldn't control her
seizures at home, so our life is
very chaotic, um, long hours
spent in the ER, um, medication
changes and, and just different
things that she had to go
through to um for, for us to try
to control her seizures, so, um,
when we got to
about when she was about 8
years, or 7 years old, we were
told, um, about the VNS device
and at that time, the um, the
doctor, uh, her, her neurologist
has explained that, you know,
it's, it's a fifty-fifty chance
that it could work for her or it
could not, but because of her
type of um of um seizure
disorder, um, not being
controlled by, by normal
medication that it was something
that we could try. So they had
also stated that there was also
a chance or side effect of the
VNS would be that certain parts
of her brain that were kind of
um dulled by the medication that
she had been taking prior or
just from damages from the um
seizure, the prolonged seizure
activity that she experienced
would be um stimulated. And so
that was another plus for me
that um that made me want to try
to give this vagus nerve
stimulator a chance, so we went
ahead and had the VNS device
placed in her.
Um, in her chest and uh waited
about a week for it to um start
and within a matter of weeks,
there was a major difference.
There was a difference in her
seizure activity, um, the
duration of her recovery from
seizures usually when she had a
seizure, um, it would be 2 to 3
days of recovery because of just
how bad the seizure was, how it
affected her brain and, and her
whole body. So kind of like to
help her body reset.
it would be 2 to 3 days, but
with the VNS device, um, that
recovery shortened into like a,
a lot less time. It could have
been like an hour to a day, and
even less sometimes and, and
then the benefit that I also saw
too was the
The changes in her progression
from her speech and physical and
uh
Um
Her other therapists, they noted
that, you know, there was things
that they were doing that
started to kind of work and
Whereas before they really
seeing any progression, they
were seeing more now, so it
helped to stimulate her brain
activity into really um
Help her keep the knowledge that
she was learning in school to um
retain, be retained and to be
able to use it, so, um, the
vagus nerve stimulator really
helped my daughter. It really
had the
The best kind of outcome on her
quality of life, and we are
still using it to this day. Um,
she did have to have a few
battery changes only because of
the amount of seizures that the,
the device is catching, um, when
we have the readout with the
doctor, um, the vious device
catches about 100+ seizures a
day, and that's
That's just counting any kind of
seizure activity she may have
and, and for me, that's, that's
good because that means I don't
have to worry about um
Trying to, trying to administer
medication to her to help stop
the seizure. It's just, it's a
really be a beneficial thing for
us and having
This device available to her as
a Medicaid patient. Um, I am
limited in my capacity of what
jobs to do because I can't have
um anybody else in my home to
take care of her, only because I
really worry about her care and
I just thank you for this.
Thank you.
a brief statement by Doctor
Weinberg, uh, by David Weinberg,
and then we'll go to you.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
there are an estimated 5800 New
Mexicans with DRE.
An estimated 2100 of them on
Medicaid. For 8 years, New
Mexicans have endured a severe
health equity, surgical access
barrier that limits their
ability to receive BNS therapy.
Why is there a health equity
crisis. The cause is simple. New
Mexico Medicaid ranks in the
bottom 20% nationally for
outpatient reimbursement rates
for VNS.
The negative impact of these low
rates is clear and devastating.
Only one hospital in the state
will still perform the VNS
procedures, the University of
New Mexico Hospital.
The other options for patients
and families if they can afford
it, is to drive either to
Colorado, Arizona, or Texas,
multiple times for a 1 to 2 hour
outpatient procedure. I say
multiple times because we're
accounting for the surgery
consult, the actual surgery
implant date in about 2 weeks
later for the surgeon to check
the incision sites or Medicaid
covers the transportation costs,
which includes ground obviously
and air transportation multiple
times for the implant.
Or DRE patients just don't have
access to VNS due to financial
or logistical barriers, because
it's not available locally.
The costs of care for epilepsy
is steep, according to the CDC
in 2019, the average annual
healthcare spending for epilepsy
and seizures combined was $24.5
billion in the US.
Epilepsy is among the top 5
costliest conditions in the
country.
And epilepsy is historically one
of the top 10 reasons for
hospital inpatient stays among
children and stays paid among
amongst Medicaid in the US.
South Carolina Medicaid ran
their own one-year DRE data pool
in 2017 and discovered they
spent over $870 million to care
for the small patient
population.
However, Venous therapy provides
substantial cost savings to
Medicaid.
A health economics study from
Emory University, analyzed over
1600 Medicaid VNS Medicaid
patients from 7 different state
Medicaid plans.
And they revealed that the
device pays for itself in about
1.5 years because of the
efficacy of the therapy and
reductions in healthcare
utilization.
A 4-year study by Kaiser showed
a 99% reduction in ER visits in
their VNS patients.
A 5-year VNS budgie impact model
that accounts for healthcare
utilization costs could yield
$2.2 million in cost savings for
New Mexico Medicaid based on its
annual implant average of only
29 Medicaid members.
We respectfully ask for your
full support of House Bill 53.
The goal here is to provide
sufficient funding for VNS
therapy procedures so that
hospitals are reimbursed at
cost. We believe this
reimbursement improvement to
hospitals could lead them to
increase access to VNS and most
importantly, repair.
And solve the health equity
burden that that Derry New
Mexicans have endured for far
too long and provide prescribing
neurologists standard of care
locally where they serve their
patients. I appreciate your
time, considerations, and uh
I'll answer any questions that
you may have.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, uh, that's our
presentation. Thank you. So we
will go to Zoom if you are in
opposition, please raise your
hand, and we will come back to
you in the room. Is there anyone
in opposition?
OK, seeing none, I don't see any
hands on Zoom, so if you are in
support on Zoom and would like
to speak, raise your hands.
OK, and, and, and I'll come back
to you in the room, is there
anyone here in support?
OK, well, that makes the public
comment go fast.
OK, so I will go to the
committee for questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd like
to make a motion for do pass. I
will. So we have a motion by
Representative Kates and the
second by uh Representative
Anaya. Is there any opposition?
OK then,
you have a due pass.
Oh, we need to do the, we need
to do the roll.
What if it's OK.
Oh, OK
so they get credit for
OK.
Next, we have Representative
Reeb or um house Bill 106 and I,
I'm sorry I didn't say this
before. House Bill 95 will be
rolled at the request of the
sponsor and not to be scheduled
on Wednesday, maybe Friday.
Um
And I think that's where we are.
So we are on House Bill 106,
Representative Reed, whenever
you are ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Um, I would also like to
introduce my expert witness,
Lieutenant Curtis Ward, um, who
I'll I'll go into more detail,
but it's kind of an expert in
everything DWI and has been
doing this his whole career, so
I think it'll be very beneficial
if you have any questions, Madam
Chair, on this bill.
Um, but basically what this bill
does, um, we, I introduced this
bill in the 60 day session, um,
and it went to transportation
and pastor transportation and
judiciary then it sat on the
house floor. Um, so this time
it's come to help and so I want
to give you a little bit more
background because you may not
be as familiar with it since,
um, we didn't present it in
front of this committee, but
what it essentially does is, uh,
back in 2016, um, prior to that,
if, if you
were pulled over for a DWI, uh,
1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, whatever it
was, the officer would be able
to decide what type of tests
they wanted to implement, uh,
based on their observations and
their um what what they arrested
him for as far as their fields,
etc. so they could choose a
blood test or they could choose
a breath test. Um, then 2016, a
case came out, um, Birchfield,
and basically what it says is it
was not going to allow for
warrantless search.
anymore for blood. You could
take a breath test on the 1st,
2nd, or 3rd, which is a
misdemeanor level DWI. 1/4 is a
felony, but because of the
Fourth Amendment and taking
someone's blood was more
intrusive that you now had to
have a search warrant if you
wanted to do that unless it was
a felony or unless involved like
an accident with injuries or
great bodily harm. So because of
that, um, we've had issues with
misdemeanor DWIs in the sense
that uh we aren't able to test
for blood, um, and so what this
bill does essentially is allows
when an officer stops somebody
on a a DWI and they have um a
belief and, and I'll have the
officer explain the process in a
second, but after they're placed
under arrest, um, because that
happens after the field sobriety
test, then they can if they
believe there's a substance
involved instead of doing a
breath test, they can actually
petition the court for a.
search warrant, and in the
search warrant, they would have
to articulate whether they
believed a certain controlled
substance, drug, whatever it
might be, would be in the system
and if the judge approves that
search warrant, then it is not a
violation of the Fourth
Amendment right anymore of
search and seizure and the
officer can then have that blood
drawn and used in the case, and
it would be sent to the lab and
you in the prosecution of the
DWI, which would be very
beneficial to help deal with all
the controlled substance.
instances that people are
driving under, um, and the
different types of drugs, um,
that are involved, and then, as
I said, that goes to the lab.
They would test for alcohol
initially first if they have a
0.08 or above, which is the
legal standard for a DWI, they
stopped testing, um, otherwise,
if not, they test for about 50
to 80, uh 2 panels, one's 50,
one's 80. We talked to the
toxicology lab, Madam Chair and,
um, you would have a slew of
tests done from every
Since you can think of would be
Benadryl could be pain you were
having could be heroin, could be
cannabis, could be anything. And
so what this bill does is allow
law enforcement to have tools to
deal with this and then aid in
the prosecution of a case that
involves a controlled substance.
Um, we presented this to the
interim courts and Corrections
Committee, um, had a lot of
positive bipartisan feedback on
this bill, um, so we're really
hoping that this committee will
um look at the
Same way, allow it to get
through the judiciary so we can
have some good conversations on
it, um, but I would like to,
before we begin just quickly
defer to Lieutenant Ward to just
explain the basic of a DWI stop
happens and, and, and when the
rest takes place, so you can
better understand when the
search warrant would happen. Um,
so I'll defer to Lieutenant
Ward.
Madam Chair representatives,
first of all, thanks for your
service to our state. Um.
I'm gonna date myself a little
bit here, but let's go back to
the late 80s.
I was a teenager.
3 times during those years, I
was hit by a drunk driver, one
of those times almost killed me.
Never forget my dad rolling on
the scene of the crash, where I
got hit by a 1972 station wagon
in my little Chevy Chevette type
vehicle.
Um
Luckily I'm still here.
Let's fast forward to 2001 when
I go through the state police
academy, I've been doing this
for a long time.
Um
My goal in getting to law
enforcement was actually to
truly make a difference.
Because of going back to the mid
80s when I was almost killed by
a drunk driver.
I thought what a perfect segue
into.
I can't prevent what happened to
me, but I can certainly prevent.
What's happening to other people
and it, I'm sure some of you
recall at that time we were like
top 3 in the United States for
DWI.
in 2003, I started the process
of
Creating what became the first
state police DWI unit anywhere
within our agency.
My passion since then has been
to ideally, you know, in a
perfect world, catch.
Intercept drunk drivers,
impaired drivers, before they
hurt or kill somebody.
That being said,
Uh, what I don't want is, what I
don't know is what everybody's
understanding of, of how this
works is a lot of our
perceptions are based off what
we see on TV and, and movies and
stuff like that. So I'm just
gonna give you a brief overview
of what a day in the life of my
night looks like.
So I'm out on patrol.
I'm cruising around, I'm
watching traffic, I see somebody
doing something that catches my
attention, that may hurt or kill
somebody doesn't necessarily
immediately mean they're
impaired. They could be texting,
they could be doing any number
of things, but their driving
patterns concern me, and my job
again is to intercept bad things
from happening before they
happen.
So I turn my lights on, the
question I have to ask myself,
do I have reasonable suspicion
to stop this vehicle. I can't
just do it because of a gut
feeling.
The law allows me to do it if I
have reasonable suspicions, so I
turn my lights on, I make a
traffic stop.
Make contact with the person
driving that car, introduce
myself, kind of common
procedure, license and vehicle
information is what I'm gonna
ask for. During our interaction.
I'm trained to look for certain
things, certain telltale signs
of the person I'm communicating
with.
May or may not be impaired.
If that exists, I can't just get
everybody out of the car and
start doing tests, I have to be
able to put into words kind of
like climbing a ladder.
Reasonable suspicion to expand
the scope of my investigation,
right? So, let's say that
exists.
I get him out of the car. We
have a conversation. They may or
may not admit being under the
influence of anything. They may
in fact have just been texting
or doing whatever they were
doing, and just me stopping them
can change that behavior. But
let's just say that because of
my training in this, I detect
something that leads me to
believe they might be impaired.
We all think of alcohol as the
the thing that does it.
What we need to
Open our minds to is that
there's a whole lot of things
can, that can impair somebody's
ability to safely operate a
motor vehicle.
Not even all drugs.
like to huff paint and gas and.
things.
Um, painters, any number of
things can impair somebody's
ability to safely drive. My job
is to get the car stopped, B.
Do an investigation based on a
lot of training and experience
that I've got, and determine, is
this that person?
It is in fact, in my opinion,
and as probable cause support
the fact that they are too
impaired to safely drive. If the
answer to that question is yes.
Before I put the handcuffs on,
next question I ask is, based on
everything I've seen from the
time I got this this car, so the
time I put handcuffs on
somebody, which is a huge deal.
Can I sit in front of a
courtroom full of a jury or a
judge and convince him that
based on everything that I'm
talking about right now, they're
in fact too impaired to safely
operate a motor vehicle. If the
answer to that question is yes,
it can't be, I hope so. It can't
be my fingers are crossed. It's
got to be yes. If it's yes, I'm
going to place him under arrest
for DWI.
Now what I want is some sort of
chemical testing.
To back up.
My thought, my.
My, what my training and
experience has led me to, which
is they're actually impaired by
something.
So, most times, more often than
not, um, we can tell if it's
alcohol is the primary
Thing that's impairing
somebody's ability to safely
drive, mainly because we, we've
all been around people that have
been drinking. We can smell it.
We know what it looks like,
smells like, all of that stuff.
But oftentimes,
It's something other than
alcohol.
But what we see while we're
doing our test, our
investigation.
Mimics alcohol.
In other words, the we're
trained to look for certain
clues and indicators on when we
do a series of tests that have
been tried and true for many,
many years now since like the
mid-seventies. Um
We're seeing things that lead us
to believe they're too impaired
to sleeply drive, but we're not
smelling alcohol. We think it's
something else. Maybe one thing,
maybe a combination of multiple
things in that person's system,
but something is leading them to
be not safe to drive.
Right now, as it stands, and our
goal is to change what I'm about
to say is, if I've arrested
somebody, and I believe they're
under the influence of something
other than alcohol, or maybe in
combination with alcohol.
But alcohol isn't the primary
contributing factor.
I have to read an advisory,
basically saying,
Um, I want to take your blood.
There's 3 ways to get blood into
Mexico, as it stands right now.
I can ask for consent, as simple
as I want your blood, will you
give me your blood? Yes. I'm,
I'm narrowing this down for
speed.
Um
If they say no, my other two
options are in exigent
circumstance or a warrant.
In New Mexico, as it stands
right now, I cannot get a
warrant for somebody's blood if
the charge is not a felony.
I'll tell you right now, most of
what I deal with is not felony
level DWIs. It's that first
offense, second offense, 3rd
offense, not felony level DWI.
So to get to a felony, i.e. to
get to a warrant, if I don't
have great bodily harm, death.
Or 3 prior convictions, I don't
have a felony.
So now it's up to the person
that I'm dealing with that I've
arrested.
To answer my question.
Do you agree to take our blood
test that I want. If they say
no.
Not much I can do about it.
You can't force them. I actually
agree with Birchfield that came
down in 2016. It's kind of a big
deal to have, not me, obviously,
but a person take blood out of
somebody's body. It's a big
deal. I take that seriously. So
I'm not opposed to Birchfield.
What I am opposed to is impaired
drivers.
Um, we all drive the same
streets. We don't, none of us
like impaired drivers.
Um
As it stands right now, I've
made an arrest. I believe
there's something on board in
that person's body, but I have
no means to.
back what I think up.
What we want to do with this
bill.
I changed that.
What I want
I'll let the lawyers see it in
lawyer terms, but from the
layman's point of view, I want
to be able to say I have reason
to believe this person's too
embarried to safely drive. I
believe the persons under the
influence of whatever the heck
it is.
And I want to have the ability
to get a warrant.
Keep in mind
This is post arrest, so they're
under arrest.
I am not willy-nilly.
Just going and asking somebody,
hey, stick a needle in this
person's arm and get blood. No.
Take this very seriously.
But with the judge's signature
on a warrant, and in that
warrant, the verbiage clearly
states all the reason that I
believe there's something on
board that I want to test their
blood. If a judge will sign that
warrant.
And let me just tell you, if
it's not crystal clear in that
warrant, a judge won't sign it.
It's not gonna happen.
Um
If I had warrants rejected?
Yeah.
Uh, do I understand why? I do.
And I, I'm happy we work in a
system that has those checks and
balances.
But assuming I've done my job
right.
Um, all the, all my ducks are in
a row, and that piece of paper,
that warrant, that affidavit
says clearly, here's what he
thinks and here's why, me being
the officer, he being the
officer.
And the judge will sign that
warrant. Now I can get.
A warrant for their blood on a
misdemeanor, that's our goal, on
a misdemeanor DDBI so that I can
walk into court, be able to tell
the story similar to what I just
told you, obviously, in much
greater detail.
Back up what I think is
happening here with a blood test
that says this person was under
the, under the influence of
whatever the people with the
labs find.
And then throw an expert on the
stand to say, OK.
We see, I'm just gonna use
method because everybody knows
what math is.
There's meth in their system.
Just having methamphetamine or
whatever drug in your system
doesn't get us to a conviction.
What I have to prove what we,
the state has to prove is.
Not only was it in their system,
but were they impaired by that
at the time of driving.
That's up to people much smarter
than me.
To lay the foundation of
How much is there? What's the
time frame, Things like that.
But without even having that
chance, what I'm walking to in
is a courtroom, what I'm walking
in the court setting is
Um, my hands are kind of tied
from the get-go.
Because I can't sit on the stand
and say, I think they were under
the influence of A, B, or C.
I hope they were. I cause I I
have a piece of paper, I don't
have a test to back up what I'm
thinking.
Um
We want to change that.
We're, we're one of very few,
and for all I know, we might be
the only state. In most states,
you can get a warrant for blood,
blood on a misdemeanor.
Um
I want that to be true here.
Why?
I don't want DDBI to be like the
top of every conversation in New
Mexico.
I could have retired a couple
years ago.
I actually keep doing this job
because of what I'm talking to
you about right now.
Leave me my other half wants me
to retire 3 years ago. I'm still
here because I teach all over
New Mexico. I'm very, very
passionate about DDVI, not just
DWI but doing DWI right.
Doing good police work the right
way.
Very passionate about it. So
I've, now that I've taught all
over New Mexico, not just to my
agency, but all sorts of
agencies over New Mexico.
I've made one promise that I'm
going to do everything I can
between now and when I leave.
try to get this changed. It's
not gonna really impact me.
Um
But it's going to impact the
people that follow in my
footsteps.
Hopefully help them, and in
return help all of us inspire
more and more people not to
drive while impaired.
kind of me in a nutshell.
Thank you. We'll stand for
questions, Madam Chair.
OK, thank you. We will go um to
Zoom first if you are here in
opposition, please raise your
hand and we'll come back to you
in the room. Is there anyone
here in opposition?
OK, seeing none here and no
hands, we will go to those who
are in support. So if you are on
Zoom in support, raise your
hand, and we will come back to
you in the room. Anyone here in
support.
Uh, if you'd like to.
Make a public comment.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Matthew
Broome. I'm a deputy chief in
Mexico State Police. We stand in
support of this bill. I just
like a lieutenant.
Been doing this a long time.
And the thing that's been
consistent throughout my career
is DWI with the New Mexico.
And the problem that it is.
I'm tired of us being number one
on the list that we shouldn't be
on. DWI is a 100% preventable
crime.
And we need to do something
about it, and we stand in strong
support of this legislation.
Thank you, and we will go to
Duval, Westfall, and you have 2
minutes.
Good morning, committee members
and Madam Chair, thank you again
so much for your time. It's been
4 years since our state
legalized the use of
recreational cannabis, and it's
just past time to establish
rules regarding drug driving,
and I'm sorry, I'm I fell for
the greater Albuquerque Chamber.
Apologies.
Um, HB 106 treats cannabis like
alcohol and controlled
substances including blood
tests, all can impair the safe
operation of vehicle as as law
enforcement has testified, and
ul can lead to injury or death
and all should be treated in the
same manner. The primary
standard for any DWI conviction
in New Mexico is when the
defendant is proven impaired to
the slightest degree.
And impaired is impaired, be it
by beer or hard liquor,
prescription drugs, illegal
narcotics, or cannabis, and the
chamber was respectfully ask
that you give our law
enforcement the tools that they
are asking for, the tools that
they need, and vote yes on House
Bill 106. Thank you again.
Thank you, Representative, do
you have anything to follow up
before we go to the committee?
No, ma'am, we'll stand for
questions. Thank you. So first,
I have Representative Kates.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
the first up. Um, can, uh, thank
you so much for your
presentation. Can you, um,
It's one blood test and the
blood test covers all the
different substances, including
alcohol. Is that correct?
Me which are representative.
Yes, there is one blood test
that
They do is they take 2 vials.
Um, we send those vials to the
lab, to the scientific
laboratory division, Department
of Health in Albuquerque. And
yes, the very first thing they
do is test for alcohol.
Because regardless of what or
how many different drugs
somebody's under the influence
of alcohol is the easiest test
on their side to conduct.
If there is a per se violation,
in other words, if the person's
at a 0.08 on alcohol.
We're never gonna know what
drugs may or may not have been
in their system because they're
gonna stop right there because I
have a a legal per se violation.
They're at a 0.08.
In the event it's under that.
Then they expand the scope.
To a drug analysis. It's
confirmed and reconfirmed and
reconfirmed all that the sign
I'm, I'm, I'm not gonna speak on
behalf of them, but I can tell
you that drug testing is much
more involved than alcohol
testing on the lab side of
things.
Um
So yeah, they're
We heard from like 80 to 100.
There is a whole slew of things
that they're able to test for in
somebody's blood.
When I say things that impairing
type of things. Couldn't even
give you the list, but there's a
long list of things they test
for. Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, thank you,
Representative, thank you for
presenting. Um, I am not a
subject expert, but I have been
an employer where drug testing
is used, and I've also run
programs for co-ccurring
substance abusers. So I knew a
little bit. And so I just want
to get updated information. A
blood test, uh the only two
vials, blood tests,
not, you're, you're, you are
testing specifically for
alcohol, and then it's usually
it's a name what drugs, it's not
like every drug you have to say
these 10 drugs are what I'm
testing for. Can you tell me
about uh the cannabis uh part of
it. So how do you know that that
individual is under the
influence of cannabis.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Kates, um, we have a long talk
with the lab about this to see
um where the update was on
cannabis testing, um, and
What, what we were told is
They were, they said they
actually do two panels. One is a
test for 80 substances and 1 for
50, if I remember correctly,
when we had our meeting this
last week, so they said they're
testing from everything from
Benadryl to you name it, um, the
cannabis testing is still in its
phases of trying to get better.
And so what would what would
happen if cannabis was in there,
and I'll, and I'll talk to you
about a solution that we're
looking at if we get to
judiciary and through this
committee, um, is cannabis is
still one of those substances,
it's gonna be hard.
to tell when they actually used
it, um, as are a lot of
substances, but um what they can
do is say they said I, we can,
we can call an expert, they
said, and we can come in and we
can testify and we can say based
on what the officers field
sobriety tests showed in the
driving and all those things,
and the amounts we're seeing, we
can say or cannot say that it's
consistent, you know, with prior
use or old use and so it's, it's
It's basically come down to
trial, trial attorneys, a
cross-examining witnesses and
seeing what the lab can say in
those particular situations. For
example, you might, Madam Chair
Representative Kates have
marijuana and, you know, heroin
or a combination of actually
many of these tests come back,
the majority with two
substances, um, and so the
combination of those together
might be something that they can
give expert testimony on. One
thing they did suggest, and we
are
looking at, um, I, I, I
apologize because we didn't
realize this was up this quick.
I looked at the rod on uh Friday
and then realized last night
this was up and, and that's all
fine and great, but we're
looking at actually at the
recommendation of the lab
putting in here um in our bill
if we, if we were lucky to get
to judiciary any controlled
substances, drugs, or any other
potentially impairing
substances, which will cover all
substances, all controlled
substances, yes, it would cover
Canada.
but everything. And then it
comes down to getting into
trial, Madam Chair and and and
trying the case and seeing what
these talks, you know, experts
are going to say when it comes
to how these different
substances may or may not be
able to show that they were
under the influence, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you. Um, I just wanna
say that the idea of the spill,
I would very strongly support.
I, I too, you know, there is no
excuse for uh DWI and I do.
And that means, um, try driving
under the influence of anything,
um, including cannabis, but I am
not aware.
Of an affordable.
Uh, accurate cannabis test that
shows that you are under the
influence that would
consistently hold up as your own
scenario of somebody's on heroin
and cannabis, heroin is clear.
It leaves your system when you
are no longer under the
influence of alcohol leaves your
system when you're no longer
under the influence. Cannabis
just shows that they've been
cannabis users, and I understand
that there might be a chance you
might be.
able to get something through,
given all your other
circumstances, but it does, um,
so I, I, I'm letting you know
that that is my concern with
this bill. If you pass this bill
and it gets to be on the floor,
if you can show me the
technology or the state. I
believe the technology does
exist. It's been developed in
Europe and I think can uh
Colorado has done some testing
on it, but it's expensive and if
New Mexico is a
adopting that in our drug, then
I would 100% um would uh support
the the cannabis testing, but
that is my only issue with this
bill, otherwise I wouldn't
support it. Thank you.
And Madam Cha in case, yes, I
agree, and I do think cannabis
testing is getting better and
better, and I think we're
getting there and it is out
there, we're just, we're working
on it, so drugs, the word drugs
is a consistent language in the
DWI bill, so that's why we feel
it should be controlled
substances, drugs, or other
potentially impairing
substances, that is what our
amendment is going to be if we
get out of this committee, um,
again, just asking this
committee to um give us that
chance to
To really work on this a little
bit tighter, um, in a further
committees, um, because it is
such an important bill, but I
understand your concerns or
represented Kate. Thank you.
Thank you. So I have
representative Anaya Martinez,
Jones, Herndon, and Ferrari.
So go ahead, Representative
Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I am
gonna direct us all to page 13.
Um, line 11, it starts, you
know, if a person under arrest
for violation of an offense,
refuses.
to submit to the chemical test,
then one of several things
happened, right? Um, you can get
a warrant, right, get a search
warrant.
Um, but on line 23 it says or if
there's probable cause to
believe the person has committed
a felony, we're adding or
misdemeanor.
Um, then,
You would be able to move
forward with the chemical test.
Is that, am I reading that
right, um, Madam Chair? Yes,
Madam Chair, Representative. So
again, um, misdemeanor DWIs are
12, and 3. The only way you can
get to a felony is if it's a 4th
offense or you're in a situation
that there's an accident
involving death or great bodily
injury, so we have to add
misdemeanor in there in order to
get 12, and 3 DWIs. OK. Thank
you, Madam and
um the reason I asked.
is because it as written right
now.
Um
If, once again, if I'm reading
this correctly, as written right
now, would it mean that there
could be any sort of
misdemeanor, so as I was looking
up like,
Harassment is a misdemeanor,
trespassing is a misdemeanor,
would, is there any kind of
clarifying language that says as
related to the DWI itself
because I'm just, I'm just not
seeing it.
Yeah, Madam Chair, Ms. Sameer,
Representative Anaya, um, no, it
can't just be any misdemeanor.
It has to be directly related to
the DDBI.
The DWI charge that we would
charge somebody with, that would
have to be a misdemeanor level
for this to apply. It can't just
be some willy-nilly misdemeanor
unrelated to DWBI specifically
has to be a DWI misdemeanor
charge. Just to add on that,
Madam Chair, that's why it's
solely in the DWI section code,
so it doesn't apply to anything
but DWI I'm sure.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just,
um,
It worries me, you know, it
worries me that somebody could
be stopped. And they could be
like, this person's also
harassing me and um that
somebody could be charged with
DWI and get the chemical blood
test if in fact they were
harassing someone, and so I
appreciate the clarification. I
would hope that there would be
language.
Um, that would help with that
and would help ease my concern
as we literally have a protest
outside for immigrant rights. I
would say this, Madam Chair, and
Representative before 2016, it
was very common to just do blood
tests. It was, wasn't even an
issue and it never happened. I
mean, you can't even, uh, madam
chair, get somebody's blood, um,
if you're a murder suspect and
you think they're on drugs, it's
not even permissible to get a
search warrant.
for a murder suspect because you
might suspect they're on drugs.
This is specific to the DWI
statute, Madam Chair.
Um, is there another way to, uh,
test somebody's blood alcohol
level that's not chemical.
Representative Anaya.
No, not that it's quite
admissible. The only court
admissible test in New Mexico is
that which is done on an
instrument that's certified by
SLD. So the answer is no. OK,
thank you, Madam Chair. So a
breathalyzer test would not be
sufficient.
Madam Chair and Representative
that breathalyzer test is
sufficient in the sense that it
tests for alcohol.
What we're talking about here is
when
We
Don't have alcohol on board.
How do we test somebody at a
misdemeanor level? How do we
show that something's on board,
but it's not alcohol.
If I don't have a way to test it
and back up what I think it
might be, then it's just a
hunch, and that's not how our
system works.
And I don't want it to work that
way. Um.
So, what we're trying to do is
fill that gap between if they,
if we don't think it's alcohol
or if the person performs at a
level where with my experience,
I can say,
It blew a 0.02.
On my breath machine, but what I
saw that the way I saw them
driving and the way they
performed on my test in no way,
shape or form matches a 0.02.
There's got to be something else
going on. Well, I can't find out
what that something else is as
it stands right now, unless I
have a felony level DWI or they
give consent. That's the hole
we're trying to fill, which is
they're not giving consent.
Somebody's not hurt or killed.
But
They're obviously showing signs
that they're way too impaired to
safely drive, and I have no way
of my chance of getting a
conviction on that in court
without having a chemical test
to back up my beliefs, my
findings, my evidence that I've
gathered.
Is very, very minimal.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Is there
I know we're talking about
chemical test. Is there a
chemical test that is less
invasive that we would be able
to
Um, use for other substances
other than um alcohol.
And I'm sure Representative to
my knowledge, no, the only test
that would be less invasive
would also not be quite
admissible. I mean, there's, you
can go to the grocery store and
buy a, a little thing you blow
in that tells you how much
alcohol is in your system.
Things like that, like over the
counter stuff. But things that
are actually court admissible.
Absolutely not. Um, we, we have
to rely on those instruments
that are certified by SLD
whether it be a breath test
instrument or the blood with,
this is also tested at the same
facility. Those are the two
court admissible forms of
chemical testing in New Mexico
as it stands right now.
Thank you. And Madam Chair, one
last question on page 14, line
11, um, I know it is the
person's charge may be
aggravated if they, um,
You know, if they do not consent
to this type of testing, how
does that change somebody's
length of stay, you know,
sentence, etc. etc. If they
simply just refuse the, the
blood test. Madam Chair
Representative, it's a sensing
enhancement. So let's say um I
charged him with aggravated
DDBI.
All it does is it requires just
40 hours of mandatory jail time
associated with that, if found
guilty in a court of law.
OK, so it would enhance their.
Um
It would enhance the amount of
time that they would serve,
essentially.
If they were if they were found
to be guilty. And that concept
is the same whether drug or
alcohol. And the way this bill
is written.
And the way it used to be
pre-Birchfield was, if I ask for
a breath test, a blood test, or
both, and you say no, the next
thing I'm going to tell you is,
OK, I'm gonna charge you with
aggravated DDBI and I have to go
into detail what that actually
means to somebody. And then I
would say something like, all
that being said, you said no,
but I've told you there's
consequences if you say no. Now
that you know what the
consequences are, you still want
to say no or do you want to
change your mind and give me the
chemical test I'm after.
That kind of went away with
Birchfield in 2016 on the blood
side of the house.
What proposing proposing is.
Going kind of going back to the
way it used to be, which is.
Um
If I ask for your blood and you
say no, then I can charge you
with aggravated DWI because you
say no.
And at the end of the day, if
you're convicted of an
aggravated DWI, what that means
to the person who's been
convicted is 2 days mandatory
jail time as a result of that
conviction for aggravated DWI.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair. No
further questions.
Thank you Next, I have minority
whip Martinez.
Madam Chair, I'd like to reserve
my space cause I, I like to make
a motion.
OK.
Uh, Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Reeve and uh
officer appreciate the testimony
and in-depth explanation. I
still have one question, um, I,
I'm not clear about how this
blood draw would be done.
Where would it be done? Who
would do that? Representative,
thank you. Um,
It's not done by anybody, any of
us for sure. Um, there's a
medical professional, so our
case law allows for certain
people to draw blood into
Mexico. So basically, in a
nutshell, if you could legally
draw blood into Mexico, you can
draw blood for us law
enforcement.
So that can be a nurse,
laboratory technician, uh,
phlebotomist, anybody, EMT,
anybody can draw blood in Mexico
can do this for us. In my case,
and in, in my agency's case, um,
we would take that person to a
hospital, uh, have the drug, the
blood drawn by it, usually an RN
at whatever hospital and
wherever you are, New Mexico,
uh, in my case in Albuquerque,
the hospitals will not draw
blood for law enforcement.
They, so we have people on
standby on contract with our
agency in Albuquerque specific,
that are licensed professionals
that they would come to our
office to draw the blood in the
event the person is in the
hospital for whatever reason,
it's not gonna be hospital staff
drawing the blood. It's going to
be the person that we're on
contract with, who's not
employed by the hospital.
Drawing the blood for us and I'm
speaking specifically for
Albuquerque.
And the reason behind that is
the hospital staff wants to be
in the hospital and it's not
uncommon for defense in the
Albuquerque area to call those.
Medical professionals into court
on trial situations, and what
that does is takes them away
from their ability to do what we
talked about all morning, which
is how people stay alive in the
hospital. They can't really do
that if they're hanging out with
us in court. So, but
I'm sorry madam representative,
I'm sorry for my lengthy answer.
No, and I would just like to add
to that, Madam Chairresentative
Jones, um, on page 19, um, we
did add emergency medical
technician because there is case
law where
Sometimes you have a situation
where somebody is in an
ambulance, especially when we're
in these border towns where
they're getting taken over to
Lubbock or wherever and it
allows the emergency technician
in the ambulance to draw the
blood, and that is standard case
law now, so we just put it in
the bill.
Thank you that, that, that helps
um clear it up. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative Reed, I
was in the transportation
committee where you got
bipartisan support for this, and
I think as it pertains to our
health committee, I, I not only
appreciate the effort to keeping
the public safe, but also the
person who is um is driving
impaired, needs help, and we're
really focused on getting
people, you know, behavioral
help, um, behavioral health,
health, and that sort of thing.
So it puts them in a position
where
they can actually be, get
better, they can be
rehabilitated, so I appreciate
all your efforts, I'm in support
of your bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
Madam, um, presenters and, and
I'm sorry. So to the presenters,
thank you, I do have some
questions. So with respect to
cannabis, for example, in New
Mexico, uh, it's legal to
utilize it. Is there information
and statistics and data that
show that if someone is
utilizing cannabis that it does
indeed affect their ability to
drive.
Um, Madam Chair, and
representative, there is, but it
depends the the question is not
whether it impairs their ability
to drive. It's proving when they
took it as representative Kate
stead, it, you know, you have to
look at the metabolites in it
and you know how long ago they
took it and, you know, it can
show up in your system for a
while. So that's where we would
have to have our experts come in
at the trial and testify, um,
and, you know, if an expert had
to say.
I talked to the the experts and
they're like, you know, cannabis
is the hard one, you know, we
would have to come in and say if
we were asked, depending on what
we're seeing mixed with other
substances, it might be that we
can't tell you, you know, when
this person consumed the
cannabis, um, but, you know,
it's all part of the trial
process as a trial attorney, um,
it still doesn't change the
fact. What it does is
corroborate what the officers
saw, you know, their substances
in the person's system, um.
And then it's subject to an
expert coming in and and valid
cross examination and direct
examination and argument and
then ultimately back to what the
officer observed prior to the
arrest, because again, you're
being arrested um based on your
driving and the things that you
do and say with the officer in
the field sobriety tests, and,
and again to make clear that's
when you're placed under arrest,
not after the blood test. So
he's already made the decision
at that point that you were
under the influence of an.
intoxicating liquor, so or drug,
and so then they're already,
they're already arrested, so
that's just the follow up. So as
far as testing, it's, it's still
a fluid, a fluid thing on, you
know, cannabis, but there's so
many other substances in there
and that's why, that's why we
were thinking taking the word
cannabis out and just putting
drugs and other altering
substances at the request of the
lab because then they said, then
we can grab everything and we
can look at it as a whole for
you and.
tell you if this person is
meeting the impaired or not,
depending on what we're seeing.
It's just a case by case basis.
I hope that answers your
question.
Not quite, because you haven't
really told me the drive that if
I take cannabis, that that
really will impair my driving,
so I'm not sure if that uh
indications, but that's OK. I'm
gonna move on from there because
I do have something else to ask
you, with respect to whether or
not the stop is on the federal
highway or a state highway, and
you determine that cannabis was
in the system. Is that gonna
affect the charge? Madam Chair
and Vice Chair, absolutely not.
No. Where you're at in New
Mexico doesn't really matter to
us.
Um, you can be impaired while
driving into Mexico and we can
arrest you.
If we can show if we have
probable cause to do so.
But the type of highway you're
on in your location within the
state, the only time that that
would be an issue is if I'm on
tribal land and I don't have
jurisdiction to be there.
Outside of that, if you're
driving motor vehicle in New
Mexico while impaired, we can
arrest you.
Thank you. I, I asked that
question because cannabis is not
recognized in federal law as
being a legal drug and on the
state law, it is recognized as
being a legal drug. So that's
why I was wondering if it would
affect the charge also.
And then I have the question
that I, I, I would like you to,
I wanna make sure that I
understand that if this piece of
legislation is passed, what
would happen is, and you, and
the officer thinks that they,
the person is driving under the
influence of the blood test will
be taken whether or not they
consent. Is that correct?
And I'm sure vice chair, first
of all, if I find out an officer
makes an arrest because they
think they're impaired and they
don't have the evidence to back
that up. I'm gonna be really,
really unhappy with that person.
Um, we have to have probable
cause to put handcuffs on
somebody and charge them with
that crime of driving while
impaired, assuming that's in
place, um, first step we're
gonna do is we're gonna ask the
question, um, we're obviously
gonna say the words, you're
under arrest for driving while
into the influence.
The next conversation we're
going to have is, I would like
to
Obtain a chemical test from you,
whether it be a breath test or a
blood test.
And that conversation differs a
little bit.
Depending on which way we go,
but we're going to ask them. The
first thing we do is ask for
consent.
And oftentimes we get consent.
What we're trying to do here is
when somebody doesn't give
consent.
On the drug side on the we don't
think it's alcohol side I should
say. When somebody doesn't give
consent, we're trying to add a
tool to our toolbox to where I
as the trained professional,
believe you're under the
influence of something other
than alcohol. I have so I can
back that up with my training
experience. I want to back that
up a little bit further with a
chemical test done at our lab at
the scientific lab, which is
acceptable, their their results
are acceptable in a courtroom.
To back up what I think is
happening, which is you're
driving while impaired, not by
alcohol, but by something else.
And tonight I have my, my
experience with the driver, my
observations of the driver, um,
they've been arrested. I believe
they're under the influence of
something else, and I have a
chemical test to back that up,
and I have an expert standing
behind me in the courtroom to
say,
Yes, what we're seeing this this
person was in fact under the
influence of whatever we found
in our lab, and here's what we
know about what that drug does
to somebody, and here's why we
think that it's very likely that
the person was under the
influence of that drug at the
time of driving.
And none of that happens. None
of me getting a blood, a blood
test out of somebody who's
refused without getting a search
warrant. And I think that's the
key piece of this whole puzzle
is to get a search warrant, I
have to submit an affidavit,
present it to a judge. They look
at it and they make darn sure
that all my ducks are in a row.
Because in my world and in my
mind and in this country.
And the US support Supreme Court
agrees as stated through
Birchfield, it's a big deal to
draw blood out of somebody's
body.
So, if they don't sign my search
warrant, guess what? I don't get
blood.
And if I could, I'm sorry, madam
chair and vice chair. You said
something earlier that I wanna
I'm gonna ask, we, we have been
told we have to be out of this
room by noon, and we have
another bill that has out of
town um experts, so if you could
please keep everything as brief
as you can.
Madam Chair and Vice Chair, I
just wanted to assure assure you
of something. If I'm reading
what you're asking about the
cannabis or the THC question
correctly, um, what I don't want
anybody to think is just because
we know somebody's under the
influence of cannabis THC,
whatever you want to call it, or
any other drug that doesn't get
us to a DWI charge. It is not
uncommon for me to stop a car,
and somebody, especially now
that we've legalized it in New
Mexico, um, they'll tell me, I
smoke weed every day.
Or I am a heroin user. I am a
whatever user. It's not uncommon
for the, for in our conversation
for that to happen. That doesn't
get me to being able to
Arrest somebody and charge them
with DDBI. I still have to
believe, I, I still have to
gather evidence to show that not
only did they admit that they're
a user of whatever. I have to be
able to show that they were
impaired at the time of driving.
So, somebody can tell me, I
smoke weed every, every morning
when I wake up.
OK, is it gonna be in their
system? Absolutely.
for a long time.
But if I can't show that they
were impaired at the time of
driving through my
investigation, it doesn't matter
what they tell me they under the
influence of I cannot arrest
them.
A metal chair, uh, Mr.
Presenter, my biggest concern
about this, the way this bill is
written, it sounds as though you
can have a, you, you can be
under this, you can suspect that
somebody may be driving under
the influence. Then you have to
ask the judge for a, a search
warrant. You haven't described
how long that's gonna take it,
how long you're gonna have to
hold them. But if they don't
want to, if they don't want to
consent, it seems like this bill
is saying, well, it's gonna
happen anyway. What happens to a
person's 5th Amendment right.
To refuse to incriminate
themselves. It seems like that
Fifth Amendment right is gone.
And what happens to the uh
effect already if they don't
want to consent, that that you
can, the suspect is already
presumed to be guilty. So those
things are already in place and
the additional aspect that
you're adding on to it seems to
cause a great deal of problems,
a constitutional problems for
people, and I bring that up,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, because I have seen
far too often this happen with
the
number of arrests and pullovers
occurring at a higher percentage
among black, Hispanic, and
people of color when it doesn't
happen with respect to others.
This seems to only going to
enhance that a lot more. That
causes me a great deal of
concern with that, Madam Chair,
I would say that uh this is not
a good deal and it should not be
supported under any
circumstances. Maybe we respond
to that, madam chair.
Briefly, please.
And chair and vice chair, I
appreciate your question.
The, my understanding, I'm not a
lawyer, but my understanding of
applied consent when you get a
driver's license in Mexico,
you're basically agreeing that
I'm not gonna drive while
impaired, and if you do, and we
arrest you, then.
Implied consent means you're
implying we, we have no consent
for you to, for us to test.
your system to see what's in
your system, because you're not
supposed to do what you're doing
right now. Um, I
100% agree with your concern. I
get what you what you're saying.
Um,
But that is not our goal here.
Our goal here is to
Have a tool in our toolbox to
when we
Have stopped somebody who we
believe is impaired, and just a
hunch and anything like that
doesn't get us there. I have to
have physical evidence leading
me to believe you're too
impaired to safely drive.
Then I get a chemical test,
whether it be a consent or a
warrant.
Signed by a judge that backs up
my findings.
Thank you.
In in Me charge that that was
just say there's no 5th
Amendment issue because that's
what you give up when you get
your driver's license. You, you
sign off on that when you get
your driver's license that you
will agree to, to not be
impaired and you will agree to
take testing when and it's just
how from 2016 prior, that's how
we've done it forever and it
was, it was not an issue
previous to that, Madam Chair.
I, I guess, Madam Chair, I, I
disagree with your
interpretation and what is
applied when I get a driver's
license. You cannot just come
and take anything out of my body
just because of that instance.
So I disagree with that
conversation. So no matter what
we do, I, I fully disagree with
that.
Uh, Representative Reed.
I think you probably get the
sense that you may not have the
votes here. There's been a
suggestion from one of the
members that you roll this and
deal with particularly the
cannabis part of it, we can go
ahead and take a boat if you
would like to do that, if you
would rather um make some
changes and bring it back on
Wednesday, we can do that.
Totally your call. I'm sure the,
the, the way we would um
basically fix the bill, um, and
again, I, I will tell the
committee that
This has been a bipartisan
effort through courts and
corrections and past committees,
judiciary, um, I think there are
legal issues that need to be
dealt with, but would be to put
controlled substances, drugs, or
any other potentially impairing
substances, um, and take the
word cannabis out and, and now I
would take that even as a
friendly amendment at this
point, if that would solve the
concern of the committee.
Uh, Representative, I'm hearing,
uh so would you like us to do a
motion and take a boat or
It's, it's your call how we
proceed from here.
I, I'd go ahead and ask for a
vote then, Madam Chair.
I'm sorry. You can go ahead and
vote, Madam Chair, so we will go
back to Representative Martinez
for a motion.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for bringing this
forward because we need to keep
our streets safe for everybody,
um, this is the way to do it.
So for everybody that
said during the campaign that
they were about public safety's
make a motion for a due pass.
OK. Um, so we have a motion by
Representative Martinez and a
second by Representative Senator
Cortez, will you take the role?
Representative Anaya.
Yeah, Representative Kate, no.
Representative each of us
a representative and Chavez.
Yes.
Representative Ferrari. No.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Senna Cortez,
yes.
Vice Chair Herndon. No.
And Chair Thompson.
No.
So by a vote of 6 to 64 in the
affirmative and 6 in the
negative.
We, uh, you
motion does not carry.
Madam Chacari is correct, in
which case, does that mean we
need to make a motion to table,
not, not necessarily we can but
we don't have to.
So thank you. Next, we will
quickly go to our next.
And Representative Reed, if you
can make some changes since it
did pass or not pass, I mean,
since the, it didn't pass, I'd
be, I'd be willing to put you
back on again if you, if you
make changes and I would suggest
that you talk to members and,
and kind of get a feel of what
they need to, to have a due
pass.
OK, next we will go to
House bill, um, 115
Representative Ferrari.
And if she has an expert, please
come forward.
Yes, if I didn't announce that,
yes, we are rolling the, the um
fertility bills to at least
Friday.
And we may or may not have time
to do a 116, and we've got 15
minutes for this bill, so we'll
see, but we probably will be
rolling 116.
Oh, Ferrari already rolled it.
There's too much rolling going
on here.
Go ahead, representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, some
of our um.
Presenters uh thought we were
going to be rolled, so um they
might have left, but I'm trying
to be organized and know who all
of they them are.
But just to let you know really
quick, we have um presented um.
Support for Sateria um Las
Cruces, um, it's a model, the
model is a therapeutic approach
primarily used to treat acute
psychosis that emphasizes a
supportive non-medical
environment with minimal
medication use and focusing on
preserving a person's personal
power and social networks within
the Soteria House setting and
rather than traditional
psychiatric hospitalization, and
it is considered a gentle
alternative to conventional
treatment and is based on the
idea of treating psychosis in a
safe homelike setting with
minimal coercion and a focus on
recovery-oriented care, um.
I would, um.
I think you have the handout
real quickly. I'd like to um
further ask my
experts to um.
Introduce themselves and just a
reminder we have 14 minutes for
presentation and questions, and
if we have to get out, we will
have to carry it over, so I'm
asking folks to please be brief.
Um, OK, thank you. I can speak
very fast, but you won't
understand me, um, the, our, our
current behavioral health system
is uh we have discussed at other
times in this committee is
pretty dismal with recovery
rates of around 20% in around
the country, not just New
Mexico, um, oh, I'm sorry, I'm
Susan Musante.
And I, I, I have uh opened and
run the Soteria House in another
state where and the bill I think
calls it residential treatment,
uh, but it's using this soteria
approach, which is different
from other, from many other
approaches in that it is um more
of a relational approach. Other
countries that use more
relational approaches to help
people get through this
experience.
Um, that most of us call
psychosis, um, have approaching
80% recovery rates. So we could
do a lot better in this country
and in New Mexico. Um, it's a,
it's a homelike environment, uh,
why I why I believe it works as
I have seen it work is that
instead of going to a hospital
or being contained in
unfortunately in our current
world, people end up in jail
cause
For sometimes for not really
terrible offenses, trespassing
and that sort of thing, but they
end up getting picked up for an
offense, um, when really it's
their mental illness, uh, so,
uh, it's a relational approach
and countries that use the
relational approaches, for
example, Finland has the like an
80% recovery rate. Um, so that's
why I'm supportive of it and uh
I've seen it work. People go to
school instead of being locked
up, they can go to school.
they have jobs. The house, the
house staff support them in
getting jobs. A good example is
we had a guy who's signed up for
classes, and he uh was able to
go to classes with support of
the House staff, and so that's
all. Hi, my name is Kermit Cole.
I'm uh uh New Mexico, excuse me.
Licensed uh marriage and family
therapist. Uh, my first job in
the field was 202022. I took a
job, this is while I was working
in uh going to school at Harvard
and working in uh
Schizophrenia and mood
disorders, the laboratories
there. uh, and when I learned
about Soteria, the Soteria
model, uh, and talked to the man
who founded it, Lauren Mosher,
who was the head of
schizophrenia research at the
NIMH when he founded it, um, I
was so inspired by the project
and its formulation, uh, but
also in its outcomes, which
demonstrated, I think, something
in the 80% range of people being
very functionally well by the
time they came out, and
um research on that has been
replicated over the years, found
and actually got stronger with
the replications. Um, so I was
inspired by that to uh take a
job. My first job was running a
group home, um, which, because
of the nature of its founding by
a Harvard professor in the 60s,
I was able to
To a certain degree replicate so
uh uh concepts and models, and I
saw uh and my big question was,
what if I, while I was going
back and forth to the from the
research, the schizophrenia
research lab, I was at night
working at this house and
thinking, what if I put all of
my energy into making sure that
everybody here feels really safe
and really heard and knows that
there well-being is what's
making this place run. And the
answers were tremendous. We saw
a lot of people completely
recover, step out of.
diagnoses. One of my former
residents, uh, now is the
quality care ombudsman at the
hospital that she at one time
was a resident of, seen a lot of
people go on who were told you
will never work again.
Only be a professional resident.
Uh, patient
Uh, go on to have full lives,
marriage, family, work, some of
them at the top of their
professions internationally.
Um
And so that all inspired myself
and my partner who's here uh to
ultimately become licensed
family therapists so that we
could bring what we learned into
our work, and that's also been
very fulfilling and challenging,
because outside of that context,
it's much harder, uh, much
harder to.
Make whatever gains you can
realize sustainable.
Um, uh, whereas what I saw is if
we really, in that context, work
with the clients, work with the
residents, and then work with
their families to help them
incorporate the changes and the
new health that they found.
That was sustainable.
been very hard in New Mexico for
us to see that there really
isn't a place like the ones we
know.
And we're hoping that we can see
them because we've known a lot
of people that would have
benefited and a lot of people
who
Yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We have
um a lot of people who might
still be on, um, but if they.
You know, uh, show that they are
in support since we have so few
minutes, um, but I just wanted
to add that we have uh an
amendment.
the bill.
And that's been passed out. OK.
And that the amendment is just
changing the amount we were at
um, last year we were asking the
2.7 million and um somehow it
got reduced to the annual amount
instead of the full amount for 3
years. So it's the 8:59, but
just for 3 years for
sustainability to get the
program started.
OK. Um, do we have a motion to
discuss the amendment.
We can get it backwards, but we
got to cover our bases. Madam
chair. I like to make a motion
to accept the amendment.
2.
second.
So is there any discussion?
OK, is there any opposition to
adopting the amendment.
Signon have an amended bill.
And uh, you can go on from
there.
Um
Thank you, Madam Chair. I can't
read who's on, but if we could
Please raise your hand on Zoom.
We will come back to you. Anyone
in the room in opposition.
Seeing none on Zoom, no one in
opposition, so if you are in
support on Zoom, raise your hand
and we'll come back to you and
anyone in the room in support.
Would you like to speak?
One
OK, thank you. And we will go to
Vesper Moore.
Go ahead, Vesper.
Sorry, it's not your fault.
We need safe staffing in this
room too.
Hello, can you hear me?
Hi. Uh, hello, everyone. My name
is Vesper Moore. I work as the
chief operating officer for the
Kiva Cents, and we would support
in terms of operation of the
Soteria House and um I would
just say, just like to vocalize
my support for this bill, um,
and funding this model, uh, as
we know, the substance abuse
mental health services
Administration and Health and
Human Services has published
several several reports on how
residential treatment settings
like these.
can save states, um, so much
funding, um, and, and time, and
that these models have been
proven to be effective. Recovery
houses such as Soteria House,
Peron respites, and other crisis
alternatives, um, have really
grown nationally, um, and I, and
I look forward to the potential
of this committee approving this
residential treatment bill and
uh seeing some of this work in
New Mexico and supporting its
growth.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next we have Al
Galvis.
Alves
I had to unmute. Can you hear me
now? OK.
Yeah, I encourage, I'm a
psychologist, I'm sorry, could
you please introduce yourself
first.
Oh yeah, Al Galves, um, uh, I'm
a psychologist in, in, uh, in
Las Cruces. And many of my
patients are, are experiencing
psychosis.
Um, and, you know, the, the
recovery rate using our
conventional system is, is quite
low. It's less than 20%.
And we just, we need to find a
better way of helping people who
are experiencing schizophrenia,
uh, psychosis.
Uh, this is, this is the way to
do it. Uh, I think this is the
best treatment I know of for
schizophrenia.
Uh, recovery rates, uh, up to
60% and um
That will go go a great distance
towards solving this revolving
door problem where people um are
on the street.
Uh, go to a group home, go to
the hospital, back out on the
street, cause they're only in
the hospital for 10 days and it
really doesn't help. Maybe in
jail sometimes, back on the
street group to stop this
revolving door, and um,
This kind of approach.
Uh, because it improves the
recovery rate, will also save
society a lot of money. The cost
to society for a person whose
diagnosed with schizophrenia at
age 25 and doesn't recover,
there's $3.8 million.
So, uh, I just encourage the
committee to, to, to approve
this bill so we can have one of
these in New Mexico as an
optional treatment for
schizophrenia.
Thank you. Next we have
Jennifer.
Hi, my name is Jennifer Oberley
Wolf. I'm a licensed marriage
and family therapist here in
Santa Fe. I'm support uh in
support of Soera house I have
worked in several residential
facilities in California where I
was originally trained for as
little as 14 days and as many as
several years, and I know the
model that includes family and
real change for people, um,
lasts longer, um, rather
than the band-aid of short-term
care, and I'm hoping that you
will prove this, um, so that New
Mexico can also have that. Thank
you.
Thank you. We will go to the
committee for questions.
Um, we've been given a little
bit of extra time, but I ask
people to be brief, brief,
brief, brief. Um, so any
questions?
OK, I will entertain emotion.
Thank you. And a second, so we
have a motion from rep E Chavis
and the second from
representative Anaya.
Or
Whatever bill this is as
amended.
I was 15.
It's only Monday. So Jennifer,
you call the roll.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate. Yes.
Representative each of us.
Representative and Chavez. Yes.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones. Yes.
Represented Martinez.
excused.
Representative Senna Cortez,
yes.
Herndon. Yes.
In Chair Thompson. Yes.
By a vote of 9 in the
affirmative and 0 in the
negative, you have a due pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
