Madam Vice chair here, Madam
Chair.
I'm here and we will start with
HB 304 and just I will make an
announcement that I've got a
building.
House aired at nine o'clock, I
mean Senate ad at nine o'clock,
so I'll have to pass the baton,
So go ahead. Whenever you're
ready work, Chandler. Um thank
you, madam Chair.
This bill is a pretty simple
one. There is money in the
current budget helps support
New Mexico rural hospitals with
their surcharge payments to the
medical malpractice funds, and
you will all remember there's
something called the Patient
Compensation fund, and there are
what we call surcharges in the
private sector probably be
called premiums and we are, of
course, all of us collectively,
I think it's fair to say are
concerned about supporting our
local rural hospitals. And this
bill is a complement to what's
in the budget.
And we may have to chat about
the amount of money because
there's a little bit of a
difference.
Um, and what it does. Is it set
some parameters to ensure that
the money
That this assistance is going to
actual, locally owned rural
hospitals. And that's the intent
of the bill. Madam chair and
with that, I'd like to introduce
my expert. If I may. Madam
Chair. Her name is Teresa Hassi,
and she's a lawyer who practices
in the area of malpractice
members of the committee. Thank
you.
Um, so prior to becoming a
lawyer, I actually studied
finance. And originally I wanted
to be an actuary, and so I got
my bachelor's degree in finance
at the University of Colorado,
Boulder, where I was a
recitation leader for
introduction to business. I
worked with, um, a new
department at the university
that was focusing on how
Decisions. Businesses make
impact the community members
around them.
While I was studying finance and
and focusing on economics and
mathematics, the financial
crisis happened more We saw
firsthand how big corporations,
um, got bailed out.
By taxpayer dollars and Main
Street was left holding the
book. So, um, after that
experience, I decided I wanted
to go be a lawyer. And so I went
to law school after having my
background in finance. Where now
I I represent individuals on
Main Street who have been hurt.
Um, And so that's my background
and where I come from, So when
we're looking at the problems
facing New Mexico, everyone's
been talking about insurance
premiums going up.
Um and which is true. So one of
the ways we can combat that is
by investing in small local
hospitals who keep the money
here.
Uh, this bill is already there's
already money that's been
allocated to help subsidize
insurance premiums for all
hospitals. This bill helps keep
that money local, um and and
there's very
Big reason why this committee
should be interested in
investing in small local
hospitals, rather than allowing
the bigger market of private
equity firms as um, I presented
last November and testified
there's New Mexico has the
highest percentage of private
equity owned hospitals in the
nation.
Um Harvard Medical School just
released a study in December
that more errors occur in
private equity owned hospitals
So more malpractice occurs, more
errors occur, and so when you
look at the problems facing the
Mexico we have this situation
where private equity hospitals
have found a home here.
Uh, they commit more errors
statistically nationwide, and
then we wonder why insurance
premiums are going up. Well, if
we've got the most private
equity hospitals, that means
more errors, so it so you could
make an argument of why
insurance premiums are going up.
So this bill is actually
targeting helping local
hospitals. Who dollar stay here.
They don't get swept out of
state. They help increase
competition and selection for
New Mexico patients.
Uh um. And and it's focused on
helping local businesses.
Thank you, madam Chair with that
we're happy to entertain
questions from the committee.
Okay. Thank you. First of all,
go to the
To the public, So if you are on
zoom in opposition, please raise
your hand and we'll come back to
you. Is there anyone in the room
in opposition casing? None. Is
there anyone on zoom?
Okay, So now we're going to go
for people who are in favor of
this bill.
Uh, if you're on zoom, raise
your hand in the room. Is there
anyone in favor of this bill? If
you would like to speak, just
come over to the center aisle.
You don't. There's actually a
mike in the ceiling there. Yes,
Thank you, Gerald. Gerald
Thompson. Um, yeah, I speak in
support of this bill, because
exactly what my colleague, Ms
Husky just stated was. This
supports local hospitals support
in rural hospitals, and we must
protect them to protect
competition to protect access to
care in this state.
And if we don't, we're going to
have access to care only in our
major metropolitan areas and
only
With big hedge funds, the big
companies supporting those
hospitals and we're only gonna
see
Our care go down and down and
down and also the expense of
that care go up and up and up.
This bill does exactly what we
need.
Support those small local rural
hospitals.
Could you please give us your
name? Davis? I'm sorry. Thank
you.
Anyone else?
Okay. Um, anyone on zoom
Okay, Um
That's
Dominique.
Go ahead.
Dominique, Can you mute
yourself?
Okay. How was that part of me?
Perfect.
Go ahead. A, Um Good morning,
madam chair and members of the
committee. My name is Dominique
Do Paul and I come to you today
as a new Mexican who is
concerned for the safety of
patients in this state.
Um, 10. Years ago, I experienced
a preventable medical error that
changed the lives of myself and
my family. Um
Forever while in label labor
with my daughter, Jojo. I was
mistakenly administered, Um
Pitocin, which is a drug that
induces labor rather than the
saline. Um, that was for
hydration. As I was told this
led to intense contractions that
cut off oxygen supply to my
daughter, JoJo as she was being
born.
Which caused a branch of injury.
That would, um, clearly impact
our family's lives forever.
So as someone who has
experienced medical trauma as a
result of sub par health care.
I really care deeply about the
safety of patients in New
Mexico Quality healthcare in our
state is limited, so we need to
ensure that any financial
assistance is actually making it
to our local communities.
When taxpayer money is allocated
to address health care needs, it
should it should go to locally
owned and operated hospitals in
New Mexico so that new Mexicans
like myself, have access to
excellent health care and do not
have to experience the trauma
that my family experienced.
Thank you. Thank you, Dominique.
Thanks so much for sharing your
story.
Um and then we have
Meg. Go ahead, Meg.
Uh, good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Megan Williams. I've
been a registered nurse for
nearly 11 years and have
witnessed the detrimental
effects of for profit healthcare
on new Mexicans. I began my
career at a corporate rehab
facility that was owned by an
out of state entity.
Hey, was low Staff turnover was
high. There's high infection
rates and complications. Nurse
to patient ratios ran from 30 to
60 patients to one nurse. Within
the first hour of my first ever
shift as a nurse, I was asked to
pronounce a patient dead because
I was the only registered nurse
in the facility.
We worked for 10 hours with one
or two texts. Absolutely. No
breaks. Possible medication
passes lasted for four hours,
with little to no time to
provide any other care.
Unlicensed text took our vital
signs on our patients, but only
the ones who had required vital
signs to be recorded with
medications.
Um, I lost Â£30. In two months. I
re enrolled in a different
program. I t thinking that I
would quit nursing. Thankfully,
I found a job at a new Mexico
owned facility where everything
was geared towards supporting
New Mexico and the community. I
was there eight years until that
organization was sold to an out
of state Court for profit
entity all too often. New
Mexicans, healthcare decisions
are being weighed against the
prophet of
Ability of sub standard care.
There's more big
Thank you, Meg.
Okay, We will go to the
committee. I have
representatives of pants. Key,
Um
Vincent.
Lord.
Jones and Chavez.
Go ahead. Representatives of
pants. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, thank you.
Representative for Madam chair
for bringing this forward. Um
You know, I think it's it makes
a lot of sense to limit the, uh,
the funding that our state's
taxpayers are providing for to
cover medical malpractice and
link that to
Businesses that are locally
controlled, locally owned and
that are, um
Tied to the community in ways
that you know out of state
leadership is not necessarily
tied in that way. Um, I had just
a couple of technical things
that I wonder Madam Chair if
you'd be willing to entertain a
couple of small amendments, um
The first is, as I understand in
house built to the amount for
this appropriation is actually
$8.1 million and not 10.
Um
So I and II Madam chair If you'd
like me to do one at a time,
I've just got two little
technical things I wanted to
propose or
Yeah.
However you feasts e fit.
The, um so I would just say on
on page one lines, 16 and 17
just changing the $10 million to
$8,100,000 would be Amendment
one.
That I would like to propose
Amendment.
The point that, um
Second part of that amendment
would be
Having having looked at this
issue. Um
In some other legislation. I
think we just want to make
absolutely sure that we are in
conformance with the anti
donation clause so it would mean
adding
On that same page line, 21.
After the word act and before
the period
28 hospitals who care for the
sick and indigent.
Um
Madam chair. Those are friendly.
Although I would like to add one
thing if I might and, um it was
brought to my attention, Madam
Chair by OS I that we also have
a few publicly owned hospitals,
who also, um purchase medical
amount, practice insurance, and
I would think it appropriate,
Madam chair.
For us to be helping our
publicly owned hospitals as
well. And I don't know if I
should bring up language now or
wait. Okay, So now if we we
heard representative OpenSkies
suggestion online, 21 to add to
aid hospitals who care for the
sick and indigent and then I
would add after her indigenous
before the period.
And publicly owned hospitals
that purchase medical
malpractice insurance.
Is that acceptable to you, Madam
Chair and Madam Whip.
Matt. Madam chair. I'm happy to
add that would you mind just
repeating that language, So I
sure madam after indigestion,
but before the period and
publicly owned hospitals that
purchase medical malpractice
insurance
Up Still, Madam Chair, I would
move that amendment there. Any
discussion on the amendment? Is
there any opposition to the
amending and you have an amended
bill?
Um
And then I guess we are back,
representatives. Opinsky, did
you have more Madam Chairman?
Thank you. Thank you. We'll go
to representative Vincent.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, representative.
So that this that might have
fixed my line of questioning,
But
Would discover like my local
hospital, Lincoln County Medical
Center.
This malpractice.
Lincoln County Medical Center.
And I have a list. Let me see.
Um
It is owned by Presbyterian
Health Services. Yes, ma'am.
They are not for profit, so
I do not think
I don't think they participate
in the, um
Patient compensation fund, Do
you think Presbyterian
Madam chairman
Uh um Presbyterian Healthcare
Services does participate in the
patient compensation fund, and
it is a local
Ah New Mexico business. So under
the words of this act, it would
include your hospital.
Okay. Thank you, madam Chair.
And
Not a long, lengthy list just so
I can get my mind wrapped in
this. Can you identify? Maybe
what hospitals Just give me
maybe two or three and in the
state that it would work. This
would work for your hospital.
Lincoln County. I believe it
would work for, um Lee Regional.
In Hobbs. There are a few
others. Um, but this is
primarily targeting local local
hospitals.
Who are owned and operated by
New Mexico companies.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all I have.
Normally
Representative Lord
Shoot. Hold on. I can't touch
these things when you move them.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you represent Chandler experts,
So I have some quick questions
on this.
Okay, So thank you for
addressing
Um, the budgetary issues to
explain to me real quick.
What are they going to use a
definition as a small rural
hospital? I didn't see that
there was just curious as what
that definition is.
Madam chair. If you give me a
second, I think it's I
understand what you're referring
to Madam Chair and
representative, So we're talking
about the line, 19 and 20 in the
bill, and, um what I would
suggest to you. It's
Any hospital that's locally
owned who qualifies for this
assistance.
Would be deemed a small, locally
owned hospital. If that makes
sense, so it's kind of circular.
So the second sentence here is,
um
Anyone who really is not owned
by and out of state.
Corporation would qualify for
this assistance Okay? And Madam
chair and representative that's
usually a smaller one. But did
they have a definition? When
they say small like a
population? We don't have one in
Torrance County. But if they did
get one or Torrance County gets
left out of everything I don't
know.
Four place. I'm trying to fix
that. But do they have a
definition for what? Smallest,
just based on population, Madam
Chair and representative? No.
Okay, I think one needs to look
at the entire bill. And when you
see the second sentence, I think
that's pretty much takes care of
it. Madam Chairman that I was
just asking. I would like to
have seen well.
Maybe it's better that they
don't because sometimes they
make this population thing that
doesn't include Torrance County,
and that's how they keep getting
left out everything. They're
extremely rural. There's not a
lot of money there, but they put
a population cap so that I'm
flying with that. Um, can you
just explain to me Manager
Representative So this is the
surcharge on the Medical
malpractice act? What? Why is
there is there Is this a new
surcharges? It's something
that's always been there, or is
there increasing? This is why is
there I mean, I wanted to be
supplemented because we need to
keep our small rural but
Why? Why do we need this now?
Um Madam Chair and
representative. Patient
Compensation fund you'll recall
had been, um, insolvent in the
state has actually injected a
considerable amount of money to
help support it. But
nonetheless, the surcharges
which I would refer to as
premiums, I think people are
more, um not, you know,
comfortable with that term.
Are still going up. Some
notwithstanding the fact that
we've been injecting money into
the fund and, um so this would
help support those hospitals
with the additional costs that
they've been our local hospitals
who incurred additional costs as
a result of market forces and
other things, Madam Chair and
representative Thank you, madam
Chair Robson Premiums make more
sense to me than than the
surcharge.
Um
Okay?
So I do have 11 question. Is
there going to be
Madam Chair, Robson. Is there
going to be any
Blowback from the
Out of states where they may say
this is not a this is an unfair
issue to them or violates
anything. Is there gonna be an
issue with that in the courts or
anything? Do you anticipate with
this Because I could see them
coming and swinging. Um Madam,
chair and representative. I have
not received any swings or
punches. Okay, really much
pushback, Madam chair and
representatives from any of the
Larger hospitals in the state.
Good. That's good to hear in
that, I think, um
I just want to make sure so it
would madam sheriffs and make
sure that the larger out of
state corporations they are
still responsible for their
surcharge. And this just applies
this. Okay? And you have to say
yes. Because I had people
nodding and they didn't get
that. Yes. This would apply to
local hospitals. The out of
state hospitals will be
responsible for paying their own
if they choose to participate in
the patient Compensation fund.
Okay. All right. Thank you,
Madam Chair. It's all my
questions.
Thank you, representative Lord,
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, representative. And I
didn't. I wasn't here at the
beginning. I didn't catch your
name.
Um my name is Teresa Hassi
Teresa. Thank you.
Appreciate this conversation
here, but I have some
Questions.
So
I'm trying to figure out why
we're doing this. I think we've
been funding this for a couple
of years now, and we're putting
more money into this and and
it's not really focusing on why
it's been insolvent is that
Correct.
Madam chair and representative,
this is has no. This bill
doesn't address why it's been
insolvent, and frankly, there
are a lot of reasons and some
have suggested is because it has
started to happen when we let
hospitals into the patient
compensation fund that's one of
the factors that I've heard, But
this is not
Um, identifying any causal
connection. It's really intended
to help our local rural
hospital. Thank you, Madam
chair. Thank you,
representative. I think
As I often do When we bring up
problems, I think we really
should be focusing on why this
is happening rather than trying
to put band AIDS on, you know,
but I know that's not what we're
talking about. That's off the
bill. But my main concern with
this is is how it would affect
my hospital since we have one
hospital in my district, my
rural underserved.
District that and our hospital
does a great job of providing
care down on the border. Not
only to, um, our new Mexico
residents but also to people
from across the border. We have,
uh, a high standard of care. We
do a good job, and yet we are
Owned by an outside corporation.
So how does this affect
hospital? Is it members
Memorial?
Members Memorial, So let me see.
Khorram, If I can find it. Yeah,
you can look at our statements.
So, Madam chair and
representative members is not
locally owned. You're correct.
It's owned by, um Corum Health
resources.
Yeah, uh and then Golden Tree
Asset management, so I would
imagine that's a venture capital
firm. Um, revenues are in the
$1.7 billion.
Golden tree is $126 million, and
we don't know how much the CEO
makes. And I think our concern
Madam Chair is
Most, if not all of these out of
state hospitals are either, um
large corporations or large
corporations owned by venture
capital, and they're very well
compensated and they have the
resources to be able to pay
these small additional charges
and surcharges if they
participate in the patient
Compensation fund. We're trying
to help those local companies
that don't have the very large
resources and I just referred to
Matt
Madam chair and representative,
and I think that's a reasonable
approach to this given our
limited resources, Madam chair
and representative Thank you,
Madam Chair representative. I
don't pretend to know everything
about hospital finances, But I
do know that that, um, we don't
have access to all the funds
that are out of state.
That we have our own numbers
that we operate by our hospital,
And, uh and I don't think it's
right to, um
Virtually punished a rural
hospital that struggles I mean,
my whole district struggles with
a lot of things. We are pretty
high on the poverty list and
If we could afford to buy our
hospital back and run our own
hospital. We would do that. But
we're really grateful that we
have
A corporation that's willing to
work with us and provide such
good care.
So do you have, um, just
curious. Do you have a list of
Of the other hospitals that
wouldn't benefit from this bill.
Um, Madam Chair? No, we don't.
We're focused on our local
companies. But I do have. Do you
have a list of the locals.
Excuse me, Madam Chair can get
you a list, Madam chair, but and
representative, But I do believe
my expert has some additional
information for you, Madam
Chairman Representative, so
Uh, while local hospitals who
are owned by out of state
corporations do face an uphill
battle. Part of the problem is
is that they're not the decision
maker, the local hospital. The
community members in your
district aren't the decision
makers of where the money goes.
And so when you're talking about
allocating taxpayer dollars and
subsidizing some of these costs,
one of the problems that we've
been seeing is that when out of
state corporations are making
Decisions that the money doesn't
stay in the community. It's
becomes a discount to quorum,
not a discount to members. Um
and so this bill is meant to
protect local dollars when
there's not other mechanisms in
place to keep it in the state.
And Madame representative, I
would note that members does not
participate in the patient
compensation fund.
That's what they've chosen. Not
so they aren't impacted and
that's by their own election.
Madam chair. Thank you. I
appreciate that, and I need to
dig into this more and fully
understand where we're coming
from. So make sure I can
represent my hospital because
they do do a great job And I
appreciate your efforts to at
least put a band aid on some of
the problems we have here. Thank
you very much. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Jones,
Representative Chavez. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um,
Representative. I have a couple
of questions. My first question
is
If there was
Well, let me back up a minute.
So a few months back
Presbyterian was going to merge
with a believe it was an Iowa
based corporation.
So that kind of a situation if
they ventured to try that again,
and I suspect that they might
Um, Madam Chair representative,
would they
Be removed or do or would they
be removed from participating
Because Madam Chair
representative I'm assuming that
Presbyterian since it's in New
Mexico, sort of considered
locally owned, that they would
be, um, able to draw from this
fund.
Madam Chair representative if
Presbyterian were to be
purchased by an out of state
corporation, they would no
longer meet the definition in
this act.
Thank you, Um, for the answer,
Madam Chair representatives. So
then
Staying on Presbyterian Medical
services.
Or Presbyterian Hospital. Um,
Madam Chair representative. They
are while they're locally owned.
They are a huge in my mind
Corporation.
Because they owned so many
hospitals throughout New Mexico.
I don't know how many. Um, but I
do know that there are various
various hospitals they own.
Um, Madam Chair representative,
The other. The other piece about
that is that
While they claim to be a
nonprofit. They operate as a for
profit if you look at how much
their CEOs are paid, Um Madam
Chair representative. It's in
the millions. 3 million, um,
which is
Huge
Um, and it's each individual CEO
at each hospital that's paid.
That amount is my understanding.
So, Madam Chair representative.
Is there any consideration in
terms of how big these hospitals
um, can get before they're no
longer participating, um, and
receiving money from the fund.
Madam Chair representatives. So
the money for the subsidization
has already been allocated, so
it's already being allocated to
to subsidize
Hospitals. So while I
understand you know,
Presbyterian is a multibillion
dollar corporation. It is local.
And so the money has already
been allocated for this purpose.
This act is just meant to keep
it within New Mexico.
Um And so there might be other
other ways and mechanisms to
make it better in the future.
But this is money already
allocated to subsidizing, so
it's to make sure that who's
being subsidized is from New
Mexico. Um, Madam Chair
representative, I think that
that might be one of the future
considerations to improve this
because if we are giving state
dollars to the kind of
corporation that Presbyterian is
that gives me heartburn.
Um, Madam Chair representative.
I think that the other piece. I
just have some some, um
Comments to make the other. The
other piece about these
nonprofits is that they don't
pay any property taxes. Uh,
Madam Chair representative, so
they're actually taking money
out of our communities. Um, and
I don't know what the total
amount that they would that they
would have to pay. But I do know
that it's substantial.
Um, the other comment that I
want to make Madam Chair
representative is that by doing
this? I had heard some comments
from from some folks that you
know this may help in terms of
patient care competition. I
don't believe that any of those
two things are true. Madam Chair
representative. I think that to
get to better patient care.
Um, we have got to look at the
working conditions of those
workers inside. Um, we need to
look at safe staffing. We need
to look at some other areas
Where Madam Chair
representative. We need to
create some accountability.
For the providers of healthcare.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Thank you,
Representative Chavez. I don't
see any other hands. Yes.
Madam chair. I apologize for
going the second time I was just
told by the analyst, I should
read the amendment again.
For the record just to ensure
that it's correct. Okay, um
Madam chair, so
Page one line 16 and 17. We are
striking.
$10 million.
And inserting $8,100,000.
Page one.
Line 21 after the word act.
And before the period
We are inserting
28 hospitals who care for the
sick and indigent and publicly
owned hospitals that purchase
medical malpractice insurance.
And that was after the word act
and before the period and this
amendment was adopted earlier, I
just wanted to clarify the
language for the record, Madam
chair.
Thank you, representative and
let me check with this staff. Is
everything clear?
Do we need any further
clarification?
Okay. It was clear to me. Okay,
okay.
Thank you very much. Alright. I
am open to accept emotion.
Madam Chair, I would move a do
pass on house Bill 304 as
amended.
Okay, We have emotions on
hospital 304 as amended. Is
there a second
There is a second by
representative, uh,
How to meal.
Alright madam, Would you please
call the roll?
Representative Chavez.
Yes.
Representative Romeo
Oh, I'm sorry. I didn't see you,
ma'am.
Mhm representative Cates Yes,
Representative Harmonia? Yes.
Representative Jones.
No.
Representative Lord
Yes.
Representatives. Capan ski Yes.
Representative Vincent Yes.
Madam Vice chair. Yes.
Seven point
Representative Chandler by vote
of seven in the favor and one
No. You have a do pass.
Thank you.
Oh,
We're now moving to House joint
Memorial to Multi System Family
impact study.
Yeah.
Representative Dixon, You may
proceed. Good morning, madam
chair and members of the
committee.
Um, this morning. We're here to
present House joint Memorial to,
um and this, um, joint Memorial
sets up multi system family
data.
What I'd like to do is introduce
my expert and have her, um, talk
about the reason that we need
this joint memorial. Hillary
Lipton is my expert this
morning. She's currently um, the
law and policy director at New
Mexico Appleseed. But prior to
that,
She worked at C Y F. D and also
at the Nte Casey Count
Foundation.
And so I think her experience
will provide a lot of
illumination for folks about why
we need to do this, and then we
can take questions. But if
that's okay, I'll have you may
proceed. Thank you.
Thank you, representative. And,
um, Good morning, madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Yeah.
I think it's important first to
acknowledge the work that the
state has done and ending
poverty, right. So, um, this
administration in the
Legislature have created the
early childhood department,
Universal School meals free pre
K a progressive child tax credit
and this session, um, working to
stabilize and improve capacity
in our affordable housing
market.
These are all truly important
changes that will make a
difference for New Mexico
Children and families. But how
will we know the impact of these
changes across the system?
So over the years, Appleseed has
worked on issues related to
hunger, child welfare and family
homelessness.
Um, In the course of the work,
we see examples.
That we call multi system
families, families that are
characterized by their
involvement in various social
service systems. They might
interact with systems such as
child welfare, the criminal or
juvenile justice system.
Behavioral health, Um, they
likely have poor educational
outcomes. They may be unstable E
housed and nationally, there's
been a lot of research and
progress.
On better serving and
identifying these multi system
families.
So several years ago. New Mexico
apple seed, UM based off of work
that Bob Ghirga Chapin Hall did.
Realized that
Approximately 80% of the
jurisdictions Social services
budget.
Is used by 20% of system
involved families.
80% of the jurisdiction Social
services budget is used by 20%
of system involved families.
So
What do we know?
We know that families that we
interact with we know that
they're involved in multiple
systems.
But we also know that the
Children and families in New
Mexico continue to see poor
outcomes. So what? Don't we
know? We still don't know very
much about these families
because the data that shows the
issues facing these families,
including risk factors are
housed in agency silos.
So three years ago, New Mexico
Appleseed helped to create the
family success lab.
Family success Lab lives at the
Department of Health.
It's intended to integrate data
from across agencies that serve
those families to enable a more
cross agency approach to multi
system families.
A risk factor for failing third
grade is that a child's father
is in prison? We don't know that
If a protective factor for
staying out of child welfare is
that their grandmother lives a
mile from the home. We also
don't know that
So by integrating data across
agencies, we can get a clear
picture of who's at risk and
actually helped them by setting
up services that are targeted to
them that we know are effective.
So this joint joint memorials,
asking state agencies to
essentially use the family
success lab to essentially use
this tool to generate three
important data sets first create
to create an undue placated
account of individuals across
state agencies. Second, the
integrated data can create
Family units that go across
generations and finally, to
estimate the costs that these
multi system, individuals and
families
Um
Are you are targeted at specific
agencies so only once these data
sets are created, Can we truly
begin to analyze current
interventions and create more
targeted services? And finally,
we know that the family success
lab can work because this type
of integrated data system has
demonstrated success throughout
the country?
Washington State, South
Carolina, Illinois and Florida
have all been using integrated
data systems for over 20 years.
So these data systems can help
us better manage resources
effectively allocate resources
across systems, including around
issues like prevention and
identify resource and service
gaps.
By looking across systems and
families the steak and focus its
resources and better serve New
Mexico Children and families to
experience real progress in
eliminating child poverty.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, we will
stand for questions. Thank you,
representative.
Dixon. We're gonna go to the
audience. Is there anyone here
who is in opposition to this?
Joint Memorial.
I see. No one will go to the
zoom. Is there anyone on Zoom?
Who's an opposition to this
memorial?
I see no hands. Is there anyone
in the audience who is in
support of this? Please step
forward. And if you look above
there is a there is a microphone
above you. If you stand right in
the middle, we'll be able to
hear you. Clearly My name is
Marilyn.
It was very much my name is
Marilyn Beck and I am the
founder and executive director
of New Mexico Child First
Network dedicated to improving
the Lives of systems impacted
use. We strongly stand in
support, and I just wanted to
read. The solution we're
proposing is actually very
similar to birth match. Um it's
a legislation and I just wanted
to read that and the logic
behind this is simple. It
suggests that in parenting and
other areas, behaviors and best
predictor for future actions.
Current technology makes it
possible to match existing
databases maintained by the
child welfare and health
agencies in order to identify
infants born at risk and as a
safety risk for future needs. It
is not surprising that the
committee to eliminate child
abuse and neglect mentalities in
2016 report recommended similar
legislation as one strategy to
identify Children at high risk
and keep them safe.
Yet only four states, including
Missouri have adopted such
legislation as named, and so we
think this would be a strong
step in the right direction with
technology that is currently
readily available for us. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Is there anyone else standing in
support?
Alright, saying no one else will
go to the committee. I have
representative had a meal on the
list. Is there anyone else?
Representative Jones?
Right. You may proceed.
Representative. How to meal.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative Dixon for
um, for bringing this forward
today, as many of you know, I
work with the Children's
advocacy program.
And, um, what we formed in our
community is a community crisis
response team so that we could
actually sit and talk about what
was happening in our community
to move away from those silos
and, um
Unfortunately, I'm hitting
retirement age and really, what
has happened in our community is
many of us who have worked with
multiple families, multiple
generations. We have to use our
historical knowledge to be able
to address concerns. I am so
grateful that this is moving
forward so that we can actually
look at the Y and we could
target the families and we can
support those families with
wraparound services, and it
doesn't rely on
As older folks who need to
retire at some point, but feel
like we can't because we have
this institutional knowledge of
what has happened to Children. I
am now fortunate to be working
with the Children of the
Children that I worked with or
the families of the extended
families that I worked with, and
it is not uncommon for me to
work with.
Three or four generations, and
so thank you for bringing this
forward wholeheartedly support
it. And, um, I hope everybody
else does, too.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative represented
Jones.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, representative. Thank
you. Um I to think this is so
needed, And I'm I'm in support
of this effort. I guess I was
listening carefully. When you
described your reasoning, your
rationale for this and your
goals and I just wanted to talk
about that for just a moment
because I heard you saying that
you wanted to know current.
Intervention. You wanted to
understand the current
interventions and targeted
services or provide targeted
services.
And that you wanted to better
manage resources.
And that you wanted real
progress. And so sometimes I
think we're talking about We
think we're talking about the
same thing. And maybe we're not.
But I would hope that real
progress means that we could
discover how to help these
people not be dependent on the
government anymore. Help them.
Help them come out of this cycle
that they're in.
And and become independent.
And contributing.
Happy members of society rather
than being being dependent, if
not necessary.
Totally don't want to be
misunderstood here. I'm not in
favor of people being needy and
not being helped. I certainly
am. But are we talking about the
same thing? Madam Chair
representative? Yes,
Representative. We are
Um, Madam Chair representative.
Yes, we are talking about the
same thing. Um, I think our goal
at New Mexico Appleseed is to,
um, create, um, solutions to
poverty that empower Children
and families to lift themselves
up and out and really thrive.
That's
But I think we would all want US
society. That's wonderful. Thank
you so much for that answer.
Appreciate it. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you, representative
representative to bits.
Thank you, madam Chair of
Thank you, Madam. Chair,
Philadelphia. Madam Chair
representative. I have a couple
of questions. Maybe, um, on your
Where? On your first page? You
define multi system families and
you know, sort of. They're the
ones that are engaged into him
or social services.
Is I s d considered a social
service and would I s d be
sharing that is as well.
Madam Chair, representative
Chavez Income Support division.
Yes, Yes, ma'am.
That's what we would hope. All
right, okay.
Alright, so
Has there been any thought?
In terms of when this bill was
being crafted or this memorial.
Sorry, madam Chair
representative to look at how
systems have impacted and
created, for example, family
poverty for generations.
Madam Chair, representative
Chavez, Um this the family
success lab.
Is absolutely intended to do
that, when fully functioning so
people would pros research
questions I could think of a
couple of different research
questions based off of what you
are saying. That could, um
Be queried into this data
warehouse and we could get
information from it. Um, at that
point you'd want, I think
program professionals to work
with this. The answers that the
data, um and inform
Innovations or rough reforms to
SD in different programs within
SD.
Um, Madam Chair representative.
That's very helpful because one
of the things that I'm thinking
about is that a very long time
ago, it was proposed that we
track
Um
Those who were being served by
income support division in terms
of food stamps in terms of tan.
If
And really looking at because
many of these folks are also
working.
Um and really looking at the
company's where they're
employed.
Right?
Um, Madam Chair representative.
I am of the opinion that we
In many ways, keep people poor.
Because their wages aren't
sufficient.
To be able to provide for their
Children, causing additional
stress on the family, causing
evictions, causing encounters
with the with the justice
system. Those kinds of things um
Madam Chair representative, So I
think that that that also needs
to be taken into consideration
because I think that it's
systems that impact our
families.
That also creates the situations
that families writing themselves
in
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, representative.
I I have a couple of questions.
I'd like to ask, Madam. Um
Presenter when I look at your
memorial, and it talks about 900
million being spent on
20% of the families. Do you have
a document that shows where this
funding is being distributed?
Madam chair. Um, those. Those
figures are based off of the
8020 ratio We talked about, um
New Mexico. Apple seeds several
years ago hired an economics
economist, um, to do those
calculations for New Mexico,
which we found at the time about
16.
1000 families.
We're spending about $900,000. I
don't have the breakdown of that
900,000. That's what you're
asking for, But, um, we can
definitely
900 million. Sorry. Sorry. Um, I
can definitely get that for you
and get the report that we
produced. So once this system is
in place than who was
responsible for overseeing this
system and comparing it with the
money that we've been spending
the 900 million to see how we're
saving and being more effective.
Madam chair. I think that's the
beauty of this. The family
success lab while lives at D O.
H should be available for every
agency to use D F A and lfc as
well. I just think that it's
gonna be very important to have
accountability and transparency
to understand that we actually
saving money, too, on this
system, and so we'll be looking
forward to that report.
I am.
I just wonder what this report
in the fact of
There will be looking at
Children. Are we going to then
be able to do away with home
visiting, for example, because
this report is not gonna show
the interrelationship between
Children and all these other
factors involved in other state
agencies. Is that something you
are anticipating.
Madam Chair. I, um I can't. I
would not even begin to
anticipate doing away with home
visiting, having come from C Y f
D and working so closely with
the C D and D O h, I can't
Imagine doing away with home
visiting
But I wonder. I mean, this. The
family success lab is meant to
query questions like what you're
saying so I would pose it's
something like
Are we
Engaged in the most effective
home visiting model.
Do we have the right models? Um,
what is the impact of our
current models? Is the money
that we're spending
At all three agencies, right we
have home visiting and all three
agencies of a of a type.
Is all of that money being spent
in the most efficient and
effective manner.
Or our Children.
That's what I think we would get
out here.
All right. Thank you.
Uh, I'm open to entertaining
emotion.
I move for a do pass second,
that motion.
We have a do pass by
representative how to meal and a
second by records, and it'd
Cates, will you please call the
roll representative case? Yes.
Representative Chavez.
Representative Jeremy Oh, yes.
Representative Jones. Yes.
Representative Lord Yes.
Representatives. Capan ski Yes.
Representative Vincent Yes.
I met him. Vice chair. Yes.
Representative Dixon by vote of
eight and the affirmative and
none in the negative. You have a
do pass.
Thank you, madam chair and
members.
We're now moving to a house
Memorial three.
Parental substance Exposure Task
force.
Representatives, Lord and Jones.
Representative Lord, I
understand we have a substitute.
Yes, Madam Chair. Um you should
have substitute 227661.2 and the
committee substitute took the
agency concerns that the task
force to be met was too
prescriptive and we gave full
authority Department of Health
Secretary to appoint members as
needed.
That was a change.
May I have a motion to adopt the
substitute for purposes of
discussion.
It's been moved by
representatives of Polanski and
seconded by representative had a
meal.
The we have moved the substitute
for discussion.
Thank you, madam Chair.
So what we have today.
Is hospital World three and I
did have an expert, but they
can't be here today. I did have
a nurse who works with these
issues so
I think the bill will speak for
itself. So how some more three
is making notable rising number
of infants exposed to toxic
substances such as fentanyl in
utero and the high social and
financial costs of care to
infants damaged, I'm gonna move
this closer.
Remember to turn it off. Thank
you, madam Chair, uh, damaged by
the exposure, and we ask the
Department of Health to
establish a task force to study
the issue and recommend
solutions, the problem and its
secondary effects.
So, madam chair.
I think one of the saddest
things
If you go to Google
And you type in fentanyl
overdose for Albuquerque,
Children.
You get
So many reports.
Just recently, there were two
Albuquerque parents are behind
bars for their two year old
overdose on fentanyl.
And these are all separate.
There was a warrant issued in
Albuquerque for mother after
toddler loaded on fentanyl.
The child. The child dies with
fentanyl overdose Mother
arrested More fentanyl More
fentanyl. The Albuquerque Fire
Department said that exponential
increase of fentanyl overdoses
and with Children
Mother charged with overdose
death of material from fentanyl.
It just goes on and on and on.
And when I took this into
consideration, I talked to a lot
of boots on the ground people
and what's happening is they're
stories that are making the
news.
Where the baby dies or the very
egregious But what law
enforcement is telling me when
they knock on the door? There's
usually a plume of smoke, and
the mom is holding the baby and
there's there's smoking
Fentanyl. So we're not hearing
is about all the Children that
are half dead.
And
That was actually when I did a
story the other day and Katie,
they brought forward some
numbers from a p D. They're
extremely high of how many times
are having to, um, administer
the drug.
For Children.
And the Fire Department said the
responding to more and more
fentanyl overdoses.
And it's an epidemic right now.
And we have a letter here.
That I got from the A P. D.
With some stats on this.
And this is from Detective
Christopher Niederhauser,
Niederhauser and the Crimes
against Children Unit by the
way, if you want to learn what
crimes are happening in Children
highly recommend they had their
first one last year was a very
hard summit because a lot of
Things you learn about that. You
didn't know what's going on.
But he said, we are seeing
infants on a weekly basis.
overdosing on fentanyl and too
often dying. As a result, our
team reports approximately 1100
reports each month.
Resulting in approximately
13,200 annually.
We're averaging 50 to 60 reports
monthly detain detailing
fentanyl use in the home.
Which Children
That's just an Albuquerque
So they're going to 50 to 60
reports each month.
For people.
Usually smoking, fat and all or
the child being exposed to
fentanyl.
And homes.
That's a ridiculously high
number.
I get a little emotional because
it's very sad because I feel
like
At this point, we need to be
doing more than just this task
force. But
So this session, the governor
made firearms our priority for
the budget session. However, the
death rate for drugs is double
that firearms with 51.6 per
100,000, and we're almost at the
bottom of the list. There's only
five other states worse than us.
We're close to being the worst
of overdose deaths for the C D.
C.
And 74% of those are fentanyl.
Drugs are killing a very large
number of our people in New
Mexico, and that includes
babies, toddlers and miners.
I really wish that the governor
would have made the fentanyl
epidemic a party and as we
speak, it's more likely than not
a child is probably being
exposed to fentanyl.
We have an issue. We passed a
bill and as they go through, and
I'm gonna talk about some of the
issues that we have in that it's
not working.
And we know as legislators. We
can't keep giving.
These babies back to drug
addicted parents where we don't
have mandated care oversight or
making the child's safety a
priority.
We also need to understand the
effects on the Children born
there Darkness state and the
cost, which I will go into
detail.
And what we need to do is set a
tone and set a precedence that
in our legislation, and this is
an important issue for us.
So, madam chair.
The memorial gets to the heart
of the question that we holler
asking is in New Mexico,
Carolina working
Since passing the bill in 2019
having done that
Has it done. What we wanted it
to do didn't reduce the
substance exposure of Children
among newborns and supported
their mothers and families.
And if not, why, and what can we
do to correct this quickly?
We already know from the recent
LFC care program evaluation,
that car is not working as
intended and our state's most
vulnerable Children.
And families continue to be in
danger.
Our Children are dying and this
is a crisis and we need to
figure out why and how we can do
this quicker and safer and pivot
the direction
It is worth knowing this
memorial is not just about New
Mexico's field Carol Law because
we see that's not working this
task forces and subsequent
studies about digging deeper to
understand the lifelong
implications of failing to
address and prevent substance
exposure at birth.
We know this is a crisis, but
what are the implications of the
crisis tomorrow?
Next session.
Or in a generation from now.
West Virginia's legislature
recently convened a similar task
force understand a view their
neonatal substance exposure
rates and they identified
A child born with inter uterine
substance of exposure would cost
West Virginia $2 million. That's
for one child.
From birth to 18. That's a
tremendous amount of money.
In 2020. There were 18,375
babies born in West Virginia.
Approximately 1200 were born and
diagnosed with Nes was when they
have withdrawals.
An additional 2600 babies were
born with inter uterine
substance abuse, which is almost
identical to the New Mexico
numbers.
The legislative study for West
Virginia discovered that the
cost is going to cost it's going
to cost them $2.4 billion.
That's about what it's going to
cost us in New Mexico.
So we heard over and over again
this session. We're funny
behavioral health and treatment
to the tune of $1.1 billion so
in our state understands dollars
and cents when it adds up to the
impact of taxpayers, and I'm
hoping maybe this $2.4 billion
will shock a few people of how
expensive this is going to be.
We saw the alarm report on car
failures and lfc last fall and
nothingness but done since then,
and that's what absolutely
breaks my heart.
We need to take care of our
kids. Now we need to take care
of the future generations. We
need to protect our Children.
In the LFC car analysis last
year. Major conclusion was that
after New Mexico enacted the car
statute, child protective
removal of infants from the home
due to substance abuse fell
below national rates, however,
as we know that did not help
And the same families have not
received the care that they
needed for the safety and well
being of the child.
Only one in seven families in
the car plan is getting the
services that they need.
And we know that New Mexico
hospitals are also under
identifying substance exposed
Nusport newborns up to 40%.
We know that subject. Substance
exposure. Birth is a huge issue
and we need to grow. We need to
address this growing epidemic.
So how's Morro three is a step
in the right direction to take a
serious look at the issue and
the full authority of the
legislator behind it and provide
necessary evaluations and
recommendations to improve the
future of our Children. And with
that, I stand for questions.
Thank you. We will. We will go
to the audience if you are in
If you are on zoom in
opposition, please raise your
hand and we'll come back to you.
Is there anyone in the room in
opposition casing? None. Is
there anyone on zoom?
Okay. So on soon if you are in
support, please raise your hand
and we'll come back to you in
the room and support. Please
raise your hand. If you would
like to speak. Please come to
the center aisle.
Thank you. And I'm founder and
executive director of New Mexico
Child's first network. We are
dedicated to improving the lives
of systems impacted used. I
think what stands out to us is a
need for ongoing evaluation of
the care program and
specifically substance exposed
infants since Keira was passed
in 2019 and this legislative
body, I think the other
interesting thing that we've
seen is the fentanyl epidemic.
Just this morning.
Just this morning, the child
maltreatment of FY 22 came out
from the administration of
Children and families that came
out on Monday, and just this
morning it was released that
actually Washington State has
issued an alert in crisis for
specifically fentanyl epidemic.
and they just want to read this
to you because it came from the
A. C F. It says Washington has
seen a significant increase in
the number of fentanyl and
opioid related fatalities.
And s Y 21 data and fentanyl
opiate overdose. Ingestions of
death accounted for 0.08% of
child fatalities in FY 22. That
number accounted for 23% almost
23% increase more importantly,
and I think what's also
shocking.
2121 28% of Near fatalities were
fentanyl related in 2022 in
Washington state. 44% of mere
fatalities were fentanyl related
for youth. Mexico is not
tracking that There's two bills.
I think multiple, I think
representative Matthews Bill
Senator do Hicksville. We're
actually looking at defining
their fatalities were not
representing it, and I support
this because it goes to D. O H,
which is the public health.
Body should be looking at this
and then I just want to say one
more thing is that since 2021 we
haven't actually evaluated Kara
from a public health
perspective, so the ongoing
evaluation of Kara with the
fentanyl epidemic is just
critical. And thank you all for
your
Okay. Is there anyone on zoom?
Okay?
So I guess they've changed their
minds. So
Madam speaker and
representative, Lord, Um
Thank you for bringing this
forward. Of course. I think
everybody here knows that. Um
one of my duties is to evaluate
infants. Um and, uh,
During the pandemic. I was I
made a comment to a colleague,
Boy, I sure am seeing a lot of
infants exposed to heroin, but
thank God we haven't seen, um
That fentanyl and a week later.
Um
There was fentanyl, too.
Um and usually multiple drugs,
which include fentanyl.
And I heard my colleague last
because it's it's it's hard to
say thank God, it's only heroin,
right? Um
But I knew that that the scourge
of fentanyl was coming and how
prevalent it would be in our
community.
Um, I know that your bill is
looking at
At prenatal exposure, and I do
want to highlight that, um,
working with families, we know
that there is continuous
exposure.
Um to to these substances, it
could be a two year old. I don't
And I love the idea of a study
because I do not know what
happens to the developing brain
of a two year old who was born,
uh, substance exposed and how
has now lived two years on
fentanyl or 10. Years on, Um
Fentanyl.
And I did raise this to my
school.
District.
What are we going to look at in
the future, and, um, I have been
asked to testify in court cases
about what does fentanyl due to
the developing brain, and
unfortunately, we don't have
studies that tell us I can
hypothesize.
What happens to the to the brain
that is chemically exposed, but,
um, But these studies are so
important so that we can prepare
Um, our school districts and in
our support services for what
That means to Children. But more
importantly that we can then
look at how do we support
families in crisis? So, um, So
thank you for bringing that
forward, But with that long
conversation, my question would
be. Is there a reason why you
you just focused on prenatal and
not
Continuous drug exposure of a
child.
Thank you, Representative. I
don't say thank you, ma'am.
Chen. Thank you, Representative.
Um, that is a great question.
I'm trying to get the ball
rolling with just this because I
my degree is in early childhood
development and also in
psychology, And there's lots of
other studies with the effects
of the brain. I cannot even
begin to imagine what that's
going to look like with
fentanyl. It kind of all ties
together because if we can get
the families, right, we're
looking at the family right now,
and they have a drug addiction
problem.
If we can at least look at that
and then move forward to say,
Okay, these are all the
resources they need. Because as
you know, right now with the
car, we're just saying Here you
go. Here's your baby.
Good luck. Maybe try a 12 step
program.
I would I would like to see at
that point. If this goes
through, then develop off of
that to look at them. Okay, now
we need to because we should
right. We We should looking all
the way up into 18 because we
have a family that their
dynamics is drug addiction and
more likely than not, That child
is also going to end up drug
addicted. We also need to know
what is it going to look like
for this five year old when they
enter school? What are the
teachers need to look at?
To say, Okay, These are the
signs that this child is
probably far injected drug
addicted family because we have
to encompass all the way around,
right?
This is my start. I would not be
opposed to adding that in there,
but I get worried if we start
adding too many things that this
will get stopped. I look at this
as one
Honestly, I'd rather just see us
fix it rather than doing this to
be honest, But this is our way
of saying, we know there's a
problem that needs to be looked
at kind of lost faith and C Y F
D. And I'd like to push this
along that we're looking at at
least on the neonatal side. And
then eventually then, include
what does that look like for a
five year old entering
kindergarten?
But the damage is already done
by then. You know, so we need to
make sure that this one step in
the car that we're doing
everything we can, at least in
the very beginning at the mom
off of drugs.
And to make sure that child is
safe, which it if that means
putting it with other relatives.
In the meantime, until that
parent can get well.
So I understand what you're
saying. But this is the first
step for that.
That answer your question. Your
question. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Representative Kate's Thank you,
Madam chair and thank you for
this presentation. Um, I'd like
to say as well. I am grateful to
see a memorial brought forth to,
um
Study these extraordinarily, uh
Devastating situations, um, and
to be able to bring us some real
data on on what to do, and I I
share your concerns and your
horror regarding the epidemic in
our state.
My concern is I, um Well, maybe
you can explain, um so on Page
three.
It's just online now, therefore
be it resolved by the House of
Representatives of the stadium
in Mexico that the secretary of
health be requested to convene a
task force.
To make recommendations and
study the effect of prenatal
drugs exposure to birth
outcomes.
For Children in New Mexico. So
representative Artemio clearly
and you did clearly state wide
only, uh, prenatal. I, too,
would want like to at least see
up to age six. Since we talk all
the time about, um early, but
that's so great. We can start
off with with prenatal. Um uh
But I don't understand.
Um, who? Who's in this task
force? How
You've already you've clearly
expressed your lack of trust
with C Y f D And you're asking d
O h to leave this task force,
but there's nothing near
memorial, telling them who's in
the task force and what you're
doing. There's also nothing in
the memorial, saying, Are they
going to go look at because you
spend
It's only a three page memorial
and to the pages you're talking
about.
The need and and the devastation
very little on really what the
memorial and the task force is
And so is the task force going
to look at all data back to
2010 because they're going to
provide us a report in 2025.
Are they only looking at one
years data before they report
that where they going back and
going to 10 years data?
That's another one of my
questions.
Um, go ahead and you can read.
Do those two. Sorry, okay.
And I hate to say this Madam
chair. What line were you on on
that page? He was trying to find
it as you were talking about
Page three. Thank you. What I
just read was Page three line
seven through 11.
And so it's just it's just stick
seen in capital letters from the
House of Representatives, the
state of New Mexico and I'm just
saying, Who's on this task force
that is going to be overseen by
the secretary of health?
Uh, Madam, Chair and
representative, so you'll hear a
lot in here where we don't like
to make the rules for other
people. This is going to the
Department of Health, which had
convened in 2021.
That they already had an
evaluation group on this and
they were considered the experts
in this and moving forward. I
wouldn't want to tell them what
to do. But if you have more
questions on that I can bring
up. Uh, Marilyn back, madam
chair to answer more questions,
But I kind of stand with in the
past. We've always said we don't
want to tell people exactly how
to do their jobs when they're
the experts.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, representative just so I
can get clarification. So you're
saying the Department of Health
has already had an evaluation
committee.
And do you not believe in the
have they not provided
Data. If they've already had an
evaluation committee. I'm trying
to figure out do you not like
the data they provided did not
provide data for you. Why are
you asking for another
evaluation committee and not
directing them on how to create
it?
Thank you, madam chair and
bringing forward to Maryland
back. She's more of the numbers
and data. Uh, numbers and
compliancy. I would say more
than dealing with the actual
issues of neonatal. That's why
it had a nurse. So if that's
okay with you, I'm gonna allow
her to answer that question.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative. It's the first
time on this side, and I can
only imagine what they're
hearing on that side. Um, in
2021, the Department of Health
did convene a Karen evaluation
task Force Force C y f D, but
that's it stopped there, right.
And I think the intention of
this task force is to look at
where that happened and got
ongoing evaluation. Also, my
phone is blowing up and I think
the intent was the 0 to 3, if
not 0 to 6.
There is also the family infant,
Other coordinating council that
I think are chairwoman,
representative Thompson sits on.
So when we're looking at
prenatal and post Natal, I think
it is important to lean on the
Department of Health. But as
representatives, Artemio said,
You know, this is a big
conversation and even since
Keira was passed, the landscape
has changed. So
The feedback from the agency was
not prescribed. Who should be on
the task force. That's why
there's this amendment in the
have the family Infant Toddler
Coordinating Council have the
CCD at the table. They have a
chief medical officer, have them
without prescribing and let the
experts do their jobs. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and I
I've worked in early
intervention as well. And I've
provided services for these
families as well And and I
understand. I do have an
enormous amount of trust with
the family and for toddler
program and for the I C C, um
that is so. So let's just
clarify. So in 2021, the
Department of Health started in
evaluation committee.
For Kara.
Go. Go ahead present chairwoman
in 2021 that Mexico Department
of Health issued a first and
only care evaluation report. I
think this memorial is a little
different and then it's not just
about Keira as the LFC report
identified in October, the LFC
actually believes we're under
identifying newborn in substance
exposed by at least 40%.
In the 2021 evaluation report
That was a one and done. They
gave five different
recommendations, including. I
Know one that we've talked a lot
about is increasing prenatal
screening for substance
exposure. We still don't do that
that came back up. So I think
that I'm sorry to interrupt. You
know, that's you're going into
it. So this is my this is my
concern is you, uh, the bill,
the memorial and the
communication is all about the
need. And I You don't have to
convince me. I agree with you
thousands.
Were saying.
We need to do the five things
that are recommended. We need
something other than just an
evaluation of Keira but also the
evaluation I I share in your
concern.
It's that you're not telling me
really what you're doing about
that in this memorial. You're
not saying so. We are not just
going to evaluate care. We're
valuing prenatal. This is busy.
These are the positions that we
want. We want medical
information. You also have
things like perform research
that supports the task force
work. I'm so sorry,
Representative.
Page three line, 25 it Well,
let's go 23 to 25 to be further
resolved that the task force be
requested to enter into an
agreement with an institution of
higher education to perform
research that supports the task
force work.
And then it goes to another
paragraph, so
That's just, um is the higher
education. A State university is
the perform support.
Um, I don't. I'm going to make
it up and I'm so sorry. But like
the statistical department at U
N m, you know, because we need a
stats cruncher. So you so you
can show. Hey, we're gonna have
a medical. We're going to have a
social sociology. We're going to
have a stats. That's that's what
I'm trying to figure out is what
this
Because I share your concern and
that your fear
Uh, that nothing's being done
and people are dying and we have
to do something. I want to make
sure that when we're gathering
data
It's going to be real data that
we believe in that it comes from
a reliable source source. And
what kind of data are they going
to bring to us so that we can
make those decisions a lot
quicker than we've been making
and thank you very much for your
advocacy. Thank you, Chairwoman
and representative. I just want
to say that the task force
activity of what it's asking for
is very specific.
Um, it's studying the state's
adoption. Is it working
reviewing the States mandate? I
also know that last year we
brought forth and we amended the
House memorial and studying
foster youth running away and
missing youth. We amended that
per representative Travis's
request that we would partner
with an agency with a with a
state agency, higher education
with an accredited school of
social work, So that's happy,
But I also think the entire
feedback from the agency was
that it was too prescriptive in
saying who was on it, and they
wanted the authority to choose
who would be on that task force.
Course.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Thank you and just just kind of
as an aside I've done a lot of
these kind of memorials and you
can list things like
Someone who represents the fit
program. Someone who represents
family, You know me not not say
which individual person it
should be. But what kinds of
people you know. We want a
statistician. We want an
epidemiologist we want or
whatever, and then leave it up
to the department to figure out
what person it is that meets
that. So that's how I tried to
thank you, Madam chair that was
in the original bill, but
Department of Health said that
was too prescriptive and that's
why we moved it so it was that
originally they said, no, we
want
To do it.
A specific way, so that what we
can go back to the original one
of that we need to do, but that
was for the Department of
Health. I'm mad at him, Madam
Chair 8.5 days left. Sure. Yeah.
So we will go to representative
Chavis.
Thank you, Madam Chair
representative. I just have a
couple of questions, and one of
them is that the memorial is
asking that a task force be
created.
Right through the department of
Health. Um, but there isn't any
money attached.
Madam Chair, representative. Any
thoughts on how
The memorial or the task force
will be funded.
Madam Chair of the, Um They said
they didn't need the extra money
that they could handle it. So
that's why there's no fire and
there's no money appropriated.
Thank you, Madam Chair
representative. The other
question that I have is that I
noticed that there is a similar
bill HB 97 that also creates a
task force.
Um
To also, um it's a prenatal
substance Exposure Task force.
Have you had conversations with
the sponsor of that to see if
yours and if your memorial can
fit in with this or you know if
they both of them accomplish the
same thing is what I'm trying to
say, Madam chair That's actually
my other bill, And that's why
we're going forward. This one
and not the other one. So I was
a sponsor of the other bill,
Madam chair.
Does that make sense? So, Madam
Chair representative, you're not
Carrying
It's basically dead is what
you're saying.
HB 97. Yes, that is correct.
Okay, thank you.
I will entertain a motion.
Madam chair before before we
can, I ask would
I'd like this to move forward
because the D O h s
recommendations and not being so
prescriptive. But if you guys
want to go back to the other
bill with cameras much lengthy
in the department, health is not
going to be happy and they're
going to come back and say,
Please take all that portions
out so we can move forward with
this or go back to the original
world. But I think the O H is
going to be very angry if we do
that, madam chair.
Madam chair.
I'm overdue Pass. Do I have a
second?
And here's how to do pass on the
substitute.
Yes, Yes, I do not pass on house
Memorial three, but it do pass
on House Health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for house Memorial three. Thank
you for that correction.
Came for you take the original
Came for you. Take the
representative Cates.
Okay, hold on bench. I think
there's some discussion going
on.
Because I think there's some
people that like that I might
like the original matter,
Please, I do to tribal
communities. Communities is
Um, so important when we're
asking to do a study that is all
encompassing and really mirrors
the community of New Mexico.
And thank you, Madam Chair. I I
agree with that, too. That was
the original bill that I had.
And it was when wh said to make
it not so prescriptive. So can
we go back and vote then on the
original bill instead of the
substitute? I don't know how
this would make the motion do
not pass on the amendment passed
on, Um, representatives Jones,
are you Madam chair? I'm willing
to withdraw my motion. I'm good
with that. Thank you. Okay, so
we have that motion has been
withdrawn, so we have a motion.
For a do pass on House Memorial.
Three.
Mr No. Do we need to do
Do we need to read the original,
uh, 202 numbers, So there's
clarification, so or do we just
need to say this isn't we're not
voting on the subject. We're
voting no on the substitute and
yes to the original bills at
clarifying enough.
Um, we haven't adopted the
substitute so we can just go
ahead and do it do pass.
Got it. Thank you, madam Chair.
Right, And do it do pass on.
On the original House Memorial
three
So is everybody clear.
Everybody, okay?
I'm sorry.
There's concerns that you were
saying Bill it's still It's the
Memorial Memorial. Okay, 8.5
days, man.
I hear you.
We just want to make sure that
we get it right. So we are on a
do pass motion.
For House Memorial three and
we're gonna put the committee
substitute to the site, so it's
the original memorial.
Okay, So is there any
opposition?
Okay, seeing none. You have a do
pass.
Uh, 8 to 0. Okay. Next, we will
move on to, um
Representative Little on.
H. Memorial H Memorial House,
Memorial 12 Behavioral Health
Workforce Studies. It's
representative Little and
representative horror meal. Um
So whenever you're ready
representatives
So
please turn the mic off before
you touch it or move it or
they're very sensitive and
cranky.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the committee. It is,
um
Actually, my pleasure to be here
today to bring
Before you a memorial House
memorial 12.
It is a memorial, acknowledging
the to acknowledge the
administrative burdens faced by
behavioral health care providers
and calling for a study.
To examine these burdens and to
provide recommendations to
expand the behavioral health
care workforce in New Mexico.
In a moment I will introduce my
expert witness. But if I may
offer a brief, um
Narrative of why this is
important.
Um, the issue of of the
administrative responsibilities
but faced by providers first
came to my attention as a tribal
administrator. I oversaw the
health and wellness Department
and under which was our mental
are Behavioral Health
department.
It's as many of US notes are
hard to fill area. Um in our
communities, it may be in some
areas, especially tribal
communities.
And the
What was happening was that with
this, a limited number of
providers and the large number
of patients that were waiting to
be seen.
Um
There are many natives who want
to do well, who want to achieve
a full and quality full quality
of life?
Ah, unfortunately, their face
with disparate mental health
issues.
Um, and the need for behavioral
health services is very clear in
our communities.
Um, there. Wait. Time is
Very difficult. And as we know,
behavioral health is in our
health, mental health is one
facet and our entire makeup that
helps us to move forward.
So
Um
Today. I'm going to move it
forward to today and narrative
offered by a provider Mortar
recently was to illustrate the
administrative burdens faced is,
um
He described over 70 hours of
administrative responsibilities
and we know that it came to my
attention really caught my
attention because as we know,
these appointments are
approximately 35 to 45 minutes
long.
And when we look at the number
of visits that can be made, uh,
offered by a provider that's
probably less than about 50. I
would say about 50 appointments
to, uh, for people who are not
able to be seen, so we
acknowledge the importance of
administrative reporting
responsibilities.
But it would be helpful to
determine just what how this
reports are coming through these
administrative responsibilities.
And so with that I'm going to
introduce, um
My expert witness. I'm joined by
David lay of the New Mexico
Health Providers Association to
provide more a brief statement
and then we will stand for
questions. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee. I'm Dr David
Lay. A clinical psychologist.
Got my PhD here at U and M back
in 2000 and practicing in New
Mexico. My entire career as the
as the representative said.
The administrative burden that
is experienced by behavior.
Health providers is
disproportionately high. Um, we
spend far more time on things
like site reviews, Paperwork
reporting to the state,
particularly taxes, state
dollars, Um, Medicaid in on
Medicaid dollars.
Um, in a way that frankly,
medical providers don't and part
of this comes from my belief
that, uh, Baber health
experiences stigma where people
perceive it as not as real as a
broken leg. And so then the
state wants to monitor and make
sure that
The treatments are being done
responsibly. All of that, I
think is appropriate. However,
it has gotten so burdensome that
we are unable to meet the demand
for behavior health services
that we're currently
experiencing the state and
nationwide were experiencing
work for a workforce crisis in
behavior, health and
unfortunately, every hour that
is spent meeting these
administrative demands takes
time away from
Ah, services to patients in the
month of October, my agency had
four different site reviews by
three different state agencies.
None of those agencies talk to
each other about their site
reviews. Just one of those site
reviews took 73 staff hours from
from my agency. Now that's 73
patients that we could have
treated and couldn't
Um, because we were meeting the
state's demands, and this isn't
just about bashing on the state.
We also have three different
managed care organizations It's
going to be for this summer, all
of whom are coming out and
asking for this kind of
information doing their own site
reviews. Um, what we really need
is a partnership with the Baby
Health Collaborative of New
Mexico, where the collaborative
and provider association groups
And providers can sit down and
say, Is there a way we can make
this more efficient? If if
there's information that you
need we're happy to give you
that information, But can we do
it in a way? That doesn't mean
we have to deny services to this
person walking in the door who
is suicidal?
Because we have to respond to
the state instead to keep our
doors open.
That's the kind of partnership
that I think we want, and one of
the things that I'm excited to
say, is that the nick bookers
who is the current director of
behavior Health Services
division for HST and carry
Armijo, secretary for public
health, the health care has
already are very interested in
working with us to, um, find
ways to reduce the
administrative burden. This is
the perfect time to do it as
we're moving into turquoise care
and redesigning the healthcare
authority.
We can start identifying some of
these places where rules changes
could be made to reduce the
burden, keep transparency and
reporting but increase the
ability of providers to
effectively serve all the people
that are walking in the door.
Thank you, madam Chair members.
And with that, madam chair, we
stand for questions. Thank you.
Thank you. We will go to the
audience. If you are in zoom on
zoom in opposition. Please raise
your hand.
And we'll come back to you.
Anyone in the audience and
opposition.
Casing. No hands. Is there
anyone on zoom?
No. Okay, so we will go to focus
on zoom who are in support? If
you are in support, please raise
your hand and we'll come back to
you and folks in the room in
support.
If you would like to speak.
Please come. Please don't feel
like you need to. But please
come to the
The center and make a statement
One minute time Mexico Child
First network We stand in strong
support of this. We think this
is important and critical
importance. We know that
behavior hold in New Mexico is
in crisis and we think the
sponsors for bringing this
forward Thank you.
And if you want to speak, go
ahead and come to the middle. I
don't know who else wants to go
ahead. Thank you, Madam Chair
members. I just want to give an
antidote, um as a behavioral
health provider. Um, At one
point, I did have a contract
with one of the managed care
organizations and
It did not pay my claims for a
year and I had to go actually go
down to the office with my
contract and asked to have my
payments implemented, Um, and to
have it streamlined to be
accountable and also
Um, have a streamlined system
where we can get audited by
maybe a centralized location
would save us from having a long
waiting list and being able to
provide more services.
Could you please give us your
name? Chloe Edgar, with Sandia
therapy and Wellness Center.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is David Burke. I'm a
director restaurant. He may say
Youth Recovery Center.
I'm also the board president for
NAMI, Albuquerque.
Um
We get audited by the city. We
get audited by the county garage
it by the state.
We have independent audits, and
they all want different things
and it we spend more time doing
audits and we can actually
serving the clients.
We're in the process right now
of going
To get our TC licensed and to
open up our detox for youth. And
wow, it is so difficult about
barriers in place just to serve
those who are suffering from
substance, substance abuse and
mental health change needs to
happen. We've got to be able to
provide services quicker, faster
and there is a way to hold
people accountable.
It's just got to be consolidated
somehow. Thank you.
Marty, Madam chair members of
the committee. My name is Rachel
Biggs with Albuquerque
Healthcare for the homeless and
for the reasons already stated,
we stand in strong support of
this
Anyone else? Okay? Is there
anyone on zoom?
Um Oh, Danica. Hello, Tanika.
Hi. Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee. Thank
you for allowing me to voice my
support for this bill this
morning. I'm very thankful that
this topic has come up again. I
know that we've been having this
discussion since 2016. I'm a
board certified psychiatric
behavioral health nurse in Las
Cruces. And I've had oversight
of many, both inpatient and
outpatient behavioral health
programs.
And one of the biggest burdens
that we face is not just the
paperwork, but the amount of
time um the amount of moral
injury that occurs when you
really want to be doing the work
and you can't do the work
because you're doing the
paperwork and I would also just
mentioned and put this out there
for thought that I would really
like for us to consider moving
out of what I think collectively
is a poverty mindset and feeling
that feeling that we are
indebted in some way to the M.
C. O S and
Really start to stand as
providers and take our voice and
let them know that they are here
to provide a service to us as
providers and two new Mexicans
and leverage our collective
voice.
To ensure that they are moving
forward in a way that supports
us in our mission, which we are
paying them to do. Thank you,
Tanika.
Anyone else on zoom.
Okay, so we will go to the
committee.
Representative Cates.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, representative little for
bringing this forward. Um, I am
thrilled to find out the
findings of such studies.
Um, I do not feel indebted to
em. CEO so clearly stated, Um, I
will say that many years ago,
maybe 15 years ago I read rain
Behavioral health program, and I
also know that they went under
audit so many years ago and, um
and in all healthcare were
overly burdened and overly
audited.
Um and finding a way in of
accountability and
responsibility that is not
redundant, and um, and doesn't
take away from the patient care
is so important, and this is a
great first step.
Thank you very much, just for
those who know behavioral of
health. And if you look at, um,
fraud and misuse among managed
care and Medicaid.
Um, it is always
Mm. Much more the physical
medical arts not to behavioral
medical arts. Um, And yet the
medical uh and behavioral, the
behavioral and especially
substance abuse are audited.
like like, he said, 40 times
more often. And so, um, being
able to find out where the
redundancy is, and then
We can take this process to the
others. Thank you very much.
Thank you, representative
Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Um I have a
couple of questions. One of my
questions is somebody spoke
about multiple audits. Right?
Um, so Madam Chair
representative is that or
multiple audits?
Because of multiple funding
streams. Is that why
Madam Chair representative, Um
it's a good question. Uh,
Audits and site reviews happen.
Um, uh, across different
licensing departments across
certification departments across
funding streams. Um all so, for
instance, my agency might get,
uh, site reviewed.
By C Y F D two different
departments within C Y F D for
multiple different programs that
we have, Um H s D or B. H s D
Now under healthcare authority,
they might audit that same
program because they funded the
licenses it and certifies it.
Medicaid pays for it, so they
come on site, review it and then
the managed care organizations
Because the money comes from
them. They comes out review it.
So, um, the site reviews and
audits can happen from many
different
Different entities.
And unfortunately they don't
talk to each other. Um, where,
you know, for instance, we could
schedule them all together to
come look at the same program.
Instead, they come one month and
they can be different month So
it is.
Because our system, um is
fragmented and siloed each of
those entities over those silos
feels this responsibility to do
these audits and reviews.
If that makes sense,
Representative, uh I think it
Kind of does.
Madam Chair representative.
Um
Yes, it sounds like, uh,
Maybe figuring out how to not
have to do so many, but yeah. Um
I guess I was thinking that if
there's multiple funding
streams, each of those funding
streams is required to conduct
an audit or a site visit. Um
then I have one other question.
Um, there is a Senate Bill 89
that is going to be looking at
also expanding, making
recommendation to expand the
healthcare workforce.
Um, have you all Madam chair
representative looked at that
And do you know where it's at in
the process?
Um Madam Chair, Representative
Behavior Health Provider
Association has been supporting
that that bill and those
efforts we This is one
additional aspect. We think we
can increase the ability to use
the existing workforce to meet
demand, Um, immediately by
reducing some of the
administrative burden and
support efforts to continue to
grow the workforce through
activities such
Is certain.
Bill 89.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you and Dr Lee, I will
just say at one of our interim
health and Human services
committee meetings you you said
the plural of anecdote is not
data. That's that's one of my
favorite things. I mean, it's
like I've used that over and
over again because it puts into
very concise words. What
What I think so.
Yeah, The administrative burden
is ridiculous, actually. And so
I will entertain a motion. Okay,
Representative Chavez to have a
second.
Representative for a meal. Is
there any opposition?
Casing. None. You have a do
pass 8 to 0.
9 to 0. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and I also think
the
My colleagues who joined me in
sponsoring co sponsoring this
bill, and I encourage all my
colleagues to sign on if they
wish. Thank you.
Representative Armstrong for
House Memorial. 39. I I googled
it and found that But you're the
one who brought it to me.
Whenever you're ready,
representative
Thank you, madam. Thank you,
Madam chair. Sorry about that,
Um
I think like twice this week
I've been in front of this
committee so
Feeling pretty good, Madam
Chair. Yeah, I'm good.
Um, Madam Chair. This is one of
those memorials where you get
the cutest.
Gentlemen that calls you on the
phone.
Sends you an email first.
And I don't like to communicate
through email because some
people might interpret it.
Whatever I'm saying differently,
so I gave the gentleman a call.
Cutest little man out of my, um
district in Valencia County, and
he brought this to my attention.
And he wanted me to run a
memorial.
Recognizing the blue butterfly
as a symbol of bringing
awareness to Huntington's
disease.
And you know, we get all kinds
of asks
Where
Yeah. Aggressive bills
controversial bills.
Bills that want need to fix
something but this request, so I
had a conversation with him and
I said
Um, did you contact anyone else?
Like the chair of health, or,
uh, you know, did you talk to
anyone else in the community or
anyone else in the Legislature?
No, ma'am. I have a friend that
said you would do it.
And I said Yes, sir. She was
right.
So that's what this memorial is
doing. And he is just the
cutest, most adorable person on
earth and this is what he
wanted. And so we did some
research, Madam chair and this
is what we came up with.
And without L stand for
questions.
Thank you. Thank you. Um, is the
Is there anyone on zoom and
opposition? If so, please raise
your hand and we'll go to the
room. First. Anyone here in
opposition?
Okay. Anyone on zoom, Okay and
then in support on zoom If you
are in support, please raise
your hand. Anyone in the room in
support?
K Anyone on zoom
Okay, so we will go to the
committee for questions, Madam
Chair recommended do passive
House Memorial 39.
Is there any discussions?
Okay. Okay, representative chair
represent. I just have a quick
question. Why a blue butterfly
Madam chair, apparently in the
research. This is what the
symbol is. The symbol is, um,
has been the picture with the
slogan. We don't know how strong
we are, until being strong is
the only choice we have.
Thank you, madam Chair.
That's a great quote. Um anyone
else have. Okay? Is there any
opposition to a do pass on house
Memorial 39.
Seeing none. You have a do past
9 to 0.
Thank you, madam. Chair, 8 to 0.
Sorry.
Thank you. Madam Chair
represents the vice chair. Oh,
I'm sorry.
I'm next in the vice chair has
stepped away for just a second,
so
I will go out and, uh
Introduced the bill and will
It feels kind of weird. I say.
Good morning, Madam Chair, but
maybe it's too myself so I'm
just gonna go ahead House
Memorial 51.
Um, it's about nicotine use
prevention and control program.
To make recommendations to the
Legislature to prioritize and
increase the funding for tobacco
use prevention.
Requesting that a task force
make recommendations on the
effect.
Of excise taxes on the sale of
tobacco products.
And the main reason for this
memorial is
And it's very complicated, but
we are in something called it.
Tobacco settlement Tobacco
settlement revenue Um there's an
oversight committee in the
interim.
And what we have heard is that
the department
The tobacco settlement is with
the, um big well with tobacco
companies.
And it's we get a certain amount
of money each year.
But, of course, needless to say,
probably the tobacco companies
are
Objecting and so some years they
win, and so the money coming in
is decreased.
That happened this year. So many
of our nonprofit providers who
provide nicotine cessation and
prevention
Their funding was just cut. They
just went from having a contract
and not getting paid for.
Four months and so they couldn't
do what they were contracted to
do is which is protecting
Mexicans. So what this is is to
look at that and figure out how
we can make sure that those
programs are funded at the level
that they need wealth, not the
level that they need to be
because we're far from that. But
the level that week
We promised them and not be
dependent on whether the tobacco
companies beat the attorney
general's office in the in that
hearing, and this is my expert.
I will let him say a few words,
and then we will be open for
questions.
Um, I'm sorry. There's no Madam.
Terrified Sack. Look committee.
My name is Andreas Archuletta. I
represent, um New Mexico Allied
Council on Tobacco. It's a
coalition of local partners who
do this cessation and prevention
work.
As well as some national
partners, including heart lung.
American cancer.
Uh huh. And so forth the funding
that was reduced or the funding
that was promised. Excuse me in
fiscal year 2023 was 5 million,
Um, 5.4 million.
And then that was reduced down
to 4.2 after the loss in a in a
lawsuit, um
That is far below what the CDCs
recommendation is of over 2 20
million per year towards
cessation and prevention
efforts.
So we're just hoping to get some
more money and some more focus
on this issue. Thank you.
We will. We will stand for quite
it, Madame, Which do you want
to?
Um, take over as chair.
Because it takes a village in
this building.
Okay. Thank you. Um, and we've
already completed public
comment.
No. Okay. Is there anyone in the
room and opposition to the bill?
To the memorial. Is there anyone
online?
In opposition to the memorial.
Okay, seeing none. Is there
anyone in favor of the memorial
in the
A seeing None.
Um, there is a hand raised on
zoom.
Johanna.
Um, we are on testimony in favor
of the memorial. You wanna go
ahead?
Yes. Good morning, madam Chair
and members. My name is Joanna
Strother and I am the senior
director of advocacy for the
American Lung Association, and
we stand in strong support of
House memorial. 51 Tobacco use
is the leading cause of death
and disease in New Mexico
Recently, the American Lung
Association released our 22nd
annual State of Tobacco Control
report, which shows mostly
failing grades.
When it comes to tobacco control
policy that protects new
Mexicans and despite receiving
135 million from tobacco
settlement payments and tobacco
taxes, New Mexico only funds
tobacco control efforts at
23.5% of the level recommended
by the CDC.
We have an opportunity to do
better, and I appreciate
representative Thompson and
representative Ferrari for
bringing this forward. Thank
you.
Thank you. And apologies,
Joanna. Uh, my eyes are not as
great I would wish I see Laurel.
Good morning. Um, Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Laurel Markowski. I'm
the executive director of the
Chronic Disease Prevention
Council, and we are standing
strong support of this memorial.
It would be
Highly beneficial to increase
the amount of funds that go
towards tobacco prevention in
our state. Currently, school
students who smoke is that 4%
and high school students that
use e cigarettes is close to
26% and the proportion of cancer
deaths in New Mexico
Attributable to smoking is
23.8%.
This could have a huge impact on
youth.
That end up smoking, using
tobacco and then leads towards
chronic disease outcomes later
on in life. Thank you for
considering this memorial.
All right now we'll go to the
committee for any questions.
Any committee members,
Representative Lord Thank you,
Madam Chair, representative
expert. Okay, so I want to make
sure that I understand so
We want to promote, which is
good. I'm really believe in the
promotion of this, Um we're
gonna be task Force for
recommendations Is that on
I had to work with the promoting
of non smoking or what is this
going to do exactly?
And where is that money going to
come from? Is that coming from
the cigarette? Here's my first
question. Start with this one.
Is this money that's needed for
anything going to come from the
settlement and the taxes on
cigarettes, or is it gonna come
from taxation of people in
Mexico who don't smoke?
That makes sense.
Madam Chairman, Representative
Lord, There's no funding
required in this in terms of the
actual services for prevention.
At this point, they are coming
out of the tobacco settlement,
but we we want this group to
look and see.
As was stated. We're only doing
23.5% of what the CDC recommends
and the cost of nicotine use
through the state to each of us
Each nonsmoker and smoker, um,
is really enormous. So we're
trying to prevent the person
specifically to prevent youth.
But to have a robust way for
even long term smokers. If they
are long term nicotine users if
they want to quit to be able to
have the resources that they
need.
So, Madam chair and represented
with this, Um, the task force.
They're going to make the
recommendations on the effect of
the taxes.
But I did are they also looking
at? We need to look at the way
of promoting this. What? What
exactly is the task We're gonna
do We missing the point. I
support the bill. I just wanted
some clarification on this for a
moment here.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members Committee. Um, the task
force will look at the impact of
an excise tax tax upon the rates
of smoking and vaping and Madam
chair. We know that the number
one determinant of whether kids
were used nicotine products is
the price.
So we have in the past. Um
I can't remember if we've ever
done it. We've tried many times
to raise the taxes.
And mostly aimed at youth
because they're the most price
sensitive, and that's the number
one way to prevent them from
beginning is to make make the
prices higher. And the only way
we can do that is through taxes.
Okay. And, uh, Madam chair
representing experts, and now I
see you wanna task force to look
at the how much we're charging
and taxes to see if we need to
adjust that. I'm assuming more
To get more of the promotion to
not smoke. Is that the the next
component that I'm missing in
that? Thank you, Madam Chair and
um, committee member.
Uh um.
Taxation excise tax specifically
on this is kind of a two pronged
approach, right? It brings in
more state funding that can then
be used for prevention and
cessation efforts. Um, but the
excise tax itself is also a
prevention method.
Um and one of the most
effective, according to the CDC.
All right. Thank you for
explaining that I wanted to see
was trying to connect the dots.
So we're going from here to
here. And this is for this. And
then this is the next step. And
that's what this is parking.
Thank you.
Thank you, representative Lord,
Representative Jones. Thank you,
madam Chair.
I'm just wondering why we feel
that there's a need for this
since it's it's pretty much
agreed upon that What you're
studying is already
Um, unknown. It's a given.
Who's asking for this, I guess
is what I'm asking members chair
and representative Jones, who's
asking for it are the
Nicotine. Um
Prevention folks the that as I
said before the the nonprofits
who were doing the work
Had their contracts basically
just cut and so there was no for
three months. Four months there
was absolutely nothing going on
in the state in terms of
prevention and treatment from
those nonprofits because they
didn't and we were and I'm not
100% sure we were certain we
would lose some of them.
Because most most people can't
work for free. Unlike us, So, um
Yes, Thank you, Madam Chair and
I appreciate that. I guess I
missed that. And I apologize.
But thank you for the answer.
Thank you, madam Chair.
We're now going. Thank you,
Representative Jones,
Representative Chavez. Um, thank
you, Madam Chair representative,
So I absolutely support the idea
of increasing the amount that is
used for prevention and
cessation. I think that that's
what we really need to do. Um,
but the question that I have is
in terms of the I guess. The
study the effect on excise
taxes.
You arrive at a $10 amount per
pack on Page three.
Can you tell me how you arrived?
Madam Chair representative of
that amount and
It's um it almost feels like
Um, that might be a
recommendation for the
committee. Um, to look at Thank
you, Madam Chair, Madam Chair
and representative Chavez that
that's those numbers came from
The truth initiative, um, the
their policy report, and we're
not necessarily requesting that,
but that is the data that we've
seen that $10 a pack nationwide
would result in 4,800,000 fewer
smokers between the ages of 12
and 25. So that's just just kind
of a reference point. That's not
what we're looking at per se.
But that's a reference point
that there has been research
around.
Thank you, manager.
I don't see any other questions.
I will entertain a motion.
I'm sure like to make a motion
for a do pass.
It's been moved by
representative case that there's
a do pass on house Memorial 51.
Is there a second? A second it
Representative Chavez provides
the second
Is there any opposition?
Sen. No opposition. You have a
do pass, Madam chair.
So members we will meet on
Friday. Um, I'm anticipating
that we will be hearing
The Senate bill on the
Healthcare authority. The
Which I'm carrying So in the
house, so and I believe we got
one other, Um
One other
12, okay?
Okay. Senate Bill 127, so we
will meet on Friday.
Hopefully, we'll get through our
agenda and we won't have to meet
on Saturday. Um, but stay tuned
in, uh, with that we are
adjourned for today. Thank you.
