Yeah.
Representative check.
Here.
Representative Lord.
Representative.
Here
Representative Montoya.
Isn't.
Representative yes here.
Madam chair bash.
And madam chair.
I'm here thank you.
Okay so again I'm going to say
one more time we are not hearing
H. B. one seventy five today at
the Sanchez requests so we will
go ahead with memorial thirty
six and again I apologize that
we don't have interpretation
services
We're working on it so thank you
go ahead Representative on
toria.
Madam chair good morning and
committee members and the
listening audience out there in
cyber land thank you for giving
me the honor of presenting house
memorial thirty six this morning
it's asking the Legislative help
health and Human Services
Committee to study hospital
charges for uninsured patients.
I believe that the legislature
should hear how public funds are
used by hospitals and what
uninsured patients are charged
for their care.
You for a go into.
The full presentation of this
memorial I want to share just a
little personal testimonial.
I have lived for thirty eight
years with HIV and the only
member of the Senate and the
house who has that.
They went.
For most of my adult life up
until the last two years I have
been uninsured it's been spotty
work in nonprofit struggling
grassroots.
Providers that that are
important but didn't have the
capacity and over the course of
my life.
I have been.
I fell into you know I I lived
in New York City Los Angeles and
I was hospitalized for various
reasons and it was extremely
stressful.
To see.
That I didn't have insurance in
that I was put into debt
collection.
The pressure the stress of that
little loan you know healing
from whatever ailment I had at
the time.
I was dean middle class you know
I don't have children I'm not
extremely poor.
But it it struck me personally
when I was asked to look at
possibly presenting this
particular house memorial I said
absolutely yes.
This is the governing body the
best thing we can do is to
convene.
To deliberate to sift through in
really consider fully the laws
that exist those that perhaps
should particularly when they
pertain to health care so it's a
deep honor to serve on this
committee I'd like to just read
the opening passage before we go
to our.
Our our guests.
The bill request of the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee holds a
hearing on hospital charges for
New Mexico's uninsured patients
and for the Human Human Services
Department HSD to report on New
Mexico hospitals use of public
funds in provisions for
financial assistance for those
uninsured.
Last year was part of the of the
body and we passed the in twenty
twenty one the patient debt
protection act it's a great step
I'm not sure how many of those
most vulnerable across our state
understand the implications and
the benefit of that law just
yet.
In closing I represent a very
rural.
District.
Colfax County all of moda chunk
of some again in a large swath
of Rio Arriba County I know
personally that many of my
constituents fall into the
category of severe poverty.
You're looking for the research
something that really popped up
for me apparently there was a
hold on and
of New Mexicans and it stated
that fifty nine percent of New
Mexicans needed tests treatments
appointments and prescriptions
or had problems getting care
simply because of the cost.
Last summer I was part of the
first in a row process and I
appreciated so much that
experience because it was
relaxed we had time to delve
deep to unpack to consider fully
it is our duty as a legislative
body to bring the best possible
product forward.
With that madam chair and
committee members I present my
to.
Witnesses who I see have been
waiting patiently.
Mr Nicholas Cordoba who works as
an advocate diligently at the
New Mexico Senator Laughlin and
poverty and Dr Jessie Barnes.
Thank you for back to you madam
chair.
Your experts can go ahead and
make a statement if they want or
go ahead however you want to do
it okay let's go let's go with.
Nicholas go to the doctor first.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee for someone to
just give you a heads up that my
internet is a little spotty
today so if I come in and out
that's fine.
Thank Mike representative image
way said my name is Nicholas
Cordoba I'm gonna turn it the
New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty an organization
dedicated to social and economic
justice through legal
representation and policy
advocacy we at the center are
members of the New Mexico
together for health care
campaign which is a community
led movement seeking quality
affordable healthcare for all
New Mexicans.
Every New Mexicans should be
able to access the healthcare
they need without being afraid
of devastating medical debt.
Fortunately that is not the
reality for many New Mexicans so
let me tell a story about an
individual we worked with that
the center is Ms Michael.
Michael works at an assisted
living facility here in
Albuquerque he lives here in
Albuquerque but he doesn't have
health insurance in fact he
couldn't and can't get health
insurance because his job
doesn't offer it.
And he is eligible for BeWellNM.
Over a year ago he was rushed to
hospital after being bitten by a
brown recluse spider home.
When he was discharged several
days later the hospital sent him
a bill for over sixty thousand
dollars so without insurance he
was paying entirely out of
pocket and the hospital self pay
policy brought his bill to still
over eighteen thousand dollars.
So many came to us for
assistance and we look this bill
we choose hospitals price
transparency tool to compare his
charges to insurance companies
would pay for those same
services.
And we noticed that even with
the discount.
He was charged substantially
more than one insurance
companies would pay just as an
example for blood tests alone he
was build a hundred ten dollars
that is up to ten times what
plans on BeWellNM would pay for
that same service ten times.
Because he couldn't afford his
bill he was sent to collections
later on.
Unfortunately there are tens of
thousands of New Mexicans who
can who could be placed in
similar situations.
The most recent projection says
that over two hundred thousand
Mexicans don't qualify for a CD
don't have health insurance.
Nearly one in for New Mexicans
have medical debt in collections
and thousands are being sued by
hospitals for bills they can
never afford.
This past December alone.
Two hospitals in New Mexico sued
almost one hundred patients in
one month.
And we know that people facing
medical debt are three times
more likely to postpone needed
medical care.
Even though public funds are
made available to help with the
cost of providing care to
uninsured and low income New
Mexicans we know that a lot of
these patients who should be
getting a lower financial
systems right are still falling
through the cracks.
Data from the iris and twenty
nineteen shows that for New
Mexico's nonprofit hospitals an
average of over one third of
their bad debt.
Came from low income patients
who are not getting financial
assistance for which they
qualify.
Some hospitals reported that
these low income patients
accounted for up to two thirds
of their bad debt accounts.
So what this shows is that a lot
of uninsured patients and
lowincome patients are likely
getting hit with hospital bills
that should either be reduced or
eliminated altogether.
And there are state and federal
sources of funding to cover the
cost of care for uninsured
patients the state seeking Ecker
pool county indigent funds
federal ideas H. payments.
And this doesn't even account
for the tax benefits realized by
all of our a nonprofit hospice
here.
And like Representative Montoya
said earlier this Legislature
fortunately passed the patients
to collection protection act
which requires hospitals to
annually report to HSD how
they're using the state mobile
funds.
And so this memorial service is
a critical first step in
providing transparency on how
hospitals are spending our
public money for uninsured
patients.
And it's well past time we had a
conversation about this issue
and whether we are as a state
are doing enough to provide
affordable Care toward low
income patients.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Thank you so much Nicholas.
I'd like to just Dr Jessie
Barnes who is a frontline
practitioner in the field to
speak on this thank you the
words go ahead.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Montoya and
members of the committee I'm up
practicing family physician and
spent the last fifteen years
working in a variety of settings
around New Mexico currently work
at a community health center in
the south valley and also
started a couple of patient
focused advocacy groups one of
which work exclusively around
issues of a medical debt so this
is an issue that's extremely
important to me and and I think
many if not all of their primary
care physicians around the state
Representative Montoya shared a
really powerful story as the
necklace to me the the first
thing that comes to mind when I
think about this issue as a
patient I saw very early on in
my career when I was doing locum
service substitute doctor job in
Cuba New Mexico for a couple
days an elderly gentleman who
had fallen and and suffered a
really bad laceration serve
through the outside of his nose
that went all the way through to
the inside of the nodes and we
spend this this fairly long
visit with me trying to explain
all the potential risks and
complications and why it was
really important for him to go
into Albuquerque and have a
specialist to a high level
prepare this issue to prevent
infections and other problems
down the road and he was on
unfortunately uninsured and the
entire visit answering those
medical concerns with his
financial concerns how much is
it going to cost what financial
aid policies would be available
and I I simply couldn't answer
those questions it's too complex
a system to understand for every
patient how much particularly
care it is going to cost he
ended up asking me to do the
best I could I spent half an
hour on the phone with a doctor
in Albuquerque trying my hardest
to do a procedure which is
really so something that that
shouldn't have been done in the
field there but but that the
specialized centre in New Mexico
and and still to this day that
that that patient did not
receive the highest level of
care that was available because
he was uninsured and did not
have access to to the means to
to get that care and
unfortunately I think that sort
of set the tone for.
For a career in in primary care
Stewart on the daily basis
across the state we're forced to
consider their patients the cost
of the billing policies the
financial aid policies rather
than the medical issues at hand
I know that the the legislature
did some amazing work last year
but this is still a I think
issue it's very complex just to
point out a couple of the issues
that we run into fairly
frequently.
Even when we know that charges
for particular services when
patients are sick they don't
usually know what they have that
sort of the root of the problem
and so if you don't know what
you have you don't know what the
charges associated with their
care going to be so there's
really most of the time no
accurate way to anticipate
exactly how much services are
going to cost ahead of time and
secondly I think across the
state in various hospitals which
do amazing work taking care of
New Mexicans the variety of
different financial aid policies
and how those policies are
publicized and advertised how
the agents apply for and get
access to those policies who
qualifies for those policies
based on your income level based
on their residency these issues
are incredibly complex they're
fairly opaque most of the time
and most of our patients many of
our providers simply don't have
the knowledge and expertise to
navigate all those complexities
and give patients an accurate
sense of how much services are
going to cost what programs are
available and server leave that
that worried that patients often
have about about setting up in
crippling medical debt and so in
the in spite of the work that
was done last year I think
there's still a lot to be
studied on this issue
we need to know what the
policies are across the state as
Nicolas that we need to know how
public dollars are being spent
on programs for uninsured
patients so that we can find out
where the locals where the gaps
are so that we can inform the
the public of New Mexico what is
available and and people can
stop having to the neglect
themselves in their care out of
fear of medical that so I'm very
grateful to Representative
Montoya for bringing this
memorial and for all of your FIR
hearing it today and I will
stand along with Nicolas for any
questions that the committee
has.
Thank you Nicolas and doctor
Barnes.
Representative Montoya did you
have anything you want to say
are we ready to go to the
public.
I wanted to publicly thank both
of my expert witnesses for
having the diligence the
experience and those stories
really are deeply touching we
talk about equity but what does
that actually mean.
How do we impact that to make it
real living breathing Policy.
I think we should move on madam
chair to listen to the public
next thank you so much for that
thank you Representative okay
we're gonna go ahead and do a
whole so I'm don't write don't
raise your hand yet although and
you probably can but and please
vote in the poll.
Continuing to go up so I'm gonna
wait a minute so we get to.
Somewhat stable numbers.
And madam chair it looks the
poll is I'm seeing on the screen
relates to HB seventeen.
I see it too I'm sorry I
selected the wrong one.
That's okay people know what
we're talking about so we're
just we're going to go with that
so
that we with the the memorial
were on so twenty five hundred
twenty five people are in favor
and so let's that we will go to
go to the audience for COVID.
And since there's a lot of hands
raised will start with support
so we'll start with and there's
a one minute timer it it'll be
on your screen so please that
try and make your remarks within
that time and we'll start with
reporter Griego.
Good morning everyone.
Yes Representative Griego I live
in Albuquerque New Mexico and
I'm speaking as a.
Patient when I was between jobs
from June to December of last
year I didn't have health
insurance and
I avoided buying my asthma
medicine and avoided getting a
foot xray because I didn't
qualify for Medicaid and
insurance on the exchange was
too expensive so please support
house memorial thirty six please
I also have an R. and here that
I don't know if.
Sh I can speak for her.
Yes.
I'm at the clinic right now
issue there with you let me try
to find her.
Our.
Are you still there.
She's of the patient okay in
your if you have heard when
she's there with the patient
we're still doing this you can
just raise your hand again and
I'll call on you if she's there
what we will hear from her.
After that we will go with that
I chose state law hair.
directos de la mohair are you
there.
Okay I'm not I'm not hearing
anything from them will go to.
Lee yes Sanchez.
Madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for having
me my name is Leah Sanchez and
I'm the executive director of
the New Mexico Public Health
Association.
We whole heartedly support agent
thirty six because uninsured
folks in New Mexico are more
likely to be from communities of
color and we believe this is an
issue of health equity and
racial justice.
The New Mexico Public Health
Association association
represents over five hundred
public health workers across the
state one of our members is a
surgeon who has operated and
several nonprofit hospitals
across New Mexico he is
experienced that the process for
connecting has uninsured
patients to aid public aid that
they qualify for it's very
difficult cumbersome and
unequally applied and that many
of his uninsured patients end up
delaying very necessary cost
care due to cost.
Please support transparency and
racial justice in New Mexico by
voting to pass on H. M. thirty
six thank you for your time.
Next we have bill Wagner.
Hi can you hear me yes.
Hi this is bill Wagner I'm a
clinical social worker and I am
the founder and director of
centrist this we're in
outpatient behavioral health
program in in Albuquerque and we
serve.
Mostly uninsured clients many of
whom are are Spanish speaking
I'm I I just wanted to tell a
story quickly about a incident
that I experience which was I I
showed up at our office in the
south valley one day and there
was a woman in her car grabbing
her chest older woman
and I I I saw her and I ran
inside and so does anyone know
who's who's who's in the car and
and one of our employees said
budget my mom said she looks
like she needs help and we took
her we we wanted to take her to
the hospital and she was afraid
to go my my point being is that
she had had an experience in the
past where she had to pay and
the shoes for charge up front
when it was medically necessary
and it was an emergency and she
was afraid to go there is a lack
of trust in our public
institutions we need
transparency and I think
when we win we can have more
transparency about where these
dollars are going and there's
better access we will have less
racial health disparities so I
either need to pass it thank you
thank you and remember there's a
one minute timer if you're
finishing up I'll let you go on
but if you're and.
Going on and on I I may M. ask
you to stop so next we will do
yes share.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Debbie a ship New Mexico voices
for children and I'm here in
support of house memorial thirty
secs no family should have to
face high hospital charges and
the risk of medical data
especially if they're uninsured
and in need of financial support
House more your third house
memorial thirty six is an
essential stop to study
uninsured patients hospital
charges and the relationship
between hospitals public funds
and the financial assistance at
hospitals given to low income
patients we strongly urge your
support the House memorial
thirty six thank you.
Thank you next we'll go to curse
breaker.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee this Kurt right
here the for of loop for avid
sinister New Mexico the three FC
also advocates this morning on
behalf of the New Mexico
conference of churches I'm here
is this morning the state are
strong support for H. M. thirty
six we supported patients debt
collection legislation last
session agree that agents at
thirty six in the is an
important follow up to that very
important bill transparency is
critical equal and fair billing
it as as well as we saw last
year medical debt has reached
crisis proportions in the fear
of that that will keep me low
income New Mexicans who are
uninsured from seeking care more
work needs to be done to
understand how state aid dollars
are spent and how is the state
can better ensure equity in
health care for all New Mexicans
I urge your support for eighteen
thirty six and thank you for
this opportunity speak to this
morning.
Thank you next we have
and M. eight FC.
Good morning and this is the low
end with New Mexico Asian
families can you hear me yes we
can go ahead okay thank you and
hi my name is home we and and
I'm with New Mexico Asian
families.
At idea madam chair and members
of the committee I'm here to
support H. and thirty six
are because we at stop we are
talking about law than a two
hundred thousand an issue of
patients in New Mexico we also
talking about the public funding
that the hospital at using to
public school packet that Jack.
So I'm here to really.
You to vote yes for these
memorial two up to start the
first back in making sure
transparency and potentially
accountability of four people
that are really vulnerable so
again thank you so much for your
walk and hope that US the staff
and well thank you again.
Thank you next we have all my
all of us.
Good morning thank you for
giving me the opportunity my
name is that amount of us I'm a
community health worker I've
been working with the community
for eighteen years on health
care access and I've seen many
many barriers for our community
I support the H. H. M. thirty
six we do need more
accountability we do need more
more transparency right now for
people to apply for the
financial aid in a public
hospital it's four months before
they can see somebody for
financial aid application
process in Albuquerque you would
have to go all the way to Rio
Rancho in order for you to
process that application so you
know I know that we have a job
with the COVID but it is hard
for our community to have to
wait for months before they can
no you know if they fight in the
if they could qualify for the
program so I do support the H.
M. thirty six thank you.
Thank you all my next we have
Joseph from.
Good morning.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Joseph
Cromwell I live in Albuquerque.
I recently retired and now on
Medicare and I was stunned to
learn last month that my monthly
copay for my medication is gone
up two and a half times I'm
gonna pay two and a half times
more and I'm wondering if the
same pricing principle the less
money you have the more you'll
be charged will apply to any
future stay in the hospital I
know I'm responsible for twenty
percent of it so the total makes
a big difference I've known for
years that health care providers
charged people without health
insurance more but I didn't
realize that hospitals receive
state funds to provide health
services for the uninsured and I
wonder about the financial
reasoning behind the structure
pricing is it that people with
fewer resources will be unable
to hire a lawyer to challenge an
exorbitant hospital or medical
bill at any rate I'm asking this
committee to just the House
memorial thirty six of
but prime price structuring for
the sake of transparency and for
fairness in regards to health
care costs thank you very much
for your thank you Serra man's.
Good morning.
Thank you madam chair Sarah Maez
Mexico coalition for affordable
prescription and this morning to
asked the committee to pass the
memorial because so many of the
stories that we hear from around
our state about patients have
trouble accessing prescriptions
are stories from folks who have
also experienced medical billing
that is impacting them because
they're uninsured and we believe
that there's a significant cost
over here and that this morning
really helps to better
understand the problem and help
all of us to support people in
our state you need a
prescription medications to be
sent to or from thank you.
Thank you next we have blonde
send the.
Then I don't know how to
pronounce your your last name.
on the sea where did you go
okay.
Go ahead look plan.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I want
to especially thank the sponsor
for this memorial and glad to
see that he is well and
recovered well M. as a cancer
patient and today marking world
cancer day I know that many
members of this committee have
been impacted by cancer what
many of us face as cancer
patients is really going through
treatment but having to also
become experts in insurance and
especially for those that are
uninsured having to both
navigate their cancer their
prognosis while also navigating
the hospital systems and finding
coverage is also a challenge the
understanding in equities
whether it's being charged
different amounts compared to
other chemotherapies is
important that's why I urge your
passing of house memorial thirty
six so that we can understand
the inequities and injustices
that many of our cancer patients
like myself face thank you.
Thank you thank you for all your
advocacy through the years next
we have Lee roast so.
Good morning.
Madam chair and committee of
coming committee members.
My name is leroy so I am from
hello guys a small community
eight miles north of Gallup.
And one of the core leaders for
for together action we are in
support of HM Curtis six one
hundred percent.
No one should be taken out of
town to be traded when there are
when there is a hospital in our
town.
As language Berrier is a big
factor with a diverse community
maybe don't have insurance and
never get a chance to get.
An explanation for what they are
being built for this bill will
help the patients and.
Doctors have better
communication thank you.
Thank you Lee Roy
Next Fred costs the dissolute.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Fred I
am the siege W. community health
worker class of the salute a
personal story myself I have had
been uninsured during the time
where I suffered a severe spinal
injury
I had to forgo having to go
through diagnostic tests until
my income tax was ready so I had
to wait for about six months
before I was able to actually be
seen as so that I can pay for
and more hi in more cost me
about thirty six hundred dollars
and
We should be able to have access
this is definitely a situation
about equity transparency and
accountability if I would have
none of these
services were up an actual
option things would have
definitely been a little bit
better on my and
so please please supports
I. H. M. thirty six it's it's it
it's a multi faceted situation
it would must be addressed thank
you so much.
Thank you read next Barbara
Webber.
Morning madam chair and members
of the community of the
committee also want to thank the
sponsor for bringing this very
important bill forward
Health Action New Mexico which
I'm the director totally
supports HM thirty six we've
supported similar bills in the
past and we think the time has
come and it's never more
important in addition to
everything everyone he said one
reminded committee that this
year we expect the end of the
public health emergency
federally eighty five thousand
people will drop off of Medicaid
and will be without insurance
unless we have a really.
plan to include them we also
have the children's credit.
Expanded that has went away
January first and so for four
hundred fifty thousand children
they lost that additional source
of income so we're very
concerned that the number of the
uninsured is really going to
grow and then next year too so
we strongly support the bill.
Thank you Barbara next we have
Althea Yazidi.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee can you hear me
yes.
My name is they are they are
from time makes the Mexico I
live on the Navajo reservation
for the past six years I've been
fighting for affordable health
care for New Mexico families.
And this year I my symptoms from
our way I has been to shift guns
Sen Graham.
And now I have to travel to
Albuquerque for medical
assistance I support HB thirty
six.
And let's keep our insured
families ensure our renewable
people over here are struggling
and are free to even go to the
hospital because of because of
insurance reasons our survey
showed that one hundred percent
of us natives are really scared
to go to the hospital because
some of them are aging and very
the ones that are insured are
being charged twice so we need
to keep our families out there
just remember our lives are
aren't valued their valued thank
you.
Thank you all the next.
Mark Christiansen.
Maybe I'm saying the name wrong
at the last name is
Christiansen.
Hi this is Kristin sent.
I'm good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Margaret Christensen I'm a
family nurse practitioner at
casa de salute and Albuquerque
and between patients right now
this morning.
At the eighty percent of my
patients are uninsured and as a
primary care provider it's
really common that when I
recommend patients go to the
emergency room or follow up with
the specialist they declined
because of their fears of
medical that.
Many have been to the emergency
department in the past and may
still be paying off debt years
later this makes my job much
harder because my patients are
opting out of higher levels of
care because they're concerned
for finances and they often will
ask me the costs of medical care
at the hospital in their process
of deciding whether or not to go
I strongly support HM thirty six
thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you next we have forward
together action.
Where did that go ahead.
Yes.
Okay good.
Yeah.
and not on it
that how may I don't think I'm
not
I think you are muted in all our
thank you a lot of trouble thank
you thank you madam chair and
the rest of the committee and
and then there click on their I
strongly support.
Thirty six.
And that is.
That is what I want but I think
I am one of the core leader of
McKinley County and that we
need.
And I speak for everyone across
the state.
As usual I would like to pay
that to to everybody out there
what I say at the meeting and
how happy state.
And and I believe that our
leader and advocate will do that
act because we fought to log for
that.
And it's time that we put it on
the table and get.
Thank you very much of the day
and a lot of that black.
Thank you next we have Maria
Burciaga.
Okay it says
Maria is using an older version
of them so I'm going to promote
you to panelists Maria.
Maria are you there.
Yes thank.
Yes good morning madam chair and
madam.
Members of the committee my name
is Nadia we'll see that I didn't
time alright and I am from.
I'm with strong families and for
together I strongly support the
the bill H. M. thirty six.
Because so it's I needed a.
It's something that we need and
it's been too long that we're
waiting for it to happen thank
you.
Thank you Hoover Hoover or Lou.
Yes hi sorry this is doctor
Connie Lou.
I work as an OBGYN and McKinley
County I just wanted to find
some of my experiences I know so
my parents my patients and like
this community are primarily
Navajo and I will say that the
issues that are brought up in
this bill affect my patients at
our local private community
hospital seventy percent of
patients serve there are native
American in a county where
twenty percent of community
members are on on in short it's
very clear that patients have
issues with navigating the
system of with track price
transparency I know the patient
who was delivered a baby at the
local hospital and received an
unexpected bill this was a woman
who had persistence access to a
computer and time to navigate
the system and she it took her
several phone calls and several
weeks before she could resolve
her bill I know that this is not
going to be the case with many
of my other patients who have
difficulties of navigating the
system because they don't have
regular access to the internet
long distances away and don't
have regular phone service age
this house bill thirty states
will go a long way towards
identifying those issues and
reducing the barriers to care in
our area and so I just speak is
strongly in support of that
thank you.
Thank you for taking the time
doctor Lou and our last
committee is Kenya you just go
ahead.
Sorry this is really I think you
accidentally unmuted me okay
actually I'm can you is is also
go ahead.
Yes.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee my name is connect you
just I am a clinical coordinator
at this estimate in Albuquerque
New Mexico and the population
that we do see here in our
clinic are mainly uninsured
patients and a lot of them do
decline being referred to
hospitals just because of how
scared they are to become and
debt and personally myself I
growing up had to go to Mexico
just because my family was so
scared of that and the that
there was not a lot of Aid
economically so yeah please
report house memorial thirty
six.
Thank you.
Susan Valentina.
Susan you can go ahead.
Yes good morning madam chair and
the committee thank you so much
for the opportunity to say a few
words I wanted to relate to
personal story
my mother lived in Abbey Q. New
Mexico very rural northern New
Mexico and lived on a fixed
income and was very very
concerned about medical bills
she developed significant cough
some years ago
and continue to be treated the
local clinic they're on and they
were just not able to deal with
her particular issue but because
of the cost
she did not travel to Santa Fe
or Albuquerque for a specialist
care should need to be seen by a
pulmonologist turned out she had
a condition that was very
treatable in its early stages
call back it's a our version of
tuberculosis essentially on and
so but she did get to a
specialist two years later in
spite of our you know continued
please to to seek attention at
medical care and and that we
would help her pay for she would
not she.
She two years later when she
finally did get treatment on she
was in critical and critical
state was not able to survive it
and it was something that was
very treatable in its early
stages it was a devastating
situation for the entire family
something that I would not want
any family to go through on and
so forth for this kind of
situation for these reasons I'm
hopeful that you will support
House morning thirty six thank
you.
Thank you I'm here in moon yo's.
Or good morning everybody
I am grateful where they're at
and those in Albuquerque New
Mexico working in this
organization for three years and
the amount of uninsured patients
I've encountered have financial
issues that is outstanding we
have all we have multiple is we
have had a multiple instances
where people patients have been
referred to urgent care or the
E. R. and have declined due to
how expensive a trip to the
hospital can be.
Elaine their health just to
avoid that so this is why I ask
you to please eight and thirty
six thank you so much.
Thank you we have two more hands
and and I'm gonna stop it after
that because hands keep popping
up so we'll go to Diana Medrano.
Diana are you there.
Thank.
Yes.
Diana.
Are you able to hear me yes.
Please.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is yes
I am a clinical coordinator
addresses number and I'll get
you Mexico Senator is a small
clinic
in the south valley this is a
large population of people who
are uninsured
and seeing a whole patients
turned down medical help that is
very necessary for them to live
a healthy lifestyle due to
cost of medical care
is it just seems unacceptable
and people are having to choose
between their health and being
economically stable.
And I believe this is a choice
and no one should be forced to
make and this is why I ask that
you please support HM thirty six
thank you.
Thank you this time our real
last Madam and and I'm going to
kick Representative bash I'm I
am presenting a bill in tax any
time now so I may just pop off
and if you if I'll send you a
text are let you know when I'm
going to so our last one is live
here Regino.
I'm good morning can you hear me
yes.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee and sponsor I
appreciate your sponsorship it
is very crucial that this gets
past I am the community health
worker and I work doing
community advocacy for over
twenty years and I've seen first
firsthand the fact that people
actually pushed away the
medically necessary procedures
because of lack of insurance and
and the fact that the hospital
sometimes just it's not very
transparent so it is crucial
that that this gets passed so
that so that we can see more
people I received the services
and the care that they need
especially with this comment
I've seen people who have just
pushed away necessary medical
medical care being really sick
with COVID and just staying at
home and some of them survived
and some of them did it so this
is crucial thank you very much.
Thank you all for your I am
wonderful comments we I will go
to the committee Representative
Boca.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you and Representative Montoya
for bringing this for it this is
such an important thing for the
state to do you
And really thank you for the
beautiful testimony at the
community members who are doing
the where where the most
impacted by what this will do
you hearing the stories is
absolutely heartbreaking but
also light a fire to do and to
do it now because we know that
that is so powerful it is so
important for good policy making
good just general decision
making and gives us a a for what
doesn't in the right direction
as we think about what the state
the state needs so that we can
do the best by our families I
wanted to share how this would
affect in my family my dad I
remember when I was just
starting college you is climbing
down from the roof after
finishing up fixing the swamp
cooler and as you would as he
was stepping down the ladder he
fell off and he had a I like the
what long gash down his chin
that we could and see the bone
coming out and he said oh my
gosh we have to go to the
hospital and he said no no no we
can't because I don't have
health insurance and I don't
have many
and that to me was just one of
them instruments Ising ends in
my life because I had to sit
there and watch it and not be
able to do anything and he
called my uncle over and they
helped to just steal it together
with what we had at school then
he did his best to continue
cleaning and for days on end and
I I came to an understanding at
that moment that this wasn't the
first time that they had to do
something like this they knew
exactly what to do and they were
supportive of each other to
commend each other and at that
moment I realized yes health
care is absolutely a human right
but is not something that's
recognized by our institutions
by who has and who doesn't have
access so with all the parables
stories here today I just wanna
thank you all.
For reminding us of why we need
to be doing this work and again
thank you so much Representative
Montoya elsewhere and ensuring
this this gets in front of us
today thank you.
Thank you very much.
I'm.
I'm I'm sorry I'm I'm gonna
present in tap in tax so
Representative bash if you could
please take over.
Thank you.
Yes I am I'm and also secretary.
Last year bash.
The.
You're on yes we have some other
comments from the committee
we'll go to Marian Matthews.
Thank you at madam chair.
Just need to say that.
Tuitions.
I'm.
Eight.
I really appreciate at
Representative Montoya bringing
this issue to us and I'd I'd
never seen a memorial that asked
for a committee of to hold
hearings yeah but I think it's
an interesting idea and I'm
imagine that it's something
that's been done before or at
least Representative Montoya has
has push great new a new
boundaries
what I wanted to say though is
this is going to be a complex
topic we are going to be looking
at.
We're going to be looking not
only at the causes of the
problems that have been
described to us so eloquently by
the audience members and the
experts
but our job is to try to craft
solutions and I think that this
would be a perfect opportunity.
For us to.
Request some assistance.
From
The house to provide us some
additional staffing.
So that we can have people who
are helping us assemble
information sort information
focus do research and help us
come up with the legislative
solutions we need this maybe
should be a subcommittee of the
I mean we might want to do this
to a subcommittee of the full
committee but this to me cries
out for it inputs a spotlight on
the problem of us sitting
without any staff other than
helping with this with the
mechanics of the meetings
to delve into and provide
appropriate solutions for very
complex healthcare problems and
so I would put that forward I
don't quite know how we.
Move that but I'm thinking that
as a committee we could
certainly go to the
leadership and talk to them
about providing just that so
that we can do our job better
and we don't spend a lot of time
hearing about really difficult
problems and then we don't we're
not the position to figure out
appropriate solutions.
So madam chair Representative
Matthews if I if I may respond.
Music to my ears one year ago I
introduced a memorial on rural
infrastructure it turned into a
rural task force we produced a
document that is the
architecture for moving toward
for millions of dollars for
rural infrastructure.
I believe that when policy meets
the people I come from nonprofit
come from public service we have
to listen to our people the
stories today Representative
because well we're riveting they
illustrated beautifully why
we're motivated to do what we
do.
I believe that having.
The interim focused sumptuously
on issue we're all of the
stakeholders come to the table
with their hearts open their
minds keen to find the solutions
but I think Representative
Matthews you point to a very
constructs deviced in that.
What's missing from our in rooms
is a really gender reveal
focused initiative to get to the
nuts and bolts of what policy
must be I will stop their.
Thank thank you.
Joanne for ari.
Your muted I know madam vice
chair I have to leave but I just
wanted to say I support this and
that we need this information
but the there since it's just
started happening here ago or
just just last year we might not
have a lot of information but
what we do will be valuable so
thank you very much for bringing
us forward.
Thank you.
Do I see other hands.
I don't believe so.
Madam chair if I may I just
received a wonderful email from
the director of consumer search
service division from the New
Mexico office of this
superintendent of insurance
they're listening they are
inspired in the committee to
help us during the summer I just
want to let that be known
publicly.
Are you back.
Right Representative tur USCIS.
madam chair thank you very much.
My friend.
Representative will bless for
bringing this you know it's it's
these are tough things that
we're talking about and I agree
with the.
Representative Matthews is
complex.
Is a complex a.
Our
situation we're it's not an easy
there's not an easy answer
there's needs to be a lot more
discussion absolutely we got we
have.
We have people that are afraid
to to go to the doctor I I I
understand that
for financial reasons so does
are fated to go to the doctor
for.
The reason that they don't want
to hear what the doctor really
has to say if that makes any
sense
It's a little scary but you know
I also am concerned that if
we're.
We need to have the conversation
what we gotta be careful always
about balance that we don't
Get out of balance and encourage
people just not to to to pay
and and and because there's so
many ways for them to apply for
assistance and there are gaps
and that's what you're talking
about.
Madam chair representative the
gaps that but I I would agree
with with them that we just have
to have some some constructs a.
Discussions or that we.
Structured discussions we can
actually sent everybody at the
table and and and discuss that
so I appreciate your your
legislation for trying to do
again very complex.
This is just I think of.
To the tip of the iceberg and we
don't want to do is is
abruptly create something that
we go oh no we don't realize
that would cause this that that
that sometimes collateral damage
from trying to do the good the
the right thing thank you madam
chair Representative.
Chair is it time to move that I
do passed yes.
I'm a do pass is there a second.
Second.
Right we have a a motion and a
second and will the secretary
called the roll.
Representative Anderson yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Ferrary is not.
Representative more.
Yes yes.
Representative mark you.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative confirmed.
Yes.
Madam chair bash.
Yes.
Content is not present.
Eight in favor here are part.
All right you have a do pass
Representative Montoya.
Thank you so much.
Yes and we'll hear more about
this issue.
Madam chair if if I may and good
committee I just wanna make a
statement on.
The comment pandemic gives the
silver lining with public ask
access to the comments for me as
a public servant those voices if
you're still listening folks out
there we need to hear from you
it's so inspiring and it informs
everything that I do.
To hear you and understand the
inner intricacies so thanks
again to this committee madam
chair it's been a beautiful day.
We'll see you soon.
Thank you.
Well that concludes our work for
this morning.
And so
Until Monday.
We will.
Be in recess and we'll see you
then.
We have a good weekend with
those in the this what's the.
