State so madam chair gets ready
to present our bill is set up as
a substitute for Senate bill
fifty one is amended its cost
sharing contributions for
prescriptions and more continue
to roll sure.
Representative Kate here
Representative Chavis.
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative part of the LFC
your Representative Jones
Representative more
Representative Sapan ski she's
excuse Representative insincere.
Representative Thomson I'm here
Representative Chavis itself of
use okay other committees are
having trouble getting court
okay and madam chair here.
Because.
Okay SO good morning all I know
we're all.
From bright eyed bushy tailed.
So I do have an amendment madam
chair
Or somewhere.
Yes so alas the the
administrators to pass out the
amendment.
Well the best thing at the
minute would you give us the two
two six.
Okay it.
Two two six three oh two point
one.
Thank you.
The.
The madam chair we need a motion
to have a low staff to discuss
the amendment types of it's been
moved for it to begin with has
been moved with the session okay
thank you madam chair so it's a
little complicated here so I
will try to
not confuse you too much but so
we have if we are anything
health my house bill five forty
this is on three forty the
pricing what we did
I think it was last week where
where's.
Hospitals and clinics that serve
a lot of low income.
Senator people get special drug
prices and so that is being
amended in to Senate bill
sixteen and now fifty four the
committee members.
so Senate bill fifty one is this
is
it prohibits the pharmacy
benefit managers discriminatory
harm.
and it gets really confusing and
I'm really sorry we spent four
days in health and Human
Services this kid from
discussing staffing thank you
feel like you're lost join the
club
so basically what what the
house Senate bill fifty one to
say that.
That company the insurance
companies can not.
Let's say you are low income or
whatever you get get a special
rebate or you get you get
special pricing or there's
there's like I don't remember
what the word is is not grant I
question cost here and so what
teachers companies are doing are
not allowing the money that with
the cost here is to be counted
towards your deductible so even
though you are getting help with
your prescriptions the insurance
companies are tending to did not
count that towards your
deductible and so it doesn't it
helps but it doesn't really help
so that the health the Senate
bill fifty one and I'd probably
I'm not making sense I'm sorry
Senate bill fifty one take care
of that and then we're amending
on that part of House Bill five
forty to protect the safety net
care that that help rural
hospitals UNM.
Lots of and how many.
Somebody named all the hospitals
so that that's what we're doing
and I'll let my experts mmhm
introduce themselves and trying
to make sense of what I just
said.
Chair members of the committee
last week health policy adviser
the governor's office
Senator.
Senate bill fifty one which is
in front of you for the question
contribution for prescriptions
really the results of the work
in the interim by the
prescription drug task force led
by Dr I am asking any she's
actually on her way should be
here shortly
to help answer any questions
just to give you a little bit of
background about what this bill
does it requires insurance
companies to pay independent in
network pharmacies under the
same contract they pay the fees
that are actually owned
pharmacy.
that we built a plane filled it
requires insurers to apply
prescription drug rebates
obtained by insurance companies
for the pharmacy benefit
managers to lower the cost of.
To the insured
their out of pocket costs at the
point of sale
if the reader is more than the
issued out of pocket costs
remain rebate is credited
actually to the insurer.
it really directs rebates to
patients and the purchasers of
insurance instead of the
pharmacy benefit managers and it
prohibits copay accumulators and
maximizes
a little bit of that family team
leader maximize rule from the
insurance programs.
Funds that discount the price of
the prescription drugs to count
toward the patients out of
pocket maximum which means the
pace at which the patient must
pay an additional cost sharing
amounts that split Madam
speaking.
Thank you.
Good morning my name is K.
Parker I'm the CEO for your
hospitals Senator.
For your attention.
Thank you so much for spending
your time on this today and I'm
just here to speak to the
amendment adding our amended
house bill five forty two Senate
bill fifty one because both of
these bills deal with practices
by pharmacy benefit managers
that have for safety net
hospitals covered entities like
us and.
Asians and consumers as were
mentioned in the synopsis is
Senate bill fifty one so
essentially I forty and that
amendment prohibits pharmacy
benefit managers from not
applying the discount that three
forty B. entities like us
services.
Here.
I don't think I'll go through
thank you I don't think I'll go
through the the amendments but
we are straight the all of the
items from Senate floor
amendment number one because it
was unclear and was completely
unenforceable for adding in the.
Part of I forty B. and
It's a definition you can read
it.
So I think madam chair we will
stand for questions or is there
anyone in the audience who is
opposed to the amendment.
So.
So to the amendment after the L.
talk about the amendment okay
can you please the stand up and
introduce yourself and you have
a minute to tell us Madam a
admins please.
Thank you madam chair on job
losses pharmaceutical care
management association I have
real concerns about the
amendment if in fact they are
striking the Senate floor
amendment Senate foreman
required policy maker the drug
manufacturers to offer copay
coupons if they're not from they
just have to offer year round to
all people as a fair making them
available to right move forward
to make drugs more affordable
and striking that.
Takes away that one thing that
actually drugs and report.
The.
Chair members of the committee
my name is I work on a registry
this is health insurance plans
and added benefit of seeing what
is and the commitment that's
proposed here but I would speak
to the Senate floor amendment
which seems to be coming out of
this and please be clear that
what that build the but that
didn't does that makes discounts
and rebates and price reductions
available for everyone we
encourage the committee to think
long and hard about sticking
that in in the now that's what
you has a situation where
coupons are used by drug
manufacturers to keep prices
artificially high they are used
by nonprofit foundations.
Fractures in use selected.
Ice hockey instead of just
simply reducing price shipping
and then the office would
essentially say keep those
prices high we want to continue
using coupons and this
circuitous fashion and
understand that on the federal
level these funds are considered
a little cake that so I would
urge the by urge this committee
to think long and hard about.
The Senate forming.
The bill that we have issues
with we don't have the benefit
of thank you thank you very
much.
Thank you a good morning madam
chair members of the committee
impact log stating on behalf of
prime therapeutics this morning
speaking management initially we
had some concerns about three
forty B. language in the bill
that bill was subsequently
amended so assuming that we're
using the last four of the five
forty eight okay with the I will
echo the concerns raised by Mr
box Mr Moore you thank that
stripping the floor amendment
and limiting the use of coupons
to commercial insurance shows
the true intent of this bill
last to maximize drug spend by
insurance companies it feels
like it helps the insurer on the
front and the back and you're
looking at a lot of pain because
you're using more brand name
drugs more expensive drugs and
so it's not going to help save
people thank you.
Thank you so we're going to do
this is there anyone.
I'm sorry to the zoo is there
anyone assumes opposed to the
amendment.
See no hands there is there
anyone with going back to the
audience who is here in support
of the amendments.
Thank you very much would you
please go forward you will each
have a minute to speak chair my
name is that we Representative
Mexico Hospital soldiers.
And I favor with this I ordered
those
bills if you want it's very
important we have twenty one
do Raul disproportionate share
hospitals that serve a
disproportionate share of low
income individuals also read a
list of school owner statewide
everyone who is Committee have
hospitals that will fall.
And are also.
Of clinics throughout the state
report abuse as well as.
Thank you.
Please.
Madam chairman of the committee
my name is Naeem question staff
at the university of New Mexico
but we do urge adoption of the
amendment we do feel there is a
nexus between what Senator fifty
one is trying to achieve and
also from the standpoint of
three forty providers were
providing care to the most low
income and underserved
populations in the state we urge
your support for the men thank
thank you for going out is is
there anyone who stands in
support of the amendment.
For instance there were going to
the committee to discuss the
amendment Jeff.
Maybe.
So the Senate floor the reason
were how many help the Senate
floor amendment is because it's
very in that it introduces many
fifth terms any factor in
customer which were not included
or defined insists Senate bill
fifty one manufactures works
looted from all Senate bill
fifty one House Bill five forty
the practice is thought to be
remedy I do feel are the
practices of PBMs not
manufacturers similarly the
entities protected by these
bills were enroll using group
health coverage and three forty
he covered entities the
amendment introduces the term
customer which is undefined
overly broad equities compass
far more entities than either
bill included it's unenforceable
due to its very essence customer
was not defined in the amendment
there's no way it should be to
determine the requirements of
the amendment would like to the
customers of many factors could
be construed to include
pharmacies PBMs as well as
patients thank you madam chair
thank you.
Going back to the committee
committee you have any questions
regarding payment Representative
del Norman Division.
Yes ma'am thank you madam chair
and.
and and thank you so it just so
we heard from here and I do not
have time for coughs.
it so it sounds to me like the
concerns although we passed
house bill the concerns in this
committee it sounds to me like
they have been addressed in this
amendments which was wanted to
make sure that the cost savings
for being passed down to
patients and not just at the
hospital level is that is that
correct what I'm understanding
from the Senate chair
representative page yet now and
not just a hop I mean we're not
targeting the hospital where
I'm particularly pharmacy
benefits managers is what these
what this bill will will address
okay and
and can you tell me.
can you tell we address some of
the concerns that we heard today
regarding the coupons why do you
feel is what will need for
expert witnesses twenty the
concerns that we heard today
from the opposition how do
parents Nick's plane was in men
yes right now.
madam chair members of the
committee it's specifically as
stated by madam chair regarding
the coupons it's unenforceable
we didn't have the language
state
we are not the bill does not
address the manufacturers per se
it's really the pharmacy
benefit.
Madam chair and chair members of
the committee thank you just add
one more item because customers
is not defined in the Senate
floor amendment make a list
right because customers not to
find there it could be anything
including us right the pharmacy
that is seeking spittle pharmacy
because the floor amendment says
any discount that three forty B.
pharmacy receive should be
applied to everyone that would
potentially violate federal law
because nine covered entities
can't receive three for you the
discount so it would probably
unintentionally.
The result a lot of litigation
around who can and cannot
participate three forty B.
because it doesn't define
customer and for.
Thank you very much for the
chair.
Could anybody else right may I
have a motion regarding the
amendment.
We accept the.
To accept the million and
seconded is there is there
anyone in opposition of
accepting them I am sorry roll
call please okay Representative
Kate yes Representative.
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative because the LCS
Representative Jones no.
Representative more.
Senator kanske Representative in
Sanzone.
Representative Thomson yes
yes.
You have.
It amended bill twice.
L. O. G. is there anything that
it was about this bill is just.
I have to work for if they want
to join us
the state of this thanks for the
Senate and I carried this over
there but I.
My the real experience Dr
Macanese this year the.
yes force and
questions regarding her findings
all of this bill and some other
bills came from her task force
for the.
It is.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee on farmer mac's.
His run New Mexico cancer center
and have the honor of June the
governor's task force where we
look at those things because
that could decrease the cost of
drugs to patients in New Mexico
and all the recommendations that
we put forth in this bill have
that particular goal.
The main additional of cost
after the drug use the
manufacture is through pharmacy
benefit managers and fifty
percent of the cost of the drug
to the patient provided by the
county.
And so this bill would decrease
their ability to take that we
have thank you.
Was it just.
But.
I think this is an important
step in making sure that the
people of New Mexico we'll be
able to take drugs at a cost
that comes more affordable and
we hope to continue that work.
Representative.
All right so I'm going to the.
To the audience is there anyone
in this.
As amended.
Please go forward and we will
have a.
Madam chair members the
committee on the bus the
pharmaceutical care management
association we risen in
opposition to this bill from our
process this does not save New
Mexicans.
It will raise premiums will cost
people more because of said
Senate finance another place if
you cannot pay more and pay less
if you are pushing these costs
back on the front plans those
plans will have to increase
premiums for the have to
increased costs here the
minister down from the Senate
floor making funds available to
everyone it made you also an
option an inmate drugs cheaper
that's now so we're just off of
the bill is gonna raise premiums
and we it is these are not for
the poorest in the indigent
they're not allowed Medicaid
they're legal they're not
available to uninsured these are
only coupons offers insured
people to specifically push them
to higher costs drugs whether
cheaper options.
For that reason the same
opposition the.
Committee of morning passed a
lot of those are consulting
registered lobbyists with prime
therapeutics we oppose the bill
is a mishmash of these three
different bills now so it's been
hard to track we have from
senator hospital.
I think if you look at your FIR
each of the responding agencies
talked about multi million
dollar increase in costs that's
the just one day after the same
thing will happen on commercial
insurance market so to concerns
on state budget aren't enough to
this year this is going to be
expensive problem for public.
Markets experiencing thank you
very much.
Is there anyone who stands in
opposition to the bill as
amended.
I see of Chelsea Canada Telsey
you'll have one minute.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we
respectfully oppose this bill
the chamber supports efforts to
expansive stable access to
affordable health care coverage
for all New Mexicans and
businesses this includes
ensuring the appropriate cost
management of limited healthcare
resources and prescription
medications we appreciate the
attention of the legislature and
the executive to look into cost
drivers of health care New
Mexico our members support
transparency initiatives that
address the entire prescription
drug drug supply chain to ensure
accountability but this proposal
does not provide for that and
only focuses on specific
elements we also support lower
costs but are concerned like
others in opposition that this
will not address those costs
thank you.
Thank you we're going to Terry
Cole.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee hi
Terry Cole president and CEO of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce we believe this
legislation as well intended as
it is purports to lower drug
prices I truly believe what
actually results increased
health coverage costs for New
Mexicans for example requiring
health plans to pass on direct
rebates at this point of scale
would prevent them from using
the rebates currents that lower
health coverage premiums across
the board similarly we believe
this bill will ultimately
encourage thank you so much more
expensive drugs when lower cost
alternatives are available this
two would result we believe and
higher health premiums generally
speaking for these reasons
because of that many
prescriptive costly regulations
in this bill that would raise
health coverage costs we
respectfully oppose this
legislation madam chair members
of the committee I appreciate
the time to share our views.
Thank you.
Of the harbor.
Good morning my name is Dr
Latino Mendez Harper and I am a
pharmacist and we're with prime
therapeutics which is the PBM
owned in part by Blue Cross blue
shield in New Mexico I stand in
a respectful opposition this
bill and wanted to explain one
of the more concerning concepts
The statement was made earlier
that what this bill is intending
to do is to even the playing
field for non affiliated
pharmacies with PVM affiliated
pharmacies.
Sorry apologies.
I'm.
But I wanted to just share with
everyone that that's already in
statute that not affiliated
pharmacies have to be paid as
the same as affiliated
pharmacies if they are providing
the same services what this bill
is actually doing is mixing up
affiliated pharmacies with the
concept of preferred provider
networks I would have preferred
provider is whether it's a
pharmacy or infusion site those
are providers that are willing
to offer their services at a
lower cost and because of that
the insurers share those cost
savings directly with the member
either at the pharmacy counter
at or at the infusion site
location windows in relation
choose to go and find thank you
very much we appreciate your
comments.
All right.
The audience standing in support
of this bill is amended.
Please go for and you will have
a minute.
Madam chair your tier of.
In New Mexico pharmacists
Association.
I watched this bill as it stood
up to this I say process and it
does have a lot of Judas
and I have to tell you I I
appreciate those changes the
things that are happening right
under your nose together that
were good for patients in New
Mexico and I think this bill
provides a lot of those so we do
support this.
Thank you thank you.
You're very brief.
Of the.
Thank you.
Rep Jason bush staff with the
University of New Mexico again
we thank you for listening to
the debate is one thank you for
calling some changes the bill
this is covered by legislation
and you feel very good about
both from a consumer perspective
in the legislative perspective
that we manage to that managed
to consider a very strong.
Mexico thank you.
Thank you all right is there
anyone else whom who is in
support.
Of the bill as amended.
I don't see him there and
they'll go into the committee
questions so Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative madam chair
all of your great experts and
and for the committee debt or
the task force that met I think
as you can see there's a lot of
the finger pointing like we saw
when we were in interim
committee and I trust that the
task force to really good job of
trying to you know sort out all
of this in bring this forward in
this bill and and the others
that you've worked on but there
is one question I had about why
the task force not deal with the
manufactures of big pharma.
Madam chair representative of an
excellent question of New Mexico
has two point one million people
and these corporations are large
multinational corporations so
the amounts that we would be
able to affect the list price of
the manufacturers would be
minimal at best because we do
not have sufficient market share
to really get the attention of
large multinational corporations
we would basically be budget
test for them but what we
figured we could make an
immediate change on was those
things that are superintendent
of insurance office would be
able then for New Mexicans so we
have not given up on the idea of
focusing on what manufactures
was prices are but is also
federal legislation addressing
this and inflation roof faction
and we felt that it would be
better have on the federal
level.
Thank you and thank you for
taking this.
Eight.
Elephant in the room I.
Thank you madam chair that's
all.
Representative yes ma'am thank
you madam chair thank you madam
chair and experts.
So I want to go back in and
would you explain to me I know
you already kind of explained it
but the the Q. pops I heard the
legal.
madam chair and representative
the coupons are not illegal what
there's a confusion between
coupons which are not the things
that you pull out of the
newspaper and yes a little bit
off on drugs the coupon so
they're trying to talk about or
not actually how we see this
happening in the real world.
What happens is that first of
all eighty five percent of drugs
purchased today are already
generic.
When we get these assistance to
patients and we do call patients
assistance foundations.
Fill out a form and apply for
patient assistance for patients
who cannot afford hoping for
very expensive drugs not for you
know penicillin over the counter
but very very expensive drugs
where patients otherwise would
not be able to afford the co
insurance which is twenty
percent of the cost districts
and can be a thousand dollars a
month for patients the mind New
Mexico patients with cancer
heart you know.
Rheumatoid arthritis other
autoimmune disease multiple
sclerosis they basically can do
so the special nations allow us
to fill out a complicated form
and then they page patients
copay for them so there's no two
part of all and less than one
percent of the drugs that we
have patient assistance for I
have a generic are less
expensive alternatives so from
the patient's standpoint and
from my standpoint as a cancer
doctor if I have a drug that is
the appropriate job for that
patient and it's their very best
option but it's tremendously
expensive.
And the patient had a for that
copay.
That puts the patience of the
bind of saying I can't do I
can't take the stress.
And so they would not be able to
afford the drug at all.
What this bill is trying to do
is to tell the insurance
companies that when those
foundations donated their money
toward the patients out of
pocket costs that the insurance
companies should and the PBMs
should have to count that toward
the patients out of pocket costs
and Justice if your brother pay
your co insurance for you it
should be any different.
Those a lot.
This is all a lot it's come in
Madam chair representative so.
There are generic drugs.
Name brand drugs is that right
correct.
And.
We all eighty five percent of
the state generic drugs they're
still drugs correct.
We take something generic and
not take the name brand just
because the name brand is so
much more expensive.
Madam chair representative for
the vast majority of drugs where
there is a generic opportunity
where you can take the generic
instead of the branding doctors
prefer to find that there are no
coupons that push people towards
brand names it is for those
drugs that are still under
patent which are the very new
brand name chemotherapy drugs
the immuno therapies the the
biologic agents that have made
such a huge difference in cancer
rheumatoid arthritis and
ulcerative colitis and other
diseases that are still under
patent are still terribly
expensive and are saddled with a
copay determined by the
insurance company that is in the
form of a COVID sure which means
it's not a twenty the copay and
you're done is every month you
have to pay twenty percent of
the cost of that drug until you
get to your out of pocket
maximum where the insurance
company should take over.
And we're trying to block the
insurance companies from being
able to say those donations
towards your out of pocket don't
count we think they should count
and patients should be able to
take these drugs if there were
less expensive alternatives that
were equally good we would
absolutely be providing that
medication.
Thank you for the and madam
chair an expert.
Then it's hard to get your mind
wrapped around all that so I I
heard Representative Ferrary St
you know people are point at
each other and I'm just trying
to find a middle ground on
everything and I see that.
I've got Blue Cross blue shield
so if if.
My family I going to get a
prescription.
And I'm used to pay a twenty
dollar copay I could pay a
hundred dollar copay I could pay
three hundred dollar copay.
Our copays all the same on some
of these drugs.
Of Madam chair representative
are your copay is set up in your
contract for various tiers of
pharmaceuticals and the
insurance companies and PBMs
have designated the newer
immunologic biologic entities
the Montel antibodies all those
very highly specialized drugs
for very specialized conditions
as having a co insurance and
being the fourth tier of the
pharmaceutical so if you pick a
first tier gin Act your comment
should be nothing are minimal
and if there is a need more
involved there's an opportunity
for there is absolutely
appropriate to say I want you to
use that copay to push people to
the equivalent Representative we
are looking at that category for
there is no other option for the
patient and there is no
equivalent generic drug.
Campos and I and I.
Madam chair representative so I
I I keep hearing about the PBMs.
And then I see the hospital so
will I know that the PBMs make
money.
Will the drugs being marked up
by the hospital is it gonna say
New Mexicans money.
Madam chair representative
of the hospice do market drugs
when they're delivered in the
hospital as opposed to a
physician fee schedule practice
there is a difference in co pay
their but that is not what is
addressed in in this particular
bill
that the question about premiums
and saving money for New
Mexicans there's good data that
shows from Millman and from the
Kaiser family fund and from
Arizona and Virginia where they
have enacted legislation like
this and that have shown that
the of premiums do not go up
when there is PBM for so this is
one staff and controlling drug
prices.
It is as complex as you can
imagine and I believe
intentionally so but this is a
good first step for New Mexico
it will not solve the entire
problem thank you madam chair
representative so.
Do you think this is going to
save people money.
Madam chair and representative
absolutely I do.
And madam chair representative
do you think it's going to
raise.
Of the premiums.
Madam chair representative no I
do not issues.
So madam chair I thank you we
have a Representative Jones and
and Representative Kate.
Thank you madam chair and
representative everyone
I yeah this is complicated but I
do have some experience that I
can draw from it's good when you
have something you can actually
point to this that's real real
world and I've given a lot of
chemotherapy handle drugs that
cost thousands of dollars and
and those are these the past
drugs before they they become
eligible for generics so so let
me I need some help
understanding this
Is this pretty much only apply
to those patent drugs.
Madam chair representative.
What this applies to is when
the.
Insurance company wishes to
disallow.
The copays that are paid by.
Asian foundation's patient
assistance foundation those kind
of five oh one C. threes paying
that money to pay for that co
insurance for that patient and
so it really is aimed at the
very high priced specialty
pharmacists pharmacy
pharmaceuticals that are
otherwise patients reach.
Okay so does this legislation
affect people who don't have
insurance.
And.
Okay madam chair
Would it would someone who
doesn't have insurance be
eligible for.
Hey I know I any any kind of
savings based on this
legislation reserve target just
to appease.
Madam chair representative of
when we take care of a patient
who has no insurance it becomes
very important that we be able
to access the patient copay
foundations and we also access
the foundations from the
manufacturers who are willing to
donate to us free drugs for
people who are not insured and
make the appropriate financial
criteria so it does help us to
pay for chemotherapy another
biologics is center for patients
who
handle insurance.
Thank you for that I'm starting
to understand that being at
madam chair
Representative of the building
being a clinical person I was
always amazed that the
pharmaceutical companies were so
willing to to
to give sometime just give their
jobs to patients in need of them
and and I I don't think folks
here about that very often so I
know there's there's a lot of
effort to we've got a new drug
that that actually works to get
it out there and see people
benefit from it so
What else to ask for you
I think that's that's all I have
so thank you madam chair thank
you Representative kids.
You madam chair thank you madam
chair of
you
addition to speak said every one
of these awesome she's to do
so please forgive me Madam chair
and and committee I'm gonna
repeat back what I think I heard
this we already have a program.
in where individuals who are
receiving
C. will of medical program that
requires of the.
And the drugs that are still
The don't have engineer
option for its
program in where
we have funding sources to be
able to.
The issue was the Peavey Iran's
war when you are in those
tracks.
You say that you are in a
different tier in which you also
have to have a second deductible
and that those copays even
though they're being paid by the
different funding sources are
not being counted towards your
deductible and then you still
have to pay your deductible
so this bill is seen it doesn't
matter if it's your brother or
these funding needs medical
funding sources if they are
paying this portion of your co
pay for these high in drugs that
can be counted towards your
second susceptible in this
difference here is that like a
bachelor of fine arts
explanation.
Madam chair Madam chair
representative you've got the
basic function on a second
deductible it's that you do it
contractual out of pocket
maximum at which point the
insurance company is supposed to
take over the full cost right.
Thank you very much Mr chair so
thank you Madam Representative
presenters hi I just need to be
connected out forms so I
understand the part about the of
the insurance companies not
wanting to have the copays made
by the foundations to be.
As part of the total amount of
out of pocket that has to be
paid before the insurance
companies take over everything
so what I don't because what
will happen is the insurance
companies actually get more
money not only are they going to
get the money from the out of
pocket of that the foundations
of the pandemic then you have
the patients who have to
continue to pay into the weeds
that whatever this level is what
I don't understand is why PBMs
how they fit into this
connecting these out so help me
so this insurance company in the
patient understand that can you
please direct me with the PBM so
that I can understand what that
policy madam chair when when
pharmacy benefit managers were
originally created they were
basically an administrative
function to go around
manufactures and come up with
the prices of the insurance
companies would pay.
The problem arose when they
started being paid based on a
percentage of the cost of the
drug and then it was in our best
interest to say raise that price
give me a rebate which goes into
my pocket or the insurance
companies pocket and that is
what led to things like where
the deep state of Texas the in
twenty sixteen the pharmacy
benefit managers made five
hundred and fifty seven million
dollars profit and five years
later in twenty twenty one they
made five point seven billion
dollars of profit and that
profit would to the insurance
companies in the and the
pharmacy benefit managers and
less than one percent of those
rebates and discounts went to
the patient the patient ended up
paying this higher price so that
they can generate these rebates
and discounts for themselves.
Yes all right well thank you
very much for for that
explanation I I don't I guess
I'm having a hard time seeing
the argument that the premiums
would not be raised if they're
not getting any less money than
they would be getting when they
came out the pockets of the
patient of the pockets of
somebody else so help me to
understand is that that why that
argument with the range
Madam chair of frankly that
argument is always race winners
in each arm of insurance reform
but the data from Kaiser family
fund and from element which is
an actuarial fund as well as
from states like Arizona and
Virginia who enacted this
legislation there has been no
change in the premiums and the
rate of rise of premium
sensitive completely unrelated
to what goes on pharmacy
benefit.
Okay thank you very much so if
they know for the questions from
the committee I will accept
motion to have one more shot yes
you may.
One real quickly.
Madam chair and representative.
So going off of what the
Representative Kate was just
talking about Medicare patients.
do they pay a copay.
Madam chair representative yes
they do and are correct as they
do not allow coupons or.
More from patient assistance
foundation setting of the above
but the maximum amount of cost
for Medicare patients is four
hundred and forty five dollars
the maximum out of pocket for
patients who are getting on the
exchange plans for example were
very poor people as well is up
in the five to seven thousand
dollars right that they could
pay.
Thank you madam chair
representative so when you talk
about people being uninsured
you're really talking about they
have no insurance or the on
Medicaid.
Madam chair we're talking with I
was answering the questions
about the uninsured I was
talking about truly uninsured
not Medicaid not exchange.
Okay Madam chair representative
why are they not insured is it
because I mean they can get
Medicaid right.
Maybe maybe maybe not because of
how much money they make
chair representative if they
make too much money they are not
eligible for Medicaid we're
going to lose the Medicaid
expansion that we just came in
there will be a lot of patients
across country who will find
themselves unable to afford
commercial premium but no longer
eligible for Medicaid.
And just adamant madam chair and
insured patients cost us all a
lot of money because that means
they don't get preventive care
the because things get worse and
then they're much more expensive
to treat them if they would have
had insurance and been able to
have regular health care.
And madam chair representative
so after this session.
I'm gonna stick with health I'm
gonna fund figure this out.
And the only thing that this
keeps sticking in my Craw right
now is.
Premiums going up and and I I
kind of understand what the
gentleman said you know you
can't pay more.
And get less.
Madam chair representative said.
A lot of that is profit and and
so I mean that personally that's
one of my issues I don't think
anybody should be getting filthy
rich on people's diseases.
Yeah so I mean it's it's it's
it's not a new problem and it's
not a problem that we're going
to solve the one bill or twenty
bills for and there needs to be
system wide change but we're
we're picking away at.
Thank you madam chair
representative last last
statement on the making as I'd I
try as far as I can to protect
premiums because I'm one of
those people that you know we
just talked about the person
makes too much money to get
Medicaid well I'm just I'm on
that other end where my
insurance costs so much is just
about to tap me out and those
premiums are high and I just
don't want to get higher
especially depending on
whoever's making the money I
know that we're all in the
business except for legislators
were on this.
Representative.
You know I agree with you madam
chair that you know we should be
making too much money on on
people you know because I know
that medications report.
So I know your bill's gonna
pass.
But on respectfully given not
supported just until I figure
this out.
Senator Vincent I will suggest
that you ask to be on the inner
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee where we do a
much deeper dive than we can do
here thank you.
I see this thing to.
This is so hard for me Madam
chair
being being a a nurse and and
being a concern you know I want
to save everybody but but I know
that somebody's going to pay for
that as.
I I feel like I'm going to that.
I agree with my fellow
representative here that I have
to vote no on this but I and I
know it's going to pass at the
same time simply because I don't
fully understand it I want my
patients to benefit I truly do
but I I need to make sure I know
who's paying the price for that.
And the and I I want to be on in
the committee as well to to
really make sure they're we're
making progress and and I and I
appreciate all the work that
goes into and to.
Into.
Moving forward so so that's
where we stand thank you madam
chair thank you with this one
clarification on the foundations
that are provided the funding
for the copayments of with these
issues Madam coupons so these
are organizations that are
raising money throughout the
country for to help these
individual sector.
Madam as our general fund and
they
The foundations are often funded
by pharmaceutical manufacturers
but there are also patient
assistance foundations that have
other funds.
This.
Madam chair there's no one else
I'd like to move for to pass on
Senate Bill.
the festivities like reading the
acronym of for
Where the heck.
At fifty one thousand and.
What it.
All right so if there is a
motion on the floor.
For us to pass is there session.
It is a second would you please
call the roll.
Representative Kate yes
Representative.
Representative I.
Yes Representative on meals yes
Representative Jones respectful
know as explained.
Thank you Mr Representative
kanske.
Representative is respectfully.
Representative Thomson yes and
madam chair.
Yes.
I did the.
I in favor to pose you have a do
pass thank you very.
Thank you.
