So.
Good to be here.
Thank you Representative bash
Representative Matthews.
I was because I knew you were
messing with me.
I was I was messing with you yes
I am I got to write this down
now okay I'm Erin Matthews a
representative district twenty
seven in the northeast as of
Albuquerque New I've been on the
committee since twenty twenty
when I a replace Dr bill Pratt
who had died and became the cap
of the where the money a
legislator for the.
and I he he was a medical doctor
I'm not but this is been a great
committee to be on I've learned
so much and about such an
important topic so I'm pleased
to be here thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you vice chair stepping up and
we are so glad to be here I am
house district thirty seven and
that is the I used to say that
eastern part of Los crucis and
now my district has changed and
so I'm I'm still the eastern
part but kind of like in central
so I'm I'm glad to be on health
and Human Services because
there's so many things that we
need to work on and promote and
during the inter it was just so
interesting to find out a lot of
the needs that I'm sure we're
going to be seeing it during
this session thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative
Montoya.
Good morning everyone I don't
see that there's anyone rural
New on the committee right one
in.
One morning you and.
Representative.
I think.
Has your bill in another
committee but hopefully we'll be
able to join us before before we
finish okay I am I am lucky to
serve the rural communities of
Colfax more US army Gail in Rio
Arriba.
This is my second year on this
beautiful committee.
The one thing I have seen an I
knew it coming in but it is
glaringly latent to me that the
divide between urban and rural
is real.
I was told recently twice by two
members in leadership.
That when Los crucis and better
Leo in Santa Fe are are healthy
so is John money jumped out on a
limb with a.
I disagree with that I do not
believe there's a trickle across
the fact and I will defend the
rural areas to my last breath.
Especially around the Human
Services needs it is dire I will
stop their.
Thank you representative
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and
congratulations on your new role
and US representative for us
thank you for stepping up as
well and congratulations I'm
Gail Armstrong state
representative district forty
nine I represent frontier and
rural New Mexico district forty
nine which is Valencia's growing
catching County in the new
redistricting Ideen Sierra
so I'll be representing for
rural New Mexico counties happy
to be here been on help
for six years since I'd be
better Representative and look
forward to helping our lock arms
with Representative Montoya and
let's get some stuff done thank
you very much madam chair.
Representative Lord.
Thank you I thank you madam
chair and apologize for being
late I cannot get into my
Legisla- email to the row now
keeps locking me out.
Thanks for that I'm glad to be
here glad I made it on and good
to see all your happy faces and
looking forward to getting some
health issues for New Mexico and
make our state a better state.
Thank you representative
Representative Anderson.
Good morning madam chairman
I am Representative Phelps
Anderson representing a district
sixty six in southeast New
Mexico that would be Chavis
Roosevelt and we counties and
I'm pleased to be here today and
Please that it's Friday thank
you madam chair.
E. G. I. F. for sure
Representative off of.
Okay I think he's having trouble
we can't hear him he's not muted
I'm always gonna try on his
phone.
Charades you're right.
Early morning charades I am okay
so we will come back to him I'm
Representative Liz Thomson I'm
the new chair of this committee
house district twenty four north
these types of Albuquerque and I
don't know my district anymore
since that sixty percent New I
don't even know my boundaries
yet so so there's that and I
will
I will let the staff introduce
themselves and we'll start with
Emily.
Cantrell I will be your
committee is percent I look
forward to getting to know you
are better over the next month.
You have a little bit of an echo
or other people hearing that.
Because Karen.
Makers also claim the firm okay
Care Karen.
Yes.
Karen wells sorry.
The break I forgot I I was
thinking oh now we don't have to
Armstrong that will be a little
less confusing but now we have
to care what we always had to
cairns but Karen wells.
Good morning everybody it's
great to see you all and to be
back together with you I would I
have been the analyst for this
committee representative I think
this is my seventh year of being
an analyst so I've been here for
quite awhile and I've gotten to
know so many of you so well and
look forward to working with you
again and if you have any
questions about my order for
analysis or would like to give
input I'm always happy to
receive that in to talk with you
looking forward to working with
you again.
And I just realized I skipped
right over madam vice chair.
I was waiting for her tell that
that and so I'm coming back to
your represented by that asked.
Thank you madam chair and our
congratulations I thought you
did it on purpose thank you
thank you madam chair.
I'm I'm really about US I I
represent a district twelve in
the south valley of Albuquerque
this is my second year on this
that this committee I absolutely
love this committee are I think
we have a really great balance
I'm really really glad to see
our rural communities
Representative especially when
it comes to something as
consequential as health care
whites it's very very important
and and I also really love about
this committee is the way that
everybody is bringing something
really cool to table and we work
we work well together and I look
forward to hearing some some
great stuff and and working with
you guys sell thank you thank
you I think finally Maryland
price.
Yes hi
can you hear me yes okay I'm
Maryland price the house
majority analyst I have been an
analyst for the past decade
except for last year in a
variety of committees and and
and did health for.
The pastor for years my
background is in early childhood
disability programs since the
nineteen seventies we were
working to lower the school age
and such a retired out of the
department of health as the
deputy director of the
developmental disabilities
program as it was called.
Thanks.
Now I live in rural Rio Arriba
County and
In the village of inn Bhutto so
I I get it about rural areas as
well as urban.
Thank you I'm pleased to be
here.
Thank you and I think I see on
the chat help you hopefully you
all can see it too and our our
the Republican analyst she says
good morning my name is Lisa and
I hope I'm pronouncing that
right plumber I am the
Republican analyst and have
worked on H. H. the fort three
or four years during the rest of
the year I'm a physician
assistant in the emergency
department I also am having
trouble with my email so do not
have access.
To the meeting with video so
hopefully we can figure that out
and I'm glad we're doing this
Okay and then family did you see
that the yes I'm working with
now.
So if it Emily if you do get our
Representative hospice if you do
get down get get it figured out
just that interrupt me and we'll
let you introduce yourself so
I'm so this is an organizational
meeting M. most of you are
familiar with with me my my
style is pretty I'm.
Informal essentially I mean
we're still going to follow the
rules and all that but
and and we will hear every bill
that comes to us as long as you
know until we get it tell it
makes no sense you know we're
not going to hear a.
House Bill the first time on the
twenty eighth day and that's
just not gonna happen but we're
going to hear the built in
generally in the order that they
come in we will do maybe a
little skipping around based on
on what the sponsor may want
we've already got one that that
we were referred that the
sponsor has said we don't even
need to hear it it's just to get
language for and I junior events
so we're not gonna pass it now
that it's just to get the
language and
and we make group things
together I'm kind of to keep the
subject area I we have to I
believe now that we're grouping
together and for the life of me
I can't remember what they are
but
but so that that's how it will
work for I I am not that kind of
chair who you know if somebody
if I don't if I'm upset with
somebody or I don't like the
bill I'm not going to not
hearing will hear it and will
not take action on it whatever
you know up or down whatever it
may be and I see that
Representative process has
joined us and so go ahead
Representative process.
Hi.
Let me get this out.
You you're on twice so you may
want to call I I don't know if
you can I just closed it okay
just close that and and what
happened is this happened to be
early I just thank you madam
chair thank you for your
patience hi this just happened
to me I had a meeting with Dr
Scrase secretary Scrase I am
the.
Lot of special were with all my
and stuff on issue there
Bernalillo and so I just thank
you for calling me to speak and
I guess your question was to
introduce myself I I was so busy
trying to I can hear you but
couldn't you can hear me well.
Yes from US sources in New
Mexico are married and I I've
been on this is our second year
on on on on this committee find
committee complicated committee
good people are working with
everybody but my district is
basically from scratch goes over
the Dona Ana up to your county
impact awards for the
district they just reformulated
the lines in order being grants
is outgoing catching County now
the first order just yes Sir
which is what we all are great
great people throughout this
whole cell area so I look
forward to working with all of
you I I you know I see the same
movie faces good people and so I
I I look forward to working.
With you guys and hopefully we
can make good strides this year
in that good legislation so
thank you very much madam chair.
Thank you for that and it that's
kind of a good reminder for me
that I was chairing C. pack last
year and and our model was be
gentle on yourself and be gentle
on others we're all going to
have technology good perhaps or
gonna not a new when we think we
did we're not going to get the
right lane car we can't find a
lake or and hopefully you all
know the link will be coming
from Emily now that's one of the
bands of my existence is trying
to remember who set me which
link to email
so so that's pretty much all I
have to say working at we're
gonna have a good time we're
gonna be we're gonna be gentle
with the public we're going to
be gentle with each other and
we're gonna laugh when we do I
because everybody does it and
it's not the end of the world
and anybody who thinks that the
legislative process is perfect
and pure and now no mistakes
that may need to spend more time
with us I think so good we have
a lease on and I'm going to
allow her to introduce herself.
Hi my name's Alicia Plummer and
like I said I'm a physician
assistant during the rest of the
year and get to come up and have
fun for thirty days every couple
years up with you guys have been
on the committee for three or
four years at various times and
I'm really looking forward to
this year thank you so much
thank you I'm glad we got we got
you.
Okay and now does anybody have
any any anything they want to
discuss any questions any.
Madam chair representative right
now do we have.
What we have for Monday is there
any and is it already posted
online I think I looked
yesterday and I didn't think
I'll start by having checked
today okay I'm gonna let and we
take that.
Question what kind.
Yes and I'm sorry if there's a
there's an echo to I'm I'm in
the kitchen right now but I was
just wondering what bills we had
for Monday and whether or not it
was already online and if we if
we can expect that as a way to
see bills or if they'll be maybe
sent to us with an agenda just
kind of seeing how how it will
go yes.
Already posted online and I'll
follow up in a just a couple
hours are directly to your email
I didn't want to send a thank
you thanks for today you'll get
it right with.
Thank you so much and we really
appreciate it thank you.
We we are taking the built in in
the order they were introduced
point so as I said there was one
that Representative Miguel
Garcia had that he doesn't want
to stay here so if you were if
you were keeping good track on
the floor which I was unable to
do but so yes we will we will
have our we have to have our
agenda posted at least twenty
four hours in advance we will
meet at eight thirty if they and
right now we're pretty we've got
quite a few bills I think we're
doing I the first day and
depending on how how quickly we
move we may or may not and have
to have to do we can at some
point so so we're gonna just
trying to keep up with the
workload but we've we've gotten
quite a few bills for a short
session so so coming on Monday
with your with your coffee and
here your Representative
Matthews yes question about I
had a memorial the referred to
this committee and I'm just
wondering how you're going to
balance the bills on the
memorials I think at this point
we're still okay to kind of do
I'm in the order that they were
introduced on the floor and so
we and I also have a have a
memorial coming to this
committee we will if if if it if
time starts to be kind of a
crunch and we may need to really
look at things we may skip over
some memorials since they don't
carry the same weight as that as
a bill but at this point we're
I'm planning on hearing
everything that we get.
Thank you.
Anyone else.
Okay well welcome back everyone
welcome to the new folks think
that I am always knew for sure
and and Maryland Maryland you
were with us last year were you
know.
I took the year off.
I actually had and yet and I
injury and couldn't work that
session so okay please to be
recovered we're we're glad to
have you back and I think it was
that we will stand out and.
I have dependence recorded but
are we required to do a formal
role we we are and I'm so sorry
I see I'm here with the state or
go ahead Emily okay at
Representative Anderson.
Anderson was here I think you
need it we.
Anderson is here thank you okay
Representative Armstrong
present.
Representative bash.
Representative.
Representative Ferrary.
Representative Lord.
Representative Lord are you
still with us.
Getting on and off you're
getting on and off okay well.
Yeah which is here
Representative Matthew your.
Representative Montoya.
Isn't the.
It also
looks a come here twice on this
June.
You don't get double party at.
Madam chair.
I'm trying I was thinking more
the two hotels we hold on a
second.
You I see you.
Finally madam chair.
Thank you.
It will be excused I'm and let's
see I I think Representative
Montoya is hand first and then
we'll go to madam vice chair.
Madam chair and members thank
you I I just wanna make a
statement in in in my first year
it's been so apparent to me that
we have a serious barrier to
productivity in the legislative
body period.
Is this notion that we are
somehow separate that are
Republicans and Democrats and
independents are in different.
Strapped in that we can never
find this sense of humanity in
our work we are the health and
Human Services Committee and I
hope that we can begin with a
concerted effort to focus on
that.
Not just stability but actual
care courtesy.
To release that an example.
But I'm just going to say to
hear publicly I'm a bit
embarrassed at the loss of
productivity because of that
division and that insistence on
difference it pains me to keep
me up at night I'm not here to
serve one part of New Mexico
we're all suffering we all have
gives to bring forward so I'll
get off the soapbox now but I
just want to say that.
Thank you Representative I think
that's a good a good thought for
all of us to keep in mind that
can be our our second down model
we'll have T. shirts and pom
poms and things made up with our
with our team came in our our
models there we go we've got a
choreographer among us.
There you go Representative
Barreras.
Thank you madam chair and that
and thank you Representative
monthly if you're saying that I
I also believe the same thing
and that's why I love this
committee so much is because I
didn't really I I'm this is only
my second year and I didn't feel
that a lot last year in this
committee and and I really
appreciate that but but thank
you for saying that and I think
that I think everybody everybody
in this committee is is is you
know committed to keeping it
that way but madam chair thank
you for calling on me I actually
just wanted to to point out that
that last night we had a a
virtual dinner which first of
all virtual center right I was
so angry at the end of it with
but they would they they they
were talking about people that
we're gonna be retiring the last
year and we have Representative
bash with us and I just wanted
to thank her for her service and
I am so sad that we have to say
goodbye to you but I'm also very
very grateful they are on this
committee and thank you for all
of the the work that you've done
and and we really appreciated
New Mexico appreciate that thank
you Representative bash.
Thank you madam vice chair that
was that was well well stated
and well and and very true and
and our former chair
representative.
The Armstrong will also be
leaving the legislature and I
know I am no Debbie Armstrong I
dream of someday being as smart
as Debbie Armstrong but you know
I'll do I'll do the best they
can in her big shoes to fill in
and I count on all of you to
help me go in the right
direction and keep keep me on
track so thank you for that and
Representative bash you are you
I'm your amazing and now it is
sad that that you will but we
have this thirty day session to
what to hang out with you at
least virtually so so I love I
love the love fest here I never
do the hard with my hands
because I think they look weird
in my hands but but you this is
going to be a great committee
we're going to do some good work
there's a lot of money out there
and New Mexico needs health care
and Human Services so this that
this is a good opportunity for
us Representative Ferrary yeah I
just wanted to stay you all you
are and you will be doing a
great job we have all the faith
in you and you have the
experience and the knowledge and
we appreciate you being art Mr
chair.
Thank you you get extra
brownies.
Our heart.
Were you.
Representative Armstrong her her
hand is little emoji had is
that.
Okay I don't.
there she is okay Representative
Armstrong I'm sorry and I have
gotten out of this.
thing and I we did our our
meetings in real life during the
interim awfully and now I've got
to get back in that zoom mode
okay Representative Armstrong
thank you madam chair yeah I I
always try to raise my emoji
hands but sometimes I know it's
hard to see what all the people
and everything so I appreciate
you pointing that out of vice
chair I just wanted to say that
the Armstrong caucus is is
ending and I I'm really sad
about that representative Debbie
Armstrong and I double we we
don't see politically a lot
alike in so many ways but we are
friends and it's I'm sad.
To see her go and
Representative bash you were
truly loved.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you I I I've got the best
committee that was proved this
morning we keep your tissue box
handy your computer because
we're going to hear things that
make us cry and and I'll tell
you right up front I'm a crier
my advice here is a crier so
madam chair I'm like how is the
organizational meeting on what.
I know.
The house.
I'm such a really great okay
what is you guys are making me
feel at home at your home right
now I deal with crying all the
time.
You are working with prior is
here.
Okay we're all emotional I'm
certain ways madam chair will
have working yes and I I don't
see any more hands on and and.
From now forward you if you if I
don't see your hand you can send
me a text you can put in the
chat you can stand up and wave
your arms are you can interrupt
however it just I don't want to
and and please I will say right
now I if I don't want you it's
not anything about you or
anything else it's my lack of
noticing so so please make sure
that I noticed you and we will
recess and we will be back at
eight thirty on Monday to start
hearing bill.
Thank you all this is going to
be a great committee have a good
well see you most of you on the
floor leader bye bye thank you
madam chair.
