Representative Lord.
Representative Matthews Matthews
is off of mute and here.
But using.
Representative Montoya here.
Representative to us here.
Representative Ferrary your.
Representative Lord is here
Representative.
And finally madam chair.
I'm here okay we have everybody
okay well that amazing I'm good
morning all so we are we just
have one bill today and we have
Representative Castellano and
Representative Strickler do you
have an expert or experts that
you need to have promoted.
Good morning madam chair.
St Strickler here I'm waiting on
Ambrose he's got everything
lined up so okay hopefully it's
not delayed this here to assist
him okay so the second I.
Attendees are numbers occurred
at panelists I heard madam chair
go ahead if you at question
because of the bill I and I
think is a different one.
And I have to double check I
have H. B. one fifty seven
that's not what we're hearing
today yes it is it is okay
great.
I did.
What what was the confusion
there I just want to say
something wrong I think what
happened it was a little this is
one seventy five it was to
somebody was dyslexic when they
plug it in.
So this is one seventy five now
it's one fifty seven.
Okay.
Representative Strickler where
are you seeing the one seventy
five I'll try to track that
down.
Judy my my LA look it up you
should get your hearing one
seventy five said no we're not
issue a fifty seven so I have to
refer defer to her
yeah we've got that one place
where it's getting corrected
there is a collection and I'll
see if we can yeah I sent out
yeah I think.
Madam chair.
Yes I really think it's because
it's gross that and and things
are going to be Dicks lex six.
The drive in the snow
what I'm talking about madam
chair.
Well have no disparaging
comments this early in the
morning.
Chair.
Good morning everyone.
Good morning Representative you
you all can go ahead.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm here with
the Representative Strickler and
Representative Fajardo which
also she's also a sponsor of the
bill.
What else bill fifty seven those
managers we getting to children
allowing persons to leave
infants in a safety device for
the surrender of infants under
certain conditions without
criminal prosecution for
abandonment or abuse of a child
allowing the installation and
operation of safety lessons for
the surrender of intent infants
providing limited immunity for
operators of those devices
require the public education
department to promulgate rules
making appropriations and
declaring an emergency madam
chair madam chair if it's a if
it's okay with you we have an
amendment to.
House bill one fourteen fifty
seven if you wanted amended now
or after no will do it now I
will move the amendment for
discussion so Representative can
you explain your amendment
please thank you madam chair I
proposed the house bill health
and Human Services Committee the
following amendment to house
bill one fifty seven on page
five line six after location
strike the remainder of the line
and strike line seven through
use madam chair.
What do it's a technical
amendment from thank I guess the
attorney refuted in LCS and
every there will deadline
Representative Matthews.
Representative Castellano then I
read that back to you to ensure
I have it correctly yes.
And so starting online I says to
consider thank you sleep mark as
a safe surrender location
semicolon and and then we move
on twenty eight.
Yes okay thank you very much.
The amendment okay
Representative can you give us
the two oh two number just to
just to make certain everything.
Why yes it's true Tel two three
seven five point one.
Okay thank you for that so I'm.
Madam chair if I may can we go
over Monica his and John with
Christian as my experts okay.
And madam chair if I then like
the movies Representative
Fajardo Representative stricter
relations you words before.
And I'm I know what to expect
motion Representative Anderson
can okay to what approved the
amendment do I have a motion.
Motion to approve the amendment.
Okay is there any opposition.
Okay Representative Matthews.
I'm sorry I am still confused at
two two two number I'm not
matching my copy I could could
you just repeat it real quickly
yes.
On the amendment but.
Yes please is two two two three
seven five point one.
Okay.
So I'm not quite sure.
Was happening here because the
original to to to number I have
on my copy of HB one fifty seven
is two two two one six seven
point one so are we talked.
Matthews two oh two number he
gave is of the amendments were
right but it's got a different.
It's normally an amendment would
be like a point to.
Not necessarily the first
amendment is a point one.
Okay all right okay yeah.
Okay so is there any opposition
to adopting the amendment okay
seeing that you have an amended
bill like go ahead and.
We repeat to meet the motion and
the second.
Good question Representative
also just made the motion and I
can't remember second actually
madam chair Representative
Anderson made the motion and
representative of us a second
that's right thank you.
No okay thank you madam chair
and I would also like and like I
media Representative Fajardo
Representative instructor if
they want to say a few words on.
On the bill.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and the this is our this is a.
Really good bill
we've got to.
Eight other states have done
this and and I think it's a step
in the right direction to have a
safe haven for these these folks
are in crisis and appreciate to.
Representative Castellano a care
in the bill.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the of the committee
so I just want to echo my
colleagues that sentiment I'm
really proud of that because
sponsor this bill we all know
what happened in Carlsbad with a
young lady who is in distress
who didn't know what to do she
ended up throwing her child in
the trash can if it wasn't for
happenstance and some people
happen to be in the area that
child would have died so that
child was lacking we don't know
what happened from day to day.
But people in crisis need help
people in crisis need a place to
go and this is just one Avenue
and one way to do that there's a
lot of work this is an at and
I'll be all used communication
and and.
We need to provide to people but
you know what we have a young
mom in distress we need to be
able to have resources to them I
representative Lente county and
I think we all also where the
one case where we had a young
mother who reached out for help
didn't get the help she needed.
Our.
You we have lost your sound.
Your muted.
Representative Fajardo we are
are you working do you do you
hear us.
I will texter madam chair okay.
Madam chair and if I may we also
had a situation in two thousand
nineteen where
there was a the respond I I
responded to DC's newborn.
In a call the Mexico nearest
manual as well so you know for
me we're Christian is part of
that.
Five requirement and he was the
one that really came forward
with this with this device so we
just want to commend them I know
it's two babies within three
years but in a note allies are
important if it's one baby we
need to be there to advocate for
these babies thank you madam
chair and I think Representative
hose ready.
Representative harder we still
can't hear you you're off Hermio
but you have noticed I owned.
Madam chair I.
I don't believe she's too far
from representative Armstrong
small.
So maybe she can find a better
set up for her testimony thank
you.
Apparently she can hear us.
Okay I'm.
Let's give her a couple seconds
and I'm gonna throw this cat out
of this room so excuse me for a
second.
No problem.
Excuse me madam chair she's
gonna try to get sound again I
let her know that we couldn't
hear her at all thank you madam
chair.
Hear me now yes we can thank you
so I did this great speech and
nobody heard a word.
We heard a little bit but not
much.
I have a bit I've been playing
with these here systems in these
might at it is been technology I
do apologize madam chair and I
apologize to the members of the
committee but for the technical
errors so what I was saying I
support you know I signed up to
this bill we know what happened
down in Carlsbad we had a young
mother in distress who ended up
throwing their their child and
in the trash if it wasn't for
some people who just happened to
be on stand just happened to be
at
dumpster diving found that and
that and that is not what we
want that's not what we want
moms we don't want them to feel
like they have no place to go we
understand the distress that
that they're going through we
don't want them to know their
children away we also know the
landscape County where you had a
young mother.
needed needed assistance and
asked for help them get their
assistance and Janet and killing
her child as well little bit
different situation.
But you know this bill also
can cause positive fourth
trimester built along the same
lines it's about giving women
support it's and at the end of
the day that's what we need to
do we need to get women support
give them just a safe place
and that you know and have a
system in place to to protect
these children and I give them a
chance as well so thank you
madam chair thank you members of
the committee and I do apologize
once again for my my technical
errors.
Thank you Representative Fajardo
and that the the model of this
committee is be gentle on
yourself and be gentle on other
stuff is happening and we just
we deal with that so when the
cat starts walking on the
keyboard you have to pause and
take the cat out of the room.
So so no worries Representative
Castellano did you want your
experts to or they hear more for
questions.
If you may if we may madam chair
if you like the can give a
little bit of what we are and
what they how they can part of
this okay.
What works okay thank you madam
chair of my first
instrumentality General
issue assistant chief medical.
Good morning madam chair
representative members of the
committee John we're jammed the
system fire chief the city
Espanola.
we did have an incident about
three years ago in two thousand
nineteen we found a baby in the
trash and
It is these.
But the mother maybe she got
option news you were she had
different options need about
this bill she knew about she had
a state Turner devided Mr chair
which one is that that's why but
that that happened we just try
to thank you different ways we
we raise the awareness
resolution to this the Espanola.
with their more queer Sanchez
are we we got a resolution to
raise awareness for the law we
created posters we created
flyers created proshares
distributed throughout the
community along with the
resolution without a different
ways one of my friends in the
video on a seat in the box and I
was like wow this is awesome
that's when I went back to the
more.
Hughes is supported one hundred
percent and so from there with
the lawyers and lawyers.
Really have an issue with.
The bill currently current bill
says you'll leave this with the
staff is the insight
our lawyers look at that in the
state are very nice if the bill
is changed out of this device in
the bill so that's why we went
to Representative does is that
is the time in two thousand
nineteen try to amend that.
I didn't get to a committee to
get past so I just kept at it
Representative I'm Ambrose
Toscano I move forward with this
bill this year along with the US
senator Kay goes they supported
that one hundred percent and
that's why it's really important
to get this bill with these
devices.
That way minutes probably don't
have to go through the this
trouble in the hurdles that we
had to go through with the city
has been all up
to get these.
The device is there very well
thought out there decided well
image deregulated they have
different alarms once the baby's
plate inside out there on the
well I'm not respond within
three minutes
these devices there are.
I believe there to save lives
here in New Mexico so that's why
I'm so grateful that this bill
is to a committee I hope after
thank you senator are out
Representative Castellano I
appreciate it.
Thank you madam chair like the
Monica if you like so few words
please introduce yourself thank
you madam chair.
Good morning New Mexico I'm
actually in Indiana and it is
snowing snowing snowing right
now up here so hopefully it's a
little bit warmer down there for
you I am a retired firefighter
and a medic and I was also
abandoned as an infant and so I
started safe haven baby boxes
based on my knowledge of the
fire service but also as a child
that was left in an unsafe place
we are in we are legal now in
eleven states we currently have
ninety eight boxes and six
states New Mexico would be the
seven state that we went into
and if this past we would be
that would be the twelfth state
that we've passed legislation
and we've had a total of
fourteen babies in our boxes in
Indiana had twelve of those
babies Arkansas had to those
babies and we had a hundred and
fifteen women come through our
program women need options when
you give them good options to
choose an option that's good for
them this is an anonymity option
no other option out there gives
any woman one hundred percent
anonymity and some women don't
want their faces seen or they
might know someone at the fire
house so this is just another
Avenue for these mothers to be
able to surrender their child
safely legally
and go on knowing that they've
done everything possible to keep
their child safe I'm often
quoted as saying this isn't a
pro life or pro choice bill
these babies are born these back
these are going to go in the
trash can they're going to go in
a dumpster or they're gonna go
in one of our safe boxes and and
that's the reality of the
generation that we all have
faced.
So but thank you guys so much
for being proactive in this in
this movie currently it across
the United States we find a baby
every three days and dumpsters
and trash cans the last baby
that was found well this is a
couple babies at ago was found
in a duffel bag outside a fire
house in Chicago Illinois and
they do not have baby boxes in
Chicago but a woman went all the
way to the fire house dropped
the child at the door because
she didn't want to see anyone
and and left in that child died
and so if there would have been
a baby box at that fire house I
guarantee there would have been
a different outcome so now of
course Chicago is looking at
doing baby boxes and being
reactive in in this movie so I
thank you guys so much for.
Looking into this program and
allowing women of your community
to have a one hundred percent
anonymous option available in
the communities that that the
you guys Representative so thank
you so much.
Thank you Representative
Castellano it are we ready to go
to the audience madam chair if I
may.
Average Senator Gallegos is in
the panel attendees.
Can he can he remote over so he
can explain the situation that
he just went in his district yes
and chair.
There has not been promoted okay
and for those of you in the
audience that have raised your
hands please lower your hands
because I will be taking either
support or oppose and if your
hands are raised you may be on
the wrong side I promise you we
will hear from from everyone who
wants to speak so so please
lower your hand if you're in the
audience go ahead Senator.
Madam chair and committee thank
you I do want to give you a
little bit of background I I
appreciate the opportunity and
when you're doing for the safe
haven boxes also I
Representative Hobbs New Mexico.
You're right.
Phelps I got interrupted but in
harms we had a young lady that
of first off in twenty thirteen
when we did the state paving Act
she was not talked about to drop
off at the fire station police
station and or the hospital so I
think in desperation she did do
the only thing she thought was
available I know her father in
the young man's father in in
discussions I've had the they
wish we would have some other
opportunity for behind me I
don't know if you can see it's
actual pictures so the story of
the young man that was in the
dumpster at six days old I think
that the this young lady's life
has been changed for the worse
and at the same rate in boxes
and bin and placed up already
and I know we did try Senator a
representative so I just tried
in of twenty and then also.
And I'm gross because you're on
Roger Montoya.
Ride last year so I would
appreciate if we look at this
and and just remember what the
mom and her family is going
through these boxes would have
been in place already we would
have had a totally different
outcome I thank you and I'll
stand for questions appropriate
time manager thank you for the
option state.
Thank you senator Representative
Castellano is it that you're
ready to go to the audience.
Yes madam chair okay so we're
going to do a poll so and we
will put up a poll and please
vote if you are in opposition or
support of this Madam.
Okay looks pretty stable so ten
out of ten people are in in
support.
I will go to the audience and
first just in case you didn't
vote and you want to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Okay I don't see anyone in
opposition are in support if you
would like to speak please raise
your hand.
Okay and we will go to hobby
here Sanchez.
Good morning madam chair good
morning madam chairman honorable
representatives can you hear me
yes we can hear you wonderful
thank you very much for giving
me the opportunity to speak as
deputy fire chief wicker sham
mentioned we did have a fatality
in our community so our hearts
break when that happens but what
I would like to speak toward is
exactly what this is which is
about the health of not only the
children but also the women who
are involved in the situation as
Representative Fajardo said we
have to give women an option and
AS Monaco also said we have to
support these women when coming
to such a difficult decision
making and we have to let them
know that we are behind them and
that we're willing to take care
of those children in the case
that either they are unwilling
or I just can't and if we're
going to be a healthy community
and we really need to come
together as one to provide that
open he even for for mothers and
for children to pre vents not
only a child from you know
disappearing from this earth but
also to raise the community
toward the standards that we
desire so I'm fully in favor of
this thank you very much.
Thank you next we have Maryland
back.
Thank you at chairwoman and
thank you to all the
representatives and senators for
bringing this forward my name is
Maryland back I am the founder
of New Mexico child first
network we are a nonprofit
dedicated to improving the lives
of children in foster care and
empowering those who serve them
when when unfortunately this at
K. out of hijabs came to light
just a last month
our community was very very
rocks I just in fact and it was
interesting because there was an
outpouring of support of how can
I adopt this baby you know what
can we do how can we give them
yes and really I think that this
bill does what like one of the
expert witnesses said this is
not a reactive solution this is
a proactive solution and for
those of us in the child welfare
world we are always looking for
pro proactive solutions to
really empower and support these
families and my heart breaks
with Senator Gallegos testimony
that the the mother of this
child her life has really taken
a sour turn so so again for all
involved the child and the
parent giving up their child we
have a we have always strongly
support this legislation and we
thank you all for hearing it.
Okay thank you that's all the
public comment I see so we will
go back to the committee and I
will start with Representative
Matthews.
You at thank you madam chair
I'm.
The public there we go okay
sorry the screen was showing me
something.
Kind of different I mean first
of all I.
It was a terrible tragedy would
happen Hobbs and I'm really glad
to see
Some of the senators and
legislators moving so quickly to
offer isn't a solution or
possible solution but I did have
a few questions about.
some of the contents of the bill
first of all I was surprised
that.
The.
Administrative agency
apparently is is the public
education department.
I'm not and that CYFD is not the
appropriate agency is is not
listed as the agency to oversee
this program and.
I know we like to we thank the
teachers and police can sell all
of our problems and we we keep
responsibility on them but I'm
and CYFD certainly has certain
challenges as we all know but it
does occur to me that CYFD would
be a more appropriate agency for
this and I'm wondering I'd like
to just the Sanchez Y. public
education is given that chore
instead of CYFD.
Madam chair if I may and I think
I think why in public education
I think is why the publication
education is and I think madam
chair.
Right along the Senator guy go
this so we can raise awareness
to the younger kids to advocate
for this box in case something
were to happen to you the
younger women in schools that's
why I think that the public
education department is involved
madam chair and Representative
Matthews.
This year at Representative
thank you thank you for that
information but yeah let's go
back for a second how many do we
know how many times in the state
in the past year five years
whatever period of time I want
to look at where we've had
babies dropped off.
Madam chair maybe John if you'd
like to answer that question or.
Any one of the witnesses.
And
yeah Monica what.
My.
My apologies one of the things
that we struggle with when we
work in states is that at the
state level it's hard to get
accurate information on
surrendered children but also
abandoned children throughout
the country no one is tracking
abandonments we're the only
organization out there that's
tracking abandonments but it is
a struggle to find out how many
babies are actually being
legally surrendered at your fire
stations and hospitals ask for
the public education we do
public education in the schools
we have one chance to get this
right with the kids growing up
and for us in Indiana we we do
this at the the that middle
school and high school levels
because these girls are these
these boys might not remember
all of the legalities of the
safe haven law but when they're
in college somewhere else
they're gonna remember that they
can take a newborn to a fire
station or a newborn to a
hospital based on the training
an education that they received
in high school once they get out
of high school there's no
guarantees they're ever going to
get that information anywhere I
hope I answered your question.
Share
Members of the committee thank
you for that information.
I guess I'm having a little
concerned that by where's we're
making an assumption for New
Mexico and maybe is a correct
assumption I'm not saying that
it's not that is incorrect we're
making an assumption that most
of these instances are going to
be people with a young woman who
are in high school or maybe
middle school but I know that
the incident in I believe Policy
County Representative Fajardo
was actually of a of a older
woman older right your twenties
I assume but
I'll ask for help and was
apparently not aware of this law
or maybe didn't want to give up
her baby and so the assumption
that this is only a situation
that arises for young women in
high school or middle school I
think is perhaps not accurate
and again I'm kind of thinking
particularly of high drop out
rates I would think that that
would.
What women and the situation
might will not be in school this
question arises and I would just
I I just think that that's.
Public education the public
education outreach part is
important I just think this CYFD
gives you both the schools and
the broader community and people
who are receiving public health
with income and so forth so that
is just gestione the second
thing I wanted to talk about
madam chair is the money and I'm
looking at the F. I. R. and it
says it HB one fifty seven
carries an appropriation of
seventy thousand to the public
education department.
And in additional three hundred
thirty thousand is appropriate
to install these devices.
And I'm wondering if that is
actually in HB two that was just
passed or
is there in fact any money that
at least at this point has been
appropriated for this purpose.
Madam chair sure guy goes to one
answer that question yes madam
chair and senator or
representative I appreciate that
question so in the discussion we
had
that Monica and her group will
help us to on the actual boxes
of the money was not in the
house bill two yet I know
there's been discussion on the
Senate side to try to help get
that as it comes over Senate and
house bill two comes in of the
appropriation amount was just
stated they estimate between
seven and ten thousand dollars
per box for the installation
when the other seventy childhood
wish for the education piece at
of at PED well one of the
things.
Madam chair and senator is that
a Representative is that the
other option that we have on the
education please is that you
look at communities lack
Espanola they are making their
own flyers in their own
ScienceAlert area I think as we
go forward we need to learn just
for instance from your idea that
is not just school children but
I think the communities will
take an act of proactive
approach on this and get the
word out but of the
appropriation we're open is
putting on in the Senate finance
when it comes on.
I could I want to address the
Education Department PED part of
that and Representative Matthews
you're correct it's you know
it's not a passionate this that
this is only going to affect
middle school and high school
kids but you know the the young
lady implementing a county if we
would have had the education in
school and when she reached that
age of twenty she would now so
that's the education we're not
it's not necessary targeting
those those young young girls in
assuming that that they're the
ones who who are going to be in
crisis even now since the
specifically that that is the
age group.
When you educate them there and
if they are in that state when
their their twenties or thirties
and they have a place to get
they get help I have a young man
in my district.
She was very very young mother
she was in her early twenties
and she ended up committing
suicide.
Right after she gave birth
because and so so the the crisis
that happened we need schools to
do the education so that when
they're out of the school they
they there's the resources are
going away so that's why the
education happens at the school
level and as far as as and and
then you do that you know I mean
CYFD I think you and I can both
agree that.
CYFD seems to be at a live call
information trying to get
information back out of them how
many kids have been surrendered
things like that and then
there's also the idea.
Once somebody deals with CYFD
I've had parents who they don't
want to deal with the White do
because they feel like if they
contact them if they're in
crisis that has going to be
taken away from them.
And so that's the reason why it
is not necessary safe place and
so we want safe place do I do
what needs to get involved but
we also don't want people not to
surrender CYFD is involved I
think that in Albuquerque you
know that the same clinic or
were victims of sexual abuse is
tied to to the police station.
And you have a lot of immigrants
that come and that won't go
there because they're afraid we
don't want that we wanted we
want a safe place we went to
safety for for the cat we want a
safe place for that whether the
family so that's that's kind of
the backstory on that thank
thank you Representative
Matthews program that I'm asking
that question
Madam chair can get you in on
that point.
Yes.
I just want to bring up in
twenty thirteen when we pass the
state paper law it was dictated
to CYFD to advertise it it is on
our website but you have to go
get confined of the piece put it
out in the public and in public
at is that it is taught out
amongst our people so I just
want to clarify that we tried I
wish I had followed up in twenty
thirteen to make sure that my
community knows about safe able
all if I had done that hi this
young lady may not been
situation she's in now I did not
see what he's got it you have to
look for so I hope that helps
thank you madam chair senator
and representative thank you for
those explanations and having
tried to get information from
CYFD website I realize within a
hopeless task that is
our and it points to well well
taken about that agency the my
last question again is about the
money looking at the F. I. R.
that DPS is calculating it would
take five hundred fifty thousand
dollars
to install these and again I ask
is there at least at this point
any appropriation and H. B. to
to fund this or are we.
At
this race but are we creating a
solution that is essentially an
unfunded mandate for our schools
and others state agencies.
Madam chair.
Representative Castellano I
thought you were talking but you
are muted what did you want to
go first I know how to time
Senator go ahead so okay that
question has been answered but
thank you for that and
Representative Matthews I
appreciate that I I still serve
on the school board and Eunice
and we receive a lot of unfunded
mandates but on the fifty of the
five hundred fifty thousand that
projection I think is including
the purchase of the boxes in
Monica's group is just saw
obligating try to help us
fundraise so that's not part of
the cost of the state
like I say I I know that there's
a lot of people that have had
discussions on how to get it
into the finance peace once the
V. two comes over the Senate and
even to the point if we know
early enough I would.
All love to be able to give some
my capital outlay money to this
because I think it's very well
needed and that would be an
investment in our kids from now
all.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and
Senator Gaydos
I I I have to say that I'm so
we're concerned about the
funding on this and but I will.
Yield my time at this point in
the other states thank you.
These forward get set at that
was a terrible tragedy that
happened.
Representative took office.
Thank you madam chair
representative the I and and I
appreciate this bill a lot
in that it allows us to have.
Different options for we're
meant and that gives us a.
We're moving in the this gives
us a direction that we haven't
seen all right I think this is a
wonderful thing and I know the
some issues baby with some of
the other Representative with as
far as who's in charge of what
what not but I I'm gonna go back
to what I said a few of what I
think last week when it came to
smoking how I still remember
that big green frog with those
red lips and it said that some
of you know formal which means
kiss me I don't smoke this is
stuck with me so as a kid and I
I think it's it's absolutely of
important for us to start
educating our youth and and
giving them that in the know
that there's more to it you know
they have choices and this is a
a choice and I I I really really
support this.
Again you know.
I know that.
That was Representative Matthews
Representative drops the points
and I get that want to make sure
this thing is funded in my
opinion and and continues to to
receive the funding needed
keeping our our baby safe thank
you been I I read some stuff in
the FY are that they're worried
about law enforcement is
something that is a trap I'm I'm
sure there's ways for us to
somehow make sure that that they
keep everybody safe this worked
in other in other areas from my
understanding and I guess my
question would be it in all the
duration of this.
Program in other states as
anything.
That happened law enforcement by
having these little baby havens.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair for the question to
my experts Monica.
Thank you and now actually you
know there's signage on the
outside of the building that
says a silent alarm will
activate
we did have in Carmel Indiana we
had I know with two kittens and
one of our baby boxes but
literally is the only thing that
we've ever had in our boxes
besides besides babies so in in
in Indiana since we launched
baby boxes we haven't had a dead
baby in our state sense so we've
literally turned the tide in
Indiana and in Arkansas and
every state that we go and
abandonment rates do drop but as
for the boxes no we've never had
a problem with first responders
or anything being put in our box
decide to set of kittens with
the note.
Thank you thank you madam chair
representative I'm gonna keep it
short because we're all trying
to to.
You know get everybody speaking
up but I will tell you you know
I know what it is first hand to
see a a dead baby R. M. no abuse
baby and I've seen.
Everything you can imagine I
don't want to really talk about
right now but I can tell you
that that this is a wonderful
thing thank you for moving and
in a positive direction I will
fully support this bill and I
appreciate you guys bringing
this to our committee.
Representative took office do
you we have someone as a
panelist with T. E. R. R. eight
do you happen to have to
programs open or if the I just
looking at that madam chair it
with that okay okay just making
sure that we didn't have
something going on here that
going on okay we're open it
they've got their hand raised so
maybe you should just I don't
know I want to know what to do
madam chair but you should just
call online over that is.
Okay it are you sure you don't
maybe have to programs on like
maybe a phone in your computer
or something.
Minimize Mr chair let me check I
don't know what if you do if you
could close one of them that
would that would alleviate a
little bit if not
We'll go on to representative
Armstrong I'm gonna I'll reenter
this thing again madam chair
okay thank you.
Thank you madam chair I believe
that I'm not sure why terra's
been moved to a panelists but I
believe she wanted to be and
In favor of this bill which.
You can take that for what it's
worth madam chair sh anyway
thank you so much for bringing
this legislation forward I don't
think that we can being on
probation I can I can tell you I
don't think that we should put a
cost on a baby's life
this is something that needs to
happen.
my one of my concerns so madam
chair is.
How does this work in rural New
Mexico when and how does the
alarm sound is it through a
hardwire phone system is it
through broadband can you answer
that question please.
Thank you madam chair refer to
my experts Monica.
Thank you Representative that
the box is actually called nine
one one on their own we actually
have volunteer fire stations in
Indiana that have had babies
placed in their boxes in our
protocols as for a baby to be
pulled from our box and five
minutes or less we've never had
a baby that's been in our box
more than five minutes the
longest it's been four minutes
and twenty seconds the alarms
are actually extremely fast the
first alarm goes off at two
seconds when the door is opened
up there is a second alarm that
is also dialing nine one one
that is not connected to the
first one that when babies
placed inside and when the door
shuts when mom shuts the door
the door actually locked so the
baby can only be retrieved from
the inside of the fire house or
the inside of a hospital by a
acrylic nor you can see the baby
through that door we are putting
cameras in all of our baby boxes
where I can actually grow grab
my phone right now and look at
my old fire house which has a
baby box and I can do you in
real time a baby if it's place
in our box or actually just the
bassinet right now most of our
devices are on cellular networks
with a battery backup and we've
never had one fail to date.
Thank you madam chair so it is
on the in the style does it dial
nine one one on the cellular.
It goes because it's illegal to
call actual nine one one it goes
to an alarm company the alarm
company dials the nine one one
center so it takes right about
for a baby to be pulled from the
back for about two minutes but
the door is calling it two
seconds and then when babies
placed inside that's calling as
well.
Okay thank you madam chair I'm
I'm I know that you're probably
not real familiar with rural New
Mexico madam chair but you know
we don't a lot of places we
don't have cell service and so
that's a concern but you know it
doesn't mean that we shouldn't
do that as we can find other
ways to do things madam chair
just as a as a statement I saw
on the news after this tragedy
happened in New Mexico how
actually putting up signs and
letting people now advertising
that there are places that we we
you can take a baby into a
hospital and not be charged that
we already have this on the
books so I think going through
PED I fully agree with that
and I think madam chair that
there's a lot of people that
would support this with capital
outlay junior money I mean I
know that's the junior money's
gone now but I really feel like
this is something that would be
supported across the state and
I can guarantee you we can
figure out a way to pay for it
I so I think PED going to PED is
is the perfect place I also
think educating and our schools
is the perfect place and my only
other question is.
What if we have a scenario where
I dad.
Takes the baby from inside of a
relationship and puts the baby
in a box is that have we had any
instances where and maybe it
wasn't the mother's choice and
that was the father's choice and
do we do we have anything on
that madam chair.
Madam chair representative on I
think US senator bangles as an
explanation on that as well if
you thank you madam chair and
representative Armstrong that's
great question so I don't know
that's ever occurred but to to
resolve that CYFD will take us
to the child and all the mother
would have to do is go through a
DNA test to recover the child
that actually works in the
opposite when the mother of
deposit to child and the father
if he knows about it can go
to see what to do the exact same
thing it'll have to be through
the DNA tests because we don't
have any verbal instructions on
who the parent is but the D. and
I won't lie so that's been look
at and and discussed on how that
would work through CYFD.
Thank you so much thank you
madam chair and agreed it could
go both ways and so I'm glad to
know there's some safeguards in
place for that as well and you
have my full support thank you.
Thank you Representative.
Next Representative
Montoya.
Madam chair and members I
apologize for not being on the
screen I'm not quite ready to be
are sitting up.
I first became aware of this
about a year ago when fire chief
Wickersham approached me.
As well as Representative
Castellano and more recently
Senator guy gables.
On first glance I am absolutely
in support of this it makes
perfect sense if we can save
even one life.
From a mother or is a situation
where a baby is in danger.
The the there's a couple of
things that I'm just struggling
with.
I'm wondering.
Why there is not a
representative from the PED or
see what I do here today.
I also have a question.
That Representative Armstrong
just posed in the case of a a
lovers spat or relationships
that would one parent.
Relinquish the child to get back
at a mother and with that open
up really challenging legal
issues.
The third is a full force.
Aspect too.
Do we open a precedent here at
this bill was to pass and the
company that creates the boxes
with David.
Gain money from a state funded
program.
Is there legal issues in that in
that room so that's three
questions I I deeply apologize
for the convoluted nature of my
questions.
More insurance thank you
Representative
would you like to take a shot at
that Senator I would so.
Representative Monday I just
want to you we're glad that
you're even able to get online
We're we're praying for your
speedy recovery but trying to
think you and I don't do not
know why the departments have
not changed in
I think you'd be really did it
they did I I would venture to
say that now go back to the
discussion on you know if it's a
custody battle between the
parents thanks to what is a good
place to for that to happen
because they will give the
mother and the dad ample chance
to to discuss custody is with I
really think the DNA is going to
be the strongest pres that we
have to resolve that in the last
question I apologize
Representative when did not
write it down can you give that
to me one more time.
Yes I I believe my final
question was around the notion
that if we pass this law and
it's funded would these the sole
company that we know of
nationally Representative bye
Representative did today by
Monica what they stand to gain
financially and wouldn't we have
to put it out to an RFP.
To make it legal.
You're right representative
madam chair and representative I
think the theory is that if
there are other vendors out
there that they'll come to the
table I think right now your
jacket right Monica's
organization has the only one
that's been tested and used but
who's to say someone here in New
Mexico we'll take this idea and
run with it but the RP will be
from the city or county and
they'll put it out there and I
would presume if anyone else in
our state or anywhere else
decides they want to get in the
business of as long as the child
is secured and has all the
safety precautions are in this
device that I think we you know
we let of the market place cover
that but I do think we need to
go out for our you're right can
do the entire donation.
Thank thank you so much but
madam chair sponsors.
Last year.
I am so sorry Representative
Montoya I accidently muted you
can I am so sorry I was trying
to lower your hand and I messed.
So sorry last year.
Madam chair and it's an Sanchez
when I was looking at this group
critically because I believe in
it I think we need to do
something around this
particularly with the existing
law that's on the books I do
believe that a full throated
comprehensive messaging campaign
is needed because the law as it
stands is solid.
I don't want to place blame on
anyone I think moving forward we
have to use our free based our
public schools are health
centers CYFD to get the message
out.
I am.
I think I lost my concentration
isn't so great I apologize my my
concern last year and a remedy
that we came up with was to to
C. F. instead of running a bill
that we could do it is a pilot
program in municipalities across
the state to practice if the
legal team at the municipality
was willing to take the risk.
And if you could be fund funded
or fund raise and and trials if
you will so that we have
evidence on how the public
responded how much it costs it's
it's cetera and I still believe
that this law this bill is
worthy of this time that we are
giving it absolutely but I'm
just wondering if it's not
completely think through just
yet that's my heart of hearts
focus at at this particular
moment and I yield back.
Thank you representative will go
to Representative Lord.
You madam chair are all all of
my questions.
You I.
All.
Thank you Representative bash.
Sorry.
Madam chair
It looks like we have an idea
about funding for the initial
purchase of the boxes.
But there would be lease of
expenses down the road and I
wondered if we had any
plans for who and how those
lease expenses would be paid.
Madam chair if I may.
Yes Representative lease
expenses I think that's what
we're trying to do it within the
fire station or hospital so we
don't have those lease expenses
I think that's why it's going to
be in in a community a community
setting which would be like I
said I department or a police
station or hospital I don't
think they would lease the boxes
I don't know Monaco the scene
the boxes at the fire station
right now in Indiana.
Yes our our program is a lease
agreement and the reason why we
did this it's two hundred
dollars a year for a location to
least one of our boxes the
reason why we did this is
because this was such a new
program and we didn't want other
people messing with our boxes so
if I was to sell you a box today
in five years that box to be
outdated so we you know your
electronics to be operated when
you lease from us we actually
take care of the box we we
repair the box we upgrade the
box to new electronics last year
we put new heaters and all of
our state and this was a way for
us me being with fire service
and and in the medical field I I
knew the fire departments don't
have money so I had to make this
cheap for the fire departments
to be able to utilize but also
maintain a hundred percent you
know these boxes have to work a
hundred percent a hundred
percent of the time and so us
having kind of oversight on
these boxes along side the fire
departments because we we do
look at these boxes once the
review recertify our boxes once
here all ninety eight of them
get looked at once a year if
they ever need repaired were the
ones that do it because I don't
want the liability on the
locations so but you know and
Senator kind of touched on this
a minute ago there actually is
another organization in America
let's call it they're at banner
hospitals and their baby drawers
out of Arizona so this isn't a
vendor driven bill this is a
bill that is that is working
basically to to have these
available but we are not the
only ones in America doing this
anymore.
Thank you.
Madam chair.
Thank.
Representative Matthews you have
your hand up but since you've
already asked I'm gonna go to
Representative Anderson first
and then I'll come back to you.
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair all the
short
because I don't want to slow
this bill down in the two weeks
remaining
Representative I would encourage
you issue.
Chair next committee to think
about your funding source
because I fear that the general
fund may be somewhat closed down
so some were moving in the
legislature's bill that opens up
the.
Early childhood trust fund and I
cannot imagine a better because
then house bill one fifty seven
as a source of funding so we
should visit with that as you
have your next committee I would
support the bill thank you madam
chair.
Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you all for the questions in the
discussion it's been really
helpful
Is it the need to offer one of
the other question somebody
asked was what happens to the
parental rights
Of the mother and possibly if
and the father if a bat if a
baby is anonymously left in one
of these boxes and I want to
look at it from the standpoint
of the child for a second.
And I don't know the children
what do children's code says if
it says anything about what
happens in this kind of
circumstance whether this child.
Would be and sort of limbo and
whether or not it could be
whether not to child could be
placed for adoption in an
appropriate time or
some other.
Effort made to find a permanent
on the child a permanent all
because purpose is.
We are
Child welfare so I have that
question and I don't know the
answer off the top of my head by
any means but I think it is a
legitimate question to think
about what is going to happen to
this job and I just references
to that it Senator Gallegos semi
DNA the problem is we're not
gonna have DNA.
The most cases because this is
an anonymous drop off and in
part of the reason I'm thinking
about this and I'm thinking
about it that is the case when I
worked at P. B. NJ family
services we had a situation
where a baby had been put up for
adoption was in a home was in an
adoptive home the father had not
been notified of the adoption
the biological father and he
came back and because his
parental rights should never
been given up he was allowed to
have visitation with the child.
Which.
The adoptive family was
unbelievably hostile toward
there were lawsuits there are
all kinds of issues so this is a
I raise this that not because
I'm opposed to the bill but
because these are tough issues
that we need to think about when
we get into.
Dealing with the child's life
and a child's future life.
and what's going to happen to
the baby and what's going to
happen to the rights of the.
The mother the father and
conceivably.
The baby could be dropped off by
someone else could be dropped
off by the mother of the mother
or the grandparents because we
see grandparents.
All of a sudden it having to
take care of children that
their that their children have
left them with so it's just I'm
I'm concerned that we.
Think about how we tie these
loose ends up and be sure that
we're protecting this this
child.
Be on the drop off point.
That's all I have and if I'm
fine if somebody wants to
respond to that.
I may of the the really good
thing about that this is already
done an existing law so CYFD
when they take the custody of an
abandoned child at a hospital
our department or police
department they would go to the
same protocols to try to if
there's chance to reunite the
family of the young man
For in Hong also sold stand.
According to his father there
two Stephen never knew the
shipwright.
But once he found out that he
had a child you just want that
child so you know there are
going to be instances of people
are going to be
on knowing the situation but we
need to see what you to be able
to check that what you said if
someone comes forward figure out
a way to make sure the family
has access the grandfather
Oscar street for a well was
through the deputies got a
grandson so there are chances to
reunite with family I think
that's like it I said it's
already being done through CYFD
they would just have a different
way of looking at this because
the parent isn't the one
visibly problem child off so
that's going to give them a
little bit of work more work
possibly but I really think that
we already have it being done
through CYFD I would love as we
go forward this bill is see what
the would come and participate
the answer how they do that on a
regular current so I think
that's a really good question we
need to let them try to give us
some dialogue Law.
Representative Buka.
Thank you madam chair said the
fix you brought this to the
table and I was just curious and
sorry if I missed it I saw I'm
just wondering how many or how
the thanks B. determine of where
these boxes would you all across
New Mexico what's the process of
determining that.
Madam chair Monica.
Thank you we allow in this
current eleven states that were
legal in in the six states that
we've launched in we allow the
fire departments and hospitals
to choose if they want to do the
baby box program it's not
mandatory but the majority of
these communities are coming to
us and saying what can we do to
be proactive and one thing that
we always look for when we go to
these locations is anonymity as
a woman gonna get anonymity by
placing a child that this fire
house on a really busy road and
so there's a couple things that
we look at but ultimately the
decision is made by either the
hospital or the fire department.
Thank you.
If I may you know it's just like
in Espanola I think the
community assistance you workers
shouldn't needed that oxygen
felt Eddie at box in that
community and that's why there
placing one now Espanola and I
think they're going to have one
on opening or a ceremony and I
believe in March a chief workers
should.
To.
Yes.
Yes madam chair are.
R. because none of that is
correct should be installing it
on Monday Monica began here
Monday next week to get an
assault was a seven day a thing
period measure out everything's
working correctly on that line
we will have a lasting and it'll
go live so I'm hoping.
Opening March first.
Thank you thank you done.
Did you have more.
The only other question I had
was just in terms of again
access so depending on where
these are at least.
And I and our stand point is to
also protect
against confidential as possible
but can the women or that
whoever is surrendering can they
get to this is like what what is
that around that if it's not in
line or if it's not on the bus
stop if there are no buses
ready rural New Mexico as well
and how excess supply these
boxes really it is is my crush.
Madam chair would you like to
take a.
And to that question Senator
Madam chair representative I
would and it's great question so
when I started looking to this
bill I visualize one Kerr county
because you want.
People go somewhere close you
know when they're in that kind
of type of stress in need you
don't want to have to travel to
Albuquerque but in rural New
Mexico that's not actually
doable and a lot of our counties
we don't have a hospital we may
not have a twenty four seven
volunteer fire department you
know the state and county police
maybe a roaming the streets but
I think what we need to do is
well in the three hundred thirty
thousand that was to give us
thirty three locations statewide
for the funding for the install
I think we need to be strategic
and I think the fire department
is the best place to go because
they have more locations around
in the hospitals do and you
would want them somewhere in
close proximity you know
Farmington the way the Navajo
Nation is so broad that you want
to in areas at the population
can get to but the least amount
of time and least restrictive
and the would given the and then
name of the so I think we'll
after it's done
John is actually part of the I
think he's chairman of the state
ward firesteel Association and I
think they will have to look at
a state map and say okay.
If for instance Lea County.
The size to do this then they
would get with their fire
departments okay where's the
best place to.
To put the box for the whole
county and I think this would be
because it's our largest
community and it's forty miles
from anywhere sixty miles from
Tatum's but you want to place an
and location that anyone in that
area would feel safe in deposit
that child and make sure that
that child got the needed care
that it had as quickly as
possible but that was the
original thought on three
hundred thirty thousand of the
we're gonna let like saves the
partial ciation have a lot of
latitude in that because I think
they can come up with a great
plan.
Madam chair.
Widget what once once go ahead
Representative Ferrary.
I'm sorry I thought discussion
was over actually I have a
couple questions if you don't
mind holding.
So I just just looking at the
map thirty three hundred thirty
thousand will give ten thousand
to each county not twenty so
that your this would only cover
sixteen count sixteen and a half
County so the math is off there
and
it says in our fiscal impact
report and.
It is not clear from the bill
how many safety boxes will be
installed or how the annual
lease to be would be paid for
however DFA calculates as
follows the appropriation to DF
a local government division
includes state owned
requirements so that that would
the bill actually has language
that says it must be a state
owned building so any private
hospitals I mean we we have a
few state owned hospitals I'm
not a hundred percent certain
but I think that most fire
departments are not state owned
there county owned or city owned
so I'm afraid that that language
it's going to trip you up and I
also am very concerned that we
are essentially putting into law
a single company and I know that
we heard there is the second one
I'm not sure how this would work
with the anti donation clause
they're they're also in the in
the FIR we see if I can find it
again I'm.
Something about that the company
says that they that they do not
take our tax dollars that all of
that all of it is is fund raise
this centrally is is charitable
giving so I'm not understanding
how those to fit together that
we're giving three hundred
thirty three thirty two thousand
dollars to install these things
not to purchase them but to
install them when when the
company's website says that they
do not take tax dollars.
Yes.
No does not jump in after okay
madam chair and great question
so I will look into the state
location the state funding
of the facilities but on the on
the dollar amount to three
hundred thirty was the average
what we thought with the cost of
the installation is because on
the purchase of the box that is
what more could you group will
fundraise so if they come to
Hobbes and they will help the
local entities in the businesses
and hops fundraise for the
purchase of the box the
responsibility for us is the
actual installation and the
facility so you're right I I may
have to work with we while we
talk to the drafter I didn't
pick up on that but we're
talking about for me the easiest
place would be a fire department
because there are so many of
around but we may have to look
at that I totally think that the
as long as they do an RFP as far
as the county of that they would
be
As far Santa Fe donation Clause
they would be okay because there
are now that we know on a Bender
Arizona I don't know
Any other way around that is to
go single sourced we've gotta
have other businesses in Eunice
our school board has a contract
with a the lumber yard downtown
and it's the only one in tap so
there's gotta be a way to work
around that because it you know
they put out an RFP they applied
for the opportunity to serve the
schools and even though it's the
only one and community they get
the access to so what we're
purchasing from that may be a
David Abbey question but I'll
look into that also because I
think as it goes forward I don't
want to have anything that's
going to stumble us before we
get to that for.
Thank you for that I still don't
that that you said that the
company will raise the money to
purchase the box.
Our fiscal impact impact report
doesn't talk about purchasing it
talks about twenty thousand
dollars to install the box so is
the box cost ten thousand and
the installation is I'm and and
how do we know you know I mean
what it's going to cost that's
kind of a that would be like
saying you know I need a new
roof the new roof cost ten
thousand dollars obviously it
depends on on what we have to do
is that I'm still not clear
about how that how the state
funding is going to you madam
chair if I may I think the box
in the construction we were
asking for our two different
things the the thirty thousand
or us forced to construct and
install the box in a fire house
I think the the purchase of the
walk to the definition of what
is coming from the organization
itself so we're asking for
thirty thousand dollars to send
an art P. out to contractors to
install the box in the fire
stations I believe this is what
we're doing madam chair so
they're two different to
severance and I don't know if
they are F. I R. says that or
not but the thirty thousand is
going to be to construct and
install the box not to purchase
and I know that we have a rough
estimate because as this bill is
doing there's right now it's
roughly about from anywhere from
twenty one to thirty thousand is
it's what they've they've spent
already to construct install the
loss of their fire station
manager that's we got that
number from.
Thank you for that but then if
now we're talking thirty
thousand we're only talking
eleven counties are are counties
are going down so and and I I
hear you about the single source
and all of that but we have we
haven't put that into law I mean
we we don't want to do a law
that essentially makes a single
source and I know that there's
there's I'm at another company I
don't know anything about him
and this the our analysts didn't
know anything about him either
because they have reported that
it's basically a single source I
I really have I mean I I am I
work with kids my whole career
of course I want I don't want
anything to happen to any kids
I'm just not sure that this is
fully thought out and also
seventy thousand for the PED to
develop and implement a campaign
a public awareness campaign
actually I would like to see a
lot more money for that and I
would like to have PED here has
anyone has PED has anyone
working on this welcome to PED
about what they might need where
did you come up with that
seventy thousand four PED.
Madam chair and and that there
again being on school board
we're always receiving unfunded
mandates I just wanted to by Ian
to PED so they're not of
Secretary is now here in the
Senate trying get confirmation
but they've not given me a
number I came up with a total of
four hundred thousand and I hear
a little bit I'd like John to
explain because when we came up
with the numbers I had asked
what Espanola is doing in in
order to get their box installed
and I appreciate the more of
your site just because he's not
waiting on the legislature to do
this they ran a proclamation we
get it there but in the
discussions I understood is
between seven and ten thousand
per install for what they're
doing and I figured that
statewide so I used that thirty
thousand for thirty three
counties but I increased it by
seventy just to make a flat four
hundred thousand because I
thought that would be easy to
push through the legislature and
we always every year Sen
publication mandates that we
don't fund so I appreciate it if
we want to increase that money
and I'll get was secretary
Steinhaus in minutes and asked
him what he would need I view
this as all they need to do is
come up with a proposal and then
send that to all the school
districts so they can print on
eleven by thirteen flyer so they
can put on the walls for ever
they want in schools I think
that the message out I would
love that we actually have it in
some kind of a classroom setting
but the message out just has to
be seen for kids
if this passes this year and
US secretary sign house needs a
reoccurring money we we just
need to look at on a regular
basis it that's what is going to
take to get the message we
failed this young lady but not
fortunate in the pocket in
twenty thirteen and I was just
trying to correct.
Thank you for that and I will
tell you I have been working for
several years on an affirmative
consent bill that it puts it
into their curriculum
essentially that this has to be
taught so that may be something
you want to think about is doing
a bill
mandating that the PED have a
section in there health classes
or you know I mean I don't know
exactly what what your bill
would look like but something
along those lines because just
saying oh here's seventy
thousand dollars come up with
the nine by thirteen she sent it
out to the districts have been
printed and hand it to kids I'm
we know where we're going to see
most of that was we're going to
see in the in the traction on
the ground so so I'm with that I
will entertain a motion Adam.
I'd like to move that
We
Table house bill one fifty seven
as amended.
We do have a second.
Okay Representative Matthews is
seconding.
I'm sorry Representative.
Do you all have anything to
close before we I went I went to
the motion to quickly so if the
sponsors have anything to close
with I will allow that now.
Sure I think Monica to leave
close with.
I thank you for allowing me to
just say just a couple of things
on the this the financial side
when Senator came to me and and
told me he was going to ask for
money my first response was we
don't take government funds and
we still don't we don't install
these boxes the money that's
being given is going to stay in
your communities by contractors
in your communities that are
going to install the boxes that
we bring to you these boxes are
going to be owned by us so the
money that is being allocated
I'm I'm not gonna see that money
and and so I just want to make
sure that you guys understand
that were an organization that
does not reach out to
governments because we we want
to be able to pray with a mother
that calls are twenty four hour
hotline and we don't want
someone to tell us that we can't
so I just wanted to to be clear
that we're not installing these
boxes that money that you guys
are allocating is going to go to
contractors within your
community that are licensed by
the state.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you for that I just don't
think that's clear in the and
and that they the analysts
didn't find it to be clear in
the I'm.
In the bill either so
Representative Senator.
Madam chair thank you I just
want to closing telling you that
I really appreciate more hope
you're Sanchez in Espanol also
they didn't wait on legislation
they're doing what they need to
do protect your children in
their community and I would hope
that was we look at this forward
that that's what we do for our
entire state I know there
isolated instances in one
discussion that I had
I was asked if we had any
history on this and there's no
history on how many children and
then thrown into a dumpster
dumped into a a round and very
and this bill would give us an
opportunity for that mother have
another option and I appreciate
the dialogue today will wait see
what the vote bonus thank you
okay thank you have a I'm.
I'm sorry else long Madam also
want to thank the committee for
taking taking this bill and in
order to it's my first bill I
think it's a bill that means a
lot to a lot of constituents in
the state of New Mexico and and
I also just want to thank you
guys for hearing it out today
and and if we need to work we
might be bringing this bill that
next year it's something I think
that's very important to
community solar response from
the community people are online
if it was ten ten vote I mean
when I which would add more but
I just want to thank you guys
for then this bill conjured
Committee and thank you guys for
the the committee for the hard
work.
Thank you okay so I'm.
I will go ahead and Lee and take
the role.
Okay so for the motion to table
Representative Anderson.
Where P. cation of the motion
please again motioned to table
temporarily.
No.
Representative Armstrong now.
Representative bash.
Yes.
Representative thank.
Senator Ferrari.
Yes to table.
And I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Lord.
No.
Representative Matthews.
Yes the table and I would like
to explain my vote.
Representative Montoya.
Representative task force.
To table.
Could you repeat that
Representative no to table now.
And madam chair.
Yes.
Okay we have.
In favor and six opposed.
Comments those are from Ferrari
lord New Mexicans here.
Okay so hold on.
We we have to pass it now so
I'll go except a motion to pass
and then after we do this voting
I'll go back to the folks who
want to explain their boat.
do that so I have a motion for
two passed from representative
Armstrong second.
Yes.
Okay okay I heard both Anderson
entered office so we have double
second okay Emily will you call
the roll again.
For the motion to pass
Representative.
I do passed as amended.
Representative Anderson yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative bash.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Ferrary.
Representative Lord.
Yes.
Representative Matthews.
No.
In love explain about.
And I would like to explain
that.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative trespass.
Yes my vote.
And madam chair.
No okay so that's the vote Emily
thank S. seven in paper three a
post and we have comments from
Ferrari lord Matthews and Texas
okay so we'll take it in that
order Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair I the
concept I really agree with I
think there's too many like
definition of student dissent
given the
agencies involved are here to
you know lend their support for
how they would work I think it
puts too much on PED to have to
do the outreach it might be
something better done through
department of health
who is better at managing
campaigns like that and also for
CYFD to not be in the picture
more and get more answers from
them so I think this is just
something we need to work on for
next session but obviously it's
going to go on so
I think these things need to be
kept in mind thank you madam
chair thank you representative
Representative Lord.
Are there
Representative Lord you your is
it just me or up if this you
sound kind of like Charlie
brown's teacher.
Yes so I don't know if you need
to get closer or
what but it was hard to
understand what you're saying.
One.
While we're waiting
Representative Matthews why
don't you go ahead and that will
can you hear me at all oh oh
actually that's perfect I'll go
ahead Representative thank you
technology I'm.
Thank you madam chair the only
I'll and I'll speak briefly I
get it there's some issues with
the bill but I don't think
that's any reason that's why I
but yes there are some
technicalities that need to be
worked out but what I want is
for everyone to work together
and come together with their
ideas and help the sponsor of
this bill forward sh because I
could not sleep at night if this
if this bill was killed and
ended up with another baby in
the trash I consider myself at
night so I would really like for
all the people have the great
suggestions and actually I've
been talking to has a fire
departments who want to be
involved in this conversation so
what I'm doing is I'm going to
help you guys I I you know all
the people get them all on board
so we can get this job fine tune
get ready get it passed and help
anymore babies ended up in the
trash can which which Oakes
ma'am thank you I'm finished.
Thank you Representative
Matthews.
Thank you madam chair and I I
don't think that anybody on this
committee wants to see babies in
trash cans and that's not what
certainly most of our votes at
and to do with our this is a
bill that relates to the welfare
of children and their parents
and IAD.
I think the that the issues with
the bill are more than just
technicalities we this bill
probably should have been also
referred to judiciary I think
it's unfortunate it's not
because there is some some
substantial legal questions
about how all of this will work
with existing law
I the.
I am.
I think the bill is very well
intentioned I think this is
something we should do I just
think we need to have a very
solid bill to do it because if
we don't we will end up with
additional problems additional
issues and certainly I think
that
all of us would be willing to
work with the Sanchez and share
ideas or whatever so that we can
make this happen that's the goal
here is not to kill the bill the
goal is to get a very solid
piece of legislation that
protects these young parents and
that protects the children.
Of who are in fact in these
cases thank you thank you
Representative office.
Thank you madam chair I think a
lot of us are are in in the same
agreement that
although it has some some flaws
I think of it this committee has
brought to the table and.
I know that both the center and
and and Representative and all
these.
Co sponsors are responsible
enough to just see those issues
and that they will work hard in
that that
our other representative on the
panel are willing to to help and
so again this is a will move in
the right direction so I I
congratulate the the the
committee for helping hopefully
we don't get any babies in there
but if we do at least they're
safe thank you.
Thank you thank you all for for
great question.
Let me before we want.
If I may.
Okay I just want to thank you
all for your guys inside and all
your comments are taken to heart
I think this is something where
we need to have a community come
together and one life that we
save is one let them be here for
the rest you know for the rest
of the community or the rest of
our lives having it's it's
something big I get a little
flustered because this bill
means something to me I think it
means something to Monica being
somebody that was you know left
out abandoned like that in look
at her now she's she's inventing
something that's going to
prevent that two other other
infants in the world so I I
really I got a little choked up
because this really means a lot
and I and I think take your
comments and suggestions to
heart and I guarantee that I
will work on this with my other
representatives of other
sponsors to check to make it
right and hopefully we don't
have issues.
When this bill becomes law so I
thank you guys for your time and
I appreciate all your support
thank you guys.
Thank you Representative
representatives and senator and
and and and Representative
Matthew says I don't there's I
don't think there's anyone on
this committee who doesn't like
the idea we just what we don't
want to put into law something
that that is going to make
things worse I'm so and and to
add since this the Espanola is
doing it there's nothing that
precludes localities from from
doing this so and I just just
because this is what we're
talking about I have to say this
that the mom in into Valencia
County who ended up killing her
baby we failed her she called
out a week before and and we
didn't we didn't take care of
her and and so it's on it's on
all of us essentially that that
this was a mom who was in deep
trouble and she tried what she
knew how to do and we as a
society failed her and and
that's that's really sad and I
hope we learn from that good
luck on this Representative then
Senator you might think about
trying to do some amendments
with some of the things that
that were raised but with that
we that's the only bill we have.
And
So what we what we leased the
folks and I we will recess for
today and we do have I believe
we do have a bill and a memorial
for Friday so we will meet on
Friday thank you all for your
your time and patience and any
public homeless and in thank you
for for for being here
Representative Senator madam
chair I just a question of what
was the final vote I did not
capture the.
I think it was seven three
Senator seven three I think
that's correct okay I was just
been checked with Emily thank
you.
Thank you madam chair.
