I come before you today to four
Senate bill two seventy three it
is identical to two sixty that
you heard from me about a week
and a half ago or a week ago and
as such just for freshman is
called mental health parity and
it is sure is that there are no
barriers to individuals who need
to get mental health right at
that moment previously or
currently they have to go
through eight hundred number so
have the effect that it also
ensures that we will pay
behavior health providers to
keep in the state and that's the
summary okay I'm just going to
do a show of hands in the
audience anyone here in
opposition.
Okay anyone here in support.
Okay
I will entertain a motion unless
someone has.
Okay.
Madam chair I need my memory
refreshed on this more bill real
quick and I I don't remember
that the I have vague memories
right because.
Representative Jones actually as
you begin to hear it with your
background as a nurse and and
you know the need for mental
health and substance use
disorder treatment in the state
what this bill does is
essentially given the patients
who who need to do is you know.
Very often times and substance
abuse an individual will be on a
binge and then finally on
Tuesday wake up and staff I
gotta get help and the and the
family says great and and right
now then then they have to call
health plans and they have to
get prior authorization then
they have to get whatever and by
Andrew stayed individuals back
drinking again or what have you
and so this is to allow rapid
movement it also allows the
needs of the patient not to a
number day program to be the
guide as to how long the patient
stays in whatever rehab or
mental health situation and it
encourages significant dialogue
and medical necessity which is
something you might remember
it health plans of just pretty
much treated it like medical
surgical whatever this requires
them to use standards of
behavioral health organizations
and this parallels federal
legislation almost every part of
it it is a pair of what's
already on the books federally
it has been funded it's in the
budget for the OSI to work with
the health plans for a year to
get all the written material
they need to put into place to
because they have to show their
policies to anyone who asks for
a and and and the other thing is
it does allow family therapy
which otherwise you have to have
a mental health diagnosis to get
therapy and as we know aces in
New Mexico start
long before maybe there's a
manifestation and and we could
prevent a lot of them if we got
couples into therapy so I think
that's those are most of the key
points okay thank you very much
thank you madam chair okay I
will entertain a.
Okay that Representative Chavis
and the second.
Representative par meal is there
any opposition.
Thing then you have a through
pass and to.
Okay now we'll go back to the
agenda
Senate bill one seventeen.
Please don't take offense if
someone logged off.
I heard you had a very late
night.
We will try not to will also try
to be very short if you're ready
for us.
Of the prescribing psychologists
practice actress New Mexico was
the first state in the nation to
allow prescribing psychologists
they've been doing this in the
state for well over twenty years
with out adverse problems or
concerns the prescribing
psychologists have requested to
move under the medical board for
their supervision the medical
board wants them under them for
supervision all of the problems
that that worked out this is
just we have to formally go
through the process I do that
with me Dr John Courtney who is
a prescribing psychologist to
give a little more background if
you like but with that we be
ready for questions.
Let's go to the audience for
anyone here in opposition.
Go ahead and come up.
And on zoom if you're in
opposition go ahead and raise
your hand.
Chair representative well hold
on for that one yep in my own
now yes Madam chair
representative my name's Jason
Thompson I'm here representing
the psychic psychiatric medical
association of New Mexico first
off I just want to dress up
respectfully we really do
appreciate the work that's been
done on this bill from the
original version to now we do
think it's a much better tighter
bills we do really appreciate
the work that the Sanchez done
on and I appreciate him and the
proponents here and our concerns
out on this we just wanted to
still just address some concerns
that we still have conceptually
with the bill wanders around the
long acting injectable
medications and also on a more
of a training and expertise
level in section three around
the board duties in terms of
future training what that's
really going to look like going
forward for energy in the future
scope expansions or what that
training is going to be like to
get as close up to par as a
psychic psychiatric level
training as as possible so with
those we just like to share
those concerns and again thank
center so.
Okay
anyone here in support.
If you want to speak come on up
you'll have one minute.
So please get in line.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Amanda can
time the
executive director for the New
Mexico Medical Board the end
interim executive director and
we stand in on behalf of the
board we stand in support of
this bill we will work with the
of the psychology board to make
this happen as seamless as
possible but we are in support
of this bill.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee Linda Siegel
representing the New Mexico
psychological association and
the prescribing psychologists
and we have worked with all of
the groups including the New
Mexico Medical Society and we've
addressed all of their concerns
and the reality is putting a
prescribing psychologist under
the board of medicine gives the
board of medicine the authority
to make these decisions about
training education
pharmaceuticals everything thank
you.
Dr may filled up some
psychologist I'm also a member
of the New Mexico psychological
association who stand in support
of this bill thank you.
Anyone on zoom in support okay
Patsy Romero.
Madam chair good morning sorry
you had to delay night members
of the committee thank you to
the sponsor or the sale I
represent the National Alliance
on mental illness and for all
other reasons stated chair we
stand in full support of this
legislation thank you thank you
Patsy okay we'll go to the
committee.
Any questions.
Is anyone awake I'm.
Representative Vincent and then
thank you madam chair and
senator.
Of let's see.
Are these changes necessary to
for New Mexico to me federal
law.
Madam I my experts is very
versed in these kinds of things.
Committee and Representative
fence and
I'm not certain what federal
laws you might be discussing the
practice of a prescribing
psychology already meets federal
guideline we're able to we have
the As already
and we're also able to prescribe
suboxone so it from our
perspective the important the
purpose of moving into medical
boards to make sure we had a
regulatory authority that was
familiar with the practice of
medicine.
Madam chair and and Senator so
are you trying to align this is
that what the reason for this
legislation is what's the
reasoning for the legislation.
Madam chair and and
Representative Vincent how the
purpose was to move the practice
of prescribing underneath the
board with the most experience
in regulating the practice
medicine.
Thank you madam chair
Representative
Permitted.
Thank.
Thank you madam chair and the
senator and experts I'm just
trying to understand the
differences there are two major
psychologists groups is that
correct one is the New Mexico
psychologists and the other is
the New Mexico psychological
association.
In the state and I I heard of
Jason Thompson indicate they had
some concerns and so I'm just
trying to understand that there
is two groups and why this still
a concern madam chair and and
Representative Lujan
there are two organizations
representing psychology in
general in the state of New
Mexico one is New Mexico
psychological association the
other is a state psychologist
Association New Mexico that
latter group represents the
interests of prescribing
psychology only both groups
support this bill.
In this in the state and you we
are moving this under the Madam
chair of Senator and an expert
we are looking to combine these
two organizations the two groups
now if you don't want the money
to the maybe you do want the
money to the medical board I
want to make sure that that's
clear but prescribing is an
issue isn't that correct and
madam chair and and
Representative heard only the
practice of prescribing
psychology that act or practice
of prescribes opposes the only
part that would be moved into
the medical board the practice
of psychology would remain under
there the RLD.
So madam chair members of any of
them Senator in it experts but
it's the New Mexico the the New
Mexico state association of
psychologists that does do
describing their the ones that
are having them Texas is that
correct chairman Thompson and
Representative heard
The New Mexico psychological
association in the state
psychologists Association of New
Mexico our interest
organizations they are at the
regulatory authorities the
regulatory authorities is under
RLD is board of psychology
psychological examiners and then
so we're talking about taking
the practice of prescribing and
moving in entirely under the
board of medicines regulatory
authority.
And madam chair Senator and
expert what are you going to do
to resolve this matter because
it sounds like prescribing
psychologists are also objecting
so what is happening at them
not understanding that
correctly.
Nope.
Representative heard and there's
no disagreement there in fact
everyone is now in favor of
exactly what this bill is going
to produce which is the
psychology all prescribes
psychologists are also
psychologists in order to become
a prescribes a college you have
to first be license as a
psychologist in the state of New
Mexico then you're going to get
additional training afterwards
and you get license specifically
as a prescribing psychologist so
the that license to prescribe
medication will be regulatory
relief will be regulated only by
the board of medicine where is
your practice of psychology
which might be counseling
psychological testing will be
regulated by our own the.
It's more about.
This
is.
Yeah I apologize and perhaps you
are you referencing psychiatry.
Well I'm referencing the the
statement made by Jason Thompson
okay at the.
K. and come up and and say who
you know who is opposing this
bill your.
Here we need the money.
That is.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me at no Representative my
group that I represent as the
state association of
psychiatrists not not
psychologists there the person
they're prescribing physicians
that work in mental health care
they're not associated with the
state psychology board another
can be at and everybody's tired
and still is very but the my
group is a psychiatrist this is
he's mentioning that state
psychology group okay.
Madam chair that up thank you
for the thank you for the
clarification thank you madam
chair thank you senator
Representative Jones.
Thank you madam chair and so
madam chair Senator expert
the only thing I've I've heard
that might be have an issue is
is that is the administration
aspect for psychologists that
they would be there would be
some training involved in maybe
protocols involved in
injectables rather than just
oral medications so is that
something the medical board
which would create a plan for.
And they would train and so
forth and then of course there's
there's the possibility of side
effects with those injectables
the they would also have
protocols for treating.
That's great I think it's good
that that would to streamline
everything I think.
That very much thank you
managing thank you for allowing
the kind of silent answers.
We heard a lot of talking
yesterday.
I will entertain a motion.
Committee staff yes as amended
okay is there a second.
Thank okay is there any
opposition.
Thing then you have a to pass
the issue to be here after a
long night.
Okay Senate bill one fifty as
amended Representative I mean
Senator Kernan.
Thank you for.
Whenever you're ready Senate
thank thank you very much madam
chair and members of the
committee Senate bill one fifty
just twice amended
and this current law adopted in
twenty twenty which was house
bill two thirty by requiring
CYFD to conduct a family
assessment we in the parents
guardians or caretakers of a
child released from a hospital
or free standing birthing
facility center with the plan of
care failed to comply with the
plan based on the results of the
family assessment the department
shall provide referrals for
counseling training or other
services aimed at addressing the
underlying causative factors
that may jeopardize the safety
of the well being of the child
so in the Senate health and
public affairs committee there
was an amendment which removed
from the title the requirement
for an investigation and that's
a really important amendment
because the goal is not to rush
to the investigation piece so we
also struck show in return the
language to may proceed with an
investigation into Judiciary
Committee amendment was offered
in a adopted which struck offer
and left provided in other words
they must provide referrals so
in section a beginning online
for this child's parents three
line nine purpose was was struck
in so we come to you with a bill
that I think kind of resolve
some of the concerns and issues
that we had from the very
beginning with regard to living
directly to an investigation
which is not of the purpose of
this bill it's more to make sure
that CYFD when the babies leave
the hospital
performed a family just
assessment of eyes on the baby
if that family is not complying
with the plan of care and so
with that I'd like to turn it
over to Representative Ferrary
mail I really appreciate her.
Up on this as she certainly has
far more experience than I do in
this area would like for her
safe you point thank you good
morning madam chairman and
members of the community is as
as you all know this is the work
that I do and
We believe in in providing to
families with with help and
guidance that we can move this
family forward in healing what
we have found through surveys
that were done last year is that
fifty seven percent of the
families of children who were
both born exposed could not
identify who their who their
contact person was or care
coordinator and they then refuse
services or did not receive
services and that to us is what
is concerning we want to provide
these families with wraparound
care of services so that we can
find the healing and so that is
is the how this bill was that
was created with that intention
of providing more services for
families and
Part of what what I have
experienced is that many
families do reviews these
services because there are
deeply in crisis and so what
this offers is another choice an
option so that we can do a
family assessment make sure that
that child is safe in the home
but also we've provide these
services to families and and it
is through these services that
we can see the our best results.
Thank you just one quick follow
up madam chair members of the
committee we understand the role
that the department of health
place in this as they are
responsible for through the NCOs
developing the plan of care
making sure that that's in place
as well as the rules that ECECD
will apply going forward
certainly CYFD needs to do the
family assessment once that's
completed then we know that
ECECD has many opportunities for
providing some of those services
there's a long list of things
that can be done for that family
so it's it's a role that
everyone place that CYFD has to
be the department that puts us
on that child to determine
whether that child is safe for
now with that I think with Jason
I didn't know if you just we're
ready for questions right anyone
in the audience in opposition.
Okay if you want to come up and
then if you're on zoom in
opposition please raise your
hand will get.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Emily Martin I'm the director
protective services at CYFD.
Last week this committee.
For hours it felt like talk to
listen to ask questions were of
the department of department of
health and ECECD regarding the
comprehensive addiction and
recovery act in House Bill.
Four thirty four sorry there's
so many numbers to remember
right now.
And with that I want to say we
took a lot of recommendations
from this committee we also took
some of the language and worked
with Senator Kernan from just a
Senate bill one fifty to ensure
that there are family
assessments being done
immediately.
This is our working with
families is not a quick fix
there's no quick fix it is
comprehensive it is complex and
we feel that that this bill just
does not go quite as far as
house bill four thirty four by
requiring all for department
CYFD D. O. H. HSD in ECECD to
come together in statute so it
lives on and not.
Work between all of our
departments were moved on and
that that the department of
health initially engages with
those families to do the family
assessment when they aren't
engaged and that that we we also
took our.
We also ensured that we worked
we built in the recommendations
from this committee to ensure
that in M. D. T. was created and
rules around multi disciplinary
teams meeting that surround that
family not just an assessment of
the plan of care so thank you
very much.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen Canaday with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and I
think that the Emily Barton just
stated it perfectly that we feel
that a lot of work is been
looked at in this bill has been
addressed in other places and we
do appreciate them work that
everyone working together to
make the House Bill the.
Child newborn Care Act
I'm sorry I'm really bad at bill
numbers but anyway I.
I can't.
And make it effective anyway
thank you very much.
Okay anyone in the room and
support.
Okay if you'd like to speak
please come lined up.
Good afternoon committee members
and thank you for being here
again I know you guys have less
than six hours of sleep my name
is Maryland back and I'm the
founder and executive director
New Mexico child first network
we're very proud of this bill is
passed unanimously in every
single committee and it passed
unanimously on the Senate floor
I'm we know that care at is
failing this bill is our best
shot before the clock runs out
to fix it.
And I also want to draw
attention I'm sorry I think in
order to the capital.
This also just isn't about non
compliance and protecting the
nine children we know in the
very first year care dying fifty
seven percent of people not even
knowing on a plan of care I want
to bring attention to the real
grandson article from July
twenty second twenty twenty two
the headline is same home to
babies found dead within
eighteen months both babies one
plan of care.
An infant died on June twenty
third after medics responded to
a call reporting to female child
was choking and not breathing
that mark for the second such
incident at the same home
identified by the mother who is
just twenty one years old.
This mother lost two different
babies and I have to say as
we're here working these are
most vulnerable youth that's why
care existence comprehensive
addiction recovery act is to
support and empower a two
generational model under Obama
it this bill passed because
Obama identified in his
administration identified that
substance using substance
exposed parents giving birth to
substance exposed infants are
the single most vulnerable
population with the single
largest impact for improved
outcomes of our entire nation
and until we fix this plan this
is possibly the number one most
important but we can pass this
session we have to fix cara we
have to fix this thank you.
Thank you anyone on zoom in
support.
Okay we'll go to the committee.
Representative Jones thank you
chair Senator.
Representative expert my gosh.
I just a I'm glad to see any
improvement on on this care plan
I was
the more I learned the more I
realize we have a lot of work to
do and I appreciate that we're
you know we're making steps in
the right direction so I do have
some questions.
This this is a real it seems
pretty simple these changes that
you made but that but they're
big from may to shall
So is there is there actually a
conflict with for thirty four.
So
madam chair members of the
committee I I am probably not an
expert on at the bill that of
four thirty four even though I
have spoken with the secretary
and her staff and we've had good
conversations and I'm gonna say
right up front I think that the
current secretary is doing a
very good job of trying to
figure out how can we improve
the department I it we we're
working together the difference
is
the the four departments under
the house bill four thirty four
they can already do all of those
things that I I don't think you
need legislation to begin to
work together to accomplish what
needs to be done the differences
with this bill it does require.
CYFD who is ultimately
responsible for the safety of
the children.
To make that one.
Family assessment just make sure
everything's going well and so
that's what this bill does it is
a requirement it does because
the need for family assessment
but as you know if there is a
family assessment things are
going going fairly well there's
no need our duty to route
there's no need to report which
that creates the investigation
we're not asking that an
investigation be done we're just
asking that eyes are on that
baby just to make sure and and
that's what this bill does in in
part frankly hi sorry I can't
answer your question on state no
four thirty four okay maybe.
the bill I didn't.
Madam chair and representative
honestly I don't see a conflict
with for thirty four what I see
is a further definition of of
how we follow through on the
assessment for care plans so so
I'm.
I guess I I'm I'm just a little
confused on that so I I just
want to to identify that this is
filling that gap and it's only
if there is a non compliance
component to it and in follow
through and and what do we do
with that that moment I know
that all of the systems are are
working together ECECD which I
love is that's what her work
through and and all of these
entities coming together I know
that it was my recommendation to
have an M. D. team meeting so
that we can talk about the is
that we can move these referrals
up I work in early intervention
and that is the most important
component that I I wanted to
push that there is communication
between all of these departments
but I honestly don't see that
this this is in conflict with
that
I I believe that this is when do
we need to have a family
assessment and I believe that
that's what defines it in this
bill.
Thank you.
I I agree with that and I
remember Madam chair
representative I remember we I
remember right we all agree.
I felt like I was missing so we
we shall do an assessment that
contact is so important that
that's what's going to make me
make it or break it in my
opinion
This so I'm just going to go
over this in my mind this just
this bill just tells it tells us
that we have to we would they're
going to do it CYFD is going to
gonna make contact is there any
framework about when that
contact is made is there any
direction on that at this point.
Madam chair Representative Jones
the the family assessment would
occur when a CYFD is notified of
the non compliance.
What the safety care plan.
A little confused so how do we
know there was non compliance.
So as an early intervention
provider up plan of care is is
designed for this family when
that child is born and then they
are referred to early
intervention or other home
visiting programs so if if when
we try to make contact and and
they refuse or we cannot provide
those babies are those families
that is the non compliance
component.
Okay so madam chair
representative are we it is CYFD
in touch with the service
providers that have been chosen.
By the family no I I believe it
would be the service providers
who with and make the refer.
I know that this bill the scope
of it is.
A lot of detail at this point
I'm just excited about go ahead
go ahead did you have something
to add thank you madam chair and
representative when you're in
the hospital the NCOs if it's a
Medicaid patient baby they're
responsible and that was in the
original bill so they developed
the plan of care and in that
notification is given to CYFD
that they have a plan of care
that's getting ready to be
implemented so all of these are
interconnected but you're
exactly right if the baby leaves
the hospital and we cannot prove
that those services are being
provided that's when we're
asking CYFD to step in and just
did the family assessment so
that the NCOs the hospital the
care coordinator all of those
individuals within the hospital
system the instancias that's
weird originates that plan of
care yes thank you and madam
chair Senator Representative
this I feel like this bill is
absolutely essential it is an
essential first step but in the
future I I I feel like we need
to put some more parameters on
this I personally think that
CYFD I know we have a staffing
issues we've we've got people
spread then but but in order to
make sure these babies are
taking care of and the families
get what they need that everyone
else's babies need an initial
contact and soon after they
leave the hospital that's that's
my opinion but I know that's
that's beyond what what the
bills addressing this is this is
absolutely necessary first step
though in my mind so I really
really appreciate you bringing
it and I support it completely.
Thank you so much thank you
madam chair madam chair and
representative if I could this
is this is not in lieu of
the the what is it for twenty
four for thirty four four thirty
four this is not in lieu of that
this is a component as I see it
as a component of it of all
these entities who will be
providing those wraparound
services.
Yes I understand that thank you
thank you Representative Vincent
and then the Chavis thank you
madam chair.
And representative thank you for
bringing this I have got.
A really big dose of CYFD in the
last sixty days.
And I know that we are all.
In the right direction to help
babies help families me and I
know that whenever I see CYFD.
And.
And the other agencies that we
saw last week that was awesome
to watch them get together and
and pass a bill where we're all
working together.
And.
When I hear the opposition.
And then I hear the people to
support it I'm always trying to
find that middle ground.
And I have I've read this bill
over and over and over and all I
see is good in this bill.
And so one of my questions was.
What does the plan of care look
like.
Share yeah I think it's so so
the plan of care is is designed
well the infant is in the
hospital and what that looks
like it is referrals to two
different supportive services
that will help that family
before that baby goes home and
it is assigned to an MCO.
Who then monitors that planet
Kerr and follows up with the
family to see how they're doing
how that incident is doing and
the follow up services that
happen.
I think it's important madam
chair and representative to also
know that early intervention and
home visiting is an option that
you can opt out of it is not
mandatory.
Thank you and Madam chair
representative this will be
funded through the budget
correct.
That right.
Yes that madam chair members of
the committee there wasn't
appropriation requests not in
this bill but I believe in a
house bill for the four thirty
four I think they went before
Senate finance and perhaps but I
cannot I cannot say definitively
that definitely if there was an
asking whether it's in the
budget I'm sorry I cannot answer
that that and madam chair
representative so when when a
baby leaves the hospital and I'm
I'm trying to envision this.
What are the.
What are the dangers of the drug
addicted baby.
Madam chair members of the
committee we heard testimony in
a previous committee and in the
Senate regarding from our
nicking nurses and actually I
had Nick universe in both
committees described some of the
situations that they have
experienced with with these
babies leaving the hospital and
then
several weeks days later being
returned to the hospital and so
the difference rationing is
they're sending these babies
home knowing that potentially
there not in in a save situation
so in in let me just remind
people that the plan of care in
in if it is Medicaid baby the
NCOs have that responsibility
that that cost is borne I
believe by the NCOs so it does
not require an additional
probation for the plan of care
but it does the certainly within
the department we all know that
that they have some vacancies
and and I believe that ask Miss
for more support for the care
coordinators and the navigators
within that CYFD department so
want to clarify that with
planning care is paid for it's
my understanding that you see as
thank you and madam chair
representative.
When a baby leaves the hospital
and the baby is addicted to some
kind of a substance is the is
the mother trained she shown how
to take care of that baby.
Miss madam chair committee
that's part of the plan of care
I think part of what that mother
needs to know in part of the
services that they need to leave
the hospital with and take with
them and so the long list of of
services they don't have to
actually participate in every
single services offered but
certainly the services in a pie
to the safety that baby that
particular time so that that
would be part of what they need
to know is how to take care
those babies are really
struggling I mean when you think
about an addictive.
Adult going through withdrawals
and and the pain of that when
you think about a baby taking
the baby home under good
circumstances can be trying for
the mother the to take a baby
home in a situation like this
has got to be significant and
and we want to help that mom and
we want to help that family and
we want to have that baby
because it is very challenging
what that mother needs to do to
take care of that baby.
Madam chair representative why
is the baby come back in two or
three days just because the mom
wasn't prepared or she's not
able to handle it how does that
work why why are they come back
in the thing that stuck in my
mind last week is I heard that
line babies that died.
And I just want to make sure
that we're preparing these
mothers when they're leaving the
hospital to be looking out for
this or or doing this house
outlook.
And chair members of the
committee that's exactly why we
would like this assessment we
want to have to do to make sure
that that that that baby is safe
in a save situation with that
mom and so that's the purpose of
this bill.
Thank you in and madam chair
representative and senator.
I heard the the nice lady from
CYFD say that you know in that
for thirty four bill
it's going to have there's going
to be four agencies why is it
gonna take four agencies is that
just for oversight to make sure
we have each other's backs.
Go ahead Madam chair
representative for the four
different agencies ECECD has the
early intervention or home
visiting component of it and
deal weights is the one that
oversees the the plan of cares
and so with everybody working
together in tandem the idea
is that we can quickly assess
the situation and that's why I
wanted the M. D. T.'s to happen
because boots on the ground we
are the boots on the ground we
know whether that baby has
engaged in services because they
were referred to us and whether
we've made contact or not
then we would need to inform D.
O. H. of the MCO so they can
manage that care of that baby
and then what would come next so
all of the different agencies
involved in this are vital
because we all work with a
different component of the
family whether it's the mother
of the child
the plan of care.
Thank you.
And Madam chair representative
and senator who does the
assessment.
Madam chair and members of the
committee of a staff person from
CYFD whether it's a navigator on
I would assume it would be
someone from that department
Jason you may have that are
coming on that Madam chair
representative in so it would be
a a staff member within CYFD and
they're currently CYFD is
already currently doing family
assessments in the multi level
response pathway system which
was enacted by the legislature
couple years ago okay.
Madam chair representative and
senator.
So
a baby is born at the hospital
and it's addicted to a
substance.
Then the nurse is supposed to
call CYFD correct is that how
that is and how the process
works would you walk me through
that please so I'm madam chair
members of the committee I want
to make sure this is done
correctly and I'm gonna let that
Mr Spanos said do that for us.
It says in the region Madam
chair representative Vincent
so within the hospital or
birthing center finds that a
pregnant woman is using or
abusing drugs through you know
routine interviewer Reports or
or upon birth of the the newborn
a volunteer contractor or staff
of the hospital or the free
standing for center shall
complete the right and plan of
care for the substance exposed
newborns Daschle provide
notification to CYFD.
and then just as a note that
notification is not a report of
child abuse and neglect it's
just a notification that that
substance exploring effect has
been born on and that's the way
it currently works thank you and
and.
Madam chair representative
senator so is there any way that
when that babies born say the
mother does not say that she's
doing any any kind of substance
and
Nobody knows that she's an
alcoholic or addicted to drugs
and the baby is a drug to a drug
addicted baby.
How do you know that.
Much more.
Madam chair representative of
this Vince that part of to be
part of house bill two thirty
which was enacted the Care Act
also require training both
hospital staff and by Senator
staff on to both within the
surveys in the interviews to do
that and also to be able to
identify
a drug addicted babies and
babies with fetal alcohol
syndrome so they're they're
trying to do that.
I think that's all of the thank
you for the questions thank you
Representative Chavis thank you.
So.
I may ask questions that are
been asked I hope not
So
Why isn't the assessment done
first in order to determine.
So madam chair in Representative
Chavis it's not required to
begin with it is not required
and less with Indian regional
built the care bill that we we
heard several years ago and that
was not that was not a
requirement that's why we're
coming back because we all know
that when we pass legislation
sometimes we need to come back
in twenty and and and do I care
that bill on the floor of the
Senate and so was very
supportive at the time that this
was a good way to go forward
because we do want these
individuals to receive services
that that was not something that
I believe was in the original
bill in effect madam chair.
So I don't know if Mr Espinosa
can confirm that that that's
what we're coming back to do
this yeah I'm Madam chair
representative Travis
Currently in the care access the
the hospitals the NCOs and and
the health care providers are
work lab particularly to develop
that plan of care based on the
knowledge that they know and
sort of the medical.
Expertise that they have and
that's that's currently on the
planet Kerr this is developed.
So Madam chair Senator
Representative I have a I have a
problem with that because it
seems to me that in order to
develop a plan of care you've
got to do an assessment first so
that you know what goes into
that plan of care.
I don't have a history in terms
of the you know the care and
when the first legislation was
passed and all that kind of
stuff but it's
it's.
I think that you know having the
hospital staff were very good.
and other folks put the plan
together.
It is sort of putting the cart
before the horse I really think
that the assessment needs to
come first otherwise how do you
know how to put the plan of care
together.
to me it sounds like you're
Madam chair representative
senator
you putting together sort of you
know supportive services
wraparound services that you
think might fit this family but
again are we taking into
consideration not just the mom
not just the baby but who else
is in the family but all those
dynamics are in terms of looking
at the assessment and what the
plan of care should look like.
The other question that I have
madam chair Senator
Representative is that the NCOs
so the NCOs are responsible for.
implementing the plan of care is
that what you said.
Madam chair Representative
Chavis the NCOs are responsible
it's my understanding to develop
a plan to care and and I would
assume that as they are doing
that they certainly are looking
at the family it's not called a
family assessment because that's
a term used by CYFD that I'm
sure is the NCOs in in the the
the navigators the care
coordinators that are working
with that family they they're
looking to see what is the
situation there meeting the
family in the hospital the
reading the mother in the
hospital they're talking with
them about what's available
there.
We are not just sending them
home that plan of care is done
prior to leaving the hospital so
it may not be called the family
assessment that we're talking
about with CYFD that that that
assessment under the NCOs and
what their responsibility is to
provide that plan of care that's
certainly being done and then
looking at that family so what
we're trying to do is.
Applied to CYFD the requirement
that that family assessment will
be done by CYFD winded that plan
of care developed by the NCOs in
the hospital setting before the
parents come home with that baby
they've done that look to see
what are the needs when that is
not accepted by the family what
this bill does is require CYFD
to do that we we could go back I
suppose and require C. with CYFD
to do that initially that I
don't think that's the
appropriate place I think it's
better to let the NCOs did a job
that they've been trying to do
to evaluate the situation
develop this the services and
then send that child home
hopefully with the family
compliance all this bill does is
when they don't comply then that
term family assessment which is
at CYFD definition is down
possibly FTE at that point.
Madam chair Senator
Representative so tell me about
the care navigators how many are
there with how many are there
what are their skills and what
are their caseloads of like.
Okay so I cannot madam chair and
representative of tell you how
many there are I know there are
not enough and that's one of the
reasons that we need to FTE to
have additional funding the care
coordinators as my understanding
those within the department the
navigators the navigators are
within that MCO hospital portion
of this and I don't believe
there enough either and I think
part of the contracting that
needs to occur is the NCOs are
brought back on board we know is
that process continues its was
evidently there was a a possum
that I think that
NCOs have gotta be held
accountable for what their
responsibility is under the Care
Act in I'm not sure that that is
being done appropriately but
that's why the department of
health needs to be involved in
that contracting process they
need to make sure that those
NCOs are not only aware of what
their job is but that they're
doing their job with regard to
the plains of care in their
responsibility under care so
that's a separate thing and we
need to make sure as those
contracts are let that those
NCOs who receive those contracts
are doing their job and so
that's where the net that's
where the navigator rest is in
of that person navigates with
the family to make sure the
services are offered in the
families know the care
coordinator comes under CYFD
when they are the ones that to
come back and follow up point
it's my understanding and family
assessment is done and certainly
if an investigation is done
that's further down the road
that's not what we're dressing
today just the family
assessment.
Okay madam chair Senator so so.
Did answer my question.
I'm sorry I do not know the
answer madam chair and
representative how many
navigators there are with the
NCOs I do not believe that that
there sufficient and so that is
something that D. O. H. would be
responsible for in leading the
contracts for the NCOs to care
for these Medicaid the patients
that are under medicated they
need to to provide the services
and even private insurance
they're responsible as well so
so I would madam chair Senator I
would appreciate knowing how
many there are what their skill
what what skill requirement of
of of the caring of the Gators
and how many families are cases
do they carry on with you all
could provide me with that
information that would be great
so on here we certainly will do
our best.
madam chair Senator do you need
to ask the NCOs or where would
you get that information madam
chair I would assume that CYFD
should be responsible also for
knowing how many care
coordinators they have the
navigators I would think the
department of health should have
that information is they have
trained the hospitals in the
care plan in care so they should
know how many navigators the
NCOs have hired alright how many
navigators that hit hard so we
can sure check on that with the
current NCOs and find out what
they have what they have done
and how many to have higher if
those are by hospital haha I I'm
not sure within the hospital
structure how that works I think
I would I would really
appreciate that information
and then I'm assuming I'm going
to make the assumption that they
don't make phone calls they make
they do home visits.
Madam chair I can I can not that
I don't would not assume that as
a Madam chair representative I I
would not assume that and that
is the the original care plan
the bill that was enacted two
years ago those are the
guidelines within that what
we're trying to do today with SB
one fifty is to identify that
smaller portion of when we do
have a family assessment done so
so you know I I've worked in
this field I I can't tell you
the number of navigators there
are and
The NCOs madam chair and
representative that I had
contact with or by phone it and
fifty fifty seven percent you
know in the study of families
didn't know who their
who their Care plan what's who
that person was.
So there is that there is a
disconnect.
Madam chair representative
Travis to and and just to add on
the Representative how to be as
comments I think one of the
things the bill is really trying
to fill a gap and is currently
and and conversations that we've
had over the summer with some of
the M. C. as in the care
coordinators is that they're
currently making the
notification of noncompliance to
CYFD but that nothing is
happening which means these
families that we know we're not
engaging and services are
falling through the cat cracks
because they're not receiving a
family assessment and so what
this bill tries to do is when
those care coordinators to make
that notification of
noncompliance to see why it the
that CYFD gets engaged and gets
eyes on those children that's
really what this is trying to.
I have so I have I have one last
question and so you send the
baby home.
Hello office and I know it's pry
gonna depend on you know the
individual family but these are
these your babysitter addicted
right and moms probably still
addicted to right these are hard
babies to take care of.
and so are they visited on a
daily basis twice a day I mean
what does that look like madam
chair and representative of
Chavis I would like to share the
testimony the Nikki nurse that
sits next to me in Senate
Judiciary I believe it was
Senate judiciary and her comment
was at one time making nurses
maybe have one maybe two babies
over a period of time.
They are seeing anywhere from
seven to eight to nine babies in
this is in a large metropolitan
area of these babies who are
addicted.
She shared a conversation about
setting a mom home with a baby
who is addicted that would not
stop crying because of the
addiction they're very hard to
care for and so the mom put the
pacifier in fifth and all it
gave it to the baby and that's
what brought the baby back it's
so this is what we're dealing
with no one was going to that
home to check to see if that
baby was state.
This is all this bill does we
can't fix with the O. H. is
doing or what the NCOs are doing
that's not the purpose of this
bill all we want to do is make
sure that CYFD.
Falsely with their
responsibility to make sure baby
safe when it leaves the hospital
inducted and it's not from the
plan of care it's as simple as
that we're not trying to fix it
what I do I can't fix it.
I don't know if we'll have any
fixes session but on this
particular case we're trying to
help not only the baby but we're
trying to help a bunch of burned
out Nick you nurses that are
seen these babies come back over
and over again with that family
assessment that CYFD is
responsible for not deal with it
not ECECD it is CYFD is
responsibility to make sure
these babies are sent and that's
all this bill does so what's
madam chair
Senator so tell me Madam.
So the baby goes home.
So how often is that baby.
Visit it is not visited madam
chair and representative that's
what we're trying to do with
this bill how often with the
baby because it yes no no help
but how often in this bill with
with with the baby visit that
would be determined madam chair
and representative Bassey way
FTE who are the professionals in
understanding if that mom is
attempting services if they're
getting some services if they're
making an effort we don't want
to scare that mom off in state.
You're not doing everything so
we're going to do an
investigation that is not what
we want to do we want those moms
to feel comfortable about
receiving services and about
someone having an on on that
baby and that's what's a family
assessment it is not an
investigation but we feel like
that CYFD does have a
responsibility just to make sure
that baby is not receiving a
pass of our with it online I
mean this is exactly what we're
trying to do is to keep that
baby said as much as I care
about those moms and I want them
to to get services I want them
to turn their lives around the
number one issue is safety of
that baby and so this is sort of
a compromise in not doing an
investigation taking that baby
away that's not the goal of this
bill it's simply to make sure
that that baby has eyes on it so
that we can make sure services
are being provided and received
and that that they be safe
enough to stay in the home with
that mom who isn't it probably
and madam chair Representative
if the family does choose to
engage in services of family
home visiting early intervention
family supportive services that
family can have those services
seven days a week that was the
answer that I was looking for
thank you to thank you she's the
professional madam chair I mean
you madam chair Senator
Representative I mean this is
the you know like I said before
and we all know drug addicted
babies are very very hard to
take care of it if mom is still
addictive that she's going to
pay attention to her addiction
first and that she's going to
take care of that baby later and
so this is an issue that I think
we all as a community need to be
concerned about and we need to
figure out you know how we are
going to not have babies fall
through the cracks again because
nobody wants to see a baby died
and you know question our
fingers here we go thank you
thank you.
But I mean the.
Make sure that the plan of care
the thing.
Madam chair in in in members.
Who am I with or who is what
care if madam chair Karen isn't
an act in statute no one's with
care I care is an act it is
something that we passed several
years ago as a legislature and
it defines how we care for
babies I believe it's an act in
law so no one's really with it's
not an organization it's it's
something that we as long as as
state require of our hospitals
are in CEOs of our departments
to perform certain things and
that's part of the act and it's
it's a it's it's it's it's not
easy to understand but it is
something that was passed in
this legislature couple years
ago.
I apologize okay.
With the regular so.
Yes.
Of the plan of care and then of
course
yes Representative that the
there was a bill to DO fate.
Related to the top.
Bored with some sort of
a fiction then I think what the
has a responsible.
And so in that building three
days we spent and I.
Whatever they do.
So it's service we.
Responsible for these plans of
care because they have the end
of the LFC with that I just
wanted to come back up here for
just a moment association of the
state and the the process is
simple so that.
Before that we are.
I understand that there's a plan
here this designed to to help
well with the baby the
of the treatment that the house
of the state of Texas I'm gonna
respond first.
If.
The politicians remove the baby
from the base to the home so.
What what.
Sure that there is a plan the
plan that's been presented to
the department of health by the
here are.
We we had a very long
conversation last week about
this that when when a baby is
born in the hospital.
Canada's has been drug exposed
to substances the hospital in
the MCO began building not plan
of care at no point does the
planet Kerr take the place of
mandatory reporting for abuse or
neglect of a child to CYFD the
planet Kerr notification is
different than a report of abuse
or arc of concerns regarding a
few CENIC lacked we and I
believe it's our.
Forty percent of the children
that are born drug exposed we
are getting a report of
concerned for an investigation
from the hospitals so many of
the babies we are involved with
doing an investigation before
they even leave the hospital.
The we continue whether that
baby comes into CYFD custody
because law enforcement gives us
custody of that child or the
state with the mother and the
father or father or another care
giver that planet Kerr follows
that baby even if they can come
in to custody.
To with a foster parent to
ensure that that baby is getting
the support that they need in
addition to the services and
supports that the mother and the
father or other care givers need
so there there's multiple
multiple.
Ways into there's one way into
the program and that a child the
substance exposed but from there
it can go in multiple directions
that a planet Kerr is created
and the child goes home with the
parent because there's.
CYFD was not called for an
investigation and there were no
cuts no immediate safety
concerns or dangers.
Or that there are and CYFD is
working with that family either
through custom immediate custody
or through our investigation
ensuring that those.
Those services are being
followed up on.
What what but I'm sorry Senator
go ahead I I just chair was just
going to follow up and say the
forty percent they're talking
about that's wonderful we're
talking about the sixty percent
that are not receiving that
additional eyes on the baby so
there is a difference in
percentages that's all I wanted
to say thank you so thank you it
and one of course they'll go to
the other members of the
committee miss Martin Senator
Representative an expert so when
a when a baby is going to date
that there are two things that
are supposed to happen so that
report of abuse and neglect
whether not to investigate is up
to you but that that that report
S. is supposed to go to you so
is that report coming to you
every time they tell a child is
a boy that is the date that
that's the requirement that is
under the care of program when
it was established in twenty
nineteen so if you are we get
you are getting a report of
abuse and neglect the question
is whether not to follow up on
it and decide to do an
investigation but a plan of care
then is supposed to be put in
place what I hear the
Representative stand is that
CYFD is not following up on
those plans of care to make sure
that they are instituted and
what I also hear you say this is
not necessarily investigating
those reports of abuse neglect
is that correct on both of those
statements.
If
the okay madam chair and and
Representative the bill so.
It's existing statute that if a
child is born addicted they if
they had that is not considered
of abuse or neglect right off
the top so
so a volunteer contractor or
staff of a hospital or
freestanding birth centers shall
not to make a report based
solely on the findings and
she'll make a notification
pursuant to this section so it's
not an automatic referral when a
child is born addicted but it's
a report that should be made to
CYFD is that not correct yes
ma'am okay.
All right then I'm looking at
this the.
So going back to just one less
thing of what you're saying what
is important what is supported
to see what the.
madam chair and representative
if there is if the hospital
staff of yeah they notified
signification but it is here.
If there's a difference in this
is what I've had to learn in
actually I have my mic that can
only help me and so we it it's
about notification versus a
report over did you ever before
report creates a tool called sky
that determines whether there
needs to be an investigation you
have to be careful with the term
report so the hospital has they
notify which does not trigger
in investigations the
notification so you have to
understand the definition for
notification on this side then
that the final thing is a duty
to report which does trigger the
opportunity for an investigation
but not necessarily an
investigation because you have
to go through sky and so we're
talking about the sixty percent
that don't get that duty to
report investigation process
these are the people that
through volunteers they notified
the department to notify the
departments of where.
That's why we wanted to do the
family assessment when the duty
when the when the plants not
being followed that's all we're
asking if the plan is being
followed they don't need to do
anything.
Just if the plan is not being
followed then we want them to
put us on the back all right
thank you thank you Senator
Representative thank you miss
Martin thank you for coming up.
so next to go to Representative
Ferrary and then to
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you of.
A representative and senator for
bringing this forward and our
experts
I am concerned that these are
things that are already in house
bill two thirty and then also it
was mentioned house bill four
thirty four where I think we
were all supportive of the
different agencies working
together
And also.
I'm concerned about you know a
potential bias
If we don't have universal
screening of policies
could this by just some of the
Those who receive an
investigation due to non
compliance with the plan plan of
care and before you answer that
also is there a chance that of
mother of parents
Could already have of.
A plan of care and engaged in it
and are receiving services that
you all don't know about or the
NCO's don't know about the.
Madam chair and representative
no because of the plan of care
is is developed and then it is
followed up on what services are
you receiving so if they are
receiving those services and the
family is is engaging in their
PDA pediatrician appointments
and everything's going fine then
then that is the duty of the MCO
to follow through on that and
and then everything's fine so
this this bill is saying what
happens when they don't engage
in those services and it's
asking for CYFD to do an
assessment
And and in response to the
screening madam chair and
representative are you referring
to the family assessment.
Madam chair and representative I
I'm not sure if that is.
You know the screening.
At birth or.
If you could explain.
madam chair and representative
are you referring to the
screening of the infant to see
if they are drug exposed.
let's go with that madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative so
that so this bill is just saying
when a family doesn't engage in
services
If we're Madam chair
representative if we're talking
about the screening so that is
done by medical professionals in
the hospital and often times as
a provider I received the the
blood test or or hair follicle
test that tells us whether the
child was exposed so
So that component is done by by
medical staff.
Madam chair and representative
is that something that's done
universally or just if there's
suspicion or you know the mother
Madam chair representative I
believe it's done after several
different screenings of of the
mom asking questions and then
they can move to that I don't
believe that it's universal but
correct me if I'm wrong.
Of Madam chair representative
Ferreri my understanding with
the and I'm gonna for at the
national sort of medical
association's best practices is
to do it universally and so in
the judgment of the positions of
the following best practice.
Hey I'm madam chair and Senator
Representative an expert
is it when you mentioned about
if they
answer that care plan our
information is there a chance
that they wouldn't engage in
that because they don't feel
like they're they've already got
another treatment plan and
services.
And they would district are
answering that madam chair.
Madam chair representative
Ferrari if we're looking these
these in this is an example
Medicaid population if they're
receiving other services.
The through health care
providers or others the the the
care coordinator would know that
because they're managing those
the services they're terrible
that's their health insurer hi
who's doing that so in the
development of the care plan
which involves the hospital
staff medical professionals and
the MCO
they would know what services
they're all already providing so
there wouldn't be duplication
our state you have to follow
this plan because they they
would now.
On thank you madam chair and
Senator Representative I I think
that if this bill is passed as
well as some of the others that
are kind of well our overlapping
or in conflict that the governor
within decide which bill and I
would think she would support
the one that has all of the
different agencies working
together and incorporating what
you're also proposing
so with that madam chair thank
thank you Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair and
senator and representative my
apologies for the late my
husband had minor surgeries more
in the building and typical
fashion I was like worry worry
when I sat there with
conspiracy.
He still hasn't gotten back to
me so.
No he's fine he's on his way
home.
I'm.
So.
Madam chair I think it Mr
speaker.
I just elevated a home of them
madam chair
Senator so to touch on what
Representative Ferrary have
brought up about the universal
screening those actually a bill
that I presented that was H.
before seventy seven it was
actually a recommendation the
twenty twenty one NMDOH card
valuation and it was tabled here
in this committee which is
unfortunate because it was a
huge component of all this
because what I'm finding and and
all the stuff with CYFD.
No matter how good the
intentions are there's missing
pieces instead of it flowing
like a flow chart from one thing
after the other after that
there's a gap there's a gap
there's a gap and there's a gap
so would you say
Madam chair.
Senator Representative what
you're trying to do is fill one
of the gaps and issues with the
Care Act is that correct yes
madam chair yes Representative.
So one of the things I was
actually horrible for fight
about Madam chair Senator
Representative was.
I saw these programs but there
was no compliance as well here's
some things you might want to
consider and then that was it.
So is actually horrified that
nothing was mandated it's may
and not shall and this is one of
the issues that you're trying to
correct with this Madam chair
Senator Representative that
correct.
Then Madam chair representative
lord that's exactly exactly what
we're trying to do and I think
just to to add a stat on why
it's so important that we
mandate the family assessment
upon non compliance in the deal
H. care report did note that
forty two point six percent of
families with the planet Kerr I
had at least one subsequent
investigation and that almost
half forty eight point eight
percent of the subsequent
investigations were
substantiated compared to the
substantiated substantiation
rate of twenty eight point six
percent for the same group
without a plan of care so we
know that these individuals
these newborns are at a higher
risk and we need to ensure
through the mandatory assessment
if they're not receiving
services that we have eyes on
that children that CYFD is
engaged
and that there were five
receiving care.
Thank you madam chair senator
and representative and I can
breathe because he's home so I'm
good.
I was holding my breath I got
home so I do have some questions
so maybe someone can answer this
for me so who is this guy the
state central and take who runs
that the people how many people
do Ms guy would tell.
Madam chair and Representative
floor I can't answer details
about sky it's a tool that you
specify where do okay that's
that's what I thought I thought
they fall they fell under CYFD
madam chair representative so
here's what I'm hearing from
some nurses.
The feedback I'm getting is when
they were to report they're
being told by god that it's
unsubstantiated because a child
is currently in the hospital and
that's also another big
component of why these children
are going home.
So when I'm seen as.
Because when I see a lot is we
pass a bill and they're like oh
we need to go back and fix all
these things madam chair Senator
Representative.
And when we did the car I don't
I'm sure it was good intentions
but there's so many issues that
are going on.
That we're trying to fix all
these little parts that are
broken and I I mean I look at
the sky issue that's a huge
component we're gonna have to
look as on the do the bill
that's another issue are going
to have to talk about later on
an address.
So Madam chair representative
I just want to say thank you for
trying to fix one of these
broken components.
It's a huge part and that we
send people home and we're not
doing enough with the.
Challenge to the NMAA which was
one of the sections that I was
completely frustrated with.
And I'm glad you're trying to
fix that one component and I
understand there's other
components so the people are
talking about but that's this is
laser focused on this one issue
which I completely support and
thing.
Thank you Representative the
question I just like to make a
motion I second.
Okay we have a motion for to
pass in the second
is there any objection to the
motion.
Sen no objections to path thank
you I'm gonna think this
committee for your thoughtful
questions and for all that
you've been hearing over the
last few weeks on this issue
thank.
Thank you.
Rate cemex we have a Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino as Senate bill two
forty two medical cannabis at
the in the middle.
Good morning madam chairman
members of the committee.
Good morning and welcome.
Senate bill two forty two is a
bill dealing with medical
cannabis and and it is an effort
by the department of health and
the.
By the cannabis.
Medical cannabis Division at the
department of health to make
medical cannabis process less
expensive and less burdensome
for the patients in the program.
We currently require them to
renew their.
There certificate only every
three years but we require them
to see a doctor the doctor who
certified them for the program
annually.
And.
This bill attempts to bring
those two things into confluence
by having both the certification
and the visits to the doctor
Kirk only every other year.
Would save a great deal of money
for the patients and would make
the administration of the
program much simpler and with me
is my expert witnesses or doctor
Dominic's low who is the head of
that division and Dr Gary French
who is the medical director and
I'll turn it over to them.
And Morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you
senator and this really is an
effort to try to streamline the
process reduce some of the
confusion that providers and
patients have had because even
as we just have talked about it
over the last few weeks when we
when we start talking with
patients and providers that you
get a card that expires in three
years but to remain eligible you
have to still submit the same
paperwork every year and see the
provider this actually creates
an additional burden on both the
patient and on the medical
provider and as I know you've
all heard many many times we
have those issues where we want
to reduce the burden on medical
providers especially in rural
and frontier areas our patients
are seeing that providers
discussing the issues with them
and so this isn't an issue about
continuity of care we're
insuring that they're getting
the care they need this is
simply an issue of reducing down
that burden administratively and
also from a cost standpoint for
those patients who are not able
to get their primary medical
provider to sign off on the
certification because they see a
federal providers such as that
the veterans administration or
Indian health services or FQHCs
then they have to actually go
out and pay out of pocket to
another provider to get that
signature and that can cost two
hundred dollars or more
and so this this bill would
actually reduce this for the
overall for all the patients by
over eleven million dollars a
year that they will not have to
be paying out of pocket.
And so that's why we really urge
you to consider this bill and
thank you.
Senator center questions chair.
The same thing to I don't have
any comment thank thank you very
much we'll go to the audience
now it is there anyone here in
opposition to this bill.
I see no hands of going to the
zoom is there anyone else owns
in opposition to Senate bill two
forty two.
I see no hands there is there
anyone here in support of.
This bill.
I see no hands there and I'm
going to this is there anyone
else is in support of Senate
bill two forty two.
All rights in our hands there
I'm going to the committee
committee do you have any
questions Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator thank you experts and
thank.
I just have one question do you
support this can you someone had
asked you for the difference in
recreational and.
I think this is the Senate and
medical cannabis I see that this
two completely different things
can you explain to me why
someone may need the Carter may
need the medicinal versus the
record just going with
recreation can explain that
please.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Lord and that's a
great question and it really
comes down to a couple of
different items the most
important from the medical and
from the patient's standpoint is
really going to boil down to two
items one the strength of the
product that the patients were
able to get it is higher
concentration and sometimes in
different delivery methods that
are not necessarily going to be
available on a regular basis
through a recreation or adult
use program and without the
medical program some of those
would not even be created such
as for example suppositories and
so that's one that's one sets of
the strength and the type of
administration for the other is
the tax benefit if an
individual's purchasing through
the medical cannabis program
they do not need to pay the
sales tax and excise tax that
are actually represented are
currently on that and that is at
twenty percent at this current
point in time varies a little
bit from county and
municipalities but it's rated
about twenty percent okay thank
you madam chair center
representative makes sense
because I know that was one of
the questions I want to have
some clear.
Medicinal is different than the
record I see them as two
separate things and ice I see
that you know some people chemo
anxiety PTSD are going to need
different strains different.
Different different ways of
ingesting it so and the sales
tax thing I want to actually get
now so that that makes no sense
so I support this bill so thank
you madam chair.
Well it's in no further
questions may I have a motion of
some of.
Good move that that it's been
moved and seconded for to pass
the Senate bill two forty two is
there any opposition to the
motion.
Sen opposition says to you have
a deep thank you very much Mr
chairman and members of the
committee.
So we're next on the Senate bill
two forty five rural emergency
hospital licensure.
Thank you very much with you
introduce yourself and your
expert witness thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee thanks for being here
and not hearing this bill Senate
bill two forty five with me so
sitting with me today is areas
showers with the department of
health and then online madam
chair is Christina Campos is
another expert witness and she's
the administrator of the
Guadalupe County Hospital if you
can all make curry.
Analyst I would appreciate it.
The.
Okay what will keep moving on
and will will texter and see
Anyway madam chair what the this
this bill is
Possibly one of the most
important bills for health care
especially rural health care in
the state of New Mexico
what Senate bill two forty five
proposes to it to allow current
currently existing critical
access hospitals and licensed
hospitals with fewer than fifty
license budget to located in the
county defined by federal
regulation in a rural area to
apply and receive federal health
care reimbursement as a rule
emergency hospital this is right
now madam chair and members of
the committee sixteen core
hospitals qualify in the state
of New Mexico and this is a new
licensure proposed by the
federal government and without
this bill are hospitals will not
be allowed to apply for this
licensure what it is is an
enhanced reimbursement and so
well with that madam chair I
will stand for questions.
Thanks for your expert it was
the panel
the sap seems like Christina
Campos is on.
The word.
Sure she could say a few words.
This call.
We can hear you all right thank
you madam chair members of the
committee this is a designation
that was passed by the federal
government it went into effect
on January first of this year
and this is a state it is a
destination for the for a list
of the bills New Mexico
hospitals my hospital is the
smallest and over the years we
have seen of a a decline in
inpatient missions as we focus
on chronic care management and
keeping patients of the hospital
which is and I'm advocating for
the patients but less so for
twenty hospitals are struggling
to stay open it would allow us
to keep patients on observation
aces and it requires a very
strong referral agreements of
with at least one trauma
hospital so we can make sure
that patients get when they need
to to it would also provide for
a set payment for the hospitals
that would allow us to enhance
our outpatient services make
sure that the quality of
emergency services as high as
well as diagnostics mental
health hopefully and and in the
future I think that the goal is
to develop rehabilitation
services automation relocation
services and a patient more
elevation behavior health
services but it would also
definitely not allow us to do a
full inpatient admission we see
this as the start of my hospital
is ready to
Leave a the secretary for this
designation for rural hospitals
we have applied to this and have
been approved are we connected
to go
to to be in place New Mexico
regulations and rules we
anticipate at other hospitals we
take a closer look at this
program as a yield allows for
you will reward us members of
including three forty and
perhaps a very limited amount of
admissions with that I stand for
questions thank you madam chair
and I'd like to I'll allow your
interest to say a few words.
Madam chair members of the
committee I just wanted to
emphasize that are getting this
bill passes really a huge
priority for the department of
health without it we really just
cannot make this type of
licensure available to hospitals
in New Mexico it's crickets a
critical for staff to simply
allow the top of the division of
health improvement the ability
to license the hospitals in New
Mexico now that this is a
available as a federal
designation and I appreciate you
hearing the bill today and would
love your support thank you
for questions thank you we're
going to the audience is there
anyone in opposition to this
bill.
C. L. O..
Sen no signal hands up going to
the to the zoom is there anyone
in opposition to Senate bill two
forty five.
Sen no hands them but back to
the audience is there anyone
here in support.
All right and soon is there
anyone here in support.
I see no hand sauce are two
individuals of like to come up
quickly.
You madam chair my name is Dan
weeks are representative of New
Mexico hospital association the
association's been involved in
those for quite some time
several months trying to repair
this legislation this
legislation in this new
licensure category will give
rural hospitals one more
opportunity to stay open there
are several hospitals that are
struggling in the state they
will consider this I think Miss
Campos is the only hospital
Guadalupe County this actually
actively pursuing this at this
point in time but it gives the
option it's not mandatory he
gives is one tool more in the
toolbox to try and stay open and
provide rural health care thank
you thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee Linda Siegel dander
jar had to step out for love
less but level of supports this
because we need our rural
hospitals to in order to keep
the the numbers down in our
urban hospital so this is a very
important piece of legislation
thank you.
Thank you very much so now I'm
going to the committee of any
questions a state representative
Vincent.
Representative Chavez I'm sorry
Representative Ferrary so as not
to Representative Ferrary pers.
Thank you madam chair
I appreciate that this bill is
coming forward because we do
have such
a tremendous
need in our rural communities to
support our hospitals that's all
this but when you are listing
having a transfer agreement with
level one or two trauma center
my understanding is that we only
have one in the state.
Is that.
Madam vice chair I'm gonna turn
this over to Christina Campos if
she's available online yes okay
of.
Representative we have one one
level of trauma center
university Mexico and we have to
level two trauma centers they
are someone in Farmington and
this is a and currently hospital
has an agreement with a little a
little bit came in Santa Fe.
So madam chair and
I.
We are in the southern part of
the state very void we have to
go to el Paso because we can't
get our other hospitals in Los
crucis to be able to find that
there was one level three and
I'm not sure that it even now
has that so are there plans I
know this is part of the bill
but when you mentioned about an
agreement for that are are there
plans to help
Other hospitals become those
higher level of Thomas madam
vice chair Representative
Ferrary I do believe the
specific designation which was
completely
created by the federal
government so if the state
doesn't really have any
discretion over what the the
main elements for eligibility
look like but I do know that you
have to be either critical
access hospitals or have fewer
than fifty budget or both and
Christina if you're if if you
want to correct me please do so
but I think those are the two
ingredients that need to be that
are critically important before
you can be eligible.
The manager and and
Representative the bill does not
preclude a hospital from
injuries and women across state
lines it also does not include a
hospital from being able to
transfer a patient to another
hospital so for example here's
Senator we made transformations
to also has to make us
because a little bit closer or
lower level care healthcare
Senator Mizzi but through for
many many years of the problem
Fund
the has been working to expand
the the numbers of level two
trauma centers I think we the
state has a quite a real us
amount of the level three of the
funding for that has
deteriorated over the last
twenty years I think that the
efforts of the continues to
expand those and I think it
should continue to access
additional in southern New
Mexico.
Thank you very much appreciate
that madam chair and
Representative is there an
emergency clause for this to go
into effect right away Madam
chair representative no there's
not there is a date I believe it
was a January.
Is there isn't a date of
activation that soon after at
the if the governor signs the
bill the but no ma'am there is
no emergency clause and we chose
June sixteenth would go into
effect June sixteenth twenty
twenty three.
Okay thank you madam chair
that's.
Thank you Representative
Davidson.
Madam chair I was gonna make a
motion to for to pass before we
do that Representative Thomas
thank you madam chair
representative one of my
questions is already answer the
other question that I have is
that it is
to the information.
That you passed out I think it's
in here maybe you said it but
there are sixteen hospitals that
qualify currently can we I don't
want to name all of them but can
you give me a list of which ones
those are Madam chair
representative most certainly
thank you.
Representative this basically
little include hospitals that
are already in rural areas of
service or already clear left us
a little so one pointing about
disability that does not allow
for pop up an emergency
hospitals in New Mexico so you
have to have already in
existence in December of twenty
twenty could have closer after
learning all schools around the
nation have closed and then
reopened but this does not allow
for use so those sixteen all
know we only sixteen that
whatever called I..
Thank you.
Madam chair said it yes all
right Sen no other questions
Representative defensive will go
to you of.
Representative no I actually
don't have a question okay
Representative some of those you
for the motion thank you madam
chair I move that Senate bill
three ninety seven as amended to
pass I second two forty five to
forty five sorry.
Second that wants to.
Right all right thank you we
have a new pass motion and the
second on Senate bill two forty
five is there any opposition to
the motion said no opposition to
have a new path thank you madam
chair thank you and committee.
Committee thank you we are now
going to Senate bill three
ninety seven as amended school
based health centers.
Senator Rodriguez Representative
Trujillo at this point madam
chair center a drink this isn't
stuck in Senate finance you
should be doing this and that
that.
And good morning to all of you I
hope you're doing well long
night have.
what I'd like to do today is
before I begin I'd like to
introduce my witnesses Aerion
showers from D. O. H. and
they'll let you introduce
yourselves I apologize.
Good morning my name is Kristen
early to the market.
Good morning my name is Kristen
arrest Commission The clinical
operations manager for the New
Mexico department of health
school based health center
program.
Good morning committee Nancy
Rodriguez or the other Nancy
Rodriguez the executive director
of the New Mexico Alliance for
SchoolBased Health Care and and
madam chair just to give you a
preview I chaired Health and
Human Services the summer right
and we covered a lot of topics
one of the issues that the the
committee talked about was
school based health centers and
the need for making sure that
kids had access immediate access
to health care in their in the
realm because it sometimes it
was difficult for them to have
access anywhere else so we made
it a priority of the committee
committee to endorse this bill
to ensure that we provided
health care clinics and in
schools especially right now in
schools that are community
schools but mostly we're trying
to expand an existing I think
group of sixty how many.
Seventy nine schools.
Committee.
Voting in the Senate finance.
And so with that
we'd like for I'd like to
introduce my.
Eight major sponsors you could
have a little bit more
Representative heard the
chairman to yes good morning
madam chairman members of the
committee My Baby was sharing
that this is was a health and
Human Services Committee
interim.
Harrity yes thank you so much
for that and madam chairman the
purpose the main purpose
committee members the main
purpose of this bill truly is to
ensure that the the Schoolbased
health centers that we have here
at the state with other school
districts are with the many
school districts that have it
are in fact safe and protected
from political whims that can
come in any moment and
completely derailed or ability
right there is nothing in the
statute today Madam chairman
members of the committee that
protects the school based health
centers they are miniature
sometimes not chair clinics that
provide health care for our
students and especially those
that are the most poor
impoverished students and
families that many times do not
have a place to go for ordinary
health care conditions and
they're at they exist as a line
item anywhere now of course with
the department of health a
budget but they're not codified
in statute so what we're trying
to do was codified in statute
we're not making any other
changes to anything in the
statute that affects school
based health centers other than
putting them in statute to
codify that's all we're doing
thank and madam chair just to
just to.
share with you we've been I I'm
sure you all have been receiving
same misinformation that we've
been receiving and unfortunately
some of those comments that
we've received have been very.
Very hurtful and profane.
And what we'd like you to know
is again.
The school based health clinics
have existed.
And there's never been an issue
with them in the past right now
we're simply wanting to codify
that when I want to make sure
they said that because there
there's somebody out there that
is sending out information that
is truly false.
And we stand for questions.
Anything else from your.
experts.
All right then I'm going to the
audience is there anyone.
That in opposition to a Senate
bill three ninety seven as
amended.
Yes ma'am please come forward
and use the microphone.
I wasn't aware of the health.
Would you introduce yourself yes
I think you writer with from the
heart ministries and I was not
aware of
The school based clinics before
this but
you know there are many parents
who to table the microphone a
little closer they could hear
you on that so there are many
parents to consider
the Bible to be their guide for
the way they raise their
children.
And for instance in a genesis
god created man and woman.
And he told them to be fruitful
and multiply and have babies.
and in the book of psalms this
summer said you know I'm
fearfully and wonderfully made
you made all of my part unit
together.
And we know that god had a plan
for the prophet Jeremiah when
you said I knew you when you
were in your mother's womb.
So of what is your objection to
the bill I believe that it is a
violation of parents first
amendment rights to have
children go to school and be
able to get services that their
parents who are raising them
would not agree to
and they and they don't even
know that this is happening now
this is my understanding if it's
incorrect please correct me but
this is where my objection comes
from and the objection of many
many parents in the state and so
I urge you to vote no on this
ammendment thank you for hearing
me thank you.
No one else in opposition to the
bill in the audience I was going
to be.
to the zoom if there's anyone in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Right so I see a leaf that and
at least a you will have one
minute.
Okay Mister chair can you hear
me we can hear you.
My name is Lisa Martinez I'm the
executive director of New Mexico
Alliance for life anything to be
concerned because of the with
this bill is a down to
circumvent circumventing a
parental rights and you know
other than a one time because at
the beginning of the year
arsenal are parents being
consented when children are
receiving sexually explicit
Services agency for you were in
Kaufer percentages hormone
containing vaginal rings a
cervical cap for contraceptive
use this is all for the New
Mexico department of health
website and other question is
that SBHCs on our cleanings
reduce unintended pregnancy by
users like forty percent how
exactly is happening and does
this or does not include
referrals for abortions when I
have reports from all over
secede it young teenage girls
are being referred for abortions
we understand the clinics
perform abortions but we're in
the federal statute doesn't
explicitly state they are not
allowed to refer I'm it's
actually was based clients of
health clinics is on their side
that there is on the left
listens reproductive health
adolescent unintended pregnancy.
Thank you very.
Is it.
If there's anyone on the zoom
and support please raise your
hand so will know thank you good
morning madam chair and members
of the committee I'm doctor
Janelle Taylor Garcia with the
public education department and
I want to know the school based
health centers provide on site
primary preventive and
behavioral health services to
students while reducing lost
instructional time removing
barriers to care promoting
family involvement and advancing
to health and educational
success of school age children
and adolescents as a former high
school principal at a high
school in a rural community in
the state that did have a school
based health center are
wholesaler was invaluable to our
staff our students and our
families that we serve so again
the public education department
is strongly support of Senate
bill three ninety seven.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee of Charles good marker
speaking on behalf of an MVC
action fund and urge your strong
support for this bill
You know it with school based
health centers building located
on campuses they provide
students with much better access
to all all varieties of health
care which produces better
outcomes and act and I would say
actually for my experience in
the past of working with any a
New Mexico visiting school
campuses across the state I saw
it and it directly where many
students for many since it's the
only health care that they get.
I think it's kind of shocking
but it's true that it's the only
health care that many of them
get so these are very important
for for students across the
state also from a financial
perspective
would note the department of
health notes the reduction
school time travel reduced
emergency department visits and
hospitalizations and that lot
and reduction in Los parental
wages contributes to return on
investment of about six dollars
for every dollar spent on these
health care centers thank you
right thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen Canaday with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter we
stand in strong support of
school based health centers
particularly that they provide
many community services that
people would not be able to get
other elsewhere in rural areas
it's extremely important that
the whole community not just
students but many families in
addition you school based health
centers for their primary care
as well and for those reasons we
stand in strong support of this
legislation thank you thank you
I am going to the zoom.
First I see not me too you have
one minute.
The manager and members of the
committee my name is average the
second I am the executive
director of the National
Alliance on mental illness New
Mexico new Mexico's Inspiron
support is essential because we
are so appreciative of the fact
that the bill provides for
parental consent and the
officers on site access to care
for behavioral health and for
physical because this is a
learning about singles are for
you can't earn your sick thank
you very much thank you Bill
Jordan.
Morning madam chair members the
committee those were done with
Mexico which is our children I
really wanna appreciate this
officers in that in a long time
champions of school based health
centers and also appreciated the
legislature forgiving bipartisan
support to school based health
centers over the year
I I we stand as strong support
and I just want to go again the
importance of behavioral health
care
that is available easily at the
schools up we're.
I think a lot of our young
people would not access
behavioral health services it
was not so readily available to
them and this is critically
important during those years
thank you and we appreciate your
support.
All right thank you next we have
a Patsy Romero.
thank.
You see my name is how to Romero
I'm also a member of the
National Alliance on mental
illness however I was also a
provider of children and
adolescents here all health
services in this island you are
at home our school based health
center in Senegal of was
created.
Healthy behavioral health issues
that many of our clients faced
and our families and then also
help to prevent suicides that
we're that some of our children
replacing the B. school based
health centers absolutely help
rural communities we give them
access to these essential health
care than any of our children
and adolescents need and madam
chair members of the community I
ask you please to support Senate
bill three ninety seven and
thank you to Senator Rodriguez
for bringing this forward we
here in New Mexico absolutely
need to support this
thank you madam.
Thank you Melissa Candelaria.
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee my name is
Alyssa Candelaria I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center online poverty Senator
strongly supports instability
causes officers are introducing
this important piece of
legislation school based health
clinics provide critical health
care services to you where they
are in when they need it keep
them healthy and ready to learn
how to find the requirements of
schoolbased health centers is an
important step in ensuring
primary care and behavioral
health services are sustained
and expanded to all students who
urged the committee to pass and
it'll be ninety seven thank you.
The bring the
My name is no one's and I am the
owner of and administrative
health care support services and
I'm of the school sponsor for
multiple schoolbased health
centers I started in two
thousand well we're working
Fuhrman and working with them in
that school year we had seventy
nine students positive with
STV's out of three hundred K.
and seventeen either pregnant or
already have children in the air
since I started there we now
have fewer than five I know
there are many the state that
shouldn't be there because of
pregnancy.
We don't just fiber birth
control we also provide health
others see and we work with
families a consent.
And we follow the federal state
guidelines that allow us to
write these services to students
many of our kids don't have
access anywhere the family can't
afford it and we we've been able
to reach so many preventing
suicide finding actually help
with health conditions that
these houses or injuries and in
early childhood and they never
actually and we're able to get
the reverse UNM I set up with
Medicaid.
We have been able to get it all
right thank you miss on we
appreciate your comments.
All rights in no further hands
raised am going to the up to the
committee.
Just one more one more.
Bill Jordan has already spoken.
Here and and and I just wanna
say I I really appreciate that
the services that are provided
to our students through the the
school based clinics I know
that.
So much of what we've heard is
really beneficial to the
students and
I I have a couple of I have a
couple questions.
First of all I just okay not a
question just laying a little
groundwork Care I I know there's
been a lot of controversy
surrounding school based based
clinics and it really
I think to get to the heart of
it the the the folks that have
talked to me about being opposed
to school based clinics are
really
in in opposition to the the
nature of of the clinic based on
it being in the school and and
based on it being
There with the student without
the parents involvement and I
know that's not always the case
and a lot of times parents are
involved but but admittedly even
by one of the the supporters
then.
That loss parental wages are one
of the
The benefits of having a school
clinic that the parental wages
won't be lost because the
parents are not involved and and
there's there's a.
Even heightened controversy over
that with.
So much of what we've talked
about here with HB seven I think
people are just upset that
parents are not having a voice
and and so I have to be very
sensitive to that
even though I know that that
school based clinics provide
some excellent services for kids
and and I I I acknowledge that
as well
What I want to know is when I
understand what this bill is
doing if if we pass this bill
does it change any of the
services that are provided by
the clinics.
Madam chair representative Jones
I just want to quickly address
that so what I really like about
this model and what is in
statute what will be in statute
is that it's entirely flexible
there's no mandate in it that a
school has to have a school
based health center if the
school decides to apply to be a
school based health center three
D. O. H. the services that are
provided are completely and one
hundred percent entirely up to
that screen and the medical
provider that they to choose to
go into a contract with none of
that is mandated.
Thank you madam chair I did
understand I did understand that
I already knew that I I actually
spent a lot of time talking to
folks about school based clinics
in the the you know the
providers those that work in
them and and like I said that
that's part of why I really have
an appreciation for what.
They do
I'm trying to to narrow this
down and figure out.
Let me back up just say it seems
there's an effort to pass
legislation that.
Will further confirm that.
Parents might even lose a voice
with their children.
So I'm just saying that's out
there that's what people that's
what people are seeing that's
what my constituents are
concerned about they're
concerned about parents not
being involved whether it be
purposeful or not purposeful and
so that that's a concern so in
my trying to
I'm not trying to limit the good
services that are provided by
the clinics in any way and I
don't think that I don't think
that most parents would be
opposed to their children you
know just like they would visit
a school nurse you know what to
say I need I need help with
headache I need whatever
We don't want to limit that but
at the same time I'm very
conscientious about the
possibility even if it's
inadvertently that my parents
are going to lose a voice with
their children's health care so
so with that what I'm trying to
narrow down on.
Zero in on.
Is this passing this or not
passing this change any of the
services that the school based
clinics provide.
That's my question.
Mr chairman and Representative
Jones thank you for your
comments absolutely not as I
mentioned earlier and I stressed
and I'll do it again this bill
merely puts health care center
schoolbased health centers in
statute does not change anything
if any of the other things that
have been mentioned both on zoom
in here today are truly a
concern then my bill doesn't
address those it doesn't touch
on parental notification it is
intentional portion it doesn't
touch on anything else merely
what it doesn't say students
will have access to health care
and it is already in place so
we're merely just codifying it
as I said is statute to give
them some legitimacy in statute
that's all we're doing so the
other legislation may take care
of all these other issues if
it's ever introduce store if
it's discussed or debated my
bill is not that thank you thank
you so much Senator to the side
I appreciate that and and I just
have to say there since madam
chair madam chair and I just
have to say that because of that
because this won't interfere
with the good services and
And and I have to respect the
fact that a lot of my
constituents are concerned about
maybe even the codification I
don't think school based clinics
are going away I'm not worried
about that I don't think that
we're not gonna see anybody try
to remove them so because there
is this great area and I have to
err on the side of
representing my constituents I I
I can't support it so I just
wanted to be really clear about
that so thank you madam chair.
Representative Mentzer and I'm
sorry for the in and out you're
on you Mr that you're on no not
this time sorry thank you madam
chair representative senator so
what I heard well go on zoom
was.
All the S. T. eyes that were
treated and now you know they're
lower so if a student came in
with an STI.
And you treated that students
would the parents be notified.
Kristen you madam chairman
Kristin go and briefly please
respond this time Madam chair
representative and sent
Schoolbased health centers
follow all the same
confidentiality laws as every
other clinic in in the state so
if a student was.
Fourteen or above the the parent
notification is not required by
state law.
Thank you madam chair.
In order to I'm sorry are there
other questions.
Okay I will entertain a motion.
Representative partly on a
second by.
Representative if the parents do
Kate Representative Kate's.
Representative Chavis.
Representative Ferrary.
Representative had a meal yes
Representative Jones no
Representative Lord.
Representative Vincent L..
I'm here.
Vice chair Herndon yes.
Time so now.
By five to three you have a do
pass.
The nature.
Thank you thank you very much.
Yeah
my next for money experience
allow me to thank you all right
madam chairman this is brief but
clear as possible to help.
With any information thank you
Marquita Russel from the NMFA
here with me and madam chairman
this bill merely allows three
small New Mexico finance
authority loan programs that we
currently have in place but
allows them to be able to to
allow the loans that they land
to these organizations for
example primary health care and
behavioral health funded child
care facility loan funds to be
able to use working capital out
of this loan money what happens
is that we land money out for
buildings or development of of
infrastructure and for these
facilities but they can't do
anything with them they remain
empty because there's no way to
it to fill in with with the
working capital for employees
and and that kind of thing to
provide for a for the services
that the legislature intended so
this merely will will do that
and basically aligns the
statutes on two very similar
loan programs two of these three
to be able to streamline the
process and allows NMFA to
continue to recover actual costs
of administration
yes they are because right now
they're very limited so this
will get us going to get us the
the proper funding necessary to
get a behavioral health services
and primary care services and
childcare facility long funds
going thank you.
Thank you market if you have
anything else no madam chair
thank you for those of you who
don't know Marquita is one of
the smartest people in the state
I'm sorry I was more staff than.
and I know that because
Representative Senator Rodriguez
and I go back and forth Cherry
the NMFA so
is in the audience is there
anyone in opposition.
Zoom anyone in opposition.
Okay seeing that anyone in the
audience and support.
Anyone on zoom in support.
Okay we will go to the committee
questions.
One.
Representative Penske madam
chair I'd like to move it to
pay.
That's our second.
Are there any questions.
I think we're all kind of
presumption down.
So is our opposition to the two
passed motion.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Is there any opposition.
Thank you you have a due process
thank you record tying seven.
Thank you and so we are supposed
to be on.
Fifteen minutes so.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay so we are in recess until
Wednesday morning.
Come back to the floor.
All of you so if you.
I think it's a catchable.
Yeah.
Anything okay all my.
We all okay.
