Here.
Representative Marian Matthews
here.
Representative larger money
toward.
Here Representative.
We have offered.
President.
Representative live Tom from.
Thank you bye here.
Bus to Raleigh president.
And madam chair Deborah
Armstrong I'm here.
So thank you everyone and we're
we will get this technology down
the good thing is I think we've
had a lot of participants so
we've got a lot
who are here today and today we
also have interpretation our
capability.
So just so the audience knows
what we're gonna do this morning
we're going to go to house bill
seventy two first that was
rolled over Friday and then
we're going to do house bill
thirteen because of witnesses
and experts that
that are are waiting and and
some docks that need to testify
that are also managing clinic
this morning.
Then we have a couple of bills
that are on the agenda that are
the sponsors of asked us to roll
over for now they're not quite
ready and that would be one oh
seven and one oh nine we are not
going to hear either one of
those bills this morning so our
agenda this morning has dropped
down to
and we had previously I think it
it made it on the agenda at one
at one point in time and got
pulled off and and the agenda
was amended but we had
previously also going to be
hearing this morning house bill
one twelve which we are not
going to hear that that is.
I was notified in time to bring
that off the agenda.
so our agenda this morning is
just for bills well here's
seventy two and then thirteen.
Ninety seven and one oh four so
if you're here for one oh seven
or one oh nine you're welcome to
stick around but you don't have
to we're not going to hear those
bills this morning.
So we will go first to house
bill seventy two Representative
Christine Trujillo if you can
bring her over Christine
Trujillo.
Good morning everyone issues
here and do you have any experts
that you want to join you know
that we should.
You know Rozzi but she may be
running late so I'll go ahead
and get started.
Okay we'll watch for we'll watch
for her in the attendees and if
we see or bring your over.
So
Representative Trujillo you can
on mute and go ahead.
So.
What I'm gonna do is present a
very simple bill is actually a
bill that requires an
appropriation we worked on that
this summer in the interim and
this committee approved at it's
a request for five hundred
thousand dollars from the
general fund to work for
solutions department to
Helps you should and training
for family friendly work place
policies this is a bill that
allows for flexible scheduling
and health and wellness programs
if.
The bill that the I know the
best it is I've really enjoyed
working with it but not the bill
itself but the process of
In the work place policies
It provides flexible scheduling
help the wellness programs paid
leave and economic supports and
that's pretty much it it's a
really
Good bill because it provides
business owners and families an
opportunity to be
to work together to make sure
that.
The workers have of leave time
in training to do the things
that they need to do without
hurting the business in any way
madam chair I stand for
questions.
Thank you representative first
we'll go to the audience.
If there are any
anyone in the audience in the
attendee list who is in
opposition to this bill if you
raise your hand.
Okay.
Looks like we have one J. bent
Malek.
And J. bent if you could
introduce yourself and and make
your point.
Thank you madam chair and the
full committee members good
morning.
Of this bill family of.
Currently work place I think you
cause a little confusion.
Of by that I mean there's four
other bills resting the same
topics workplace paid sick
leave.
Family medical leave
fund for family friendly
workplace I know this bill is
well intentioned.
Of but five hundred thousand
dollars other general fund is
quite a lot of money.
And the appropriation for
training pressures I have not
been passed and are being
considered with unfunded
mandates so respectfully we have
to approach.
Would you Representative I'm
sorry New Mexico business
coalition thank you thank you.
Okay.
All right any in the audience
who are in support.
Okay.
Thank you I see I see I hands
raised for I you don't have to
keep your hand up if you don't
want to say anything but if you
want to say something else start
calling on you in order.
Thank you Josh she.
And I apologize if I
mispronounce your name.
Good morning madam chair on the
house committee my name is Dave
gauger she an image of the
American college of obesity
rants and resin position here in
Albuquerque I've seen and care
for women whose pregnancies have
been complicated by COVID
nineteen since the beginning of
the song pandemic.
I want to tell you about my
undocumented patient was eight
months pregnant and diagnosed
with COVID ammonia requiring
higher levels of oxygen was
admitted to the ICU and
eventually had a caesarean
section when she was finally
ready to go can I I'm sorry
doctor I'm going to interrupt
you for a second work on house
bill seventy two family friendly
workplaces that what you're
speaking on I so sorry I
apologize out call in again
thank you thank you I I'm so
sorry.
next we have Noreen Kelly.
Good morning.
Noreen Kelly go ahead.
Okay you hear me yes okay good
morning everyone
madam chair and members of the
community are they after.
Or that committee excuse me and
I I'm in support of this bill
because I'm at this time
everything is necessary right
now almost thank you.
Thank you Narang.
Welcome.
And is there anyone let's see
Susan Loubet.
Thank was trying the.
Manage the talking.
All.
Thank you madam chair.
Can you hear me now yes thank.
I'm Susan Loubet with the New
Mexico women's agenda and I just
wanted to say that the women's
agenda has supported this issue
in the past and that we're in
favor of this bill and thank the
sponsor for bringing it.
Thank you Susan.
Is there anyone else that wishes
to speak in favor of house bill
seventy two on workforce
family front workforce salute
Department workforce solutions
at training on family friendly.
Okay all right then we will go
to our committee and first I
have Representative Armstrong.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes ma'am I'm sorry.
We're to questions from the
committee I'm sorry I probably
was on mute also.
Way I was juggling my
technology.
Conceived.
Right at thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
Trujillo for for bringing this
legislation forward I have a
couple questions first my first
and I know everyone's going to
get all mad at me but is this in
the budget.
Madam chair and representative
Armstrong I survived
appropriations I've spoken to.
Senator of folks on probation
that seem to indicate that there
can be money in the budget okay
thank you so much for that the
other thing that I have
was the our fiscal under the
fiscal implications
That this would add additional
parameters and resources to
fill what's already there so
madam chair and representative
do you know that dollar amount
that's already been appropriated
what what are for workforce
solutions.
You know madam chair
representative Armstrong I spoke
to secretary mccamley about that
this bill and he said that there
was but I don't have data to put
down but he said there is money
but they need the supports
because they're more request for
this okay thank you madam chair
thank you for that answer and
you can you give me on a number
of how many businesses already
take place I already take
RT Lim this on their business.
Honestly I don't know and I did
not
I didn't think about asking for
that okay thank you.
Thank you and then
In the alternatives it says that
of the training could be funded
by title one
Administered by the states for
workforce development boards
and and it includes a fifty
percent match for employers and
And I I just think that that is
a good idea for employers to buy
in to the training and
implementation of this type of
Thank you in their in their
companies
I won't name a company but I
know they've been brought family
friendly workplace and and had
Senator won several awards for
that and and so I think
ultimately that employee
employers want to take care of
their employees
and I'm I'm just a.
A little concerned that this
didn't go into labor he goes to
health and then back to and then
goes to appropriations so I
appreciate that it's going to
appropriations but I I am a
little bit concerned that
there's other ways to do this
and along with the gentleman
that spoke in in the first
segment against the bill there's
other bills that are floating
around and I'm just.
Interested to see if those
passed before we actually get
more funding for this and I and
I'm a little concerned also
madam chair that
workforce solutions has been
completely overwhelmed with.
Everything that's been going on
in New Mexico at this time and
not sure that they have the
capacity to implement more and I
see that they would this would
hire more people but
thank you for your answers thank
you madam chair.
Thank you representative thank
you next I have selected.
Next I have Representative
Matthews.
Thank thank you madam chair
and good morning Representative
Trujillo thank you for bringing
this bill forward
I've got a couple questions when
winning give a little context to
my questions are I was in a that
part of the New Mexico first
economic development town hall a
few years ago and for some
reason you know that imagine the
groups and our group turned out
to be sort of the rogue group
Senator we're Ortiz Y. Pino was
on it I was on it and then some
other I guess troublemaker types
or something and
one of our idea is.
Was and then we all came forward
and produce share our ideas that
for various at kinds of economic
development issues and the
business groups all came forward
and their idea was that all the
gross receipts tax revenue in
the state to come go back to
business.
The wheels a little over the top
and then I got up and I was
giving our idea which was that
in provided analysis and FIR
analysis and so forth when when
the legislature passes bills and
this is before I'm a legislator
that there should be there
should at least be some question
about the impact of legislation
on families and children.
And the the M. C. of the group
was a former state
representative and he turned to
me and said that is the most a
paraphrasing that is the
stupidest idea we've ever heard
nobody really would want anybody
to do.
So I.
I still it was
wondering if.
Given any thought to
expanding the idea of the to
include at least some thought on
in provided analysis and FIR is
to of the impact of the things
we do on legislation on families
and children as my first
question.
Madam chair I have I have not
I've I've talked to my to my
Expert witness about a variety
of things but that honestly did
not come up.
Well it thank you thank you for
that answer madam chair
it and may be a very bad idea
I'm I'm not sure but it's kinda
also an interesting idea I
thought the second thing I
wanted to ask you was
With this training be part of
another topic and it would be
like a segment in any training
on something else.
Or would these be standalone
programs.
Madam chair representative
Matthews it could be a
combination of both but when I
spoke to secretary mccamley I
think what that the intent
original intent was was just too
argument what they're doing
already.
Thank you for that answer madam
chair I have met I guess I'm not
real sure what what are they
doing in this area do you know.
Madam chair what they do is they
have the do outreach with
certain businesses that request
supports and the what.
They do is provide.
Exactly that their employees
provide
training for for folks who are
struggling with the balancing
family and work.
They provide a.
Support systems that allow them
some some type of leave if they
need it
they support of just in general
easing of the workplace.
Restrictions so that that
families can do the work that
they need to do but care for the
fact please.
Okay Madam chair of
Representative Trujillo is there
any thought to it that it would
include programs relating to how
workplace childcare centers and
so forth could be set up I mean
is it is it that brown scope is
is sort of more personalized.
It's that broad in scope we've
talked about the possibility of
ensuring that the that
workplaces provide the support
necessary sort for example a
breast feeding mom can take a
child to work and and provide
that opportunity to nurse when
she needs to.
Things like that.
Madam chair.
Representative Trujillo thank
you for for sponsoring this site
I.
I think that the health of the
community is really related to
the health of its families and
children and the healthier our
families and children the
healthier our economic.
Well being is our so I really
appreciate you raising this
issue and bringing it forward
thank you.
Madam chair may I just add
something else.
The big successful businesses
actually provide venues within
their within their arenas to to
ensure that their employees are
happy that their families are
not struggling and it they make
sure that they're what they're
doing is providing a happy
environment of.
An environment that allows for
for families and the work place
to to work with each other and
not have a negative impact so
that's my my opinion madam chair
in my and my expert witnesses on
if you wish to include
Madam chair representative G. of
other Aussies nonowner panelists
listing and yet herself if she
needs to answer questions from
the committee.
Giovanna did you want to add
anything thank you for joining
us.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I am
here to our.
Provided additional information
if if it's needed on.
family friendly workplace
policies and and you know even
some of the history of of that
how the policies support
families
To Representative Matthews
question but I don't have
anything to add at this moment.
Thank you.
Representative Matthews where
you done.
Madam chair yes I'm sorry I and
that's all my questions thank
you next I have
vice chair Joanne Ferrari
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this bill I think it's really
important to help of business
owners to you know be able to
understand and to work through
some of these different
situations that people with
families and other
responsibilities have most
importantly their jobs but also
the how to work that in but my
question is is this going to
help those businesses to retain
of their workforce and to not
have to
have those expenses like for re
training someone it you know and
actually being cost effective if
they can learn how to work with
their employees.
Madam chair representative
Ferrari.
I think I think that's what
it'll do but Giovanna Rossi he
can probably get to that she'd
like madam chair is that okay.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair
representative
the
The support that's provided
through this training and our
and education is really to
empower and enable a business
owners and employers to be able
to I understand what's involved
and how to offer these are
workplace policies that really
you know through research we
now.
Excuse me that they.
Support
they support their employees to
thrive while also
helping businesses thrive
because we know that these
workplace policies
Add to
Everyone think it's beneficial
for for all sides so.
That's what the training of for
to make sure that businesses
particularly smaller businesses
that don't have the resources to
perhaps hire a full time HR
person they don't know how to
develop these workplace policies
we want to make sure that all
employers have access to this
training so that they can offer
their employees of these these
workplace policies that that
Help their employees thrive and
so I hope that answers the
question madam chair
representative.
Yes having those kinds of
accommodations and for them to
understand that I think it's
going to be a great idea thank
you madam chair that's all and
Representative.
Thank you next I have
Representative Terrazas.
You madam chair members and the
Representative file with your
windows yes yes so when.
One of
the offices right so.
A couple questions I mean I just
want to
I I know that you mentioned that
Our corporations do this for
their employees but many small
businesses if you don't.
in the same way and so my
question is before I get into
the.
What particular policies are you
expressing that need to be done
that they're not doing.
Four straight what what also did
you want them to implement that
they are not currently doing
that is important to you.
Madam chair and representative
of ten assets that my expert
witness
respond to that.
Thank you madam chair and
representative tell us that's
the policies are are our range
of policies including
wellness programs and
reasonable accommodations for
pregnant employees of flexible
leave time for parents to attend
you know medical or school needs
ensuring workplaces have proper
breastfeeding space
or lactation space
so it's a range of of family
friendly workplace policies
that.
We know from from our research
that smaller businesses have
have a hard time figuring out
how it's not that they don't
want to do it I had to do these
policies for their employees
they sometimes don't have the
resources.
And so madam chair
Yes is roasted me Madam chair
Representative I'll review and.
Services is a loss.
Yes that sounds right lord the
rules yes the lawsuit okay so
miss Rossi so.
This what you're trying to pass
is this going to provide other
than training is it going to
provide anything more than ideas
or is it kind of providing
because if you use.
That the they don't have the
resources to do this.
You can give a training but.
Bye bye bye with through this
all.
Madam chair.
Make your Bonner Rossi respond
yes go ahead.
Madam chair representative thank
you for that clarification in
question of the the training
really would simply
Prepare employers for
implementing workplace policies
are but it wouldn't it wouldn't
be giving other kinds of
resources so the resources
really is that training.
So.
You know it is as a small
businessman myself
it I and I I again excuse me
start all over madam chair and
up Representative Mrs Rossi as a
as a small businessman.
Or in a business small
businesses
I I think we're you know I I do
appreciate always number I'm a
big
Average.
Get myself for a friendly
workplace I think the difference
between a small business and in
in the large businesses that I
know my employees first hand I
know there the names of their
children I know there that where
they live I know them first hand
and most small businesses have a
good relationship we're not all
perfect I'm gonna tell you this
and you know there's there's
businesses that do not to cure
their boys the same as others
but the vast majority do and in
a small work workplace it gives
us the opportunity to to know
our our our employees because
we're not the they come to our
birthday parties and we go to
theirs and technics and stuff
like that so I really think I
want to make a statement here I
really think they should have
gone to labor might might might
you know.
I'm on that committee like the
Richard this and it is very
similar to a lot of bills that
we're hearing
and so you know I also think you
if it was going to be
implemented.
I think you should be done we'll
go through the we're title one
type situation rather than just
are rather than just giving that
a mission so here's here's my
question so if this past when
you had with this money to go
for explain to me how the small
businessman the the the this was
small business woman that has a
I want to small businesses how
are you gonna reach out make
sure that all these this is a
reach out to this program.
May my witness speak your go
ahead.
Madam chair representative at
the appropriation goes to the
workforce solutions department
and they are
Very experienced in developing
and administering training so
that that department really
would take this on as far as as
far as the the trainings go
You know we have there's there's
a lot of evidence and
Practice in these trainings that
has gone on over the over the
number of years since the
legislature
Kind of started this this
project ten years ago
As and so we have a lot to build
on but ultimately it would be
the workforce solutions
department that that has the
experience.
And they would admit they would
you know take the lead on the on
the project.
Madam chair representative miss
Rosie so I am I said again on
labor and just the other day
director bill mccamley stated
that they were overwhelmed and
We were unable to keep up with
some of the.
Legislation that was asking them
similar bills such as this he
was overwhelmed and was wasn't
and was actually against some of
them not want to speak on his
behalf because I but but he he
mentioned that he was
overwhelmed and and his
department was for all I see
first hand here with the layoffs
that we've had here our mobile
coal mine and that the the we're
getting out a lot of feedback
we're workforce solutions the
department of labor is unable to
sustain you know the pace of the
workload that they have so I
appreciate your the the bill
again I'm I'm a.
I'm always I always think that
we should have a fairly
workforce I'm one of those
employers that you you can
always Thomas were we we need
you absolutely give me enough
notice you get has a the.
I don't know one of these of.
A program or something that you
want to ten it was enough notice
you're welcome to attend those
because those are things that
that
you only get to do once when
their first or second grader
fifth grade or whatever and so I
was trying to support our our
staff that we in in other ways
but thank you so much for for
bringing up this legislation and
that's all for me.
I'm on that point Representative
Terrazas I just wanted to point
out that the FIR
has input from the department of
workforce solutions which says
that they have the capacity to
develop and deliver impactful
trainings and would use the
funding to expand training
offerings including the required
staffing and
so I just wanted to a point that
out and and the fact that it's
here instead of at labor is you
know that's not up to us this is
where the speaker Senate so but
thank you all and you better
make madam chair and I think
that's what the that's where I
got a little confused I did read
that in the FIR but just
literally on Thursday he said
that and I'm like well he's
overwhelmed in that it's a I
just was making the statement
that he that he had made to us
on I'm on the that that I think
thank you Representative chair
thank you representative next
I've Representative Lord I thank
you madam chair so first
question that I do about this
bill so it's going to be
developing and then delivery
they're going to develop this
plan of the delivery how are
they going to deliver this.
This plan.
I could not hear the question to
the she was breaking up so may
she repeat.
I technology okay thank you
representative madam chair the
question again is with this
process you're going to develop
or they're going to develop a
program and workforce solutions
and I heard the word delivery
how will this be delivered to
businesses.
You madam chair may I my witness
speak.
Go ahead.
Madam chair and representative
the
again I just wanted to draw
attention to the FIR in the
workforce solutions department
have they they have you know the
history and the capacity our and
the experience with
delivering different types of
trainings to businesses and so I
imagine they will use their
channels that they already have
and
the other
Other efforts that are ongoing
in workforce in our family
friendly workplace trainings
we would be happy to support
that effort us so I'm not sure
that they that that there's a
specific plan yet but I think
this is this bill would help
them develop that.
And they have the.
They have the
the channels for delivering
trainings to employers already
as as stated in the FIR Madam
chair representative.
Thank you for answering that
question madam chair the
question is currently right now
these would be optional they are
not mandatory as of yet meaning
that a small business owner
would be mandated you have to I
use this training is that
correct.
Madam chair that's correct.
So thank you madam chair
question is I heard somebody say
something about with the various
trainings that there would be if
I heard it correctly lactation
spaces can you explain to me
what a lactation space would be.
Madam chair our lactation spaces
the
the small area or room in which
a breast feeding mother would be
given the privacy to nurse her
baby.
Thank you for that I appreciate
answer the question madam chair
so my question would be with the
lactation spaces then that would
probably need that a business
within have to either build or
develop or set aside an area
that they didn't have before is
that correct.
They may madam chair and
representative lord the option
is with the.
With the employer so no the
answer is no.
Eight thank you and if I
understand this cost is going to
be a continuing half a million
dollars each year is that
correct.
We Madam chair representative
lord we hope so.
Okay madam chair that's all the
questions that I have thank you.
Thank you and and that's all the
questions I I have and I'll just
say briefly that
as a small business owner myself
that is a family friendly
of Business and been recognized
as such it the purpose of this
is just to provide training to
businesses that are interested
in developing policies that are
more family friendly and
particularly small businesses
who don't have a professional HR
department to be able to train
those employers on how it would
work and what a policy might
look like
at my business we've developed
formal policies as part of the
employee handbook and and so
forth but we had to research and
develop with those policies were
this is to help businesses that
want to do something like that
to be able to put those policies
together and and to think about
ways that they can support their
employees it's not a mandate for
any program and it's not a
mandate that employees employers
even participate in the training
and it's so it's not developing
any in the new
mandated programs but with that
and thank you
Representative Trujillo and miss
Rossi I'll entertain a motion
from the committee I move it to
pass madam chair I have a due
pass and a second from
Representative Ferrary Torrez
you want to call the roll
please.
Sorry.
The ball and respond.
Yes.
Rounders.
Armstrong.
Representative.
John.
no one I'd like to explain.
Representative Britney but all
high.
Yes.
That.
Yes.
Stephanie lower no.
Marian Matthews.
Yes.
Roger Montoya.
Thank.
Your muted so sorry yes.
Representative Lewis.
No ma'am and I'd like to explain
my vote.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Thanks for our yes.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong
yes.
The.
Okay thank you seven to three
with a vote of seven to three
you have a I do pass on house
bill seventy two thank you and
to explain your vote
Representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair not that I don't
think this is a good idea I
think we've already got funding
in there for this to be
happening taking it out of the
General Fund again is I have a
major issue with but thank you
it's a great idea but we've
already got it in place thank
you madam chair.
Thank you and Representative
draws a six plan your vote.
Good even though I I strongly
believe in a friendly workplace
and I love that and I provide
one I think there's still some
unanswered questions and I feel
that we should try to get up hi
one federal funding to help us
with this.
The burden of state thank you
very much thank you and
Representative good luck in
appropriations to gets to
ultimately decide whether this.
Thank you so word and gets in
the budget thank you.
Thank you all you have a good
day thank you next we'll go to
house bill thirteen emergency
services for non citizens.
Our Representative are ours.
Yes madam chair I have to
experts if we can let in
Nicholas Cordova and sovereign
Hager.
I.
Will move out miss Rossi there
we go.
I'm sorry madam chair right in
here which bill we were to I'm
here House Bill thirteen.
Emergency services for non
citizens okay I think we're
ready Representative go ahead
and present your bill.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and
also our community I want to
start by apologizing that my
camera is not working I'm having
a great hair day and wearing my
favorite bolo tie so quite a day
for that to happen I'm here to
introduce to you a house bill
thirteen of this bill allows the
use of federal emergency
Medicaid for COVID nineteen
testing and treatment this bill
those two simple things it adds
testing and treatment for COVID
nineteen to the emergency
Medicaid for immigrants AKM
style is simplifies the process
of patients so patients can
qualify for himself before there
medical emergency conditions
arise and not after.
you know immigrants are
important members of our
community and there on the front
lines during this pandemic well
they are more likely to work in
jobs considered essential they
can access essential health care
coverage of for COVID nineteen
testing and treatment without
this coverage hospitals and
healthcare providers don't get
reimbursed for the cost to care.
I would like to.
Let my expert witnesses
introduce themselves and also
talk a little bit about the will
about the bill so to get away
thank you.
Thank you go head neck.
Thank you Representative madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Nicholas Cordoba I'm
an attorney The New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty an
organization dedicated to social
and economic justice through
legal representation and policy
advocacy.
We at the center of members of
the New Mexico together for
health care campaign eight
community led movements seeking
affordable quality healthcare
for all New Mexicans.
Since the COVID nineteen disease
researchers say March of twenty
twenty we've lost over thirty
two hundred lives to this
horrible pandemic.
And so now more than ever say
must ensure that every New
Mexican can access testing and
treatment for COVID without
worrying about being able to
afford it.
We at the center online poverty
work with families who test
positive for comment but never
see a doctor treatment of
confusion out of fear can afford
will report to ice.
These families need access to
these services.
Indeed our state has a moral
obligation to provide the
services to New Mexico residents
who immigrated to the United
States they are health care
workers teachers home care
workers.
They are New Mexicans doing
essential work.
New Mexico must make sure
they're given the essentials
needed survive this pandemic.
HB thirteen does exactly that
extends New Mexico's emergency
Medicaid program to cover
testing and treatment for COVID.
But what is emergency Medicaid.
It's a federal Medicaid program
that matches state funds to
cover the cost of emergency care
for people who meet the income
eligibility requirements for
Medicaid.
But still don't qualify because
of their immigration status.
Emergency Medicaid is a very
unique program because states
have flexibility to determine
what medical conditions and
services are covered.
In fact twelve other states have
already use their respective
emergency Medicaid programs to
cover COVID testing treatment.
And so we're hoping to do the
same here.
Now I want to recognize the
laudable public health response
taken by our governor in the
state and to that end Human
Services department has said
that are emergency Medicaid
program covers COVID testing an
inpatient treatment for COVID it
covers labor and delivery
services and it'll soon cover
COVID vaccines.
But our state's program needs to
go further by covering all COVID
treatment including out of
hospital treatment.
And although Congress created
the federal program through
which providers can seek
reimbursement for the services
for uninsured patients.
Providers are still confused
about how to access that money.
And providers are required to
check for social security
numbers.
To add to the problem Congress
is only dedicated so much money
for this program and eventually
it's gonna go up.
COVID is going to be with us for
a while and we need to make sure
our health care programs can
handle that in the long term.
And so that's where HB thirteen
comes in by expanding our
state's emergency Medicaid
program to cover all testing
treat for COVID including out of
hospital treatment.
We can insure more New Mexicans
have easy access to these
critical services.
And so having discussed what we
need to expand program I want to
turn now to how cost effective
it is to do so.
Again our current program
already covers testing an
inpatient treatment and will
soon cover vaccines.
So really what we're talking
about in added costs for the
state's comprehensive coverage
of all COVID treatment through
emergency Medicaid.
HSD R. Human Services Department
estimates that building up
emergency Medicaid to cover the
services would cost a total of
seven point eight million in FY
twenty three.
Because the federal government
pays for a large share of
emergency Medicaid costs in
general about over seventy three
percent.
The state would need to pay only
one point five million.
Which leverages over six point
three million in federal funding
to cover the rest so basically
the feds pay for most of this.
Because of that it's incredibly
cost effective measure to make
sure our community stays healthy
during this pandemic.
So just as twelve other states
have done so too should New
Mexico cover all COVID testing
and treatment through emergency
Medicaid.
Because during the pandemic when
each of us is healthy all of us
are healthy.
I would like to turn into at the
center not properties legal
director sovereign Hager to.
Discuss the application
provisions in this bill.
Go ahead thank you madam chair
members of the committee just
quickly the bill also includes a
section that allows for the
emergency Medicaid process to
work just like regular Medicaid
or folks can apply are approved
for up to twelve months and then
a provider can bill if they have
an emergency can bill Medicaid
the same way they do for other
programs the way the program
works right now folks have to
apply with the help of their
provider after they've had a
medical emergency so surgery or
given birth or something else
covered under the law and what
that looks like in practice is
very challenging for families so
we recently worked with the
family in Deming
how couple of farm workers and
the wife was about to have a
baby and she needed a C. section
which is covered under this
program she went to the members
hospital and was turned away and
told she needed to make an up
front payment the family was
about to take out a loan to so
they could schedule their C.
section luckily they were
referred to us and we were able
to convince them that know this
family qualifies for emergency
Medicaid she just has to apply
after the procedure
Seizure took place she had her
baby the hospital didn't go
through the steps and it's
burdensome for providers to do
that on the back and in the
family was put in collections
and we are still working to
reverse that and that's Madam
because this process is
difficult and challenging for
providers it's hard for families
you can only imagine what
someone recovering from COVID or
with COVID would have to I see
coverage maybe when they're not
even all the way better
and because they have to apply
within ninety days of the
emergency so what this does is
what procedurally what a lot of
states have done which is common
sense and makes the process
easier for the state for
hospitals and for New Mexicans
which is allowing people to
apply and be approved for up to
twelve months at a time and then
it's just a simple back and
billing and so it's a one time
cost HSD that saves money in the
long term where they don't have
to you know process things
manually every time someone has
an emergency condition and you
know the bottom line of this
bill is it extends treatment
that is mostly federal funded
for comment
for comment illness and I say
it's it's a simple simple a
smart solution that's really
cost effective HSD we are not
asking for an appropriation this
bill because HSD is budget over
seven point three million
can cover this in fact most of
things in this bill are things
HSD is planning to do it just
makes a comprehensive and
simplifies the process if HSD
did at some for some reason need
a small amount of money to make
up the difference I think it's a
supplement next year but we
think this is well within their
budget civil St for questions
thank you.
Thank you anything else
Representative before we go to
the audience.
No madam chair thank you so much
and I'm excited to hear the
questions thank you so we will
go to members of the audience
first and don't get too excited
about raising your hands yet
those who are in among the
attendees who are in opposition
to this bill opposition.
So if you're in opposition.
Okay
We'll go first to J. bent.
J. bent introduce yourself.
You need to unmute.
Thank you.
In the good morning to you and
members of the committee again
check bench with the New Mexico
business coalition.
the New Mexico business
coalition.
Has been in existence for over a
decade and we represent hundreds
of businesses and thousands in
New Mexicans throughout our
state.
our focus is to make New Mexico
a better place to do business so
that.
Our people have jobs it could
provide for their families of as
far as H. B. thirteen is.
If you're citizen in this
country are nonsense.
Of you'll be cared for in any
medical emergency but federal
law that was stated earlier by
expert witnesses through
Medicaid so.
You know with insurance or
without insurance people will be
cared for US federal law so we
stand in opposition respectfully
Because this appears to be a
difficult mandate approach so.
We stand opposed to the bill
thank you.
Thank you.
I'm next I have and I should
mention I I apologize I forgot
to mention for those listening
there is a button on the bottom
of those of your screen.
That looks like a globe says
interpretation if you need
Spanish interpretation and
you can press on that button and
and your interpreter.
Lorenzo Velasco's were you
speaking in opposition.
Lorenzo your muted were you
speaking in opposition.
Madam chair hi no ma'am four
days bill okay we're going to
get to you and in a moment then
thank you thank you.
Okay so next if everyone who is
in support of this bill could
raise your hand.
Icon for raising your hand.
We'll give a moment for that.
When insurance okay.
This.
It looks like we've got
about thirty one people who wish
to speak.
Since Lorenzo's already on here
I'm gonna let him go first
however then I'm going to go to
a list that I've been given this
is
for
speaking because they're
juggling clinic at the at the
same time so if we can get them
done and then we'll go to others
that
that wish to speak.
so Lorenzo go ahead.
Good again.
Madam chair and committee my
name is Lawrence this question
I'm from Sunland park and I
strongly believe in this bill
because most of our hi this is
done by non citizens so that
that's why I'm a hundred percent
behind this bill.
Thank you thank you Lorenzo.
So we've got about twenty five
people with their hands still up
and I'll ask you please not to
speak are trying to speak more
than a minute please be brief
and if you don't need to speak
you can take your hand down but
we'll go to my list first so
that folks can get back to their
clinic duties Gaby Hernandez.
Good morning can you hear me yes
go ahead.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is
Debbie of non this and I'm a
doctor we stepped in and a
community organizer across those
silos I'm here in support of HB
thirteen many of my love ones
like my mom sister and aunts are
essential workers who are
uninsured doing this pandemic we
live in a constant fear of any
of them getting sick because we
know they were faced in the
complications but even worse we
are scared of the thousands of
dollars up there the hospital
could charges us by seeking care
this has been happening this has
happened before and this
continue to happen during this
pandemic please support is B.
thirteen and ensure essential
workers like our immigrant
community get the coverage they
need to get tested and treated
for COVID nineteen thank you.
Thank you Gabbay next I have.
Haley Leon.
Haley.
State Haley.
We had to provide you Hey lady
go ahead.
Okay.
So good morning and thank you
for your time today my name is
Haley Leon and I'm a clinical
coordinator at cost on this on
is a nonprofit medical clinic in
the south valley of Albuquerque
has been at this clinic for four
years Representative
participated in the care of
primarily uninsured and Spanish
speaking patients.
Who are undocumented that are
over the last eight months I
have also been involved in a
COVID nineteen testing clinic
fair processes the leave and
I've directly witnessed the harm
that are vulnerable populations
have faced during this pandemic
this is been very frustrating
and disheartening as a health
care worker and the future
position but I'm hopeful and I
know that we have the ability to
change that so that we can
provide compassion and quality
health care to all members of
our community during this very
difficult time and I hope that
you all you will all support age
thirteen.
Thank you Haley.
next on my list I have is market
Kristin them.
See if we can find you in the
list.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm not seeing I don't
see I don't see married there
okay.
so we'll go to Lorraine Cordova.
In final rain.
There's two Lorraine's I'm not
sure which one I mean you hear
me yes are you Lorraine Cordova
yes.
Good morning
My name is Lorraine Cordova I
love family nurse practitioner
at cost of this and I've been
here since two thousand
questions the clinic opened up.
I thank you so much for
listening to our our concerns
and thank you for considering
this bill house bill thirteen
I'm in full support of this you
know I would say at least sixty
to seventy percent of the
patients that we see here
casa disabilities of family
practice clinic are immigrants
and just this morning I've seen
to patients who have had COVID
nineteen and they were reluctant
to go to the hospital because
they could not afford their they
were first of all afraid to go
in because they're immigrants
second of all because they they
were concerned about the cost
there have been many patients
called and then telehealth for
telehealth care and I've had to
send them to the hospital some
of them waited too long and and
unfortunately there were some
debts.
So I really really support this
I'm hoping that you all could
will consider these
Immigrants who are essential
workers most of them are work in
the food industry and in
construction and our tax paying
individuals so I would really
really be so thankful for not
only for them but for you to
give support to this house bill
thirteen thank you very much.
Thank you and next on my list
is.
all under a class of Rubius but
I don't see her.
Us so we'll go to on holy
tonight how and I apologize if I
just.
City.
And your retirement.
Go ahead.
Can you hear me yes excellent
good morning madam chair and
representatives on the committee
my name is Dr Anjali teenage a
family medicine physician and
the executive director of
because of this salute like
Lorraine court the mentioned
sixty to seventy percent of our
patients are uninsured and are
immigrants we see families
suffering every single day
negotiating whether they should
go to the hospital or not for
oftentimes severe COVID symptoms
we see them come out with bills
and and so it is very
challenging to navigate and our
amazing case managers help
patients but we don't know how
many are out there we don't know
about this this bill is really
creative it's important and in
this time when are essential
workers are dying at exorbitant
rates we must rise to the
occasion it's a win win win for
patients for hospitals and
health care providers to have
this kind of streamlined process
and for our state so that people
are not suffering and causing
unnecessary spread of the COVID
virus there's no duplication
with this and much of this will
be paid for by the fed so we
very much support moving forward
with this bill thank you.
Thank you doctor next are we
have Liz Lopez.
Okay can you hear me yes.
Okay good morning madam chair
and committee members my name's
Liz Lopez I'm a PhD candidate in
case manager for process and I'm
here in support for HB thirteen
simply because I have many loved
ones and clients who I've been
able to assist but unfortunately
they're not insured so there's
been a lot of impact and a lot
of them have been impacted by
COVID
personally there for their able
to fully recover and they lost
their jobs and many were left
this one manageable medical
that.
So that being said you know
there have been some fears of
any type of repercussions if
they're not able to make any
payments they have the fear of
being reported and you know it's
just difficult to reassure them
that everything will be okay if
we're not a hundred percent sure
so I'm just asking you know to
support H. B. thirteen for
communities for testing and
treatment of COVID thank you.
Thank you up next we'll go to
fill hex.
Morning madam and committee
members everybody I just wanna
let everybody know as well the
other hand across it will be S.
in Margate Christensen are going
to be twenty and they were just
with patients when the to start
it but I am the intensive case
manager got process and would
and the City of Albuquerque and
I think every day in our office
we see the disproportionate
burden that's pandemic has on
our immigrant on uninsured
communities you know not to
mention have not been able to
receive stimulus in a lot of
situations have been able to on
sex on access unemployment
and you know contrary to what
one of the opposition audience
members had to say we do see our
patients getting denied access
to care because they are not
armed with the knowledge that
they can have this protection
and H. B. thirteen a super super
important to pass because then
as case managers are service
providers were able to tell our
patients not only do you need
this care but you have access to
this care under this program and
if if we're really focused on
making sure that this pandemic
comes to an end we're keeping
our community safe it's really
important that that these
communities have access to the
care and testing they need
without the fear of you know
medical bills in the US we
support HB thirteen I really
appreciate you all.
Thank you cell and I see
Alessandra here now.
All Honduran go ahead.
Yes good morning and thank you
so much for having us here this
morning my name is secondhand
etcetera yes I'm a registered
nurse at custody said look
cleaning you send non profit
organization and as well I'm one
of the sexual assault nurse
examiners with Albuquerque
saying unfortunately call us
discriminate any human any
person has been suffering from
the consequences I will be doing
the COVID testing S. scenes the
suspended unfortunately I have
seen the suffering is struggles
of the patients for not only the
patients and family members the
low ones and also the
consequences so that they had or
the hospital bills and also they
not only physical consequences
of these pandemic but also the
emotionally mentally
economically that all the
families that have to so for it
for these I hear about that
about people going to the I see
you easy to use very very
traumatic and I can see the fear
and the fear from many of our
patients they're good people to
humans at the same the COVID
causing discrimination
unfortunately because state law
on all their lives many of our
patients so not only this year
the trauma they grieve the loss
the depression that wish that I
have seen I can't even describe
all the emotions that I have
right now so it really.
Thank you for
In the U. S. to complete support
HB thirteen to help all the
people suffering for these thank
you.
Thank you all on their own
Next we're going to go to others
that have their hand raised and
if
of the other person I had on my
list Margie are Christians and
if she's able to when she's not
with patients raise your hand
I'll watch for her and and
actually I see here no
I will watch for her and and and
bring your and I know you're
juggling seeing patients at the
same time so next on my list
will just go down the the list
of hands raised bill Wagner and
again reminder for folks to keep
their remarks short to we don't
have the time or but if you
could keep it trying to keep it
to one minute and a reminder
that there is a
a way to get interpretation on
the bottom of the screen it
looks like a globe and also for
committee members if we have a
Spanish speaker if you
and and you don't speak Spanish
and if you
press that you'll hear it the
interpreter in English so that
everyone can hear what folks are
saying so bill Wagner we have
next.
And you'll need to you
yourselves there you go.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name's bill Wagner
I'm the founder and director of
central Safilo we're in
outpatient behavioral health
provider and social service
provider in the south valley and
and the international district
of Albuquerque a large portion
of our clientele are immigrants
and we have witnessed first hand
the the the the stress the toxic
stress that this is put on
families many of whom are
essential workers many of whom
are are preparing food and and
and and serving people directly
and the disproportionate impact
of the COVID nineteen pandemic
not only on their physical
health but on their mental
health.
As mentioned before many of the
families are not receiving the
stimulus checks and many of them
have been
Despite the moratorium on
eviction have been losing their
homes because of the inability
to pay rent.
it's put a greater burden on
families to try to survive
during this period of time
without food support without
parental support without
stimulus checks and oftentimes
families have had to live
together to to be able to
survive and so it's much more
difficult in terms of containing
the spread of the pandemic and
in many cases family members
have have have died from COVID
and
You know we're we're we're
talking often about make status
families with non citizens and
citizens living together and the
difficulty of having to
live with the fear of not only.
Family members dying or the the
reality of that but the fear of
even more indebtedness because
of the possible costs of of
going to seek help of going to
and even get a test I've
witnessed with my clients the
fears that they have of going to
ask for services because of
experiences that are very real
of of either being turned away
or having is enormous bills
given to them even when the
services are covered so I think
thank you for thank you for your
comments I think your time is up
but thank you for for being here
ask you for your support thanks
thank you.
next we have doctor Emmeline
Freeman.
Friedman.
Hi can you hear me.
Okay.
Hi everyone I'm an OBGYN
resident at the university of
New Mexico thank you for being
here today through my work I
provide care for many women in
our communities throughout New
Mexico during the pandemic I've
witnessed first hand the
disproportionate impact of COVID
nineteen on women of color and
low income women including
undocumented women many of the
undocumented women I've worked
with over the past year are also
frontline workers who were
providing essential services to
our community.
As others you're already
discussed they often have more
exposure to the virus and less
access to health care services
the cost of testing early
treatment is an enormous
superior for many of our
undocumented patients who often
president and leader for Karen
at a later stage of disease.
One important step in reducing
health disparities related to
COVID nineteen is making access
to testing and treatment
available for everyone in our
community undocumented women
living in New Mexico are the
loved ones of New Mexicans who
are citizens and our
constituents families and
communities here in New Mexico
aren't segregated by citizenship
and neither should our testing
or treatment for COVID nineteen.
Avoiding funding is an essential
part of increasing access to the
services I want to take this
opportunity to ask that you
consider how we can care for
protect everyone in our
community thank spending our
coverage to include undocumented
people who are vital and
essential part of New Mexico and
supporting house bill thirteen
thank you.
Thank you doctor
next we have Dr Jocelyn move.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is also
work and I'm speaking as a
women's health care physician
who has cared for patients with
COVID nineteen in Albuquerque
area and as a family member of
the Peace known as Dodd held it
I'm going to continue services
every year and next year and
Espanola access to health care
is a basic human right is
documents stated and I have been
proud to work in New Mexico
where many providers also
believe this specifically equal
care for all service providers
to has exacerbated expose
disparities in every community
in the United States including
our own COVID nineteen has a
starting kids many families my
partner and I are both frontline
care providers and I've had the
privilege of continuing
employment and insurance during
the pandemic HB thirteen is a
step towards justice for all
essential workers who deserve
equal care and to anyone else
during this pandemic HB thirteen
is one of many steps that we
need to continue to take as long
as to make sure health is a
reality for everyone especially
those who are made vulnerable
and excluded by existing systems
so thank you very much for
considering this important piece
of legislation.
Thank you doctor will on next we
have Noreen Kelly.
Go ahead.
Good morning.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I urge you to
vote on house bill thirteen to
keep on our state of New Mexico
healthy.
And prosperous thank you so
much.
Thank you.
Next we have for Nonda
danda.
Need to on mute.
Madam chair.
Hear me yes.
He.
Members of the committee my name
is for non that on that and I am
an organizer with the New Mexico
Dream Team I strongly advocate
for HB thirty today as an
immigrant woman who has been
uninsured for as long as I can
remember this harsh reality with
my family and my community at a
huge disadvantage more now than
ever during this global health
crisis.
Engine before we are essential
workers and most of us don't
know where to get help or even
if help is there for us I have
consistently see my community
fall through the cracks of
medical neglect and get
something propose and prepares
to call I fear something could
happen to my family and my loved
ones madam chair and members the
committee I urge you.
To see the necessity for HD
thirteen and finding yourself to
offer health care relief to
those vulnerable families that
need it the most thank you thank
you for not the next we have
Barbara Webber.
Madam chair members of the
community my name is Barbara
Webber executive director of
Health Action New Mexico a
health consumer statewide
advocacy organization we
strongly support H. B. thirteen
we see it not only for the
quality of life
of decisions that noncitizens in
New Mexico but for everyone in
New Mexico because not ensuring.
He people in our community
especially there are also many
essential worker positions just
adds to the spread of COVID in
addition it is a health equity
issue and it's a time when our
country has recognize that
health equity needs to be
addressed so again we support H.
B. thirteen and due to as well.
Thank you Barbara next we have
it doesn't have a name is just
from el Centro
If you could introduce yourself.
Yes hi.
It good morning madam chair and
members.
My name is Matt and I'm an
organiser added something else
it's a grassroots immigrants
rights workers justice
organization based in
Albuquerque New Mexico with over
five thousand members composed
of mainly lowly.
I'm here to ask you to complete
will for each of the thirteen
I'm here to speak on behalf of
our members who have been
impacted greatly during the
pandemic many of who have lost
their jobs and have been
struggling to make ends meet and
this pandemic has even Hardin
Thanks for the these families
who don't qualify for health
care programs and you can afford
many of the members are impacted
by the virus and now the four
the hospital
number of them are a three to
even go get test and they don't
and they're afraid of losing
their jobs and for the costs New
Mexico is one of the highest and
poverty among people and these
are people that work full time
year round low wage jobs and
less likely to include benefits
such as paid sick leave
and their families we.
Or healthcare insurance.
New Mexico is also it this year
over all and child well being
and forty ninth and economic
well being and fifty and
education and forty and health.
So I please urge you to pass
this bill so we can move towards
a better future for New Mexican
families regardless of of folks
immigration status many who are
essential workers and risk your
life every day thank you yes
thank you next we have I'll
Elene costs along.
Again I apologize for not
pronouncing your name right.
madam chair members of the
committee at I'm getting an
error message that I have to
promote this castle on to
panelists to allow her to speak
because of the version of zoom
so madam chair I have that
permission go ahead.
I'm receiving an error code that
it's not.
Working my try one more time.
It doesn't appear to be working
okay I apologize A. Lange we're
not going to be able to for some
reason bring you over to be able
to speak
I'm not sure if it's on our end
or if you need to update your
resume for future participation
thank you we'll go next and to
Dev Q. Josh she.
Good morning again my name is
they've given Joshi and I'm a
junior fellow of the American
college of OBGYN and a resident
physician here in Albuquerque
I've seen and cared for women
whose pregnancies I've been
complicated by COVID nineteen
since the beginning of this long
pandemic I want to tell you
about my undocumented patient
who was eight months pregnant
and diagnose the COVID ammonia
requiring higher levels of
oxygen who was admitted to the
ICU and ultimately had a
caesarean section when she was
finally ready to go home I had a
conversation with her about
medication she would need
including want to prevent life
threatening blood clots are out
of pocket costs even with all
the coupons in the social work
involved would be somewhere
around one thousand two hundred
dollars for six months of this
medication there is already a
fear that huge burning hospital
bill would arrive to their door
I'm not sure she ever picked up
the prescription the barrier to
care may have been too high and
that's a happiness and shame we
should all carry our patients
without legal status are the
backbone and essential workers
of our communities and we cannot
afford to leave them behind
we'll all the weather this storm
together as everyone is in and
no one is out as COVID nineteen
continues to threaten to
overwhelm health care providers
and systems it is critical now
more than ever to expand
emergency Medicaid services and
I urge this committee committee
to urgently pass each B.
thirteen thank you.
Thank you defecate I now see we
have in the list more gate to
Christensen I'm gonna allow you
to come in thank you I know
you've been in clinic go ahead
marquee.
And I apologize if I
mispronounce your name.
You need to on you.
There you go you can hear me now
thank you yes I had a break
between patients Good Morning
madam chair and committee
members my name is Margaret
Christensen I'm a family nurse
practitioner at casa day salute
a community clinic here in
Albuquerque I'm here today in
support of HB thirteen and on
behalf of my patients many of
whom are frontline workers
immigrants and uninsured
uninsured members of our
community are often essential
workers which puts them in a
really precarious position with
increased risk of contracting
COVID in the community and
little financial support if they
become sick I've seen this
happen so many of my patients
this year are essential workers
deserve financial and medical
support regardless of
documentation status and HB
thirteen will ensure that they
have that access to care without
having to worry about medical
bills well sick country thank
you so much to the committee for
your consideration today.
Thank you and thank you for
making time between your
patience to join us.
next we have leroy so.
Good morning madam chair.
My name is leroy so.
I'm from a northern part of the
New Mexico McKinley County I'm
with
Strong families board together.
In most cities in New Mexico the
majority of its citizens are
mixed cultures.
And they all deserve better
health care.
Coverage to that's what I
support XP thirteen thank you
very much thank you Lee Roy
next we have doctor Jamie Majdi.
Hello my name is Dr Jamie
Majesty I thank you madam chair
and members of the committee I'm
here to represent primary care
advocates for healthy
communities which is a group of
over twenty primary care doctors
here in New Mexico I'm working
to improve the social
determinants of health for our
patients
I work both inside the hospital
and outside the hospital and as
Dr Joshi said COVID doesn't stop
after the patient leaves the
hospital we are seeing patients
to three months out still
dealing with shortness of breath
and symptoms from their COVID
and we also have some fantastic
treatments that are available to
prevent hospitalization like
monoclonal antibodies and
steroids and we need to make
sure that this is accessible to
all members of our community and
especially those who are have a
more vulnerable immigration
status I think people are
provided the the moral argument
for passing this bill and we
would also urge you to pass
house bill thirteen to help our
patients and limit the financial
burden on them as well thank you
thank you doctor next we have
Rachel Biggs.
Good morning members of the
committee you madam chair name
is Rachel Biggs and the policy
director Albuquerque Health Care
for the homeless a federally
qualified health centers serving
approximately seven thousand
individuals in Bernalillo county
without homes each year as a
primary structural cause of
homelessness and poverty these
barriers that we've been hearing
about to health care coverage in
access we know only create more
homelessness at this critical
time New Mexico should be
pursuing all available federal
leveraging opportunities to
ensure access to healthcare and
Medicaid is one of the smartest
investments our state can make
we urge your support of HB
thirteen thank you.
Thank you Rachel
Next we have
I'm and it doesn't have a name
is that America forward together
action.
If you could introduce yourself.
Yes good morning omitted that
that assessed from by the New
Mexico go ahead.
Can you hear me yes go ahead
these at that office and we
forward together.
And
I'm here to support they should
be able because if you know
we're we're neighbors we sit
with Mexico so Mexico is.
It
is working for for New Mexico so
we need for them to be.
Covered specially with this with
this
The pandemic thank you so much
thank you.
Next we have also you.
You madam chair members of the
community the committee I'm
sorry my name is out the idea
come from McKinley County and I
believe we are all equal and
deserving Health Care and let's
take care our generations to
come I support House Bill Page
House Bill at thirteen thank you
thank you all data.
Next we have Sikora Linden.
Good morning madam chair
committee members we can ignore
them almost saw a one on
undocumented workers and
immigrants are essential workers
in this country especially
undocumented workers who working
farms to put food on our table
under this pandemic I truly feel
that.
Are entitled for medical care as
needed we all are under one roof
in are you truly feel that will
need to keep a healthy I
strongly ask your support thank
you for our HB thirteen thank
you.
Thank you so Carl next we have
Christina Janes.
Good morning madam chair members
committee my name is Christina
James I am from McKinley County
and a leader with four together
I support H. B. thirteen because
we all deserve equal health care
and as some as as I have
overcome COVID myself and lost
many family members.
Most of my providers were
immigrants and very caring
people.
So I ask you to the.
Pass this bill thank.
Thank you Christina next we have
Tanya James.
Madam chair and committee I'm
Tania James from Gallup McKinley
county with four together action
I support HB thirteen because I
believe every human needs access
to health care no matter race or
what position they may be in
thank you for hearing my comment
on expecting thank you Tanya.
Next we have Derek lam.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Derek lane and I'm
representing New Mexico voices
for children.
Using M. city cover COVID
nineteen testing and treatment
for immigrants is an important
step towards ensuring that all
New Mexicans have access to
critical lifesaving health care
without having to take on the
burden of medical bills that
many keep many families can't
afford we urge you to support
this bill which is essential for
protecting the health and well
being of immigrant families as
well as the public health of all
New Mexicans thank you.
Thank you Derek next we have
some again on on identified but
forward together action if you
can identify yourself.
You need to on mute.
Can you hear me yes go ahead.
Yes it happened then I stand and
not on the Deborah A. Armstrong
I don't based on the key good
morning madam chair and members
of the committee my name is but
I agree with for work together
action McKinley County I stand
in strong support for H. B.
thirteen make this the bill
happen please how the state
happy St thank you for giving me
a chance to have my voice heard.
Thank you for being here.
I'm next we have Cecilia.
Good morning madam chair and
committee my name is Sylvia I
greatly support hospital
thirteen because everybody
deserves health care and
everybody will be well thank
you.
Thank you Cecilia.
Next we have
Lisa McLaughlin.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee.
My name is Liam McLaughlin I am
from McKinley County I am also a
leader of forward together
action I just wanted to say I
support HB thirteen and I urge
you everyone to support HB
thirteen thank you madam chair
and committee thank you Lisa.
Next we have
one.
I'm gonna but you and then go
ahead one.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is currently in and I'm with New
Mexico Asian families a
nonprofit organization that
provides culturally sensitive
programs and services for pan
Asian community every day we
will with Asian Pacific Islander
victims of crimes including
sexual assault domestic violence
and trafficking victim and low
income County.
And this bill will help to
reduce the but in the field the
stress of the experiencing
every day as you know many of
our API community L. so looking
in the front and essential work
so I really urge you please
support this bill so that hello
immigrant and refugee community
who at I'm not sure can be
covered under these and I think
this bill is a really smart
meals because it helped to
utilize federal program but also
Arribo some of the Baria to our
community by accessing these
programs thank you and I
appreciate your work.
Thank you next we have Maria
Rotonda.
yes within the committee.
When we look at for you find a
document that is the number is
much more than twenty so this
will be delivering what together
action this bill in the number
of total local this is one of
on on the court orders.
What the minister.
Based on the medicine for that
asset I thank you see them you
know that because I didn't know
that connections of maybe costs
thanks Amanda can cope.
A couple for you estimate this
but another almost been soreness
in this instance Committee okay
the the what what on for the
fund which.
Thank you Maria.
Next we have Ellie rush first.
Good morning madam chair can you
hear me yes go ahead thank you
my name is Sally rush for that
I'm that reproductive rights
counsel at the ACLU of New
Mexico where I work to protect
and expand access to health care
for all New Mexicans many New
Mexicans experience
discrimination hostility and
civil rights violations because
of their suspected immigration
status as a result protecting
immigrants rights is a top
priority for eight the ACLU of
New Mexico no one should fear
seeking health care because of
their immigration or insurance
status for this reason and the
reason stated by our incredible
community leaders before me we
support this crucial legislation
thank you.
Thank you M. and the last
Sabrina.
Hello can you hear me yes go
ahead.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I am Dr Sabrina gill a
completed family medicine
residency here in New Mexico and
I'm staying here to practice
medicine COVID is affecting so
many people and its
unpredictable some stay home
some need to go to the hospital
and some the outpatient COVID
treatment right now those
requiring outpatient services
are following of falling into a
gap where the care is not
covered I support this bill
because testing in treating all
people is important from my
perspective as a doctor in
helping both our immigrant and
broader communities to stay as
healthy as possible my personal
belief is that we should not
turn our back on immigrants but
my professional opinion as a
physician is that not covering
COVID care for certain patients
will end up negatively affecting
everyone thank you.
Thank you
We had a hand up from from
Theresa.
Garber and I don't know if she
still wants to talk.
You have to on me see.
Thank.
Yes.
When.
When.
But as a member of the committee
then the number listed as
sentiment so dampening on may he
go so but I'm not gonna settle
but we do know sinus and make
economy that is already that
this will work to get it axiom
get a clue but the look at
bustle going to meet them A. L.
that I see them think that are
happening in the we test illegal
they left and the left wing and
and I know for four minus eight
they need not be of it this yet
that but I see on they don't
know seventy applicant opinion
comment but I maybe got I think
the single the ability I suppose
only get out of it you do
looking out on this be done.
Is it on that but I wanted Kobe
Senator posted diva.
He enable the moment let me this
but he is no they yes.
Yes single this was the single
the US is the wall luchando por
su vida this affordable not mean
thank I guess you know the Kobe.
Our we had the anyone are on
there with them.
No that'll give us some more
which you'll see me get on this
boat is on this be look at what
I want apple again Lajovic they
say is that we're going to see
them also not gore with comment
to them would hit them and thank
which is that I see.
Thank you to ressa
and that's all I have on on the
list I do before we go to the
panelists want to recognize
Kerry are me ho is in the
audience representing Medicaid
and HSD and
Allow Kerry if you have
anything to add in or just want
to make sure that we also know
you're there for answer
questions.
I'm yes can you hear me yes go
ahead great I thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee I'm glad to be here
today thank you for that chance
to speak on the Human Services
department is not we're not in
support or opposition to the
bill however we are concerned
about the absence of an
appropriation at the bill does
have a fiscal impact of about
two point eight million in
general fund over the next two
fiscal years that is not built
into you HSD is budget
and I think it's important to
note that at HSD is facing a
budget shortfall in both the
executive and legislative.
Budget recommendations at so
it's unclear state agency how we
would be able to bear the costs
of house bill thirteen without
additional funding so I just
wanted to make that point and if
there are any questions I'm
happy to answer those.
Right thank you
Thank you carry we will go to
the committee and first on my
list I have Representative
Thomson.
Thank you madam chair
I don't really have a question
but but it's in this time of
COVID I one of the last public
comment said essentially what I
wanted to say is that anytime we
have a segment of our community
that for whatever reason is
reason is hesitant to get tested
and hesitate to get treatment
for and in this case for
financial reasons we are never
going to get ahead of the virus
I mean that's that's it's kind
of even if you don't support
this measure in principle you
have some issue with that if we
want to get beyond the pandemic
we need to have everyone have
the ability to what to be tested
and if they need to be to be
quarantine and and contact trace
so I am a thousand percent in
support of this bill and as I
said if if it's if you can't
support it for any other reason
support it for the fact that we
must do it in order to get a
handle on the COVID our pandemic
thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative next I
have Representative of lord.
Thank you madam chair
before I get into my one
question I want to tell you I'm
I'm looking at a picture of my
grandparents and I come from the
Soto family I was adopted into
that family and they both came
over documented from Mexico.
And I miss them terribly and
they later became nationalized
and they worked very hard and he
worked in the mines in Arizona.
And they never took any handouts
and they're very prone to never
take any government assistance
and they work for everything
had.
And they live through the
Spanish flu.
Thank all the medical care cash
and.
Two very long ages before they
finally passed away.
And what are the most frustrated
about right now is the issue
that hand is the cost of medical
care and that's a whole nother
can of worms because back then
you see affordable and they
could pay cash for the results.
And I do not believe that anyone
should ever be discriminated or
turned in because they are
undocumented worker everyone
should be able to see health
care.
And not have that fear.
Senator question as always is
very technical so.
I'd like to jump into this and
ask a few questions.
So is there a program manager is
program or is there any push for
case workers or for any of these
are.
Health care centers to inform
especially the document people
who are afraid and I understand
that fear about the nineteen
eighty six federal emergency
medical treatment and active
labor act that for bids
emergency departments from
denying medical care to anybody
regardless of their ability to
pay is there any question make
them aware of this.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative lord that's a
really great question I'm going
to if it's okay madam chair ask
of my expert witness Nicolas
court about to take that
question I had a close.
I think not to pass the Buck
here but I think.
legal director Southern here
like would like to take this one
right thanks go ahead thank you
madam chair and Representative
so the requirement to not turn
someone away when they're
seeking emergency care is
different from what's an
emergency covered by this
program and so I think folks
maybe you aware many aren't that
they you know can't be turned
away in an emergency room for
example but with this with this
bill is getting at is defining
an emergency which will be
covered by this program to
include COVID treatments
including treatment that is out
of the hospital contacts and
that includes things would you
hurt commenters talk about
follow up medicine
being seen a doctor that's not
any are before you get really
bad or keep them you know which
could prevent your eventual
death or the need to seek
hospital care and so we're
talking about to sort of
different definitions of
emergency.
Because the that we're talking
about two different laws and so
what states have done in the
flexibility to do this is to say
treatment for anything related
to a public health emergency I
COVID nineteen is an emergency
for the purpose of the emergency
Medicaid our programs for non
citizens and and that's how we
are able to cover those costs
which is different from being
seen at the ER which I think is
what you're asking about yeah I
think that I thank you madam
chair so continuation upon that
I know that the department
health provides testing and
vaccination without any charge
New Mexico residents regarding
regardless of immigration status
and that they also we're not
turning anyone in is there any
programmer published by anybody
case workers or any of these
clients make sure that immigrant
people know that they can safely
go and get tested and
vaccinated.
Thank you.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair is that
okay yes alright yes yes go
ahead thanks Madam chair
representative thank you that
you know we have are so lucky to
be in a state that has had such
a strong centralized response
the pandemic and is making
vaccines available has had a
strong centralized testing
what and and I believe that you
know there has been widespread
efforts to publicize that in
great partnerships with
community based organizations
what this bill is looking to do
is to in the long term make sure
that we have a federal source of
funding when we don't have of
federal funding to do the
centralized state responses
which will end and COVID is with
us for a long time and we know
that folks are going to need
that treatment testing a
treatment and vaccination
outside of the that centralized
public health response and the
need to be getting it more so in
the treatment context and this
really make sure that providers
can bill people know that they
qualify and they go through a
system that is you know already
provides health care to this of
important these New Mexicans who
don't have insurance and so by
expanding it to include COVID
we're really protecting
everybody in the long term and
not just relying on these time
limited federal sources of
funding.
Thank you for New thank you
madam chair my continue going to
question is.
If we were if someone were to
present a bill that were to push
undocumented people to the from
line to get them all vaccinated
let's say next week how long
after both vaccinations are
administered and we anticipate
that comment would possibly no
longer be an issue because it's
looking like get the vaccination
you get it a month later and
then a month later after that so
that would be about three months
that COVID would no longer be an
issue in that community is that
correct.
Madam chair thank you madam
chair of sovereign.
Representative I'm just gonna
jump and that that's that's not
within the scope of this bill or
the expertise of the panel about
public health this is about
getting coverage that they get
access to treatment so I think
that's a little beyond
As in I'm just going to speak up
form I think it's beyond what
they're prepared to answer
they're not a public health
experts thank you madam chair
I'm just looking at this I'm I'm
just I'm just looking to see if
we can make something work push
if we're concerned about the
immigrants will get the care
that they need I would like to
see them go and get the
vaccination be what the head of
the line get their vaccinations
now get their second vaccination
and then this is no longer such
a big financial concern but
that's just my opinion on that
so go back to my I think I think
this might be my final question
I just want to ask for
clarification
so the federal dollars that will
be getting is approximately at
to get seven million eight
hundred forty one thousand is
that correct.
Madam chair of members the
committee that's right based on
the projections including this
fiscal year the HSD estimated.
Okay but okay and then one point
five million dollars from the
state is that correct.
Madam chair yes okay all right
so just of this close with this
I I really wish I I'm so rather
see that people who are Freddie
going because I know what it's
like for my grandparents to have
that fear that they would just
be told Hey you guys can get
your access right now no fear
get the following vaccination
and then we would have this
issue and have to debate on this
because it would that would no
longer be a concern for them
they would get their
vaccinations and they can get
them without having the fear and
of course always I'd like to see
more for reduction of ten of
health care prices so that like
my grandparents stated paid for
their visits and it was
affordable so that's all I'm the
question you have right now
thank you.
Thank you representative next
Representative Terrazas.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative
But it us thank you members of
the committee Senator
You know I come from immigrant
family myself and I'm a first
generation our
system here and you know.
Want to see what's going on
right now and we're all trying
to work to to make this.
Are a better place for everyone.
I will tell you I think I'm
confused I mean I I listen to
what Representative works at and
and I agree with that you know.
You know I wish we could get the
vaccination at least those who
want to participate in that as
soon as possible unfortunately
we're having
Shortages here in my district
and getting that to.
Certain
places and people and so I I I
think that's going to take a
little while
So I'm a little bit confused
because I want to make sure I
understand this right thank.
We we're giving them so like
also salute they're already
giving them testing so we are
already currently testing them.
They're already being treated.
That correct.
Madam chair.
I'm sorry I was trying to the
new I thank you madam chair I
think you representative that
Austin's I think it just it
depends on on where your
treatment goes whether or not
you're going to be hospitalized
or not but just to to give some
more details on that I would
like to to have that over to one
of my expert witnesses who
everyone Japan.
Thank you madam chair to answer
this question I think it's it's.
Important to make that
distinction again between
legally being able to receive
the services and and being able
to afford the equipment that
second portion the affordability
of those services that acts as a
barrier to treatment and so
although you know patient can go
to the ER and legally receive
the services without fear being
turned away they're so the
barrier of whether they can
afford and so that might
preclude them from actually
seeing that those services
altogether.
Madam chair my question to that
is so you're you're saying they
can get on on certain I'm sorry
can't read because I've got my
notes up and attach minimized so
I can't read your name I
apologize your name Sir.
Major bank minimis Nicolas
Cordoba thank you Mr Porter so
madam chair Mr Cordoba that
leads to my next question which
is.
So we can get the services what
they're afraid to go because
they're free to be charged or be
turned into immigration is that
correct.
That is certainly madam chair
they certainly are one issue
however there's also the issue
and because we're talking about
emergency services on under and
taller which again.
Prohibits your is returning away
per a person
based on their ability to pay
but some of these are non
emergency services to treat an
individual with COVID so before
it even gets to a point which
they would need to go to the ER
and ICU and so really we're
talking about the the full
breakfasts of treatment services
that's because of as you just
said you know costs but also
fear of being reported that
might stop someone from actually
seeking out those treatment
services madam chair Mister
Cordova so what is because of
the flu because they're not what
is it what are they doing in
some of these other nonprofit
healthcare providers what are
they doing that I I know they're
not an emergency care
facility so what services are
they providing that Mr Cordova
madam chair student chair for.
You madam chair for this when
I've actually to turn it over to
someone here.
Madam chair and representative
thank you we work with Cossidae
salute and other
Nonprofit in federally qualified
health centers that you know due
to tempt to provide care to
folks who are uninsured and you
might face barriers they are not
the only providers in our state
we also have you know hospitals
in rural areas of our state so
breadth of providers and I think
that they are sort of uniquely
aware of these barriers and you
heard them speak about folks who
present at their clinics some of
whom they're able to treat and
don't know if they received
follow up care because folks are
freight or you know can't afford
it don't know something to be
able to get their prescriptions
for example so you know they do
attempt to provide this care and
bear those costs in in many ways
which are on compensated unless
we have a path to cover every
type of Kobe Care and especially
once the the federal money is
gone so madam chair on that
point Representative I would
also add that there are not
federally qualified health
centers who can who have any
mechanism for covering
uncompensated care everywhere
and available everywhere as well
as during the COVID there are
treatments that that can be done
outside of the hospital but
which a a clinics such as casa
days lewd would not be prepared
to do IV treatments of
antibodies and so forth would
have to be outpatient hospital
procedure and it would not be
madam chair like covered.
I think yours is one of our
madam chair and I'm sorry and I
can't I'm gonna minimize of my
notes on on the screen and can't
see the young lady's up
maybe so I want to address her
properly Madam chair
representative and and the young
lady who was speaking to you can
tell me what your name is that
way correct correctly call you.
Britain no it was a very that's
just sovereign Hager well Mister
speaker okay so Madam chair
representative Mrs Baker so to
that point so.
Are you are you telling me that
there's no federal coverage and
I'm not doing this I just want
to understand this please madam
chair don't don't think that I'm
just trying to dig to find which
something I want understand is
there no one healthcare them
services provided by any of the
federal
Mr emergency or medical
treatment deprivations any of
the the those type things is
there no federal funding to
cover home health health
currently for the other
treatments that you're
describing.
Madam chair representative we're
we're definitely not talking
about home health it'll we're
talking about Health Care in a
providers setting for people who
of COVID nineteen and that there
are you know it's it's a good
question around what federal
help is available because it's
confusing for providers honestly
there are some there is one part
of money the federal government
has made available for providers
to reimburse for uninsured
people
for COVID nineteen treatment and
testing however that money is
limited are running out very
quickly it also requires things
that present a barrier for make
status families I'm in their
privacy so require submission of
a social security number
address and the emergency
Medicaid program is an existing
federal seventy percent
federally funded program that is
part of our system now and that
families know how to access and
this bill even makes it work
better for the state and
providers and that's why twelve
other states have moved to wrap
in any comment testing or
treatment into this program
because in the long term it's
the best way to deliver these
type of services in a treatment
setting and guarantees that we
will just bear those costs as a
state or on compensated for
providers once the federal
funding is not available and
even in some instances where can
be access right now.
So madam chair of ma'am.
So that these these these
clinics are being reimbursed at
this time that currently you're
just worry that is going to run
out and then there won't be any
coverage under that first part
of money that you're talking
about is that with you what what
you're expressing ma'am.
Madam chair representative I'm
some of the services are built
by providers and they're
reimbursed not all and and as
you've heard today many folks
aren't seeking treatment
you know once they test positive
there at home and you heard from
people who said it became too
late because they didn't they
didn't know that they are
covered
so in some cases providers on
billing because it's confusing
people aren't and they're not
able to because it's asking for
things that invade people's
privacy especially from a status
families and then third yes it
will run out and that is a
concern across the country in
line twelve other states have
moved in the same way.
So madam chair representative
our
S. my question to you is I keep
hearing they're afraid they
don't know providers don't know
all the non non
Non citizens don't know are
there the they don't know what
they can or can't get providers
don't know how they can get
reimbursed
they're afraid what.
How is this going to change how
that they're educated both
pardons.
Thank you what's going on right
now.
Madam chair representatives
great question and I think it's
really important to know that.
Providers do you know about the
M. subprogram and they received
information about it directly
from HSD and they also providers
there's a little bit network of
folks that assist with Medicaid
applications across the state
and so the second part of this
bill that aligns the application
process is are very important
for making this work well
because all of those folks you
do Medicaid applications would
have this as an option wrapped
in so they can help people at
the spot when they're seeking
here people in the community
could apply for and be pre
approved on their own and
already have a card with which
they could show their covered
when they go to the clinic so it
reduces those barriers and the
stress by giving people
certainty as to their
eligibility and maintaining it
at the same time reducing
barriers administrative burdens
for the state and and barriers
for providers in trying to build
this so we think that the that
that portion of the bill really
helps which is a very important
concern you're raising.
Madam chair representative and
Mrs Hager that's I mean I keep
hearing that they don't they're
afraid and I don't I I.
I don't think there's anyone
bill that's going to change that
I think it's educating those are
those both because I mean I have
heard it already about half a
dozen times a providers struggle
they don't know how to get
reimbursed I heard from other
other panelists or maybe not
panelists but people that work
there were commenting so I mean
that it's evident that that's an
an issue and it needs how are we
going to this is and I'm gonna
go back to how do we think we're
going to how are we going to
overcome the burden of
immigrants.
By eliminating that fear I don't
see how that's going to happen I
mean I.
They're not being turned in now
you're right and as far as I
know on this you can correct me.
Testing for macro virus and and
treatment has been going on
because I mean they want to stop
this this this virus so I know
that that's the wells are you
you have a
Citizen status of your return to
wait so I really see the issue
of of it educating that
population are in only that they
can come because I mean we we
can pass all programs that that
that that that we want.
What if they're afraid how do we
what is your what what other
Avid do you have in other are
you do you have.
Communicating.
That tools communities overcome
that issue I think that's the
barrier that's my personal so
what other items do you have
that to educate that population
madam chair this is a Madam
chair representative you know
super important and what the
research shows is that what
prevents people from enrolling
when they're eligible
but you know they have concerns
as a non citizen is being asked
information that you right.
And that is what concerns folks
and one of the things that helps
and why it would be emergency
Medicaid programs such an
effective tool for for
addressing this issue is that it
doesn't require those things
when role you would test that
you are not an immigration
status that qualifies for
Medicaid you do not have to
You do not have to disclose
whether you're undocumented or
of the stockholder you know
because you know in a certainly
certain set of non citizens are
qualify for Medicaid you would
test that you're not in that
group and
We're able to process the state
can process the application with
that information and so because
that private information is that
requested the application
process is friendly for folks
the thing that we're we're doing
with this bill that even further
addresses this issue is it makes
it so that people don't have to
do it on the back end when
they're sick when they're
recovering from surgery so they
can do initially and that taps
into a network of community
based on rollers are already out
there that are yours for people
in the community RT do Medicaid
enrollment and that the Human
Services department does a great
job educating about the process
so we wrap in this program it
will reach so many more people
with good information and what
with what research out without
the barriers that research shows
prevent folks from participating
yes ma'am madam chair Mrs Hager
and I see I see what you're what
you're saying
I I but the people that you're
that you're mentioning are
already in that program already
part of it.
So those are the ones that are
ready are not afraid they've
already given you their
information that are already
part of that community of people
getting Medicare coverage of
Medicaid coverages and going
through during the getting the
necessary care.
We're I'm understand this is for
all those work outside of that.
We're afraid that's where I I
see the Berrier I mean there's a
thing I think this is great I
just I'm just making a mention
that you know those people that
you're describing madam chair
Mrs Hager that are in the system
I understand they're ready
they're arguing their
information nor for them to be
part of that system they've
already done that if a right
over our come the the the.
The home of being afraid it's
for those others that how are we
going to educate those outside
of that that are going to how we
gonna do if we haven't
accomplished it so far what are
we doing that's going to change
and that's that's just a
statement now so one other thing
that I'd like to say madam chair
Representative our.
But it us is because it's a
we're under emergency status
shouldn't there on see here
here's one over the final lost
my no
Sure the term emergency medical
services be used in the bill to
describe treatments
Because I.
If I can buy my nose.
This right here.
because it's going to take about
ninety days to go into effect
after adjournment.
And so
does that need to be added
deserve any of that needs to be
amended to properly I mean
Representative just I'm gonna
I'm gonna jump in on behalf of
Representative Ferrary as to who
can speak to this more
specifically but she came to me
yesterday with a amendment to
address those very things as an
emergency clause change
emergency medical services to
the program and because we
didn't have a twenty four hours
I had I asked her to go ahead
with the bill as it is and get
those amendments to the next
committee assuming we pass it
out of here so those worse
things duly noted and it's yes
was my decision to stop those
amendments on in this committee
because we didn't have him ahead
of time but
wanted to
I assure you that she has
already is preparing an
amendment to for those specific
issues you just raised.
Thank you madam chair and I you
know I appreciate you being
You're trying to be as far as we
can with all the of what's going
on this is we've fast pace we're
getting sometimes some of these
so my even my prayers kind of
right kinda late stuff so what
we are having some issues with
the well the legislature.
we tell you what those those
guys are built with everything
had to be a certain way it's
the retail how to reprogram
thirty three years of Italian so
Madam chair representative
the next the last thing I want
to make is that I think it's
great thing I I I I'm afraid
that
I'm I'm kinda.
It seems like we're already
helping them I think I'm I'm
just I just wish there was a
mechanism in here that would
educate those outside of this
outside of the.
The community that's already
comparable I think that's my
only thing that that that's kind
of bothering me and my other
issue is if we don't do this
I would I would much rather see
people going to the clinic
before then right to the
emergency room I mean I'm gonna
be honest that's really I see
that that that is an issue so I
wish I hope and I hope that one
of those amendments so how.
And education and educational.
Are you out there so that we can
do that and of course at that
emergency I feel it was madam
chair would you mind giving us
those other amendments just we
have an idea of what what did we
miss something or something that
we should or should be hearing
even though it was late I will
let the representative address
that but we did
it's not in front of us today
but you did raise issues that I
know she's us all let
Representative Barreras respond
to that.
I would.
Thank you madam chair I would be
completely comfortable with with
those being sent out it just
just know that they will be
prepared for our next committee
and yeah I would I would be okay
with that if sovereign or
Nicolas want to jump in and and
maybe I just give a quick
rundown on what the it's it's
mostly amendments that what one
amendment for wording but the
emergency clause is definitely
something else that we have
talked about so if one of you
guys want to jump in and and I
think I'd be comfortable with
that the committee seeing the
amendment.
Well we won't have the amendment
in front of us today you are
welcome to share it at your
discretion after the committee
meeting but if you want to
address what's
in the amendments besides adding
an emergency clause and changing
the terminology from services to
program.
You madam chair I believe that
actually all within the
amendment but all in all it
Mexico had in the ticket.
Thank you madam chair
representative so apart from our
renaming the program from
emergency medical medical
services to.
As you said madam chair DeMint
emergency medical program just
to avoid confusion between
different laws it was
highlighted in FY are by the
department of health so really
just clarifying that this this
program members emergency
Medicaid is distinct from laws
that government govern emergency
medical services elsewhere like
in tala and so perfect dance in
the emergency clause the third
piece that I want to highlight
again.
Not having the benefit of the
text in front of you understand
it might be troublesome fall but
I'll do my best year student
section one subsection the.
Since services described in
paragraph two.
Subsection seen and so really it
it's just changing the wording
because.
Specific agency to doesn't
describe Services it describes a
medical condition for which
services would be covered in
this program and so it's taking
that sentence and putting it in
the covered services in
subsection D. one.
And so we would it would lay out
all of the.
Comment related services that
would be covered and then at the
end would have a provision that
says such services shall be
covered for the duration of the
federal or state public health
emergency so just taking it from
again the beginning paragraph of
subsection D. and taking it
directly into the services
mentioned COVID.
Madam chair a of Representative
at us so I there is
Date to this.
Our.
Program.
Sorry thank you madam chair and
Representative but also CENIC.
Thank you madam chair
representative yes of the.
The service is provided to
assist in treating COVID will be
covered for the duration of
either the public or the state
public health emergency yes.
That's where and and and so
you're saying that's.
Will this program will will
succeed so postings.
I'm sure what.
Thank you madam chair
representative that is correct
it would just extend for the
duration of the public health
emergencies thank you very much
all the madam chair and school
this is what it us thank you so
much I think that makes me
understand a lot more what's
going on listen thank you and
thank you representative next we
have Representative Montoya.
Madam chair and representative
but it us and members of this.
Wonderful group and the citizens
who are listening I
Representative district forty
north.
New Mexico I raise an absolute
support for house bill thirteen
I believe it is a moral
obligation in the time of indeed
emergency that we serve every
human donor resides in the state
regardless of their residency
status or citizenship it is our
moral obligation to do so.
In closing.
Personally the most vulnerable I
am here to serve them in this
particular context of COVID
nineteen our veterans our
seniors and our.
Immigrant families for me that
is Amy Grant this I worked
closely for for decades with
hundreds of incredible families
who are in do in fear they are
indeed lacking access sometimes
it's financial sometimes it's a
whole host of things to use time
and treasure right now to pick
apart the technicalities for me
personally with all due respect
we need to focus on the
emergency setting that we have
to ensure that every human in
New Mexico is as safe as
possible into this pandemic is
passed I yield back chair.
Lundstrom meet Lundstrom
chairman Armstrong road
promotion there representative
but it us thank you very much
thank you Representative and I
just I want to clarify that
currently available is testing.
yeah vaccine and emergency room
this expands to cover under
emergency Medicaid the full
continuum of treatment
and what regardless of the
setting so at with that I will
entertain a motion from the
committee madam chair and like
to do our due passed for house
bill thirteen thank you I have a
motion for do passed back and
and a second are would you call
the roll Delores.
Representative standard.
Is
help.
Strong Representative Armstrong
is also excused.
Thank you.
What.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes you.
I am the lord no.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Yes thank you.
Yes.
Representative Louise.
Yes.
I'm.
Yes thank you.
Yes.
Yes.
Armstrong yes.
The eight to one with two thank
you.
Thank you Representative Ferrary
is for your very first bill.
And your very first committee
you have eight to one do pass
thank you so much for bringing
this forward and madam chair.
Her mentor you.
I'm very I'm very very happy
right now you guys I really
appreciate a lot thank you for
for for being easy on me thank
you madam chair.
Thank you next we have house
bill ninety seven
Representative Ferrari and I I
have a question for you
Representative Ferrary.
And that is that
we have had representative
Allison waiting with us all
morning would you mind if you
went first are you able to do
your bill after him or do you
have experts waiting
I have one expert waiting but I
think he's still available so
we'll be glad to okay.
thank you so we'll go to a house
bill one oh four for
Representative Allison.
And I think Representative
Allison you've been moved over
to a panelists do you have any
expert witnesses that you'd like
us to include.
Good morning madam chair yes my
expert witness is Lenaya Montoya
okay.
We'll get her moved over.
Is that it just Lynam.
The time yes okay all right.
Thank you for your patience and
hanging out with us this morning
representative Allison.
The discussions good so we'll go
first to you and your expert to
present the bill House Bill R.
one O. four expand rural health
care tax credit from the
pandemic.
Okay firstly I want to.
I thank the chairman madam chair
and the committee members and
also Representative Ferrary for
giving me the time to step ahead
of you.
I bring to you before.
Before the committee house bill
one oh four.
The title on that is expanding
the rural health care
practitioner tax credit to apply
to all registered nurses and
licensed midwives and also
essential health care workers
who provided assistance during
the Corona virus.
A disease twenty nineteen
pandemic.
It is something that I feel that
is long over due to the people
that have been on serving.
Our rural communities especially
in the.
As I said along with me will be
my expert witness Lenaya Montoya
who will answer technical
questions with that we stand for
question.
This Montoya did you want to add
anything right now or should we
go to the audience.
Agency Montoya it looks like
you're on muted but we can't
hear you.
Well what she's trying to figure
out her microphone
Representative will go to the
audience and.
This month toy will have an
opportunity when we get to the
committee to
to provide any additional
information thank you madam
chair.
Okay so on Monday attendees if
you are in opposition if you are
in opposition to this bill if
you could raise your hand.
I I don't see any opposition it
does in support if you are in
support if you could raise your
hand.
Thank you.
And
It looks like we've got.
for right now and it all if you
don't want to speak you can
you've been recognized as a as a
hand and support and you can
take your hand down if you want
to speak I'll leave you up
and we'll go first to
Linda Siegel.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee the single
representing the New Mexico
nurses association and we're
grateful to Representative
Allison for bringing this bill
certainly we would like to see
all the registered nurses who
are on.
The absolute front lines of this
pandemic be able to receive this
this tax credit so we stand in
strong support of this bill
thank you.
Thank you I'm next we'll go to
Candace from gold futures.
Can you hear me yes go ahead.
Hi good morning chairwoman and
members of the committee my name
is Kandace Littlefoot and I'm a
policy associate with gold
futures formally known as young
women United we have for many
years work with the licensed
midwifery community.
A personal story I became a
mother to demi excuse my
daughter during my pregnancy I
actually utilized indigenous
midwives with changing woman
initiative located in Santa Fe I
chose this type of prenatal
postnatal care because my care
was tailored to my needs not
only what how I envision my
birth but also incorporating our
wholistic indigenous ways other
process sees and the cultural
and traditional teaching a
pregnancy and birthing I cannot
imagine my pregnancy birthing
and postnatal experience any
other way as an indigenous woman
it is important to keep our
teachings alive to the practice
and to supporting our people
were able to serve our
communities in such capacities
we support this bill and
inclusion of licensed midwives
in the rural health care
practitioner tax credit
currently the rule tax credit
already includes nurse midwives
not including the licensed
midwives creates a disparity
within the midwifery community
we would like to thank the
sponsor Representative Allison
for bringing this legislation
board that would support
municipalities throughout New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you.
K. to.
Okay I'm.
And Chris wells ano.
Madam chair Chris boson register
lobbyist for the New Mexico
association of nurse
anesthetists and to make this
very briefly we stand in support
for the same reasons that Linda
Siegel presented to the to the
committee we appreciate the the
the sponsoring this bishop
legislation thank you.
Okay.
And policies for it takes me a
minute to handle our our list
but it doesn't look like we have
any other speakers are so we
will go next to to the committee
members but first
we're we able to get Lenaya
Montoya are you able to.
I believe you should be able to
hear me now yes we can I just
wanted to make sure that we
didn't a by pass to in the
presentation of the bill if you
had anything to add or if you
just wanted to stand for
questions.
No problem madam chair I just
wanna first given my overall
speech from council service so
my name is Lynne Ammonoidea I
work for the Legislative Council
Service I am here today for the
sole purpose of providing
technical assistance on the
matter before this committee.
And I do not appear in support
or in opposition to the matter
before you I did want to quickly
mention I did review the FIR and
there is kind of a technical
issue regarding the raising of
Corona virus disease twenty
nineteen pandemic that is just
how our office has.
Officially fully right now
currently COVID nineteen it
doesn't mean it's just applying
to twenty nineteen.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr that's kind of what
I was assumed was going to asked
that very question so thank you
for that clarification at twenty
nineteen comes from
at the start of the pandemic in
twenty nineteen not that that's
all it is only nineteen so
members of the committee I have
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair I think I
just have one question on this I
see that it includes medical
osteopathic physicians dentists
etcetera
our current practice excluded
from this.
I will refer the question to my
of.
Expert witness.
Madam chair representative lord
I am actually not sure of that I
can
One research that for you and
follow up with you offline
and also all step in for clarity
and we've heard a variation of
this adding an additional
providers that Representative
Garcia presented last week they
are not currently in the rural
health care tax credit it's not
that they're specifically
excluded out but they are not
been included and for your
information Representative we
hear a variation of this bill
every year multiple variations
by different
different professions who wish
to be added to it car proctors
are not currently on part of it
and it's not what's in front of
you today.
Thank you for that question
So I I have a statement than a
question with that madam chair
so having worked in chiropractic
offices for big chunk of my life
in relation how central they are
how quickly they get people back
to work I think people who'd
normally if they would have gone
into the medical treatment plan
which taking months for them to
recover from a back injury this
usually put them back to work
within weeks so would you
consider in this adding in
chiropractic in our practice
into this bill.
We will look into see if see if
we can Adam into the bilious.
Okay thank you for that it's
only because they I feel like
thank you madam chair I was the
only coverage to the sort of the
stick in there so essential to
help so many people especially
with a lot of our construction
workers who cannot afford to
take time off truck drivers who
cannot afford to take time off
if you could add to
chiropractors you get coverage
and I think it would be fair to
them because a lot of times are
not ever included ask real
doctors take it every type teach
that subject so that's all I
have to send that thank you.
Thank you Representative and I
look forward to having your bill
in front of this committee at
and some point adding
chiropractors if it's
not added and in this bill as I
said we've had many built in
front of this committee to add
additional rural practitioners.
madam chair yes yes we do of.
The the original.
Long was that it never included
chiropractors and what we did
was just add in the a registered
nurses and essential health care
workers.
Correct that's that's all you're
asking to add today is bill yes
yes.
Thank you
I have a couple of questions
Representative and
I have been a supporter of the
role tax credit for a variety of
professions because we are short
and providers in the state but
we're we're definitely short in
rural areas frontier areas and I
think this is been an effective
tool
however I do have a couple of
questions.
One is our.
For the essential workers that
are to be included as a result
of COVID nineteen.
Is there is this up yeah and
it's a open question so unless
you address that they would I
think continue to receive that
tax credit.
and you know until they're taken
out so year after year did you
intend it to be
a permanent tax credit for our
essential workers who are
responded to COVID nineteen or a
one time or a limited for the
health emergency
what what was your thoughts on
them.
Okay thank you madam chair.
In talking with my expert
witness we saw that we didn't
put a sunset date on it and we
would rely on the orders from
the health department or the
department of health and the
governor to give misdirection as
to how far we can carry on that
and I would like to have my
expert witness explained that
just a little bit.
Your.
Madam chair I did read it
through the FIR and I did see
that I believe the tax revenue
department also suggested that a
sunset date provision be added
to this bill just to make clear
and make certain that the
provisions of this act are
changes that were being placed
here would actually only apply
to the Corona virus disease
pandemic.
And so
that would of course fall to
representative Allison and
whether he wants to amend this
bill to include a sunset
provision just you have go
toward until the governor
it would declares that the
pandemic it over.
Thank you and I I would suggest
if if we pass on here today you
probably won't get out of tax
committee without an amendment
that tells clearly how long that
would
blaster have some kind of a
sunset so I don't think it was
your intent I assume to include
all essential workers including
non health care professionals
to forever get that tax credit
and right now is no sunset
that's I think what would
happen.
And Representative it along
those lines
I have some concern that you may
want to think about about the
health care essential health
care worker that includes
everyone including.
Really non health care workers
so it and I don't I am in total
appreciation of everyone who has
stepped forward and
provided
Services are during the COVID
but as defined that might be
every single employee of a
hospital.
Our would who who responded to
COVID nineteen and rural area
would be eligible for this tax
credit and so I would suggest
that you may want to
substantially narrow that
definition more specifically
because as it says including
custodial and security staff
at it you know everything that's
critical to the continued
critical infrastructure
operations including custodial
security to me says every
employee of the hospital.
or clinic and so that's probably
a massive number of people.
And the intent of this
legislation generally is to
support recruit and retain
workers in the in rural and
frontier areas and again I'm I
am supportive of everyone who
has stepped forward during this
health care pandemic and
provided services in on Venice
uncial frontline workers and
health care I'm not sure that
this particular credit is the
right way to go but that'll be a
question I think for on the tax
committee where you go next
but I I have that concern that
that you need to narrow
that definition and have the
sunset
Thank you madam chair my expert
witness and I will work on that
and in thinking about that
These people that were involved
with and.
With the taking care of the
pandemic.
All of
their lives and their safety on
the line to make sure that we
have healthy people leaving so
if it includes the custodial
staff to make sure that the
nurses and doctors were working
in in a safe atmospheres safe
conditions then I believe that
is necessary to implement them
of we talk about how much we
appreciate what the health care
worker has done for us we talk
about it but this is what we're
going to do to help them and so
I will help or I will have to
help with my
Expert witness to clarify some
of these definitions and we will
be well prepared before we go to
before the tax committee.
Thank you.
Thank you representative and I
realize that this is your choice
for how how you want to do this
and how you want to
go forward I'm more.
Raising it as as concerns also
for you in the next committee
because if you include every
hospital worker and all the
rural hospitals the price tag on
this of course goes
substantially higher in is will
be taken into consideration in
the tax committee up to you
whether you still want to pursue
all of those workers or if you
want to narrow it
of Representative trusses.
Thank you madam chair all.
Senator Allison
So quick question does this
include the first responders.
Yes it would be and
Under the of the house of house
bill one of four it kind of
gives you a definition of of who
could qualify and says the
department of health shall
determine whether and eligible
health care practitioner
qualifies for rural health care
tax credit and shall issue a
certificate so I think it would
be in the hands of the people
that are the ones that see what
they're Hospital cure
practitioners are doing and who
gets the exposure that they do
so I think it would be up to the
of the department of health to
determine who's really really
eligible.
So back to your question that
and I'm so I'd summarize what
was said Representative excuse
me madam chair representative
Allison are I I just heard the
chair students say.
This included.
Banners and.
Other people working at the
hospital.
What so is it going to this so
for clarification.
Is the department of health to
the defined this course you
build to the defined this.
This in the low before we added
our our provisions it just kill
it it just states in there that
the department of health shall
determine who is who qualifies
for.
This tax credit.
And on that point Representative
on page five he's a is also
added and the central health
worker who's provided assistance
to other health professionals
during the Corona virus disease
twenty nineteen pandemic and a
health essential health care
worker means an individual who
conducts operations are services
that are typically essential to
continue critical infrastructure
operations including custodial
and security staff.
So that's the current definition
in the bill.
Okay.
Real crazy but I'm gonna ask it
anyway
This includes people in the
field industries that our our
the frontline workers that are
actually removing the
Our core virus victims and
ensuring the families that
address any of those because
part of of of the department of
health director
That are under the foreman of
Health set cover them also.
With that with that general doe
definition.
Madam chair representative.
One refers to my expert witness.
Madam chair representative I.
I don't believe that it was
include that
I'm trying to see.
We at inside the bill essential
health care worker
It would be a worker that would
that have provided assistance to
other health care professionals
during the pandemic so last
that number or that person that
is involved in
that industry helped health care
workers I don't believe they
would fall under that definition
for I would I don't know I I I
think that would be that's a
great area they are helping them
and by removing or removing them
from those hospital forcing so
for.
Hearing that site
Our.
Exposure coronavirus.
Yes I could get rated by the
department of health
madam chair and representative I
just I just it was when I was
reading the language is very
generalized so I was just want
to the final closer so Madam
chair representative is there a
particular reason why.
The car factors work included.
Are not included.
I do not have the answer to that
because as I said before this
law was already in place in the
and all we did was add a license
registered nurses and the health
care industry.
Madam chair representative
Allison are you willing to amend
it to to include chiropractors
as a reason you wouldn't want to
include the.
In the first question that was
posed to us.
We agreed that we would add of
the chiropractors per.
Representative large.
I didn't catch that I I didn't
get cert I'm sorry.
Rep Phelps and I apologize I
didn't get that clarification
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative also for bringing
this legislation thank you.
Thank you Representative or did
you have a follow up question it
was mostly I'm gonna try to turn
it into a question Most this
statement I just want to remind
everybody that during this
pandemic the chiropractors have
been out there working and and
they're being exposed to Agent
very close contact with people
when they're testing them and
they're treating them so I I do
appreciate thank you fewer
consider that because they
actually have been working out
there on the front lines to and
I think people tend to forget
that they are essential part of
getting people back to work and
those on the underworld Harris
also deserve the same surgery so
it's for me thank you on this I
have thank you representative
Representative Thompson thank
you madam chair I think there's
some confusion here this is
essentially X..
Amending an existing bill of who
gets world tax credit and there
are many many many professions
that are not included in that in
that in the world tax credit
including physical therapists
and occupational therapists and
many behavioral health providers
so the fact that chiropractors
are not listed in there it
really is not part of this bill
this is a bigger majority that
as as chairwoman Armstrong has
that through the years we hear
multiple bills to add I believe
Representative Garcia has won
this year to add some of the
behavioral health providers so
this is not this bill is not
starting from the ground up this
bill is starting from a
framework that's already in
place that does not include many
of those providers and and I
don't believe it was the US
Sanchez
It was to rebuild that that
whole build that leaves out many
many many many
providers of health care in
rural so just just kind of keep
that in mind this is not this is
not a slap in the face to any
group that isn't included.
those those groups have not been
included for years and years and
many people have tried to get
them included but this is not
the bill that's attempting to do
that so hopefully that clears
things that thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative that's
the only questions I had hands
raised I'll entertain a motion
from the.
I'm.
Ask.
The motion for do pass.
second second.
Have a motion for do pass in the
second Torrez you want to call
the roll.
Thanks Anderson.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
That are.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative.
Your.
No with the explanation please.
Yes.
Log on.
Yes.
Representative believes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Deborah Armstrong.
I'm gonna vote no and explain my
vote.
That.
Two three and two X. you now.
It is a total.
And it.
Thank you
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair I think
this is actually a great thing
and not voting against it
because of the chiropractic and
I do understand that and I can
go back and write a bill myself
for that to include
chiropractors my concern is that
there doesn't seem to be and
point there's no like this is
going to go on for X. amount of
time and after the COVID is
after I'm done and this'll you
know this is no longer in effect
so I think that was in there I I
would have voted yes I'm not
against it I'm just against I
would like to see something in
there that puts and pointers
sunset as were saying to this
bill thank you.
Thank you and
Representative Allison my a
common and reason for the no
vote is largely the same you're
moving out of this committee and
to the next committee to tax but
I my vote is more to tell you
that you seriously I think for
success to get through the next
committee I assume you're going
to need some kind of a sunset on
the essential workers out more
specific definition and that's
my strong advice to you and the
reason for my no vote but I
support what you're doing in
trying to support our essential
workers I do.
So thank you you have a do pass
out of health and Human
Services.
Thank you madam chair thank you
to the committee thank you thank
you.
I'm next we have our house bill
ninety seven Representative
Ferrary the local government
tobacco products sale
ordinances.
Thank you madam chair in if I
could ask for my expert Mahesh
Sita to be brought into the
panel.
Can I in.
There he is and go ahead okay
thank you madam chair house bill
ninety seven
is an act relating to tobacco
products clarifying that
municipalities and counties may
enact ordinances charter
amendments or regulations
pertaining to the sales of
tobacco products that are
stricter than but not in
conflict with the provisions of
the tobacco products act.
And that being said it allows
municipalities and counties to
adopt local policies to address
tobacco use by minors including
vaping within their own
communities and this will repeal
the existing restrictions placed
on our communities to establish
common sense guidelines to bring
down smoking an E. cigarette use
especially among you and local
municipalities can establish low
location and density
restrictions that stop
aggressive marketing aimed at
minority and low income
communities and are you and
cities and counties can also
restrict E. cigarettes or vaping
advertisements aimed at our
children under this legislation.
And this is a serious public
health crisis and D. E.
cigarette epidemic has spread to
every high school and middle
school in New Mexico and by
passing this legislation we can
help our local communities to
get a handle over this epidemic
and hopefully reverse the trend
and my experts today is my hash
said to use the government
relations director for the
American heart association and
he's here to assist me with any
questions you may have.
would you like to add anything
at this time.
You need to mute Mahesh.
Thank you madam chair
and Representative Ferrary my
name is when they see that
with the American heart
association and you know just
briefly.
You know prior to twenty fifteen
thank there was no tobacco
preemption in New Mexico so it
was introduced in twenty fifteen
it was not a coincidence that
was but in because
if some of you remember twenty
fifteen was a time when E.
cigarette.
You know epidemic was you know
taken foot and lot of kids were
waiting and so the tobacco
industry and the cigarette
industry they don't want any
local communities to enforce our
enact ordinances that were
stricter than the state.
So it in the last since twenty
fifteen the repeal was
reinstated not reinstated but
you know.
The maybe part of the law R. E.
cigarette epidemic has taken
over our communities.
You know I I entered a study a
survey from the New Mexico
department of health.
The New Mexico department
Department of Health conducts
the survey every two years.
They ask high school kids.
It's about seven thousand six
hundred high school it's
participate in the survey and
they ask one question and the
question is have you you know
used E. cigarettes or wait at
least once you know in the last
thirty days and that you know
the chart we provided you with
that that shows you know since
twenty fifteen you know these
numbers have gone up
dramatically and you know that
this is affecting a lot of kids
as you know like you know E.
cigarettes are more addictive
and traditional cigarettes they
have five times more nicotine
than you know traditional
cigarettes and the industry has
been pushing this as
you know the a substitute for
smoking and also you know
telling folks like and I doesn't
contain nicotine so up what we
are hoping.
You know that this committee
would consider you know adopting
this resolution then sorry this
legislation and the you know we
we we have support from City of
Albuquerque city of Los crucis
Santa Fe Espanola sway guys are
Bernalillo county Rio Arriba
County and so the this affects a
lot of communities of color as
you know like you know the
tobacco industry aggressively
targets minority communities and
low income communities where
they concentrate most of their
tobacco stores so what we're
hoping this legislation would
help cities and counties to to
adopt ordinances that would you
know help their communities to
address this issue and one last
thing madam chair is you know
with the COVID nineteen.
We have seen like you know the
it's it's a people who smoke in
kids await are more susceptible
to getting serious infections
and and you know the studies
that show like you know a lot of
people have died in this
country.
Including kids what you know
waiting.
Addiction so what we're where
are
you know trying to repeal this
and go go back to what was the
tobacco laws prior to twenty
fifteen so cities and counties
can can adopt you know sensible
you know measures to address
this issue.
Thank you madam chair and be
glad to answer any questions.
Thank you and just to be a
really clear Representative we
have already passed laws that
are regulating even a thing and
tobacco but in that bill that we
recently passed yet
said that municipalities
couldn't and local governments
couldn't do any ordinances
different than the state law
that we passed this is just
repealing that section to allow
local governments to institute
local ordinances that are more
restrictive potentially but not
conflict with the state law that
we've already passed correct.
Representative madam chair thank
you I just want to be clear we
all know what we're talking
about so will first go to the
audience.
Those in opposition if you would
please raise your hand
opposition.
Okay looks like we have for our
hands raised will go first to
Luke Otero.
Go ahead look good morning madam
chair members of the committee
can you hear me.
Yes we can hear you.
Thank you
I guess I just don't know where
to begin because.
You can make a brief.
Because they're shocked that
there said a lot of things that
that are.
That are quite true so
you know I'll get to the shorts
we we passed a law to raise the
age to twenty one.
It's only been a fact first for
I think seven eight months we
ought to let that go its way and
and see how that's working he
speaks of a study that you ask
any one of the students have
used you try to they may have
tried it but have they continued
and then the second thing he's
insinuating is that the C. the
stores the retail outlets aren't
doing.
The card being the which is a
mandatory that they have I do so
if these kids are getting that.
They're not getting it at C.
stores or re at retail outlets
there to probably get it on the
black market and if you continue
to put more berries barriers up
that's exactly where these kids
are going to go so you know
there is a lot more we can say
but in the essence of time
that's that's where I'm at and
that right now madam chair thank
you.
Thank you look.
next we have
Larry ran.
Madam I apologize I'm and I'm in
support side raise then at the
wrong time I'm sorry okay I will
come back to you.
Chair those are.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Jordan is on
behalf of Swisher international.
For the reasons expressed by Mr
Otero we respectfully oppose
this bill also we believe that
preemption is important just as
it ensures uniformity in our in
our laws and regulations.
Thank you jare and next we have
Pat block.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee on that
block the registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico retail
association as Mr Najjar so that
you know we feel like
enforcement will be more
effective and achieve greater
compliance if the laws are
uniformed it's tough to train
and educate staff one the laws
are potentially a patchwork all
over the state with one
jurisdiction having different
rules
I guess the only other thing I
would add is that
Mister sea does said that.
Currently municipalities and
counties are not able to enforce
the law and that's not correct I
think he may have misspoke but
you know they are enforcing this
brand new law retailers are
trying to get their staff
trained and able to
apply the law as it's written
and so having a constantly
moving target is going to be
tough for people to have an
educated and trained workforce
thank you very much.
Thank you Pat next we will go to
those
In favor.
Hey.
There's about six someone.
Hands raised and first we'll go
to Larry hearing.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee Leri how random
registered lobbyists for the
city of Los crucis and also for
Sandoval County and and then has
to touch on on support from the
city of Los crucis but also
Santa Fe County is taking an
official position in support of
this legislation on both my
clients have passed a resolution
in favor of the legislation and
and I want just to touch briefly
representing local governments
the city council county
commission or the ones who are
having the most contact and the
most frequent contact with our
constituents and so we always
appreciate the more local
control you can give us to deal
with what we think is best for
our communities the better and
and madam chair you stated it
perfectly the state law provides
a good floor of what we can do
so we have to have minimal
standards and how we're gonna
regulate sale these products but
we we think that that and a lot
of ways work best situated to if
we need to go more strict for or
more specific to the needs of
our community we appreciate that
ability that that rest with the
city council and county
commission you know other local
elected officials who are really
in touch with their community so
we appreciate your support of
this legislation thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Larry.
next will go to
Laurel McCloskey.
Madam chair members of the
committee are you able to hear
me yes I can hear you go head
I'm more McCloskey and executive
director of the chronic disease
prevention council and the New
Mexico allied council on tobacco
and we are in support of this
bill just recently released
there's our data that's New
Mexico's Pacific and is
completed by a team up in
Wyoming looking at New Mexico
and it found that sixty eight
percent of respondents say they
would favor or strongly favor
local governments enacting
stronger laws to restrict youth
access even if those laws would
be stronger than the state laws
as a consequence of this data we
are in support of this
legislation thank you.
Thank you laurel.
Our next will go to our Ruben
Baca.
You have to on mute.
Muted there you go okay I was
test fired against it.
Okay I'm sorry I didn't see your
hand but go ahead.
Have you just go ahead okay
good morning this is a chair
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity I
represent the The New Mexico
petroleum marketers association
and the grocers association.
last year we or twenty twenty we
passed as you all know this B.
one thirty one.
We went through the hearing
process and went through the
rule making process and it just
went into effect on one one.
This year of twenty twenty one
we haven't even had an affair.
Scene with the effects going to
have with that bill in places
one of the most restrictive
bills there is in the United
States.
And you know as far as signage
and and
Placards and put on in the in
our stores will be long and we
we go through wi Kerr it's call
program call we card and they
the pharmacist signs for us and
would they do training for us
and we also with our larger
companies that have over a
hundred stores.
we have our own training
facility so we kind of like to
have it for we're training just
our employees on one separate.
waited to do tobacco only card
everybody regarding your body
for alcohol with caller Kerr
everybody for or a cigarette for
tobacco products your regardless
of what age they look like we
card anyway.
And anyway we we stand in
opposition to this
Bill thank you thank you Mr
Baca.
I next I have Joanna Strother.
Yes good morning everyone can
hear me yes.
Thank you so much I'm madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Joanna Strother and I
represent the American lung
association.
Give me a second here my.
Association is the leading
organization working to save
lives by improving lung health
and preventing lung disease we
are in support of house bill
ninety seven local governments
are uniquely positioned to meet
the needs of the people in their
communities and they should be
able to pass laws that are
proven to promote good health
well being and equity that go
above and beyond the state law
when states block communities
from passing their own laws it
can hurt the health and well
being of our families friends
and neighbors local governments
will also have an opportunity to
adopt ordinances that restrict
certain tobacco and E. cigarette
flavors marketed to under age
children with their community.
You might hear that we don't
want to patchwork of laws but in
fact that's how some of the best
public health laws are created
also retailers are already used
to following and meeting laws at
local county and state levels
even those big retailers who are
in multi states have to follow
many different laws and do a
good job.
You mentioned espys mentioned SP
one thirty one that we
acknowledge that that is a good
start in New Mexico it created a
tobacco retailer licensing in
New Mexico was one of a few
states that didn't have one but
this is just one tool to fight
the tobacco epidemic right now
we're also dealing with an E.
cigarette and vaping epidemic E.
cigarette use has jumped by
seventy eight percent and in New
Mexico thirty seven point five
percent of teens use tobacco
products a local communities
really need to have the
authority to deal with this
issue and when you look at our
surrounding states Texas does
not have preemption only on the
ages they are a result does not
have preemption and in two
thousand nineteen Colorado
legislators voted to remove
statewide preemption and since
then there has been an increase
of cities and towns passing
ordinances that are best for
their constituents I'm and so
today the American Association
ask you to do the same and vote
yes on house bill ninety seven
thank you.
Thank you Joanna next we have
Linda Siegel.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Linda Siegel
representing the American cancer
society cancer action network
and of course we support this
legislation
for those of you can go back
awhile we have fluctuated
between having preemption and
not having preemption and the
reality is we would not have a
smoke free say if if we had had
preemption in those days because
we were able to start passing
local ordinances for smoke free
workplaces long before we can
get the the state law so we
stand in strong support of this
because it will enable the
cities and counties to address
their particular needs
especially in the area of use E.
cigarettes and other tobacco
consumption so again we support
this bill thank you.
Thank you Linda next we have
Derek Lin.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee and thank you
the sponsor for bringing this
bill forward my name is Derek
land I'm representing New Mexico
voices for children tobacco use
and vaping are a serious problem
for our young people which is a
problem for New Mexico if we are
learning anything these last ten
months it is the importance of
good health habits in good
public health policy this bill
is good public health policy and
encourages good health habits we
believe it is important for New
Mexico to do all we can to curb
tobacco use of local governments
want to place tighter
restrictions on its use in the
state and we should applaud
their efforts to protect their
young people and keep them
healthy we fully expect the big
tobacco will fight to get their
products in front of as many New
Mexicans as they can they target
young people with creative
flavors and packaging it's a
creative industries and of local
governments want to take
measures to keep up with them
and let's give them the freedom
to do that we would urge you to
allow communities to act on
their own behalf in order to
protect their own kids and
families thank you.
Thank you
There are.
Right now we'll go to members of
the committee and I have
representative Thompson.
You madam chair and thank you
are I will eventually be a co
sponsor on this bill once I get
to get my act together so so
Representative Ferrary and I
both serve on the Act tobacco
settlement revenue oversight
committee I I served as the co
chair or for six years.
In basic one of our our main
charges yes to
New Mexicans from the damage of
tobacco products and we have
been slowly getting into one
more bill one more measure one
more I'm we I I think that local
control is really important I'm
it we did raise the age to
twenty one which is great but we
we all know that kids are still
able to get them one thing this
bill would do would be.
For a a town to be able to make
a regulation that you can't put
a bait shop within you know so
many feet have a high school for
instance so that we don't have
high school kids looking out the
window think of vape shop and
and making plans about how they
will get their their nicotine so
that the committee this is the
kind of.
This is the committee endorsed
bill and we have been working on
it for some time
and and and you will you
probably have gotten some emails
or maybe not about how this this
type of thing will will break
convenience stores they will go
out of business if that is the
case if all if what we care
about is keeping retailers and
business well then let's lower
the age the drinking age to
sixteen because that'll give
them a lot of business let's
let's reduce that they smoking
eight think tobacco age to
sixteen because that'll give
them a lot of business that is
not what we're here about we're
not here to protect the
retailers we are here to protect
for essentially are you and
study after study shows that if
our children do not begin using
nicotine before the age of
twenty five they will not so the
longer we can prevent it and the
vast majority of nicotine users
wish they had never started and
wish they could quit so we are
trying to save money to the
state in terms of the cost the
cost to the state in terms of
Medicaid costs insurance costs
lost production in businesses
those things are in the mail
multi millions if not billions
of dollars so we are we are
trying to make our state health
your and trying to protect kids.
So thank you.
Madam chair yes go ahead like to
respond to my soon to be co
sponsor and everything she
stated is correct and that also
E. cigarette use is considered a
pediatric nicotine addiction and
that the academic in the US and
that is
From the US Surgeon General so
it is something that if we can
prevent you know at
you that will impact as they
become adults and also I just
like to make sure that everyone
got a chance to see the charts
that were sent about the current
E. cigarette prevalence by a
high school you and if you
didn't get a chance to see that
the average in New Mexico has
increased from twenty fifteen to
twenty nineteen to thirty four
percent of which is a forty two
percent overall in New Mexico
some counties are a lot higher
such as curry a hundred thirty
five percent of change and
others such as San Miguel
seventy percent but the average
is forty two percent thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative and I
don't think that everyone is
signed on to the share file yet
but for those when you get
signed on those documents that
to a representative referred to
are in there the hand outs are
in the share file so they'll be
there they'll stay there for a
year uses the it as this moves
forward if it gets to the for
Representative Terrazas.
I'm sure that point how do I
sign up with.
You might be doing something
thank at yes and again I'm Gabby
Madam chair representative sorry
madam chair and representative
to have access I am actually in
the middle of an email that's
being sent to provided
assistance but we can for that
information to you as well all
legislators have received an
email to create their log in
information for share file but
it has most likely gotten lost
so if you search your inbox with
the phrase
Sorry I'm I'm looking for in my
email if you search your box
your inbox with the phrase wave
Shearer added you to share file
you should be able to find the
original email and that would
allow you to create a password
for your log in but we are going
to be working on re sending that
to folks who can't find it or
who have opted to use their log
in with a different email than
the one we originally sent
invitations to so madam chair
officials yeah I've I searched
it already all kinds of ways and
I wasn't having fun.
Yeah I did email the entire
committee shortly after
committee started today a link
to access the folder for all of
the legislation being heard
today.
Thank you madam chair thank you
thank you what will make sure
you get on.
Thank you thank you very much
all right
You call me already yes go ahead
you have yeah go ahead
Representative so.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Ferrary
I'm one of those people that I'm
not a like smoking and all of
that but but.
I'm not a smoker myself and
And I get that but
I just would like to know I mean
I heard of her to stop this is
B. one thirty one and and and
how it started not yet very my
understanding is that it just
barely.
What was implemented is that
correct madam chair.
Our agency to the rest of this
is for our efforts are not met
Representative part.
Is this going to affect madam
chair and representative to our
office yes January first thing
going to affect.
So
so we've only Madam chair
representative we've only given
this month's.
Time.
To to see what it's it's affects
our
On that point.
I'm sorry on that point.
Our my understanding is that on
that bill.
You could be over the age of
twenty one to purchase or you
have to be twenty one or over to
over to purchase is that
correct.
Madam chair and representative
yes.
So madam chair Representative
Ferrary
I heard issues up by of the the
people there for this
legislation like this or C.
pencil for that stated that it
was impacting kids in high
school so.
House legislation going to be
different from what we've
already passed.
Madam chair representative of
this bill will make it so that
local communities are governor
governor governments can decide
you years of local ordinance
that might be a little bit
stricter or get day know their
own community they need to make
sure that there is not a density
problem with too many retailers
one area or in on there's an
establishment location that they
feel is too close to a school or
your availability of where kids
youth congregate and they can
make those it allows them to
make their own of ordinance that
would be a little bit stricter.
Representative are excuse me
madam chair Representative
Ferrary that being said but it
doesn't address the issue of how
is it getting into the hands of.
Children under age.
Recipients are using this.
Is there a isn't there already a
mechanism to force or to to
regulate that and to enforce the
laws on the books already.
Representative of.
We're not sure exactly how you
get all and that's part of why
our last bill are one thirty one
of look at route the retailers
and regulating that and
licensing them.
This bill to do with that this
is just to let local
municipalities
I understand Representative
Madam chair representative ari
understand that's the point and
I get it I'm always for local
local control I I really like
that but the the the question
that I have is.
Is there any mechanism to to
enforce our people breaking the
law already under age twenty of
underage smokers or retailers
are breaking that I don't think
it's retailers that that's
that's my point how is this
going to change see what might
my point is.
I want to make a statement about
ask you what mechanism you think
is going to change it other than
that make making instructor.
Look.
We have a madam chair and
Representative Ferrary we have
already something in place it's
already legal.
And yet for anybody under age
twenty one get children.
From what I heard the testimony
children are still getting their
hands on it and apparently
there's a black market for this.
How does that change that is is
I mean we can make as many rules
as we have an impressive what's
legislation but it it's set as
it were just waking up a rural
or legislation out there it is
not being effective
I I I don't I just I think there
has to be some other Avenue to
make this more effective other
than just thank you another tool
on top of of the staff in the
rule that is going to say it's
illegal may be less to say that
make its twenty five or I don't
know whatever it's too close to
this but it still doesn't
address that the.
What I heard on this testimony
under age children getting here
these are tobacco products how
what can what what do you think
we could do madam chair
Representative Ferrary that
would actually be effective in
stopping.
Madam chair representative
process
The provisions in one thirty one
are just a piece of a
comprehensive effort to address
pediatric nicotine addiction and
local municipalities can address
the disparity between counties
that have very high rates of E.
cigarette use such as I was
mentioning most kids get their
products that the retailer
location and I don't
and preemption is of
you know it's part of a
comprehensive approach to
address access to nicotine Madam
number share this Representative
Ferrary did you say that most of
these children getting from the
retailers is that what you said.
At our is that what you said.
Yes.
So we have fifteen fourteen year
olds sixty year olds purchasing
from.
Local retailers Madam chair
representative are.
I'm if it's like for underage
drinking they get someone who is
over twenty one to buy set and
then gives it to them it sounds
more like it yes no I don't
think they're going in there
that get it so I played might
might again this is what I what
I'm saying remember up Madam
chair representative are you I
totally I'm totally in favor of
not having children smoke on a
hundred percent there I just
what might might.
My point is even if they make it
stricter what is it to to what
are we to say that okay Google
the the retailer.
R. O. mile down the road half
mile down the road the school or
whatever they whatever they
don't want to.
What's this house is going to
change.
The fact that you just said that
people are of age.
Are going to go and purchase it
and give it or sell it to under
age users.
Madam chair and representative
I'd like to refer to my experts
to see if you'd like to add in
the new to that.
Madam chair representative for
our region Representative
trusses I think you know kids
will get all of if they really
want to you know get all of the
cigarettes they will you know.
I get all of it but you know
that the issue we're talking
about is making that difficult
for kids.
No going back to you know just
want to clarify one thing on
Senate bill one thirty one.
You know we we adopted raising
the age to twenty one because it
was already a federal law that
was passed you know December
twenty nineteen.
And we became compliant you know
with the age twenty one and the
Senate bill one thirty one also
for the first time.
And our.
The history you know we made
tobacco retailers get licensed.
You know prior to that you know
there was no licensing.
And the penalties were imposed
on case.
We're buying tobacco.
And the clerks were selling.
And people who are running the
store owners got Scott free.
So this is one of the tools for
example and Senate bill one
thirty one you know what they
say you can have a smoke shop.
You know three hundred feet from
a school that's it we are free
from a school.
I don't know Representative
addresses of your golfer it's
hundred yards you know you cross
the street you get there from a
school and it doesn't say
anything about a skateboard park
community center.
Or or baseball fields or any
other places where kids hearing
at.
And if you repeal the
preemption.
For example city of Los crucis
can say like you know.
This these stores are to close
to our.
Ladies work kids and now they
can say will raise that to five
hundred feet four thousand
three.
And you know to answer your
question about you know kids
will where we don't.
Thank you as a coalition we have
been fighting for the past
several years to raise I mean to
increase the budget or
prevention six.
And we used to have prevention
you know budgeted at almost you
know ten million dollars and
that is right now it's cut to
half five point four million
dollars so what I'm saying this
is this is the only one we can
solve the problem maybe it's not
I think it's it's a combination
of tools that we can Barron took
to address this issue and and
right now you know on on the
licensing you know the
regulation and licensing base
your the law and then they
implementing it but it has
nothing to do with local control
you know it it's like a totally
separate issue of Los crucis was
stored up something like that
says like to many stores about
community of color and it's it's
a no secret that tobacco
industry targets you know people
of color and low income
communities because kids in
those communities they don't
have callers so they can drive
to for what you know rich kids
in the mountains can go down and
make you know drive a car so
it's it's so aggressive
marketing try that tactic.
And you know and and we're not
saying you know this will solve
the problem.
But this is one of the tools we
can and and cities and counties
the Madam chair representative
also those who have implemented
local restrictions have seen
more you know smoking rates and
E. cigarette right someone you'd
go down dramatically and so end
of the day but this is about
saving lives and saving kids
from becoming new nicotine
addicts and you know and and and
the health consequences of those
you know going forward when they
grow up.
And our
Representative
Rapp.
Representative is this going to.
It has to do with so that we
that we have not found a measure
that will keep kids from using
tobacco products we don't have a
silver bullet we are building
layers upon layers of safety and
this is just one more of those
years to try to keep our kids
safe from the ravages of
nicotine addiction so is it
going to fix the problem not a
hundred percent but it can help
move us toward our goal which is
children not having access to
tobacco products.
Representative are to madam
chair representative Thompson
thank you for bringing that up
but again I mean I'm not against
this I'm not against kids that
smoke I don't want kids to smoke
I don't I don't like it at all
it's it's you know I'm just
trying to you know someone made
a mention earlier you know that
Hey it's the details don't
matter they do.
We very much matter what we
right in there and and what does
ask because that's how we you
know a conversation between all
of this is the idea is what I
understood is the idea of this
committee this will provide all
committees is to share our ideas
and and to come up with them the
cleanest approach so that we all
come up with because I have
children I mean as kids I don't
want to smoking but but I'm just
trying to see what what what my
questions are are are valid I I
feel that they're very valid to
say how I mean if we just put a
stricter law
and it's not being enforced
towards not being effective
that's that's really my point so
Madam chair representative of
Mister's seat the
So.
What exact
because I haven't seen it again
I'm not that I'm not advocating
but I'm just asking what
specific advertising targeting
have you has have you seen I
haven't seen it
two children.
Besides the color of a you know
I I just don't understand what
but I'm gonna go back a little
bit for that when I was a kid
Madam chair representative
Ferrari I remember New Mexico
and I don't I believe is a New
Mexico program this summit your
no formal I still remember as a
little kid and they came to our
school and they give us and the
the the legislative of a class
on what smoking did to your
loans and so forth and I
remember as a kid.
That program.
But because of that program I
asked my own dad was in Vietnam
had come back in the navy and
was working out the local money
and it was a normal thing to see
smoking in the seventies was
normal and so I remember that
day sitting my that's all picked
up and used were riding down the
road and I said that.
Can you please stop smoking and
he did.
So my point is is is not so much
that I want I don't want local
control any of that Mike my
point really is is.
I would love to see the bill you
know just just a mechanism where
if we go in we and we educate
our youth rather than just
creating rules of the on the
back in transaction because by
that time some of these are our
children.
As you said I'm gonna get a from
an older person that shares
their shares this tobacco
product with them and and and
here we are one saying bill I
just like I said you know I I I
think it's all about education
and enforcement
and and and again that's just
what I remember is it is it is a
get up to the and madam chair.
Preserver ari.
I think that's all I have for
now it's a I hear something
different thank you thank you
Representative Lord.
Yes thank you I do have some
questions on this bill on the be
very brief so can you explain to
me madam chair thank you say to
me what.
So we're going to give control
to the counties to make
different regulations are to
make their own regulations but
these are not to supersede
federal laws that correct.
Madam chair representative lord
of.
These are not two of well these
are able to be stricter than our
state laws.
Okay Sir thank you madam chair
so
these can be stricter than state
laws but not the federal laws
correct.
I'm I'll step and Representative
the state is always allowed to
as long as it's not in conflict
enact laws that are stricter
than federal law this can't
conflict with federal law or
state law but could in impose
additional restrictions.
Thank you madam chair so the end
game or when I'm trying to
understand this bill is that the
hope is by making things harder
or that can small smoke recorder
to get cigarettes is that what
the end game is with this.
Madam chair representative lord
yes.
Okay thank you madam chair the
reason I ask is because I
started smoking when I was very
young and I got the cigarette
from all and I remember we all
illustrious sharing cigarettes
amongst each other.
So I'm always a your is going to
see here I'm a root cause person
I was going to get to the root
costs where kids smoking how do
we stop them from smoking I
don't I think if you banned
every tobacco store and all in
New Mexico that a group of older
kids would drive over the state
lines and go buy cigarettes and
bring him back and sold on the
black market of course I'm
always more about I don't want
to smoke I did smoke and I wish
I didn't smoke I really did
because they're finding the long
term damage afterwards from
smoking at such a young age has
repercussions that lasts a
lifetime so I just my mate
Committee was I'm always gonna
want to vote for route and
getting to the root cause and
less government control and.
Following the federal guidelines
that we already have so thank
you that's all that I have thank
you.
Thank you madam chair.
And you know
and do you want to
closer we can go to the
committee.
Leisure the committee for the
work.
Yes yes yes Representative
question and I I did have
another question and that I just
had eighteen got shuffled in my
little notes okay go ahead Madam
chair representative so
supersedes the county or the
city so the city implements.
Our students will stricter than
the state but the county comes
in and and and and pass
something stricter than city
will supersede.
Madam chair representative I'm
going to ask Miss hash the that
you would answer that.
Madam chair and Representative
Terrazas thank you know the
county and the city have their
own limits there will most
school boundaries so the City of
Albuquerque envelopes or Los
crucis.
Adopts you know.
Location restrictions and and
spirits restrictions within the
city limits you know that will
apply within the city limits and
it doesn't apply to the to the
county unless the county and ups
you know similar mentioned.
And to further answer that
question Representative if the
county adopt something it
applies to outside the city
limits.
I just want to clarify that
madam chair Representative one
last thing this this obviously
cannot apply in reservations you
are so I mean there's a lot of
municipalities that and counties
that have reservations in them
so.
We say no here they just want
out down the street that will
further down the road and there
are no rules on the reservation
is that correct madam chair
Representative Ferrary.
Representative go ahead
Representative.
Madam chair and representative
we can only be an example Ford
the tribal areas.
And I would add there's a whole
body of law of of a different
agreements and compacts with the
with the tribe's over tobacco
over liquor or gambling etcetera
that those are outside of of
this.
Right madam chair Representative
guess what the the last issue
that I had in my and the back
was because I had written was in
part of my district I have so
we're city.
Within within about eight miles
but will say C. ten miles up by
about seven miles of sensitive I
have so we're sitting.
I have our readers valley I've
got
Santa Clara there early.
And so my.
What why am I bringing that up
is because of all these all
these
Different
maybe a business that has
multiple small little store
locations you have a a person
and training they could become
confusing they can even become
confusing to the to the
purchaser that and I can these
are the rules here and Senator
up but two miles down the road
is is very and two mile down the
road is Hurley those are all
different
disabilities and and this can
happen to certain things and
that's that's what I'm as much
as I like this legislation to
restrict kids I just I think
it's confusing
for one for small municipalities
and it doesn't address which you
tax address they can just go to
the reservation and there's
anybody can walk in the store
and get it and I and I and I
understand that so again I I'm
I'm all big
promoter of of
I don't want children to use
drugs or alcohol or smoking what
I think comes down to education
thank you so much Madam chair
representative.
Thank you representative and
I'll just make before we go to
the pleasure the committee I'll
just make one additional comment
and that is because it can't
conflict with state law and so
is is not changing ages or other
big things this is largely
controlling of where
the retail sales can occur and
the so local zoning kind of
ordinances yeah and not of a big
difference scheme of how to do
the whole entire regulation of
of the sale so it has the
overarching
US state law to comply with.
That point madam chair yes that
point would existing.
This is important what existing
businesses that are already
there.
What would how would they be
grandfathered or is this
something for future opening of
businesses.
So Representative and that's
again not what is in this bill
before us since that that's
already passed but there was
previously
under the
regulations around the sale of
tobacco and tobacco products
retailers were not licensed at
all they do for the sale of
tobacco it was totally dependent
on punishing the kids who bought
it and the clerks who sold it
now there's a brand new scheme
to a license all of those
retailers so there isn't any
grandfathering it's all new
licensing.
And madam chair I just like to
add on that small municipalities
are not forced to enact anything
this bill just provides the
opportunity our if they want to.
Thank you so thank you I
anything else Representative.
No that was it I I was actually
more referring to the location
you know somebody yeah we go up
a small business had at but the
location there does this mean
and and I don't know what the
businesses also saves liquor and
tobacco products no seven they
they are
This doesn't allow them to
grandfather in that business
that's been there for maybe
thirty years I I think that's
more not the licensing all at
again big now reporter of of non
smoking and that would I assume
depend on what the local
municipality decided to do about
grandfathering or or anything
else
so what's the pleasure of the
committee I move it to pass
madam chair I have a due pass.
We have a motion for to pass a
second doors you want to take
take role.
Representative.
Representative but but I.
Yes.
It can.
Yes.
Representative step in the lower
no.
Use.
Madam chair I received a text
from Representative Matthews
that she had to step out and up
she had texted you to ask to be
excused but I guess you didn't
see it but she asked if I could
ask that she be excuse I'm and I
got the same so thank you yeah
she's excused.
Yes.
The least.
No I could scream my vote.
The.
Yes.
Vice president gore and glory
yes.
And.
Madam.
And yes.
Yeah.
To.
And three excuse.
Thank you so representative of
you have a
a do pass from this committee
and Representative trusses to
explain your vote.
I thank you madam chair
Representative I again I'm a
very big proponent I I I.
I think it's very good to stop
smoking for children stop I just
would like to see the
legislation that's already
passed the COVID affect to see
where we're at and and that that
was.
Mostly I might get big one of
the biggest things the other
thing is the grandfathering in
of some of the existing
businesses that could
Thank the smallest of I'm not
talking about the Walmart three
that
but some of that language that
isn't clear
I think it just needs a little
more clarity our I'd like to see
another bill are maybe a.
Also amendments to it but I am
at this time I'd like to do that
with no are we hoping to see
some other a adjustment but
mostly waiting to see what this
first legislation does and and
hopes and hopes that it it
corrects a problem thank you
very much thank you
representative
and with that committee members
that concludes our work for
today and we'll get out a new
challenger for Wednesday by this
afternoon we'll get that to you
and I want to thank you for your
work and I particularly want to
thank all the members of the
audience who have participated
today and who have stuck with
us.
For those new members who
haven't experienced our
the committee room.
It's small and we have
consistently had in the number
of attendees plenty to one sell
our rural but probably two three
four times over and so we I'm I
really appreciate that people
from all over the state and
those who are in the middle of
working as we heard this morning
doing their clinic work to step
away and be able to provide
input who otherwise wouldn't
have been able to travel to the
round house to do that so I it
takes a little bit more time to
hear from everyone but that are
really important
function and role for us on
these committee hearings and so
I want to really appreciate
everyone who has
participated with us this
morning and with that Committee
we are adjourned until Wednesday
at eight thirty thank you very
much thank you madam chair and
thank you committee for passing
this issue to thank you.
