Senator there you are okay here
Representative Roger Montoya.
I'm here thank you.
Representative Lewis that also.
Here.
Representative Liz Thomson I'm
here.
Vice chair Joanne Ferrari here.
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Madam chair I just got an email
from Representative Anderson he
needed to be reset the link so
I'm sending it to him now.
So all thank you Representative
Gail Armstrong and she's excused
and throughout the morning
Delores anyone who's absent is
excuse because many people are
putting on bills and other
committees thank you madam
chair.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong
here thank you very much.
So good morning and I would like
to start this morning with of a
little bit of our a recap and an
apology first and foremost and I
apologize for the technical
difficulties that we had on
Monday and I specifically want
to apologize to Dr Burke who was
inadvertently cut off that was
unintentional and we were
struggling I have to say with
the with the technology and
getting the
of the at the live captioning to
work and soon we had to switch
people and computers and reload
it and so forth so I I apologize
and meant no disrespect to
anyone on Monday it's my goal in
this committee all ways to hear
from everyone who shows up and
wishes to make public comment
and we we did that I I have to
tell you we have the largest
attendance in this committee on
Monday.
And it took a lot of testimony
and I apologize also that we had
to hold this hearing over until
today but sometimes that happens
we had to get to the floor and I
didn't want to cut off debate of
the
Of the committee who next needs
to ask their questions so we
took public comment and now the
committee gets to ask questions
and
And then we will vote and so
that's that's the process and
because we could didn't have
time to do a good
a committee work we will I cut
it off after we went late but
took all the public comment so
we will not be hearing anymore
public comment this morning.
So no more public comment.
and we'll go to the we'll go to
the committee after the sponsors
have an opportunity to to make
some remarks.
And one other thing to let you
know.
Because of the difficulty we had
on Monday with a the closed
captioning which is available on
the webcast we're now pass and
will have it on this committee
we're asking the other
committees in the house to
included in their committees in
the zoom as well as in the
webcast and so your feedback was
important and
and I took it really seriously
we we all dead and again I
apologize for the difficulties
we had and hope it goes smoother
and we will
now we'll have the closed
captioning when in zoom as well.
We had some of the same hiccups
I have to say when we started
doing the Spanish English
translation which is smoothed
out quite a bit but so forgive
us our learning curve on all the
technology and and we will go
forward.
And thank you again we have a
large number of attendees that
continues to grow were over two
hundred twenty five attendees
this morning that's not
necessarily offer this bill but
I'm assuming of quite a few
of a major R. there was great
interest in this bill on Monday
so with that
Representative Maestas would you
like to do kind of our recap to
get us
get us started this morning.
Thank you madam chair and do we
have all here at do we have your
experts if agency so if doctor
to heal can raise your hand in
the attendee I don't know if
she's there or not yeah yes
doctors you raise your hand and
the attending less we can find
it fast.
But up.
Right Martinez is here with us
okay.
All right go ahead
Representative thank you very
much of Madam chairman members
and thank you so much for the
precious time Monday in this
morning all the folks who who
testified in your staff to put a
wonderful virtual meeting
together I was just tremendous
and of course the interpreters
who are sure we're exhausted but
just a couple of.
Comments with regards to the
numerous misconceptions and I
don't want to dwell on this but
there is more misinformation and
And disinformation on this bill
that I've ever seen than I've
ever seen in my career and it's
just so unfortunate because
those lights put so much
horrible anxiety on alumni of
the school for the deaf and
municipalities that received
outreach services from the
school for the deaf but the
bottom line is and I ask this
committee to just look at the
words on the page look at the
words on the page which starts
on page four.
Aligns fourteen.
This is about children that do
not attend the New Mexico school
for the deaf and so house bill
two thirty seven does not affect
any early intervention programs
in the school for the deaf it
does not affect any outreach
services from the school for the
deaf those will continue.
this doesn't affect the budget
of the New Mexico school for the
deaf doesn't affect any employee
any teacher any outreach percent
any student who has a
relationship with the school for
the deaf at all.
this is about head the public
education department providing
better and much needed services
for deaf and hard of hearing
students outside of the school
for the deaf
and so real quick with regards
to a duplication of services
there's a position madam chair
members within pad up.
But that that position is vacant
the general supervision low
incidence position is vacant
within path so definitely
hearing parents are being
referred to general supervision
parent liaison and autism
support because that position is
vacant even if that position was
billed it's not specific to deaf
and hard of hearing education
it's not it's not responsible
for programmatic implementation
oversight of including equitable
funding mandated by the Martinez
Yazzie be state of holding and
our constitution and and and it
needs to be held accountable of
pennies to be held accountable
and so this is not a duplication
of services or anything else
that that our colleagues are
trying to achieve this is merely
of.
Having that broader conversation
of how do we modernize deaf and
hard of hearing education for
those students that that do not
attend the New Mexico school for
the deaf and our with that
Representative doubt have any
quick comments.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Martinez for
one allowing me to sign on and I
just want to remind this
committee that I signed on fully
aware of the the opposition that
would be here but it is it just
because it is the right calls
there are over five hundred over
six hundred students that do not
have equal access to services.
As some students who have have
have a we don't have equal and
we don't have equitable services
throughout the state it needs to
be a conversation it needs to be
addressed and the misnomer talk
to be put aside this is about
advocating for underserved and
underrepresented children.
And so families across our state
rely on their representatives to
bring their voice forward and I.
We are I. D. A. and and and
modern technologies they require
or or promote the least
restrictive most inclusive if
that what the family wants to
the IEP process and we do make
sure if that is what the family
chooses that we provide
adequate.
Resources an adequate services
to those home school districts
and that's for eighty percent of
deaf and hard of hearing
students in New Mexico are
served there served in the local
school districts and I listen to
the testimony even for people
who are speaking opposition
because they had about
experience a public school other
children's needs are not met at
public school because their
family did not receive the
support that they needed to to
raise their child adequately in
their home districts had to go
elsewhere.
We even heard people who moved
out of state.
We can do better we must do
better in the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit calls that we do better
and so.
I think that this conversation
and health is a great
conversation it needs to be
heard my colleagues in the
health committee and Education
Committee need to hear about
this I think it is
a partnership to I listen to
Representative Thomson advocate
so well for families with
disabilities I have similar
advocacy for families who feel
like their voice has not been
heard within CYFD whether
biological or whether they are
the foster families our families
need voices and I think this
bill and this conversation is
just critical inner in elevating
needs and so I mean I guess I'll
I'll stand for questions if if
someone has one directed to me.
Thank you and Representative my
Estes I realize we didn't
adopt the amendment on Monday so
we talked about the amendment
moved it for discussion but I do
want to recap what the amendment
is and let's deal with that and
then we'll go to questions thank
thank you so much chair thank
you so much the the amendment
takes away section one and
section one ironically it.
Our wonderfully for not on page
one line twenty section one is
the statute for the school for
the deaf twenty one dash six
dash two it was written in
eighteen ninety nine.
And has not been amended in a
hundred twenty two years so as
we know the school for the deaf
does outreach services as best
it can and so we put in very
basic language on page two that
the school for the deaf may
provide services.
To definitely hearing students
who attend other public schools
and shall not charge for those
services that was the only thing
in section one.
But it created such a stir in
such a
such a massive disinformation
campaign that it was
unconstitutional and that that
somehow the school for the deaf
was going to going to close
which was ally and and horribly
painful to a lot of people we're
asking this committee to strike
section one strike section one
in its entirety we don't want to
go there and also on page four
page five strike though the
words of the New Mexico school
for that so that the had
coordinator that we create is
not obligated or mandated or
doesn't need to coordinate with
the school for the deaf they
simply don't want that
coordination so we just want to
be simple of section one section
two rather creates a deaf
education coordinator within Pat
and section four of of.
Modifies the educational rights
of deaf and hard of hearing
children in light of the
Martinez Yazzie holding thank
you madam chair.
So it changes the the the bill
dramatically and and EVH wrinkly
ninety percent of the concerns
that folks had on Monday.
Thank you madam chair and
representative if I could just
add it also removes any
reference to its focus now on K.
twelve so is reference to zero
to five where there's a there's
a system within fifty and a
system that that it India H. a
partnership with India H. where
zero five services are provided
so that now it's K. twelve.
Thank you.
is there any objection to
to the amendment.
The objection to the amendment.
Seeing and hearing none your
bill is amended.
Thank you.
Okay now we'll go to questions
from the committee and first on
my list is representative
Thompson.
Excuse me thank you madam chair
and I'm sorry I don't have my
video up but I'm on my phone
because I have my my laptop
listening in on education
because I have a bill there so
let me just give you a little
background I'm all of you on the
committee know that special ed
and kids with disabilities is is
why I'm here it's my passion.
And I was lucky enough to work
at hygiene elementary for for a
lot of many years and that was
the school in APS that was the
magnet school for kids who are
deaf and hard of hearing so I
was I was I loved it I took a
lot of classes in ASL from that
were there from the school for
the deaf.
I I worked as an early
interventionist I just found out
this week that that the baby
that I.
Started working with that six
months of age is now twenty four
years old she was profoundly
deaf I'm we learned sign
language together.
And and and also you madam chair
you many of you have heard what
on L. E. S. C. when there was
discussion of the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit that would be
you know we're doing this for
kids who are English language
learners and we're doing this
for native cultures that work
we're going to support special
ed and I I took it upon myself
to make sure that kids with
disabilities were not going to
be left out of the discussion of
Yazzie Martinez so I threw
tantrums that every L. yes the
meeting and tell the governor's
office called me up and said
okay what are we gonna do and so
we are doing something we have
some which it's not official
we're calling it the special
lead transformation team I'm
working with the governor's
office and P. E. D. and the
early childhood department and
C. Y. F. D. and D. O. H. and
everybody were working together
and we're trying to come up with
a plan to have special ed B.
everything it needs to be for
kids and families and I have
several bills that have come out
of that now the first one is the
special ed but program.
And and I'm also working on
getting everyone including
interpreters and therapist on
the three tier system and the
reason I'm telling you all this
is that I have a quite a long
history working with deaf kids
I'm I'm not I'm not not ASL
competent by any stretch I staff
to keep up with the slow second
grader but I have a lot of
experience and I have a lot of
friends who have kids who are
deaf.
And this is just not the way to
go I appreciate the Sanchez
attempts but this is kinda like
I'm like someone is planning a
great big wedding and you come
in at the last minute say what
let's do it this way without
ever talking to the people who
are planning the wedding so I
appreciate the Sanchez
Willingness to help kids who are
deaf and hard of hearing but
this is just kind of.
Kind of it doesn't fit within
the framework we need to sit
down all together the PED and
the school for the deaf and the
deaf community especially and
and figure out what it is that
is going to work best so while I
while I completely I appreciate
the Sanchez attempts here I just
think it is not the way to go
and I cannot possibly support
this but I will definitely be
involved and help to facilitate
some further conversations
because you're right they get
kids are not getting what they
need
except possibly that the kids
who actually go to the school
for the deaf they have a very
rich are wonderful experience
there and we're working on it
but I think we need to be more
cohesive and more and more
thoughtful not just throwing
things at the wall and seeing
what what will stick but
actually talk to the people who
are affected and come up with
good plans that will not just
help kids who are deaf and hard
of hearing but help kids who
have down syndrome and help kids
who have autism and kids who are
blind and all of the things so
so madam chair I don't really
have a question I just think
this is I'm not a well thought
out solution and one that I
cannot possibly support thank
you madam chair.
Four thank you Representative
next I have Representative
Barreras.
Thank you madam chair
for first of all please excuse
you know my naive agency here
because I'm I'm really I don't I
don't exactly are are understand
all of this so the first
question that I have
has to do with.
Do and it's funding source are
spelled out in our constitution
so if this bill passes is that.
Are are we going against our our
constitution with that that's my
first question.
Thank you madam chair
representative about it as no
great question it's it's a
marvelous
Of creation the New Mexico
school for deaf it was created
in at eighteen eighty seven up
predates our constitution and
was part of our was one of one
of the original institutions are
territorial government it is a
beneficiary of land grant
permanent fund monies and so in
the constitution of the land
grant permanent fund monies
cannot be spent outside of that
institution.
so that the school for the deaf
has about a hundred twenty five
students it's house just two
blocks from the roundhouse it's
gorgeous and it's just provided
a tremendous quality of life for
a great many people it gets
about
let me just look at my notes
here I think of.
Recently at the gets about
twelve.
So in two thousand eighteen it
received thirteen point two
million dollars from the land
grant permanent fund.
but also receive four million
dollars from the general fund.
And and and so that money can be
spent is not restricted under
the constitution money from the
general fund is not restricted
it also received two hundred
thirty six thousand dollars
from statewide outreach when
other the when the school for
the deaf goals and and works
with students in our and not
school districts they get an
invoice they they get a bill
that's something that we as the
appropriators can put in its
budget so is it a educational
relationship or is it is a is it
a business transaction and then
the school that also get seven
hundred sixty seven thousand
dollars in federal funds which
is not restricted and also gets
two hundred twenty eight
thousand of for for in that part
of the SCG formula which is not
restricted and then two hundred
eleven thousand dollars for
other operating sales and
services that they bill folks
for so in two thousand eighteen
the operating budget for the
school for the deaf was eighteen
point seven million dollars for
a hundred twenty five students
and if I may madam chair
Representative about us what
what how many students do you
have and what is your budget
Representative right Martinez.
And chair members of the of the
committee Representative Maestas
so our entire and and and member
would be only a state funding
support we receive is through
the state equalization guarantee
the school funding formula I
think this past year our budget
started two point four million I
think with adjustments because
are enrollment increased we we
pushed into the that two point
five million for the entire
school under eleven students
that thank you Mr R. Martinez
I'm chair representative so so
with regards to your
constitutional question since
we're we're not violating or
even coming close to violating
the constitution the restriction
of the constitution is that land
grant permanent fund money that
that up Mexico school for the
deaf received cannot be spent
outside of that institutional
structure that institutional
structure is whatever the school
for that wanted to be U. N. M.
as a land grant permanent fund
beneficiary but has branch
campuses all over the state the
the state penitentiary as a land
grant permanent fund beneficiary
but has seven prisons all over
the state so it just depends on
how that school wishes to of
conduct itself but we're not but
once again we don't talk about
that beautiful school we want to
disrespect that school at all
this bill as amended.
Doesn't touch that screen for
good or for bad it's merely
pressuring the pad our public
educational system to deal with
a four out of five students that
don't attend the New Mexico
school for the deaf but yet are
deaf and hard of hearing
students.
Which I or I'm sorry I think you
thank you Representative and
thank you madam chair I'm I'm
totally with you on that I think
that we need to to bring equity
to the eighty percent of
students that are deaf or hard
of hearing that do not attend
the school
I know there was a ton of
misinformation our.
But but during the the public
comment I heard a lot of people
saying that there was no
there was no outreach to NMSC on
this this issue will operate on
that and just kind of it is that
is that the truth where were
they contacted you guys try to
work with them at all kind of
kind of get this was going thank
you madam chair representative
about us I've I've had a
relationship as a legislature
with the New Mexico school for
the deaf for eight years.
Of the gentle lady from
Bernalillo representative
Thompson talked about showing up
late to the.
To the wedding at planning
ceremony I did a memorial in two
thousand thirteen that formed a
definite Inc task force
that was not well received by
them by the school for the deaf
they were very very angry at me.
I did up I did a really
innocuous memorial back in two
thousand sixteen that how did
the school for the deaf.
Yeah because our our economy was
in the tank and we're just
throwing ideas out there on how
to build our economy nice I did
a memorial honoring the school
for the deaf and suggesting that
it that is equal to Gallup debt
which is the only definite
hearing college in the country
and that we should consider
doing like New Mexico military
student and have a college a
high school and college I have
made these points in the only
related to the school for the
deaf has with the legislature as
far as I can tell is a five
minute hearing every year in
LFC in December in which they
give up three minutes
presentation nobody asked any
questions and they received
eighteen point seven million
dollars for a hundred twenty
five students they there the
leadership of school with F. is
very
They don't see what I see I see
Martinez Yazzie be state I see
an institution that that that
has not changed hundred twenty
two years.
I I see students that are not
attending the school for the
deaf that don't have adequate
services when I'm gonna deal
with that that's that's that
that's that's not gonna happen
All I Want to do is.
This created equalization system
within path to increase the
educational outcomes of students
who don't attend the school for
the deaf not every deaf and hard
of hearing student is is allowed
to attend the school for the
deaf they deny applications but
I don't get into that I'm sorry
I don't get into that but but
the school for the deaf was not
contacted with regards to this
bill.
Most bills that I drop I get
contacted the very next day bye
bye lobbyist or agencies are
secretaries or whomever
I have not spoken to them nor
have they spoken to me but they
did produce a you tube video a
day after I introduce this bill.
That was broadcast to the school
for the deaf alumni and families
that receive outreach services
from the school for that that
just maybe eight patented law it
is and just stressed everybody
out and so that's.
That's
That's unfortunate.
But but I accept the criticism I
did not reach out to the school
for the deaf email on the the
bill and says Hey I'm gonna drop
this bill
let's talk I did not do that.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chair and representative I
appreciate your answering my
questions I don't I don't have
anything for thank you.
Thank you next I have
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman madam
chairman up Representative
Anderson this morning way to
present a bill another committee
and sponsor about to die madam
chairman what I wanted to say to
the R. Sanchez on this bill is
that I have not received.
As much negative.
Comment on the bill as I've
received in a long time.
I think that the amendment madam
chairman that we adopted today
completely removes the New
Mexico school for the deaf.
And with that removed from the
bill it means to me that the
bill now only tries to improve
educational opportunity for the
hearing impaired students of our
state.
I believe that the sponsors
have.
Recognized the R..
The mistake of trying to invade
The New Mexico school for the
deaf through the statutes and
they have completely reversed
they're they're met not reverse
they have removed.
That portion of the bill so I
believe house bill two thirty
seven as amended.
Has no impact whatsoever on the
New Mexico school for the deaf.
What it does have the impact on
is it begins the process of
delivery better education to the
hearing impaired New Mexicans
and and the additional services
so I'm going to urge the
committee to consider letting
this bill move forward to the
Education Committee for.
Consideration of improving.
Educational opportunities for
these New Mexicans and.
I do that knowing that without
the amendment I would have voted
no.
And with the amendment I am
willing to say I like the
amendment I like the fact that
this institution of the school
for the deaf has been removed
completely no impact.
And therefore I'm willing to.
I plan on voting yes to send
this bill on to the Education
Committee knowing that with the
do pass there will see it again
on the floor and have one
further review of making sure
that the amendment accomplishes
all the things Sanchez intended
so madam chairman my statement
is concluded and if I'm missing
for the vote it's because I'm
presenting a bill another
committee urged thank you very
much madam chair.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative bash.
Thank you madam chair and up
Representative my Estes I have a
question about
do the hundred and twenty five
students who receive services at
the New Mexico school for the
deaf are those of residential
students.
Or does that include the out
reach students throughout the
state that receive services.
Thank you madam chair
representative bash.
The let you know pre COVID and
stuff those approximately sixty
eight students that attend the
boarding school that's a
marvelous opportunity for for
students what sixty eight
students attend the boarding
schools it's that live there
and then it during the day
during classes it's anywhere
from like a hundred twenty five
hundred forty students New
Mexico state I think said or not
New Mexico school for the deaf
rather I think says a hundred
sixty eight and then they
provide services to deaf
students throughout the state
you know once a week or they
train teachers things that
nature they and of course the
bill that they bill that school
district for that service and
that get you up to.
That's where the number gets
inflated where they suggest that
they serve you know over two
hundred fifty students or things
like that I can I'll grab of a
book that behind me and I could
give you better numbers after
next question
Madam chair representative if I
could just add to that there's
also a significant number of
children that are serving New
Mexico School to death using New
Mexico pre K. dollars and use
using New Mexico home visiting
dollars and using New Mexico
state dollars but that that has
been in the amendment all of
that's removed so the the.
Original intent was to talk
about the currently in grant
funds and the services that are
filled to districts
reconsidering whether there
should be deal now it's just
okay it's not the solution we
still need one because there's a
disparity in services across the
state so they are doing the
seven the number that is broken
out of seven hundred includes
much more funding an additional
contracts with ECECD with the O.
H. with it so it's a combination
of federal and state and and
Land Grant dollar a combination
of dollars to get to the seven
hundred.
And so madam chair of the bash
in the US summer fall twenty
twenty twenty twenty one
wonderful magazine that New
Mexico school for that puts out
it it it doesn't answer your
question.
It doesn't say how many it's
also irrelevant with the
amendment.
And with the amendment does that
do anything to the funding for
school of the deaf.
Thank you madam chair
representative zero zero point
zero thank you for that thank
you so much for that it doesn't
do anything at all to the
funding for the structure of
regents that it did it doesn't
involve a school for the deaf.
At the at its request it doesn't
touch the school for the deaf it
doesn't mention the school for
the deaf.
It madam chair and
representative also you
mentioned that.
Someone didn't want coordination
and I was a little confused
about who that was.
Was that school for the deaf for
all thank you thank you Madam
resident bash the.
Based on the
Based on the opposition of.
The bill before it was amended
had school for the deaf.
You know at the head of the
table dealing with Devin
defecation within pad but based
on the opposition and the
allegations that I'm trying to
shut the school down stuff like
that we we thought it was best
instead of trying to overcome
all this massive misinformation
just to amend school for the
deaf out of the bill so I think
that was my comment that that in
what coordination but they
provide wonderful outreach
services
two you know as best as best it
can but it's pad that needs to
pick up its game its path that
we want to improve deaf and hard
of hearing education within the
public school system within the
school districts Representative
up Mr Martinez you have a.
Come in with the rest of that if
I may madam chair is in the
best.
Madam chair members of the
committee I have no nothing to
add other than I I I I just want
to emphasize this is a K.
twelve.
bill that doesn't affect any
services as as after mentioned
and and I'll just tell you as
far as our school goes any type
of
Help and and that we can receive
out of the P. T. to help us
serve specifically the deaf hard
of hearing population of kids
that we do have in our school
would be really well received.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Thank you next I have
Representative Terrazas.
Thank you madam chair I was
trying that's about all this and
you know
But I'm sure it sounds to me
like last last week when we were
listen to all this
or Monday it seems the weeks of
landing was among anyway.
One of those days but anyway
It seems like you kept hearing
such a wide range of of
information
Either it was extremely opposing
at our people then we're saying
Hey we're not getting any the
the necessary
help that we need and Services
it was just very wide range in
San Fran I'm gonna try to clear
up the clutter for myself I
think a lot of it has already
been done and and and so I
appreciate what
the legislators and temps here
the sponsor of the bills intent
seems to be
so I have some quick questions
and and and I I would like
If it's possible madam chair is
there a.
Superintendent from the school
here so that I can ask you
questions.
Madam chair of Representative SS
yes I drive through you is with
us perfect we'll district well
and I'm talking about from the
school look at us.
Pollock you madam chair of the
of the SS of the director of the
all of the school for the deaf I
they're probably one of the
attendees of the superintendent
guy goes is probably one of the
attention yes she is here that
allow I'm gonna move for to
panelist please do thank you
Madam thank you very much.
There she is superintendent guy
goes you're now part of the
panel and if you're able to
answer questions from
Representative arises.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative
Terrazas Sime here ready to
answer any questions thank you
so much for letting me
participate that thank you madam
chair representative and Mrs
I've also so first of all I'm
gonna I'm gonna state that from
my perspective me personally.
You know what a beautiful job of
the school of the deaf does and
I I and I will say that from all
the testimony that I've heard
here it doesn't seem like anyone
is is dissatisfied with the work
you actually do so might make my
questions to you now that you
know obviously.
One of the things that I wasn't
concerned with is how we present
things not only to each other
were you know we're here we're
privileged information Madam
chair representative to.
Information that not the normal
the the public isn't just
readily able to to to get so and
one of my issues with
legislation in any way shape or
form is that we are giving out.
Clear a clear message not muddy
cloudy messages out to the
public because this is why the
public has dissatisfaction with
the political structures as a
whole legislators on the whole
because we don't give them a
clear clean cut
Information and sometimes
whether it's one side or the
other one doesn't matter.
It monies and and creates a
tension that that I would like
to to to call so first of all
Madam chair representative Mrs
died also pretend it is that
right superintendent guy goes
yes thank you superintendent
idols my question is
how many.
Students or how many people are
in need around the state you
should probably have these good
figures
That are in need because of
their hearing loss or they're or
or their needs in that capacity.
Thank you for the question Madam
chair of Representative Terrazas
I'm according to the public
education department there about
five hundred sixty to six
hundred students who are
identified as defer hardy
hearing in the state of New
Mexico and that is K. through
twelve
there is another the best kids
child another a hundred and
eighty or so and there are in
the zero to three range
so yes that's that's the answer
to your question.
Thank you madam chair
representative part and and
superintendent basically I want
to make sure that I am.
Educating myself in this whole
issue and getting it directly
from from from you and and the
sponsor of the bill the
information so there's now my
understanding is from the
testimony here is that you your
school superintendent idols
actually services one hundred
twenty five students is that
correct.
Thank you for the question we
about a hundred forty five
students are Santa Fe campus
about twenty students and our
Albuquerque campus and then we
have a preschool in Farmington
and Los crucis
so that's the number of students
that get the highest range of
support are the ones on our
Santa Fe this because it's been
determined to the IP process
that that is the the appropriate
place for their services
the school for the deaf if
you've ever been on that campus
when there's an advantage or
even come to visit our
classrooms is a very unique
setting that really can't be
duplicated in another school in
order to do that you would have
to take a hundred forty five
deaths students and the staff
that we've ever been able to
come as experts into that
setting and place them in any of
our rural communities and even
of our in our bigger communities
cause for deaf children their
need for communication and
language access their need for
equality really depends on
having other deaf children and
other deaf staff who can
fluently communicate with them
to make it so that they're not
isolated so that they're not in
the minority and that is the
highest end of the continuum for
the students that need that not
all students need the same level
of support so some students need
can stay in their public schools
and we support students when the
public schools are outreach
programs we do not charge for
outreach that is the that is
misinformation that's I'm not
sure we're Representative I just
discussed that information from
but we do not bill for outreach
services and we provide those
services to about two hundred
eighty six children and again.
that is on what what the
additional districts reach out
to us or we reach out to them
and then together we figure out
what is the best support for the
students most school districts
and we have many charter schools
in the Albuquerque area now
we're reaching out to us for
support because it's also
important for those children who
are out there is that they have
a feeling that they have a
community even if they don't
come to our school what parents
have told us as we have a
community because we know you're
there so if you remember from
the testimonies yesterday there
were families from all over the
state from Laguna from Silver
City and even of those families
don't come to our campus they
also have a connection to a
community so that their children
know that they're not the only
deaf or hard of hearing child in
the world and that when they
grow up they're actually can
live I mean one of the one of
the stories that that is
profound is that deaf children
never see a deaf adults feel
like maybe they won't get to be
an adult because they've never
seen anybody like them and
that's that that is the highest
level of those of service is
that the school for the deaf but
we also reach out with all our
expertise we have at the school
for the deaf to the the state
with those resources so that
they can see deaf adults so that
they can interact with them so I
think I went a little bit off of
your question
Okay that's okay you know what I
appreciate that but you know so
I never got that I mean that you
start you start seven hundred a
hundred forty five to seven of
the twenty students and then you
can give me any more numbers
other than the two hundred
eighty around the
around other schools you work
with is that did I hear that
correctly that's correct what we
have in our numbers are seven
hundred students that but that
includes our early intervention
program because we serve we're
more than a K. two through
twelve program so we would
report about seven hundred
children that we see what we
call directly because there
regularly on our rules we also
do community services to so so
let me and I don't mean to cut
you off the chair representative
yes Representative remember.
Thank you madam chair
Representative excuse me I
apologize and so I I just want
to the reason I'm I'm asking is
that I think we have a lot of
questions and I and I want to
make sure that we get this
moving now and I apologize
please don't take me for not
cutting you off but yes Sir
other are there other
Other students outside that are
not receiving the same help of
from the school's.
In in New Mexico.
Representative Madam chair
Representative Terrazas
The.
There are all students in the in
the state have the ability to go
through the IEP process to see
if the school for the deaf in
the least restrictive
environment for that so we're
available for that process for
all students
Students do not get the same
level of services if they don't
come to the school for the deaf
because again there's a
continuum of services that
children need on every child
needs the same services so what
so so students who don't come to
the school for the deaf can
receive outreach services from
us that support them in their
local school districts and we do
that really is is individual to
that school district we work
with the local school district
on how to make that happen and
what support that they need and
we try to be as creative and
flexible as we can with that.
so I did I'm did that answer
your well Madam chair
representative like a guess
where I'm going with I mean you
just I mean you told me that
that's available but I mean are
there schools like it seems to
me Madam chair representative
and superintendent that the
school were Mr Martinez is at is
he getting that support from
your school I'm just trying to
survive thank you madam chair
and representative tosses and
time Mr Martinez is not reached
out to us four of collaboration
or support
that so we've never received a
call from that particular school
and that's that's okay if they
feel that they they don't want
to work with our.
That's that everybody has send a
letter to every every year
school districts to see if they
would like to collaborate with
us so madam chair so I guess
what I'm trying to say
Representative there are people
outside and and keep in mind
please I'm just trying to clear
all this all this just this
information that we're getting
them trying to clean this up so
it sounds to me Madam chair
representative that that you you
know as much as you're trying to
outreach and do the best you can
there are students that are
outside of that school is that
correct just a quick yes or no
because I've got got to move on
to other things
Madam chair superintendent
please.
Yes okay thank you and so madam
chair Representative what number
if you could give me a a number
of superintendent of children or
people that that that need this
help outside of what you're
you're helping how many students
do you think there are.
Just a number please madam chair
madam chair Representative
Terrazas if I could just click.
So that are getting no contact
with the school for the deaf
outreach yes yes ma'am just
outside of your.
Representative.
Madam chair representative
access I I don't I don't know I
don't keep that those that
number yeah I I would hazard to
to make a gas around that like I
said there are some schools who
don't let us many do
I I I don't know I I despite
fifty I can't I can't really get
I can find out information from
you sure you.
Madam chair representative let
me switch over to.
Mr Martinez there Mr how many
students do you have up
destructiveness madam chair
members of the committee
representatives Terrazas thank
you for the question so we are
our our total population right
now is a hundred eleven.
sixty five our special ed about
half of the of the whole hundred
eleven are deaf hard of hearing
and and and twenty some percent
arcs are high special needs
special ed so we serve many of
the kids most of our deaf kids
are not kids that were allowed
at the school for the deaf so
that's something to recognize as
well because of their
eligibility requirements around
being out there kind of primary
disability at.
Our next students in market it
just I guess.
No Sir I'm sorry Madam chair
representative having a hard
time hearing Mr Martinez.
I just want to dress something
that Dr guy goes to to say that
our school has not reached out
to the school for the deaf over
the eleven years of our
existence is a gross
misrepresentation of the truth
thank L. all right I would like
to see I would like to just take
a time out please and
Representative roses also this
is not the place to start
growing one side against the
other I don't believe I would
like to focus on the bill and
you're trying to get I know
you're madam chair just a
minute.
I know you're trying to get
information to understand and
clear this clear up
misunderstandings and I would
say there's misunderstandings on
both sides which is one of the
problems of help moving the bill
forward but I would appreciate
you to stop grilling.
If you've got of questions that
are our leaders to the bill but
I think this is not productive
to be grilling
experts and and attendees and
and pitting them one against the
other in this hearing madam
chair might madam chair my
responsibilities are
Representative two is to get to
the truth I didn't ask any more
anything more than how many
students that are being a green
Sir madam chair and.
Stop.
I'm gonna cut you off in a
minute I'm telling you this is
not an investigation we are
debating the bill.
And I will let you go so far but
I think you've crossed the line
in trying to
grill people.
And so up please.
The result focus I'm I'm I'm
going to be respectful met madam
chair let me Representative I'm
gonna cut you off.
I'm telling you.
As fast madam chair what.
And madam chair could I jump in
here for a second.
It is just a second.
Bill.
Madam chair I'm not trying to be
disrespectful okay.
But I was trying this reading in
on me Representative.
Here I'm yeah I don't have a
gavel but I'm B. gavel you hard
so please take a deep breath.
Hold on a minute I'm gonna let
representative Thompson on this
point.
Thank thank you madam chair and
I just want to add in it's it's
really hard to say how many
people you're not serving you I
mean that it's it's the state
with and I bring this up madam
chair because we always hear the
same thing in our in our quest
for getting autism services
people think well how many
people are not being served
that's the problem we don't know
so trying to growth someone
about a number that is I know
what all is out of bounds as far
as I'm concerned and I will I
will just say that that there
are kids who are not getting
served and none of us know about
a man that's not right but to to
grill someone to have them know
something that's unknowable is
is out of bounds thank you madam
chair thank you thank you and
Representative I'm gonna let you
continue asking questions but
I'm telling you and I'll cut you
off again you are setting this
up as a conflict between gas
here in this hearing.
to pet them one against the
other and and I is and this is
not an investigation.
This is not a congressional
investigation hearing this is
this is a hearing on this bill
that's before us and I know
you're trying to learn and
understand what's behind it and
I'm gonna let you ask some more
questions but I'm going to stop
you again if I feel like you are
just growing are the gas at this
hearing and string off of what's
before us on this bill.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair again my
apologies I didn't mean to cut
you off right I thought we were
having a conversation actuals
I'm sure pause and I apologize
it's never my intent to be
disrespectful in any way shape
or form I was just trying to
find my way to understand the
intent of the bill and why we're
trying to
move this forward it is the
intent is to help people outside
of the school of the deaf madam
chair that was where I was going
with that and I wanted to make
sure I was making the right
decision
I don't I didn't feel that I was
being disrespectful and I didn't
feel I didn't mean for this to
turn into hitting or grilling I
just.
You know what we all have our
expertise I have money and in my
background and I I thought we'd
be at this hearing trying to get
I'm a numbers person Matt madam
chair and so I I just I I'm
factual person and so I was just
trying to get that get down to
the fact so that I could so I
could make a.
Good of.
A good decision I'm getting I'm
getting madam chair different
emails back and forth asking me
all kinds of different questions
I'm trying to clarify all the
stuff we're not only myself but
I also have constituents in
Silver City that are concerned
and I'm not but I'm hearing
things that are that are their
contribution that so I'm just
trying to figure this out I
don't I don't and and I feel
that if you have another
question go ahead I do madam
chair so so then.
Is is there I'll just go ahead
and dress up
Representative chair
representative Maestas I think
and and then we can go from
there if we see feel like we
need to go any further I I had
information stating that
The school the gap was charging
like Los crucis school in in Los
crucis the district there
and so I I was just trying to
figure it all those things out
is that happening Madam chair
representative.
Thank you.
Representative SS.
Discover that does receive.
Several hundred thousand dollars
for services it provides but
maybe the superintendent of
crucis schools can answer that
question it's my understanding
that.
That they how do you get a
couple hundred thousand dollars
for services provided if you
don't charge for those services
and understand.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
This is doctor sure he'll from
Los crucis Good morning
everybody I apologize my camera
was not on earlier was in the PS
that they needing
we do have an MOA with the
school for the deaf as stated by
a doctor gray goes we do have a
preschool program located in one
of our elementary schools
that service some few pre K.
students.
Into our M. away we do provide
the space and then we also
within the MLA.
A third thirty five hundred
dollars per pre K. students in
that program.
So that's part of the family
that we have with the school for
the deaf I hope that answers
your question Madam chair
representative you pay thirty
five hundred per student to
whom.
To the school for the deaf.
This is what I mean Madam chair
representative I'm getting two
different
It's confusing I'm I'm hearing
on one end madam chair that
there's no charges and this is
where I'm trying to clear up
just like everyone else here
Madam chair representative we
are trying to figure these
things out when there's
misinformation like I'm just
trying to get down to the facts
of chair representative Los
crucis school still school
district falls and into in my
district and so I'm concerned
about that so Madam chair
representative I guess do we
give Representative Maestas do
we give because I don't want to
put anybody against anybody so
if you'll guide me on this madam
chair we should answer that.
it looks like
Representative superintendent
guy goes has her hand up go
ahead go ahead if you want to
respond yeah just very quickly
madam chair members of the
committee the question before
was of do we charge outreach for
K. through twelve we do not at
this time
You know the.
Districts and and the school for
the deaf as governmental
agencies can go into agreement
if they need to right now we we
don't have that for K. through
twelve we do have joint powers
agreements with preschools some
of for preschool Services and in
our Farmington area in our and
also in a Los crucis we don't
have a joint powers agreement at
this time for the children we
serve in the Albuquerque area
with APS so those you know those
kind of agreements seven flow
again it's the agreement between
the school for the deaf and the
school districts on how to best
serve those children what we've
heard from the school districts
is that those agreements that
they support us and being able
to to find the of the services
we have but would never be
closed to the amounts that would
have to be provided for the the
level of expertise that we
provide to those schools so it's
a way for us to partner with
school districts and they don't
have to go into agreement with
us if they don't want to it's
it's up but again those are only
preschool it's not outreach
thank you for your time.
Thank you madam chair
representative again so you know
I I mean I guess what was really
going with this madam chair
representative as I wanted to to
to clear some of the.
Look if we vote and I we don't
bring up some of these things
madam chair I'm gonna get email
hate email that that you voted
against the screen of death and
so I was just going to go make
sure that I was understanding
that the intent of this bill is
to have the fed Department help
of those who are not receiving
the optimum care that that the
school the day after the
providing and I was just trying
to clear that up just to make
sure I was understanding that
and another question
Representative I I do have
another question madam chair so
is the intent Madam chair
representative to just
specifically.
Bring attention to the path to
move for some help and
assistance to all those
districts around those who may
not have the the the so for
the schools for the deaf.
Madam chair representative SS
yes yes the intent of this bill
is to improve educational
outcomes for deaf and hard of
hearing students throughout New
Mexico I mean my hat goes off
and after minister spec for the
guy was as work the school for
the deaf is arguably the
greatest deaf school in the
world and I'm not exaggerating
it's marvelous in all of us to
New Mexico's to take tremendous
pride in that institution but
not every school it not every
DeBernardi hearing student
attends the New Mexico school
for the deaf on cereals and so
they're sixty eight
superintendents there's you know
thousands of schools we need a
deaf and hard of hearing
coordinator within pad to work
with the superintendents and to
and to make sure that that no
student slips through the
cracks.
Madam chair representative I
think you know I'm I'm with you
that we are trying to just help
those that are are outside and
and my question again I'm gonna
go through the chair madam chair
representative.
I just wanted to get up now that
this bill has been amended and
and it doesn't include the
school of the deaf at all
I just wanted to get a.
He endorsement or a a thumbs up
that they're comfortable with
what we're moving forward and
doing.
And who's comfortable
Representative well as the
school of that fight it sounds
like they they were upset and
Services as a satisfied the
madam chair.
Representative Gallegos I mean.
Because I just promoted you
give me a good promotion.
madam chair members of the
committee representative office
thank you for the question I
would have to study the bill in
its current form to a little bit
more right now I'm still
concerned the public education
department would have a
coordinator that oversees equity
and equality and I'm not sure
what standard we're looking out
for equal
it's possible that if you look
at and the delivery of
educational services if you're
talking about that there still
the school protest could be out
at at risk constitutionally
because they may still look at
the bill and say see it has to
be equal and what you do is
determined not to be equal so we
want to take control of your
screen and and and spread the
service opt out now that that
was our concern the way the bill
was initially crafted there are
it was clearly trying to
determine how the school for the
deaf all life managing and we
collaborated with which was
unconstitutional so that's my
concern still I still have
concerns around the
at I. D. E. eight individual
disabilities Education Act
services are to be equitable not
equal so I'm not really clear
what the it looks more like the
tens of the bill is to be Act
equal with funding and I'm not
and and and and we're really
should be looking at equity
bility for children who are deaf
and hard of hearing because if
you give kids the same equal
amount of funding it and you
can't replicate.
The same amount of of numbers of
deaf children and experts in
that area it's still will not
make that setting equal and it
may dilute services for children
who do need that that level of
services will madam chair.
Chairman miss madam chair
representative if I could just
say one more thing to that for
Representative addresses this
bill is now as amended response
the Yazzie Martinez lawsuit and
it is about it is about a
standard we didn't define the
Courts to provide it and the
Yazzie we're trying to respond
to the Yazzie Martinez lawsuit
so it's not up to us it's not up
to the superintendent this is a
response to the Yazzie Martinez
suit and a conversation that
should happen with pad as
amended.
Thank you.
Representative Madam chair
representative thank you as one
of my things I just don't want
to cross the line.
Madam chair house like go over I
go because I want to create any
issues I I just I just think
there with the amendment I
didn't read anything it's
totally stripped everything from
the
screen of death and my
understanding of the seven I can
be corrected the schools like
madam chair like Mr Martinez is
only getting up a few dollars in
comparison what I say a few
dollars a day here two hundred
thousand dollars is that right
madam chair representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative assets so we and
we know it's not a comparison.
Yazzie Martinez calls for
equalization within head but to
answer your question school for
the deaf received approximately
seventeen point eight million
dollars of the sign language
academy that has a hundred ten
students receives two point five
million dollars okay thank you
very much for that and so it
looks I guess what I think we're
all interested here in in in
making sure that every single
person of need.
Should be helped and it's not
there's no perfect situation
there's no nothing's perfect I
believe that screen of death is
doing an absolutely amazing job
I believe that schools like Mr
Martinez the schools are trying
to to step up their game and and
and do that I believe that there
are people that I have been
falling through the cracks from
what I've heard and and I
believe that I just don't see I
know that Madam chair
representative and
superintendent you see that you
have concerns it was a it's
stripped out everything from
there I don't see that anymore
again I didn't intent of the
question was not to create up
were it was basically up my
intent was to just clarify the
misunderstandings got hundreds
of emails and and just and and
listen to the to the just a
money was confusing and as a new
legislator I was just trying to
reach and clear the smoke and
and and the disinformation for
myself I I I don't see anything
wrong Madam chair representative
with us moving this to education
to the education Committee for
them to vet this properly and
try to just if this is if the
intent is for us to to help
every student I don't see
anything that that that is
attacking the screen of death I
think they're just asking Hey
that's up let's see what if we
can if we can study this a
little bit and help those or
need that maybe not the us being
served to their full potential
or even a little bit better
thank you madam chair
Representative I yield thank
you.
Next I have Representative
Matthews.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and
Just down here I do we have over
three hundred participants
watching this hearing so
and I like I'm sure everybody
else who's a member of this
committee have received just.
Hundreds of emails from people
very.
Very deeply
affected by the debate that
we're having so I'm.
When I was a young lawyer back
in the late seventies I was a
the lead counsel in a lawsuit
brought against the state and a
APS for improved is class action
for improve special education
services and that lawsuit went
on for seven years and we were
finally we prevailed and the
formulas for funding special ed
were approved
services were improved at the
time for example they were
something like two thousand
children waiting for a valuation
just in APS for services.
it was that's the parents you
brought that lawsuit
Who have been advocating for
better services for years and
years and years to the
legislature not getting any
response.
and so they finally turned to
litigation and litigation did
start to change the situation
somewhat
I mention that because in that
process I became very familiar
with the funding formula as how
it dealt with special education
I became.
Worked with experts who taught
different people with different
disabilities kids with different
disabilities including a deaf
children and so forth and I.
From that gained in an
appreciation of the complexity
involved in public school
funding and the even more
complex situation involved with
special education funding
because in special education one
of the goals is to have
individual individual as.
Education programs a peach and
there's a poll additional
process for children who qualify
as exceptional kids in the
public schools.
it is so that I preface my comp
my questions with that
background it's I'm sure that
what I learned at that time is
now somewhat out of date but I
wish and the the the concept
that we have different levels of
services for children with
special needs is built into the
system is part of federal law it
is part of state law and I as I
read this this
proposed legislation I was very
concerned that somehow rather we
were getting away from the
concept that different kids need
different services we were
getting to the concept of the
only way we can tell whether
what we're not we're doing a
good job is whether the dollars
assigned to each child in the
state and I think that is a
different philosophy than the
philosophy that we have in our
schools is special education.
R. and the whole concept of the
IEP an individualized education
programs for different kids with
different levels of services we
need different levels of
services so.
And I appreciate the Sanchez.
Changing the first provision.
The first section but the one
that still bothers me
is on page five of the bill on a
section subsection F. on line
Levin which as for a study.
On equalizing public funding.
And.
It still seems to me that the
focus of this bill is not
looking at the effectiveness of
the programs but the dollars
assigned to them and so my
question to the Sanchez is
in money miss reading.
The bill is that.
It if if I in miss reading it
then could you point to me
language in the bill that takes
something other than a financial
approach to evaluating these
educational services.
Thank you madam chair
representative Matthews for that
no that's that's a great catch
the there is not a deaf and hard
of hearing variable within our
state equalization formula
they're they're up so I I turn
this over to
director Martinez to describe
how is deaf funding happen
within pet because Martinez
Yazzie we don't this is not an
appropriations bill.
This whole equality equity stuff
you know that's that's still
within Martinez Yazzie be state
were mandated per that that
other that modern class action
lawsuit to deal with.
at risk youth and so I don't
believe that's being done I
wrote a letter about a four page
letter to then that new then
Secretary Stewart with regards
to this and then go to adequate
response we you know so anyway
of what explain now.
Hello how are defining in PED's
funded Mr Martinez Madam chair
representative Matthews.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative Maestas
and and Representative might I
just to send Matthews thank you
for this and I just want to
first I apologize for my passion
response earlier.
Madam chair I I this is been
something my son's death and so
you know I I get a little a
fired up so I apologize for that
and so so back to the question
real quick so right now as
Representative Maestas said
there is no death factor in the
SCG state funding formula most
of our deaf hard of hearing kids
at our school are considered the
level which you know as as you
all.
No it's a it's a multiplier of
three to the unit that so right
now the unit that you put the
state is forty five hundred
dollars forty five four thousand
five hundred thirty six dollars
and seventy five cents that's
what eight unit is now and and
then argue level kids get a
multiplier of three and then
other components of our program
like at risk of being a dual
language programs bring that
students value monetary value to
about fifteen sixteen thousand
four and I'll just use my son my
son is a yes multiple needs
students so he's worth that much
to SCG okay to your to your
question Representative Matthews
it you're right money does not
equate quality does that they're
not the same and and we
completely recognize that I
think in the proposal of the
bill that death add coordinator
position would that would be one
of their duties is to oversee
the quality of of death
education in the public school
sector now I say that also that
there's other there's there's
many different ways that deaf
students are served based on
that the degree of hearing loss
there to other disabilities so
so we want to say that one
method of def add is sufficient
to serve all deaf hard of
hearing kids is I think as it is
is a misrepresentation really
there's a there's a spectrum of
need to serve the deaf hard of
hearing population and it comes
in different different
methodologies just to say like
so in our case we've attracted
you know yes Monday when I spoke
to who are working with Harvard
and State University Minnesota
university is on a maybe CYFD
it's because they're recognizing
that there is a spectrum of
services and methodologies and
Pedigo Jeez that can help move
the needle deaf hard of hearing
students depending on where they
sit so I I do believe that this
position that will be created
would be a huge part of moving
that direction to monitor the
quality of deaf hard of hearing
education with.
In the school districts I hope I
are hoping she question.
And madam chair M..
Thank you thank you for that
answer I'm really focusing a
little bit more on subsection F.
relates to money.
right I see.
R. yes it talks about equalizing
funding.
And so forth
And it seems to me that.
In in employees at this point is
wanted correct me that's that's
fine if I miss right reading
what is what the bill says but
that the focus was on funding
and at least originally it would
involve an analysis of the
funding that the school for the
deaf is getting to the
constitution.
And my aunt now I understand
that's that's impact taken out
is that correct and then last
year of Representative Matthews
yes and and we didn't.
That's not really our focus but
you're correct the original
language may of may have had
that happen the letter a
permanent one money for the
school with F. must stay with
the school for the deaf and that
Martinez Yazzie lawsuit is
dealing with students within the
public education system believe
it or not school that is not
part of our public education.
So so the key is to study the
current I'm reading online
eleven twelve Madam chair
representative Matthews study
the current funding for
DeBernardi hearing students and
make recommendations.
That's that's what the bill says
on a and and the guidance isn't
necessarily.
Paragraph F. but Martinez Yazzie
and what's really happening
within path to improve
No path just because a school
that fits so awesome and has
relationships with great many
students Pat just hasn't.
Upped its game with regards to
deaf and hard extensive mapping.
Madam chair representative if I
could just at Representative
Matthews the Yazzie Martinez
lost this which is an alignment
of the Yazzie Martinez lawsuit
it's not asking for something
different or unique.
Special needs children are
identified as the Martinez
lawsuit this is in response to
the Yazzie Martinez lawsuit and
I think it's it's interesting
that both took a lawsuit now
it's taken a lawsuit we see so
many bills they're dealing with
color they're dealing with.
Might English as a second
language this is dual language
in the special needs and what is
so interesting to me is that.
C. percent of New Mexico
students with significant
hearing loss are under employed
or not employed they are they're
earning very little compared to
their typical developing
children their counterparts and
they are graduating with a two
point eight to a four point five
grade level compared to the rest
of New Mexicans were graduating
in a tenth grade level which is
still not good but two point
eight compared to ten right
graduation and they they leave
school functionally illiterate.
Compared to other youth and so
are student outcomes for
children who are deaf and hard
of hearing are not good there
funding is not adequate and this
bill is using the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit to say PED
you are obligated to look at
this these are dual language
learners and they have among the
lowest student outcomes and so
it does bond to funding because
that's what Mr Martinez directed
it's not directed at school the
school death New Mexico School
that it's directed it's in
response to the R. C. Martinez
lawsuits.
Share.
Representative is and thank you
thank you for that answer and I
appreciate that
would you be willing in F. to
add language to make clear that
in this analysis this study that
the funding of the school for
the deaf would not be part of
that.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Matthews yes and
in fact if I could words words
Smith that Madam chair
representative Matthews if I
were to follow your lead.
I would strike after make
recommendations.
Just strike the rest of the
paragraph F. so it read study
the current funding for deaf
hard of hearing students we
could even say within Pat.
And make recommendations.
Yes that that be friendly just.
Or strike F. in its entirety in.
You know how we want to do it
but yeah it's about pet it's
about deaf and hard of hearing
students within path.
and and and having PED's grab
the bull by the horns with
regards to where the largest and
most rural state in the country
to country Moores rural fifth
largest and.
And this is about Pat so thank
you that's a brilliant.
Representative.
Madam chair representative
Mestis
thank you for that
But let me just now the second
piece of of a question
I think that probably and in
particularly at the D. levels C.
and D. levels of special ed we
are going to find many children.
What ever there there.
Exception ality their disability
may be in the same kind of a
situation that we're finding
with deaf children and I've seen
the unemployment numbers on
blind children for example and
so forthcoming the.
The we had a bill the other day
we talked about how difficult it
was for the people with
disabilities to find employment
and the high percentages of
people like with disabilities
who are employed in can't earn a
living and it seems to me that.
What you're saying here about
deaf kids could be said about.
Kids with severe emotional
disabilities we could say about
blind kids we could say it about
children
Severely learning disabled
children
and anyway a number of other
disabilities at critically the
the very the very extreme levels
the CMT programs.
You madam chair and
representative okay let let if
you don't mind.
If.
The other piece of this that
that was concerning to me was
that we that we singled out a
single disability as opposed to
sort of saying under Yazeed we
ought to be doing better with
all these kids particularly at
the at the let the higher levels
of disability and
Would you be willing to.
Expand your bill to include some
study
Impaired about how will the
formula and how will the
programs are working for are
very severely handicapped
handicap isn't the word dispose
using more I.
disabled children.
No thank you madam chair of
rules in Matthews now that that
be fantastic I mean we're we're
just all doing the best we can
assist and legislate tors I
became familiar with the sign
language academy I'm very
familiar with the mandate and
the constitutional
interpretation and Martinez
Yazzie B. the state what I.
I became officially involved in.
Have definite hearing outcomes
like I said since the two
thousand thirteen task force
that.
Definitely the New Mexico's
commitment to deaf and hard of
hearing students is is
revolutionary the school was
created in eighteen eighty seven
it is our first institution of
state government New Mexicans
care about different hard of
hearing community and and want
every single DeBernardi in
person to have a the quality of
life when we that's kind of
romanticizing about our state's
commitment to different Harding
hearing people but but yeah we
let's do the whole analysis by
all means.
But I mean that's a big that's
frankly a much bigger bill than
I anticipated but we definitely
wanted to move this have this
conversation education I just
wanna say Madam this is the most
robust legislative conversation
on deaf and hard of hearing.
In the in the history the state
New Mexico.
Madam chair and representative
Representative Matthews I I
would have to concur with that
before even being elected I
spend a lot of time with me in
the Education Committee and I I
appreciate these conversations I
think they need to be having the
hard conversations are often the
most important ones and so as a
member of education we're
hearing bill of rights for
Hispanic bill of rights for
Indian bill of rights for.
African American we I mean we
are developing entire PED
departments for them and I think
it's a really important
conversation because many of
those folks have multiple
barriers and they may have an
IEP and they may be deaf hard of
hearing and so I I.
I think it's an important
conversation it's interesting to
me that this is referred first
to health and Human Services and
not first to the Education
Committee I can tell you that I
have not this is not a
conversation a robust
conversation that it happened at
the Education Committee.
Madam chair representative thank
you for for your your answers in
your comments
I I agree that the the question
of how we provide services to
our not only are minority
students students of color but
students with disabilities is is
isn't it a critical conversation
to have and and I would really
like us not to.
Take one group and should pit
them against other people that
we and people would just for
example here where we're
focusing on deaf but.
I I have to believe that what we
have in your concern about deaf
is probably applicables to kids
with other kinds of disabilities
and I'm I was a tutor in the
public schools after I retired
from teaching and
it there's a lot of need there
is a lot and eight
and so I.
I'm wondering if maybe the
appropriate thing to do here
would be to table this bill and
give you a chance to do some
revisions on the lines that
we've been talking about and
perhaps bring it back I just
that out I'm not an expert on
all the.
Your ways we do things in the
legislature but I'm trying to
figure out how we might move
this conversation to make it a
little broader and and moved it
the ideas we're talking about a
long.
Thank you madam chair resin
Matthews that's the the will of
this committee I think it be
fantastic if the house Education
had this same conversation
that's where that's where we're
hoping this bill goes.
We are planned on bringing light
to to deficiencies of deaf
education within pad that was
our goal it was tremendous
concern for the school for the
deaf now that concern I believe
is a levy added we.
that conversation definitely
needs to happen but this
conversation needs to happen as
well and so I'm committed to.
Definitely hearing education in
the bill and moving that
forward.
so I mean I'm not.
But yeah I mean if you if you
have some ideas to amend that
but I think that I think that
having this conversation with
worse Devin are hearing.
Ads and and creates the
conversation that you want to
have it doesn't necessarily need
to be in the bill.
But what we're pushing for
statutorily is a deaf education
coordinator but that broader
conversation that we're having
now is in prohibited by the
language in the bill
I I was you know sort of I don't
know that's my thoughts what is
the will of the committee chair.
And I'm on that point
Representative my assistant
Representative Dow
I I can you know a firm for you
as the chair of the Legislative
Health and Human Services the
interim committee a commitment
to have and trying get LISC to
do a joint meeting with us the
civically on on special ed and
special needs kids including and
how that integrates Services
integrate into the public
education from from the school
for the deaf and school for the
blind
both are engaged in public
education even though they're
not part of PED they're just
they're attached to higher ed
but we know that they're serving
our our public education
population and in light of
Yazzie and so forth and I think
Representative Thomson talked
about this as well we need to
have a much bigger conversation
about all special needs kids and
at so you have my commitment
that regardless of what happens
today we need to have a much
bigger broader conversation
about all special needs kids and
how we
you give them the focus that
they that they needed funding
and expertise and support so
I'm committed to do that thank
you madam chair thank you very
much and I I would suggest chair
resentment to that moving this
moving this bill on the house
education does not contradict
that goal of that broader
conversation.
Madam chair representative my
answer is and Representative Dow
I appreciate that and I
appreciate your concern for for
deaf children but I do get
concerned that when we when we
when we car about one particular
group then we it it almost
creates a competition with other
groups and I just think that is.
Not where we need to go when we
talking about special ed and
exceptional kids I it's not a
contest it's it's we we need to
be serving all these kids we
need to be serving all of them
so they receive a free
appropriate education as
required by Yazzie and in New
Mexico constitution so that it's
not it's it's certainly not that
your comments about the need to
deaf children are following our
our that I'm not hearing those
it's just that I get concerned
when we when we sort of create.
in this state
Silence we silos so many things
and it doesn't allow us then to
to everything's a little boxes
we try to solve things little
boxes and that means it
frequently we don't do a very
good job of selling things at
least in my opinion just my
opinion so we are I I would
yield.
Thank you on next Representative
Lord.
Thank you madam chair I
appreciate that
This.
This is a very emotional bill
with a lot of passion on both
sides a lot of passion might
represent my analysts are my
system is great she keeps all
the people who call in and so I
have equal form against I've
emails equal for and against and
makes it that much harder I
understand both sides I'm kind
of inclined to have this move
forward education it needs more
discussion I think education
could give the discussion that
it needs I actually do have one
more question but I'm waiting
for reply so if it's K. with you
madam chair and I'll be brief
questions I know we're running
long
I have a brief question but if I
could wait and just pass and
then come back in a moment if
that would be okay okay I will
go on to Representative **** you
have another question yes rather
quickly and I notice there's no
appropriation in this bill and
how will the position of deaf
education coordinator be paid
for.
Thank you madam chair thank you
wrote bash just in the in the
pads in the pads the department
budget.
Have money for that in their
department budget.
Madam chair representative bash
I believe they would have been
at this bill gained momentum
that they had concerns I I don't
think the PED's analysis had
that particular concern.
there's many until positions at
pet now but if this bill came
omentum then and they needed
extra money we could put it and
house bill two on the Senate
side but.
But one position within a bass
Department didn't raise concern
from that department.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair so much I
my apologies Monday and
Wednesday I was trying to
present a bill and another
committee and it kept getting
pushed and I'm glad this
conversation is still happening
Madam chair representative I too
have had several about fifty
fifty four and and against but I
understand the the conversation
so madam chair what I'd like to
do is is trust in the
representatives to fix the bill
one have the the conversation
and education so I'd like to
move it to pass not with no
recommendation.
Second that.
Madam chair I have but at
alternate motion to table.
Okay the motion to table takes
precedent so second.
Okay and Delores let's take the
role on a motion to table and if
the tabling motion fails then
were on a motion to pass with no
record.
Ocean to table Representative
Phelps Anderson.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
No to table with an explanation.
Representative Brittney better
house.
Yes.
To table.
Sorry sorry Torrez yes to table.
Representative Karen bash.
Yes able.
Representative Stephanie lord no
to table.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Just to table and I would like
to explain my vote.
Representative Roger Montoya.
No to table but I'd like to
explain my bills.
Representative Lewis Ted also
just no to table and like to
explain my vote.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Representative
vice chair Joanne J. Ferrary
yes.
Representative Phelps Anderson.
My computer says he's connecting
to audio.
As been contrite that's I think
he's having trouble okay.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong
yes to table.
Total of six to table I do not.
Time.
I'm.
Representative your your bill is
is tabled and we're going to
hear
from a few folks including
myself that this is in no way to
say that
And I'll I'll take private of
Dick's plan my vote first this
is no way it counter to any
concerns about there being
adequate.
inadequate and Services to death
and hard of hearing students in
the public schools and I share
Representative Matthews
concerned about
one over another and I share
deep concern over the
The.
The misinformation that I think
is on both sides and the heat of
all of this and I just think it
needs to have a really in depth
conversation and not just here
and then education but together
over the inner and it probably
broader than just us but
certainly
including the specificity of
this and I have concerns that
there is even by taking a
reference to the school for the
deaf out they have a function in
the public schools and so there
is an inclusion of of them in
public schools and I think we
need to have that conversation
with everyone at the table
that's not so
But but I don't doubt that we
don't have enough services in
public schools that that I don't
doubt in would
hope we have that conversation
so I probably lost track of
everyone who wanted to make a
comment Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and you
also have my commitment along
with Armstrong caucus to have
the conversation during the
interim
I I believe there is a need I
believe are the education PED
needs to be involved I think I I
agree I think we need everyone
at the table and I look forward
to having those conversations in
the interim and we've all
learned a lot today thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative Montoya.
Madam chair and Sanchez thank
you so much for this important
discussion I do believe in my
hope in voting to not table it
was that it would move to the
education.
Committee there's some troubling
things about the bill as it
emerged I think the amendments
helped greatly to sort of take
out that critical tension but I
think it was a mistake to have
that be the launching point it
created a lot of three well we
have three hundred people
listening in.
The other piece that troubling
for me is that the notion that
PED.
Is wanting or should have this
new oversight position but they
are not at the table and that
has not been adequately describe
to me.
In closing the need for
specialized.
Educational strategies provision
for for the students were
talking about is we all agree on
that it is it is tragic that we
don't serve these kids in the
way that we should.
And by moving into the Education
Committee but now I guess it
will move to the interim
where I believe a really deep
dive and some strong outcomes
need to be had a very good time.
Thank you Representative
Matthews.
You might.
I'm I'm not muted in my no okay
yeah I'm good K.
I just wanted to to explain I
and.
Building on what and our our
chairwoman and said
and widespread Representative
Montoya said there's no question
in my mind that we had that one
of the the benefits of Yazzie
may well be that we start to
have some real discussions are
in deep dives and try to figure
out how to do things better than
we've been doing them
We have terrible outcomes for
kids in the state and that's
just not my mind is not
acceptable and we have to fix
that
I'm I'm I uploaded to table
because I thought that we made
some progress in the discussion.
Here in this committee and.
If we pass the bill.
If we able to do pastor that
recommendation.
My concern was that.
It that we that what we move
that that the extent that to
which we are able to move the
dialogue along in this committee
would.
Not be reflected and whereas if
we table to bill and gave you an
opportunity to come back with
some changes we would have moved
the needle toward and so that it
could go on to education and.
The conversation wouldn't start
back here it would start where
we left it and I think that that
is an appropriate
role for a committee to to play
in the process of helping the
legislation involved in so that
that is why I voted the way I
get thank you.
Thank you and Representative my
Estes and Representative Dow and
the audience I I'd like to say
one more thing the sad thing
about this hearing is that we've
not have this hearing before as
you said we've not had this kind
of a big hearing and discussion
on deaf and hard of hearing at
least not in our memories
it and the good thing about this
hearing is that we have started
that conversation and we have
a commitment from members of
this committee to work with our
the LFC in the in to expand this
conversation and and try and
move forward.
How we address kids with special
needs including
but not exclusively kids with
who are deaf and hard of hearing
it is
the fact that we have a specials
constitutional school.
Who makes this really important
conversation it's really a it's
been important for our state all
along to serve kids who are deaf
and hard of hearing the same can
be said for for kids who are
blind or sight impaired and and
as we housing Martinez points
out we've got all kinds of kids
also with with other special
needs that are pretty profoundly
impacted when we don't serve
them well in public education so
this is been a really good
dialogue and I look forward to
continuing at in the interim and
again no.
Disrespect or feeling that this
is not important by the fact
that we tabled this bill this
morning okay.
If you're seized up overnight
tremendous a.
Love for all you your time
committed to improving that
definite hearing outcomes in the
state out for many reasons but
one of them actually is my great
great grandfather was one of the
founders of the school for the
deaf back in the day it was an
original board member thank you
madam chair very gracious we
really appreciate all the time.
Get our madam chair to get a
response ability to explain my
what I'm sorry Representative I
I I lost track of who wanted to
explain their vote go ahead
Representative.
No again.
You know one of the things that
I wanted to expresses is I'm
glad that that we brought this
conversation as others of
expressed
as the health committee I I feel
that it's our responsibility to
look at it in the in the scope
of health and I in my opinion.
It was it was just very
confusing in the beginning and
I'm glad we cleared some of the
air with some of the questions I
wish that that should have in my
opinion I should have been done
before I got to asking questions
but I feel that those questions
some of those questions were
answered and I and I'm glad that
this this is going to be a
conversation will be continued
in the in terms and I hope to
see some results of for all
those who are in need that are.
Being served and and my best
wishes to the screen of death
they're doing a beautiful job
and and god bless all of you for
for all the conversation we had
today thank you.
Thank you representatives and
thank you Mr Martinez and
superintendent of for both
superintendents for a
participating today and all the
people who have listened in over
to hearing so we've had probably
close to five hours of hearing
this and so I I appreciate
everyone's input.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Members.
Okay.
Next we have a house bill two
forty nine.
Representative Madrid is he in
the audience.
Sam.
Yes yes yes I'm gonna promoting
right now.
I can get my little thing to
work.
Somebody got a okay.
I was able to promote thank you
thank you we were probably doing
pushing on the buttons to get
him over.
Representative Madrid welcome
and do you have any.
Experts that you would like to
join you.
Yes I have Dr drive up some.
just and then the LFC to okay
and if both of your experts
please would raise your hand
we've got a lot of people in the
attendee list that it takes us a
minute to find if you would go
without him Adam we're on it
okay Representative Madrid house
bill two forty nine go ahead.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Canadian I'm honored to be here
in front of you I know you guys
been extensible last couple
bills and run respect which to
but I'm chairman and members of
the committee simply put this is
house bill two forty nine it
will allow hundreds of employees
who work in five state licensed
casinos also known as we see in
our to work in a smoke free
environment we don't allow
people to smoke in restaurants
bars public buildings and even
limousines it's time that we
take a state license because we
built to be smoke free so we
protect the health of the co
workers who work there
especially given during the
COVID pandemic.
Most of the people who work at
these gaming floors of these
casinos are lower wage workers
they don't have they don't have
to be forced to choose between a
big truck and our health I don't
believe that none of us would
allow our children to family
members to work in a small US
will build an apartment for for
twelve hours a day five days a
week and and more so why would
we now allow New Mexicans to be
subject to such as orders
going to be but Benham
chairwoman this is the day in
time we've come we've seen
other.
A single strategically with a
mantle American and indigenous
because who knows taking the
same stand I think it's time for
us as a state that we follow are
you for what it's got to become
customary in protecting our
people and our family that work
in these environments to know
that if we don't take care of it
now the just see those
receivables to be subject to
great liability outcomes because
of this so I think it's a good
time I stand now for questions
or I would like to chair for
Mario to experts to speak to
figure out be given a moment
thank you madam chair had.
You wanna go hand.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I am what is Seto the
American Association we want to
thank Representative Madrid so
sponsoring this important
legislation this is so timely
given we're in the middle of the
COVID nineteen pandemic you know
as as you most of the members
and and the chair.
Nos New Mexico as being on the
forefront when it comes to
implementing clean indoor air
you know it was after
Albuquerque and Santa Fe as
their old indoor air lack of
laws you know the state adopted
but B. Johnson lane indoor air
act in twenty two thousand seven
and again in twenty nineteen
madam chair your cell
Representative Ferrary objective
sent and former observed Pratt
and Representative appropriate
Trujillo you know you all co
sponsored house bill two fifty
six you know to add the
cigarettes to the clean indoor
air act and also closed several
exemptions in the act you know
with the exception of racinos I
mean as you know we have fired
up.
The state license racinos.
Andrea does so some and park
this Farmington and Albuquerque
that employed hundreds of
employees who are exposed to
secondhand smoke on a daily
basis.
Now twenty states including the
neighboring states of Arizona
and Colorado have passed laws
making all state license you
know to see those Representative
smoke free in addition there
have been no work two hundred
gambling I mean see those that
closed due to the COVID nineteen
restrictions every vote but
school smokes spree you know
indoor pet policies adding to
nearly eight hundred you know
gaming okay seeing as they were
already smoke free prior to the
pandemic you know in New Mexico
what most of the tribal casinos
that closed due to the COVID
nineteen have reopened but you
know smoke free indoor policies
thank you know but there's
American society of heating
refrigerating and air
conditioning engineers no they
concluded you know all at
present the only means of
effectively eliminating health
rest associated with indoor
exposure is to ban smoking
activity and they say no other
engineering approaches including
air cleaning technologies have
demonstrated or should be relied
upon control risks from
secondhand smoking no met madam
chair the FY are is pretty clear
any claims of the smoke free
laws will push customers casinos
where smoking is permitted is
not supported by research on the
contrary both the New Mexico
gaming board and the state
commission.
Feel like you know making the
racinos small pre may you know
increased revenues because non
smokers would be you know
frequenting those casinos.
You know madam chair and members
of the committee this bill we
believe should be part of the
COVID nineteen relief package
you know to provide health
really we go to these racinos
workers thank you madam chair
and members members of the
committee.
Is some.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Dr don
Upson event of pulmonary
physician in Albuquerque since
nineteen ninety five.
I'm speaking for myself and also
Representative in the New Mexico
thoracic society the Americans
for asked Psy.D the American
lung association in New Mexico
as well as the national
organization.
The two thousand six US surgeon
general's report we have no
doubt that any exposure to
tobacco smoke is harmful to
human health.
I'm gonna speak briefly about
the particular risks to receive
no workers need for the little
bit already the proven harmful
effects of secondhand smoke
exposure the benefits of indoor
bans on commercial tobacco use
that excuse me.
Gaming facility employees suffer
more severe secondhand smoke
exposure than other workers
levels and casinos can be up to
eighteen times higher than in
offices or restaurants where
smoking is allowed.
Nineteen ninety eight study.
Of casino workers and so called
well ventilated casinos have
metabolize nicotine levels three
to six times higher than those
in other smoking workplaces.
In two thousand four casinos in
Delaware found to have six times
more cancer causing particles in
the air then highways or city
streets during rush hour.
I just I think it's seen as in
Reno and Las Vegas Nevada for
five years researchers found a
direct correlation between
exposure to secondhand smoke in
the workplace and damage to
workers standing.
The health harms of second smoke
are well documented secondhand
smoke causes lung cancer heart
disease stroke and diabetes.
It causes exacerbations or
attacks of asthma and COPD it
also cause irritation the eyes
sinuses in upper Airways and can
lead to chronic sinusitis.
More than twenty five years the
second smoke causes lung cancer
in non smokers.
The risk is elevated to the
thirty percent.
There's also a documented
evidence of increased risk of
coronary artery disease and
stroke that risk is increased
twenty five to thirty percent.
And the risks of coronary artery
disease and death and nonsmokers
it may be increased by as much
as sixty to ninety percent or
almost double the risk with
regular exposure especially
explosion the workings.
The twenty fourteen US insurance
general's report concluded that
exposure to secondhand smoke
causes a twenty to thirty
percent increased risk of
stroke.
There's also an increased risk
of about twenty to twenty five
percent the second smoke and
type two diabetes compared with
never smokers.
All of these conditions and
illnesses and causes of death
are common in New Mexico.
In apartments for smoking occurs
components of tobacco smoke can
be measured in the air including
small particles and the size of
penetrate deep into the lungs
the same size.
Articles that are regulated
outdoor air by the USEPA the PM
two point five a particle size
of two point five microns or
micrometers.
The environs also contain carbon
monoxide nicotine and benzene
and significant amounts.
Because the Jemia is generated
by the combustion of tobacco
smoke of tobacco.
And secondhand smoke is one of
the major sources of benzene
exposure from non smokers so
much of that from filling a car
with gasoline and exceeding
levels from petrochemical plants
on nearby residents.
By Marcus show that non smokers
exposed to secondhand smoke
absorb metabolize and excrete
tobacco smoke components
including nicotine and tobacco
specific percentages.
April generated by E. cigarettes
almost always contains nicotine
and it may contain other
chemicals including tobacco
related carcinogens although
lower concentrations than from
smoking.
The benefits of the the smoking
and vaping bass in the workplace
Our our conclusive laws that
limit public and workplace
smoking reduce acute coronary
syndrome ECS with rapid
decreases in the number of heart
attacks in both smokers and non
smokers.
Several studies have shown
improvement in the status of
people with us after
implementation of workplace bans
on smoking.
In addition to the immediate.
And subsequent as well as
direct health benefits of
comprehensive smoke free air
laws the laws help workers who
use tobacco overcome their
addiction.
The tobacco industry campaign to
erroneously discrediting of ants
on the harmful health effects of
secondhand smoke is well
documented legal actions against
industry led to the release of
millions of their documents that
show proof of their actions in
the tobacco industry websites
now knowledge the harm of
secondhand smoke.
In summary use of commercial
tobacco remains the leading
cause of preventable illness and
death in this country and in New
Mexico.
The numbers of people who die
prematurely from tobacco use and
exposure.
You are not quite equal to the
number who died in the past year
due to COVID nineteen and some
of those COVID nineteen this.
Heads back please as a
contributing factor.
And the key word here is
preventable we know what
policies work to decrease
tobacco dependence
significantly increase in the
price of all tobacco products
adequately funding prevention
and barrier free treatment
programs hi impact anti tobacco
media campaigns.
Comprehensive clean indoor air
laws and as evidence becomes
available I'm sure the banning
flavors in tobacco products will
be proven to have considerable
benefit.
As fans are implemented a large
an increasing body of evidence
documents reduction secondhand
smoke exposure with subsequent
benefits for cardiovascular and
respiratory health.
Casino employees face higher
levels of exposure to secondhand
smoke than almost any other
profession profession as a
result they more frequently
suffer from its devastating
health effects.
Prohibiting smoking and vaping
is the only way to effectively
protect employees and patrons
from the dangers of secondhand
smoke an E. cigarette aerosols.
As the please pass this bill to
close the receive no exception
in the D. Johnson clean indoor
air act.
With hundreds of employees in
the five state licensure Siemens
work in a smoke free environment
as mentioned these employees
shouldn't have to choose between
a paycheck in their health thank
you very much.
Thank you Representative are you
ready to go to questions now yes
ma'am I just like to a.
How to tie back to something
that makes more sense I think to
all of us in this committee and
I have to go back to my mom who
was very during person to me and
of course all of our moms a
special she was a smoker very
much were much of our life that
I mean and the at the end to
battle two rounds of cancer and
the cancer she will she be but
you didn't beat was a smoking
that ended up depleting and
taking her at the end which was
you know basically POD and that
that's where it comes back to
home is that you all of us have
this decisions to make and
whether we smoke or not and we
can't change those that want to
smoke nor do I want I want them
to still enjoy the casinos of
the receivables the idea of
those a secondhand smoke does
make a difference and and that's
what we're looking at those
bills just providing all working
towards a safer environment that
I'm gonna be subject to these
things.
You know I can win the made a
difference the way in the
outcome of my mom was but the
difference is what I make within
our our state to help our state
overall in compliance and so the
system we have this pandemic
that we're finding managing and
getting into good numbers so
this just coincides with the
decision not to that I'm taking
decision are making less law to
hurt anybody but to help our our
people that work in these
environments that should have
that same what we're saying for
workforce please so thank you
madam chair were now open for
questions thank you.
Thank you first we'll go to the
audience and that we'll start
with a poll to see who in the
audience is in favor or
opposition to house bill two
forty nine.
If we were in person would be
raising our hands in the in the
room doctor who who all is there
so we can put the pull up.
Gabrielle our door Delores are
you able to do a poll.
There we go.
Thank you.
So if you're in support or
opposition if you could.
Raise your hands.
answer the call thank you.
Give it a few more seconds.
Okay.
looks like we have
twenty in the audience in
support and to in opposition.
We will go first to those who
wish to speak in opposition.
If you wish to speak in
opposition.
R. raise your hand.
And we'll go first to Aaron
showers.
Go ahead Aaron.
looks like a lost Erin I Jason
Weaks.
Morning Mr madam chair members
of the committee Jason Weaks a
registered lobbyist for
Albuquerque
downs racetrack and casino we we
stand in opposition to this bill
we certainly understand the
intent of the Sanchez but you're
right now the scene is been
closed racinos then closed for
about a year they're hanging on
by a thread from a financial
standpoint and what we certainly
appreciate the relevant effort
to protect employees the racing
commission actually disagrees in
FY are with some of the
assertions that are made about
you know financial impacts of
this bill I think they said that
it would negatively impact
racino revenue by about eighteen
twenty five percent which that
kind of has a cascading impact
on the whole racing industry our
purses as well as the ability to
do testing on so on and so forth
and so we really do not feel
like this bill is well timed in
particular we stood up in
opposition to similar measures
in the past we do feel that you
know if you're gonna allow
smoking and tribal casinos which
really can't prevent from a
state level you have to give
some parity with the racinos on
the at tribal casinos still have
smoking sections in them and as
a result you know what to tell
us that we can't have smoking
sections really does put us an
additional competitive
disadvantage in a time where
we're we're really you know
struggling to try to figure out
how to reopen our operations in
any kind of meaningful way thank
you.
Thank you anyone else who wishes
to speak in opposition.
Okay those who wish to speak in
support.
There we go I'm.
Erin showers.
Go ahead.
Erin go ahead.
Are you need on your yourself go
ahead.
We are not able to hear you
looks like you unmuted but we
cannot hear you.
Where will come back to you see
if you can fix your microphone
or audio on your end we'll go to
charter day.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Sade and I represent
Americans for nonsmokers rights
the national organization for
forty five years has been
dedicated to non smokers rights
this was a thank you so much for
the opportunity to speak today
and for your valuable time on
this important issue on behalf
of our members in New Mexico
Americans for nonsmokers rights
respectfully encourage is a yes
vote on house bill two forty
nine which if passed would
protect the D. Johnson clean
indoor air law and thereby
protect more workers and public
health exposure to secondhand
tobacco smoke emissions from
electronic cigarettes remain one
of the top causes of preventable
death and disease house bill two
forty nine will create an
ongoing healthy work environment
in racinos promoting clean air
protections everyone deserves
the right to in a smoke free
workplace so we recommend
closing all gaps in the current
updated clean air law to include
all all gaming along with
Recinos strong clean air
protections from tobacco smoke
in E. cigarette vapor safeguard
human health they protect all
the patrons who visit the
racinos and most importantly
they protect the workers who are
inside a racino all day long
because everyone deserves that
right to breathe clean air a
smoke free norm at smoke free
air is the norm in many US
regional gaming markets in our
tracks smoke free policies for
gaming environments it has
generated a list of all smoke
free state regulated and tribal
gaming facilities for you and I
think making shows that list
available nearly half of all
fifty states and more than a
hundred and sixty tribal gaming
properties in a thousand casinos
nationwide do not permit smoking
indoors want to talk for
justice.
Second about the trend smoke
free gaming was once rare but
now it's the new normal in very
recent survey of a thousand
active gamblers sixty eight
percent visit a casino multiple
times per month and spend about
a thousand one hundred twenty
two dollars each visit survey
results are clear gaming
enthusiasts strongly prefer
smoke free casinos in nearly
eighty one percent are non
smokers ninety five percent
agree secondhand smoke is
harmful that's ninety five
percent in eighty two percent of
greasy smoke bothers them in a
casino or racino ninety four
percent of respondents also
prefer smoke free casinos over
smoking one in actually eighty
eight percent of the smokers who
are active gamblers also prefer
smoke free indoor air casinos
verses a smoking one as long as
there's an outdoor.
Audio so we believe it's past
time for receive news to adopt a
smoke free air policies it in in
this
in especially in in this house
bill that would so that all
workers are protected and all
guests are protected and it's
especially urgently needed
during this pandemic so look for
your good thank you thank you
for your comments next we'll go
to Derek lam.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Derek lane and I'm
Representative Derrick.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Derek Linden I'm representing
Mexico boys for Children smoking
as serious health and economic
consequences for New Mexico
health care expenditures by the
state for smoking related health
care amount to over one billion
dollars each year creating smoke
free indoor spaces is a critical
strategy for protecting
nonsmokers such as race you know
employees who currently have no
control over their workplace
exposure to harmful secondhand
smoke.
The CDC eliminating smoking in
indoor space is the only way to
fully protect nonsmokers from
dangers exposure to secondhand
smoke is been shown that
communities that enact
comprehensive smoke free laws we
lost to there you go okay.
Though that communities that
enact comprehensive smoke free
laws see up to a seventeen
percent reduction in hospital
heart attack missions limiting
smoking areas and protects New
Mexico's workers and push New
Mexico on have to help your
future we urge you to support
this important bill thank you.
Thank you our next we have
Angelique Kearns.
Good morning madam chair I did
want to get public comment but
just note that your view is ten
on our webcast which is also
being cast on and ledges and so
we can't see the timer or on any
of the other legislators are
speakers thank you.
I'm.
Next we have the will try
Erin showers again hello can you
hear me we can go ahead and I'm
so grateful that that worked
okay so I'm from the department
of health meeting Syrian showers
and the policy director there we
stand in support of HB to forty
nine gaming facility employees
often suffer significant
secondhand smoke exposure and we
feel that prohibiting smoking
and vaping is really the only
way to effectively protect
employees and patrons from the
dangers of secondhand smoke to
twenty states including our
neighbors Arizona and Colorado
have already passed laws just
like this one making all of
their state regulated gambling
facilities smoke free
additionally as someone already
stated over two hundred gaming
venues have closed student could
COVID nineteen restrictions and
when they re opened they did so
with smoke free indoor policies
the CDC has stated and we know
that smoking increases your risk
of severe illness from COVID
nineteen so for these reasons we
do think this is a measure that
protects New Mexicans from smoke
related illness we appreciate
the sponsoring thank you.
Thank you.
And our last we have
Linda Siegel.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Linda Siegel
Representative American cancer
society cancer action network
and we we strongly support this
bill I've spent years working on
the clean indoor air act D.
Johnson clean indoor air act
passed that and it was all about
the employees and the need for
employees to have a clue.
I mean safe environment to work
and so we strongly support this
bill thank you.
Thank you.
And next we will go to the
committee.
This anyone have questions.
It's not what's the pleasure of
the committee.
Madam chair would due process
please Senator Representative.
Have a motion for a do pass and
a second source you want to call
the roll.
Yes ma'am Representative
Sanderson.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative Brett.
Yes.
Representative Karen bash.
Yes.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Yes.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Bob Sanderson.
Vice chair John Ferrari yes.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong
yes.
Ten.
And one excuse thank you
Representative
welcome to.
Health and Human Services you
have a unanimous do pass on
house bill two forty nine thank
you for bringing it thank you
madam chair thank you committee
for your support thank you.
Okay
we are at ten minutes to eleven
with
house floor session at eleven
and I hesitate to go to two
fifty or two oh nine because I
think that they deserve a full
hearing and not short shrift on
either one of those but
Representative Armstrong would
you like to do your memorial
house memorial two I would love
to madam chair when we try and
to get it and and then I I will
see if I can find Representative
Garcia to do his memorial as
well go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee of house memorial
two is requesting the secretary
of health to convene a public
health task force to recommend
strategies for improving health
infrastructure in New Mexico
basically this has a lot to do
with the health councils
of New Mexico that have been
severely under funded for the
past since I've been
Representative so for the past
five years for sure and so we
would really just like to
be able to to have this task
force to help New Mexicans and
help at the local level.
I'm what's going on in every
community and with that madam
chair stand for questions.
Thank you
We'll go first to the audience
if you would like to put up a
poll please for House memorial
to.
Yes see who we have in the
audience.
I do have some experts if anyone
wants to hear from them as well.
And the.
Let's see the polls taking a
little bit let's just I think
let's just go to the audience.
those who ways to speak in
opposition to house memorial
two.
Seeing none those who wish to
speak in favor.
area and showers.
Go ahead madam chair members of
the committee my name is Erin
showers I'm here on behalf of
the department of health and the
secretary of the department of
health who is in strong support
of house memorial two at the
department we believe that
investing in disease prevention
is the most effective way to
improve health preventing
illness to begin with is the
best way to reduce health care
costs as well infrastructure is
truly the foundation for
improving public health health
care and the state needs
accurate and timely data to
inform public health
improvements our health care
system in New Mexico is also
changing and it's prompting new
rules for public health agencies
there's a growing focus on
integrating public health and
primary care and finding better
ways to finance course services
we also need to develop better
strategies to deliver services
more effectively and efficiently
we look forward to getting this
critical work started and really
appreciate the intention of the
M. the memorial thank you so
much.
Thank you and our next we have a
Health Action New Mexico.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Barbara Webber and the
executive director of Health
Action New Mexico and the of our
agency would like to really
thank the sponsors for coming
forward with this bill we think
the pandemic has shown how
important having a strong public
health system and strategy is in
place we look forward to
building on the work that was
started several years ago in
looking at innovation the
innovation grant which was
looking at how to strengthen
public health in New Mexico so
we stand in strong support of
this bill and for your support.
Thank you
so we'll go now to the committee
and I have representative
Thompson.
Thank you madam chair I just I
just want to speak in support of
this I have carried a bill not
this year because of our I bill
limit madam chair but for the
past I don't know how many years
trying to get more funding for
the health council the county
health council and
have been a teeny bit successful
but not very successful so I
think this is a great a great
thing to do and now we we really
do need to look at public health
so thank you representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you I'm at I should also
say as a member of the Armstrong
caucus I fail to jump a hundred
sign in it
earlier but absolutely support
this effort thank you
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to add that I I think we
do need to support these up
public health task forces when
we set up the community D. W. Y.
groups around the state we off
and joining collaborated with
the health.
Different health groups around
the state so I think they're
very important that we need to
continue that support thank you
thank you Representative
Terrazas.
Thank Representative Armstrong
for bringing this forward and we
appreciate and I support this
bill will fully god bless thank
you what's the pleasure of the
committee.
What do passed just.
Well we have a bunch of our
first and second is there any
objection to the do pass.
Seeing and hearing line that you
have unanimous do pass on house
memorial two.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and
Representative Garcia I believe
is in the attendee list if we
can bring over Representative
Miguel Garcia.
Is promoted now madam chair hi.
And I just want to apologize to
you and madam chair at
Representative Gail Armstrong
for not being able to launch the
pool in the previous legislation
I was stuck on the phone that's
all right.
Thank you Representative Garcia
house joint memorial one thank
you madam chair go ahead
committee I do have an expert
and his name is David Jablonski
Bronski David Jablonski.
Recovering over.
Got a.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair
Joint Memorial one.
Request the dean of the school
of medicine
office of the chancellor of the
university New Mexico health
sciences center to nominate Dr
Sanjiv Arora for the Nobel Prize
in psychology or medicine.
And as you know much.
Madam chair I kind of a
designated the or address the
doctor Aurora as the mother
tennis of New Mexico.
And and there's only been one
other New Mexico and that has
received the Nobel Prize and
that was a all your doc.
part of Mudrick who grew up
contract on New Mexico there's a
back in twenty fifteen and that.
Madam chair Dr Arora is most
deserving of the Nobel Prize is
vision of democratizing medical
knowledge in order to provide
essential health services to our
rural and underserved
communities in our state has led
to an improved quality of life
for this population eliminated
economic burdens in assessing
needed health services for this
population and minimize
disparities of marginalized
populations Madam chair in
researching qualifying criteria
for the Nobel nominations are
Legislative Council drafter
discover that aside from the
standard nominating procedures
established by the statutes of
the Nobel foundation there is
one criteria that is attainable
and that one is that a holder of
an established posed as a full
professor at a facility of
medicine at universities around
the world of which the Nobel
assembly will only choose six of
these university.
So right in line Madam chair in
terms of what we're bringing
forth and I like to kind of deal
that we flee to David the kind
of reflect on the the
outstanding accomplishments of
Dr Sanjay Arora.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair of the
state that you're Blonsky
members of the committee a
project a strategic manager for
project echo and I stand in
support of the house joint
memorial and I want to thank
representative Garcia for
bringing this forward to the
committee and to the session I
know you only have a few minutes
before you have to go on the
floor but I'll just see if you
comments no one aspect is is Dr
Lorenz as representative Garcia
mentioned it is a very unique
and and New Mexico's very lucky
to have him in our state he's a
very humble kind and caring
person he doesn't take a lot of
credit for what he does for
Natalie the state for the world
he founded eco Institute where
I'm at right now back in two
thousand three and that was to
address a lot of the shortages
of health care
services around the state and
many of you Representative
center in rural areas can
understand we don't have taxable
services throughout the state
and what he did he he started
the eco model which allows for a
providers to get on the network
to learn from people like Dr
Rohr another clinicians we have
the expert provided to.
The providers in the rural areas
part of the state so they can
provide immediate care to the
citizens that needed before this
model started we have folks that
we're dying had illnesses he
started with Pepsi T. D. H. I.
B. all the various elements in
the state of the model helps in
address those needs immediately
and and we should be very
grateful thankful and not only
the state but also in the in the
whole world the model has grown
in India Vietnam South Africa
South America and it's all over
the world call me that
specifically with the pandemic
that we have with COVID
the federal government asked
echoing docked right to use his
model to expand
you know expertise to treat and
and prevent COVID outbreaks
throughout the United States and
that's been working very well
the best now to lead the efforts
on the vaccination throughout
the country in the world and
also with nursing homes
specifically with New Mexico he
started up the echo model for
the fifty nursing homes in the
state very low budget and up I I
do a lot more to say but no
limited on time but again as as
a human being and I work in
thank Representative Garcia he
doesn't ask for this I just want
to thank you and and and up on
the credit belongs to him and
and I just I'm open for any
questions I want to thank for
the committee.
David David M. F. M. chair one
last thing.
Dr Sanjeev Arora
The the Nobel Prize offers a one
million dollar grant.
And Sanjeev Arora in the the
many times that he's come before
the of the Human Services
interim committing as basically
stated that if we if we did when
this Nobel Prize that he would
put it back into the medical
program.
And with that madam chair was
stand for questions.
I thank you Representative you
failed to mention that this was
endorsed by the Legislative
Health and Human Services the
interim committee.
Forgive me for that.
Just wanted to make sure we got
that out there I do we have
Gabriel you able to put up the
pole is yes we have an audience
that might want to weigh in.
You're in support or opposition
to house joint memorial one.
Okay I think we can and the Paul
we've got six people in the
audience in support and zero in
opposition
We are running late but if there
is anyone in the audience who
feels compelled to speak I if
you can raise your hand.
Health Action New Mexico.
Madam chair members of the
committee briefly I'm my name is
Barbara Webber again with the
Health Action New Mexico not
only do we stand in strong
support of this because of the
tremendous impact it's had on
rural New Mexico underserved New
Mexico but also want to tell the
stories re story I was on a
plane in India a couple of years
ago and the gentleman sitting
next to me was a doctor working
with project echo in India and
he was so grateful for the work
and the impact that this work
and had in India it was clear
that he thought that Albuquerque
New Mexico was the center of the
Medical interpr University
United States.
So we stand a strong support.
Thank you and at that thank you
for that we will go to the two
members of the committee and
And first I have representative
Thompson.
Thank you madam chair I I want
to stand in strong support for
this I Dr Arora is amazing and I
would suggest that when I was
chairing the behavioral health
subcommittee of the health and
Human Services Committee I was
able to sit in on one of their
grand rounds on behavioral
health and I would suggest that
if you have not had the
experience of being involved in
some sort of a thank echo
event that you do it I learned
so much and it's such an amazing
system and I will also say that
autism has started taking
advantage of of that project
echo model I'm in Indiana I
believe I I I believe maybe in
Russia and in different states
throughout and Dr Rohrer has
indeed put us on the map in
terms of of health care and
That was the.
He's he's a state he wrote
surely is that mother to reset
New Mexico so I think this is
great thank you representative
Garcia.
Thank you Representative Lord
thank you madam chair
representative I do at this is
very exciting I'm I'm glad that.
Representative that the stock to
be recognized and look to the
program and I think that's a
great great program other
something else that somebody
forgot to tell me and I've seen
this gentleman all morning but
it's Representative Ross's
birthday and he didn't even say
anything I just found out in a
group chat so Happy Birthday to
the representative thank you
happy birthday.
I'm gonna redeem a little bit
today Hey.
Okay Representative drowsiness.
I just want to thank us Madam
chair representative Garcia for
bringing this legislation up and
up and I'm in full support of it
and in Spanish on my timetable
middle one though is temple Care
you authenticate on top thank
you ask Miss.
I basically told I'm wondering
I'm a little bit nervous to know
what you're gonna do to me it
was the day I have to sing so
but I enjoyed committee less
you.
Thank you and I would just like
to and my support all echo my
support of of.
Dr Stewart and project echo
it into the new members
they do at project echo at UNM a
really intensive training for
people from all over the world
on how to implement project echo
but the first day is open to a
lot more people as a really in
depth orientation and I would
encourage everyone if you
haven't been and that to do it
it's a day is a day worthwhile
to to really get oriented to
what project echo is and so then
I'm not a meeting of over
project echo and it's it's
pretty incredible so I would put
that out there and encouraging
folks to to do that what's the
pleasure of the committee I
move.
Here do have sent us and can't
everyone.
Representative and I assume but
all ask any objection to do
pass.
Seeing and hearing non are
Representative Garcia you have a
unanimous do pass out of house
health and Human Services
Committee on house joint
memorial one.
Thank you for bringing that
thanks for being a champion god
bless you on this finding okay
thank you all right for
sainthood to yeah.
Okay Committee we are a little
late getting to the floor so
we'll do that the bills that we
didn't here today will roll over
for Friday that may rules some
of Friday's agenda over but
we're almost at the on Monday I
think we'll hear our for Senate
bill as well so
Have a good rest of your day
thank you.
