This and that that the diet
three license thirteen changes
Representative cap with stock
it accident coming up for you so
she will be here.
And let's see Representative
Ferrary here here and the other
sponsors are not.
And I will fifty three months
or.
Sermon starting with our three
ninety three yeah.
And I will affect the sponsors
of seventy.
Thanks very.
For.
Whenever you're ready here.
good morning committee members
madam chair and vice chair of
the house bill ninety three
Was presented to the Legislative
health services interim
committee which of our.
The intent.
Is to update the pharmacy act
and
different sex point out that the
changes section one is social
care facilities redefine to
exclude community homes of
foster homes which are overseen
by CYFD and it's the settings
are there to have a place to
grow up rather than for medical
care.
Section two allows electronic or
right field notifications four
members rather than certified
mail.
in section three of cleans up
the process for approving
pharmacists prescribing
Authority pharmacists can
prescribe the public health
conditions through protocols
approved by the New Mexico
Medical Board The New Mexico
nursing board and the Mexico
border pharmacy and this is a
cumbersome process and can cost
protocol approvals take years in
some cases and it is it over two
years to get approval for
providing testing and treatment
for flu strep and COVID nineteen
and it is not done yet.
This protocol was approved by
the medical board in December
but will not be able to be
considered by the board of
nursing until their March
meeting.
This bill will streamline that
process by allowing the board of
pharmacy to consult with the
medical board in nursing board
for protocol approvals as well
as other pharmacy act changes.
That includes it allows the
board to enforce the repaired
healthcare providers act the I
EPA and of.
This of chapter sixty one
article seven NMSA nineteen
seventy eight for pharmacists
interns technicians an applicant
and accordingly the impaired
pharmacists staff outdated less
developed an icy ACA we've and
would be repealed
and it specifies that the board
required reporting of a non
controlled dangerous drug to the
prescription monitoring program
when lack of reporting they
create a hazard to patients.
And then we going to section
four this increases the quantity
allowance for emergency
dispensing from seventy two hour
to thirty day supply and there
are critical for us to may not
be broken down to seventy two
hours hi based on many factors
packaging or dosage of form and
such as inhalers insulin and
this will help patients avoid
interruption prescribed therapy
while refill authorization or
new prescription is a new
prescription is obtained I don't
know if you've ever had that
problem but
It can be a really devastating
you have to wait for your
critical prescription section
five clarifies that the board
made from shell said I rule the
amount in conditions of insured
bonds better consistency
subsection a of this section
which specifies that the board
may require surety bonds.
Section six removes unnecessary
report fire equipment for non
resident pharmacies.
And section seven at.
For protected actions and
communications and subsection a
of San word members and other
working mothers is working with
the board of liability for
Africa missions faxes.
Four.
And then subsection be exempt
information transmitted to the
board from section of public
records act disclosures with
limited exceptions where
necessary subsection seizures
that information description
monitoring program is
confidential unless disclosures
can help by word and the non
disclosure of this information
other than the specified
allowances it's important to
protect patient health.
As it relates to dispense
controlled substance
prescriptions which may include
treatment of mental health
conditions and substance
disorder.
And subsection do absolve the
provider of information to the
board of civil liability for
that information if provided in
good faith.
And finally section eight
repeals section the pharmacy act
section sixty one dash for Levin
a regarding appeared pharmacists
the section would be replaced by
application of the entire
healthcare providers.
The two pharmacists and others
working in pharmacy and is still
going to affect you see twenty
twenty three.
That's a lot and the bill is
really thick because it includes
all the pharmacy Act and you
know just certain sections as I
was pointing out our what we're
focusing on for the changes that
are much needed have been done
for some twenty years some of
them.
So I'd like to introduce my
experts
this is
Dale team for Hughes executive
director of the New Mexico
pharmacists Association and this
is Dr Sharan crack in and
I'm sorry for that the well when
you introduce yourself if you
like to go ahead and introduce
yourself thank you good morning
madam chair and crack and then
the executive director and chief
inspector of the New Mexico
border pharmacy.
And with that we stand for
questions okay let's go to the
audience anyone here in support.
Anyone here in opposition.
I guess this is that what you
call us the bill.
Is there anybody on the line who
want to note okay then we will
go to the
okay yes okay we'll go to
Representative Lord thank you I
thank you madam chair I just
have a quick question for years
I heard CYFD in there that
perked my interest so could you
expand on this because custodial
care facility I think you said
you would it help with CYFD can
you expand on that yes I'm going
to refer it to
Mr speaker and I'll refer to
doctor.
The experts you run support C.
thank you she managed to then
just for the board under the
heading of pass the Buck.
We did that very well in the
seamless thank you madam
chairwoman Representative Lord
so the change is in order to
provide some context to some of
the less well specified
components of the existing.
Definition which includes terms
such as extend and of health
care and these particular
facilities for the community
offices about sixteen of them
and the state and that they are
there to provide family living
situations close to that as
possible for children you are
generally healthy and who are in
the organization to be supported
to be assisted less approach and
I have to fulfill their
potential there
They're not there for medical
care.
For foster care
they are also and you see what.
That's an important part about
two of them CYFD to continue for
these kids who are and deciding
to go on for place to live in a
place to be supportive place to
go ahead they're not there
because they're sick
also allows the board to
Decrease unnecessary and
potentially duplicative
requirements on facilities that
are also overstate but also
focus on facilities where people
are there for health care and
they are there because their
second because they're
developmentally disabled or
elderly renters.
So I think that it's appropriate
for the system as a whole the
community homes are also.
For the more they have an
additional level of oversight
and they're required to be
twelve into it here to the
standards and requirements of
some national association.
Thank you madam chair
representative that answered my
question of the thank you.
Representative exit.
Kate and David Jones thank you
madam chair.
Representative thank you for
reading this because I had some
of my constituents that are
pharmacists.
Contact me and they were happy
with it just for me to get my
mind wrapped around it what I'd
like to ask you is.
The room the reasoning for you
bring this bill would you say is
to clean the bill up to make it.
More streamlined.
If if I can commented that
initially the intent was to
streamline the pharmacist
prescribing authorities and that
was how I I.
Presented to the legislative
health committee thank.
because of that it takes two
years our our Armonk
contraception with all of this.
I and so deaths per.
Especially during cold
pharmacists could prescribe
COVID treatments
because they have that authority
tell the feds came out right.
They made it very difficult and
so it this is from his
substitution part of you this is
streamlined that
and so it requires us to consult
with the medical board board but
not have to go through their
process and all the delays that
that causes but we still work
together because we're all
leaders in the health care team
and that's our intent so that's
where it started for me then it
then it.
Or for a drug plan that.
Which is needed very.
Thank you madam chair
Representative I of I don't know
since I'm from a rural area.
Our pharmacist that we have I
love talking to that guy I just
to talk to him no you know I
know your doctor but I just
talked to my farmers and like.
Eight they give me the right
stuff and.
During the drive.
Others you must be for.
But I would like to order you
know what I do have all the
faces of our pharmacists and
stuff and my next question was
do you feel like that this bill
just.
It it has checks and balances in
the special without prescription
monitoring program all.
Yes I can state insurance pool.
Second this bill doesn't really
change the prescription
monitoring program that's been
in place for for many years and
functions very well it is a
separate division the board I
think actually has six different
acts that they manage the
prescription monitoring program
is one of those and that works
pretty well and I think the one
changing gears to allow for some
of the.
drugs of concern that we're not
necessarily prescription drugs
I.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Representative so
could you just speak a little
louder thank you thank you I I
believe that there are checks
and balances and the purpose yes
Representative Ferrary Mr
speaker indicated is that the
pharmacy act is well overdue for
updated spent over twenty years
and with respect to the
prescription monitoring program
there is an allowance for the
board to require reporting of a
non control danger strikes
should drop its no controlled
substance if it determines the
lack of reporting which costs to
have to to the office of the
there are thousands of central
nervous system depressants
particularly that because in
order to increase in risk
respiratory depression when used
with medications like opioids
methadone someone's consider
prescribing an opioid and you
can look and see the patients on
the medicine that they might
not.
Support for for patient safety
so I I.
It threw out there are those
checks and.
Chair representative thank you.
Is that are of course yes ma'am
okay Representative Kate Jones.
Thank you madam chair
representative for our thank you
for bringing in expert witnesses
these most certainly carry a lot
of weight in their
recommendations and I just want
to reiterate what we heard from
the doctor but I will tell you
that microphones need in their
people online and so I'm I just
want to reiterate that these of
disability is not just helping
the homes of foster homes and
group homes for it children
minors in CYFD but also adults
with disabilities and the
elderly I just I have experience
in running programs like this
and this is something that
happens on a regular basis it is
the that population have already
has a decreased amount of
medical providers so it takes
even longer to get.
they have thoroughly well
documented
information about what they need
and and history everybody is
certified in house reporting
mechanism I appreciate
Representative Ferrary
mentioning at aspen diabetic
medicine I will also say there's
a great immense amount of
medicine that comes in bubble
packs nowadays and the command
boxes that are thirty days in
ten days and so those also are
very.
I think this could really help
as so many other communities and
thank you very much for bringing
it and that's all I have this is
my corrected it will allow for
those scenarios as well.
Chair.
Thank you for Kate's
Representative Jones thank you
madam chair Representative
Ferrary after the practice of
I'm I'm curious we brought up a
point a good point about comment
that reminded me of something
that happened during that period
of time.
Think that the federal
government restricted
pharmacists as to what they
could prescribe for with.
Bills for constructions and
self.
Right I don't know but is that
something that is.
And in the future thank you
madam chair representative Jones
absolutely it works the federal
government did not allow tax
located prescribing which is one
of the first.
Treatments for outpatient use
for comment I pharmacists much
much later on they did allow it
and we would have been able to
implement by protocol after
consultation with the board of
nursing and to the Medical Board
that allowance in addition to
just down to Cardi mentioned
critically during public health
emergency unprecedented to be
able to prescribe for the flow.
And strap to help to keep people
out of the system potentially
costs you know risk of
contracting the before and.
The.
Continuing here your your
disease so I I think it's
critical for that and yes we
would it would allow that.
Yes of and how would that have
to.
Off label uses you you would be
able to or would you be able to
with this in place prescribed
medications are full filled
prescriptions that would be used
properly will.
The uses that are not
necessarily improved
approved I've given you an
example we we use federal all
the time for sleep press as a
sleeping what is.
This site that.
So with that expand your ability
to do that.
Thank you madam chair
representative Johnson so for
this would primarily focus on
prescription drugs and if there
were a drug that was recognized
for use for a recommendation
consistent with the protocol
that the board would be able to
allow that pursuant to rule and
the chuckle approved or of the
fruit and double consulted
protocol so potentially yes but
it would be consistent with
evidence based standards of
care.
I would I would also comment on
that.
Pharmacists don't generally do
off label the they're pretty
good role followers so
whatever's approved by the FDA
is usually what they will do if
the board will have to approve
the protocol for this they can
include that in the armillary
that they determine pharmacists
can do but normally pharmacists
don't do that because of
liability insurance and that
thank.
They don't usually do awfully
okay thank you and and madam
chair representative that and.
Have you have you discussed.
This these changes with the New
Mexico
Medical Board and the nursing
board for their opinions.
Thank you madam chair
representative John staff I
have.
Many times over the years and
and most recently this was
actually brought up during the
Legislative Health and Human
Services subcommittee and Gallup
and of both she referred to
Senate director of the Board C.
and Sandra Frank the director of
the Medical Board where they're
and they are very well aware of
the.
Did it change in order that the
port can have some
Some efficacy and its ability to
allow pharmacists to be a
resource for patients where it's
sorely needed.
As I comment on that.
Probably talking too much but
on another bill the.
Medical Board is submitted in
their app I are for that Senate
Bill.
That.
the sorts of things will
streamline processes and loudly
forced to work together in a
more efficient way they.
And and that was their COVID
nineteen not to speak for the
medical board but I was there FY
are on it
of the bill that would allow
pharmacists to do tests and
treatments in the same.
So kind of the same
well I know this is working with
patients directly that this
increase overall costs and then
medication so much is here.
From the.
The patients in the.
Situation that Representative K.
talk about just to.
Getting the necessary equipment
that used to be seventy two
hours for physicians or so
They're overloaded with more
seeing patients and sometimes
they don't get to the free
seven it can be a long process
it's likely to thirty days as
well as a good citizen so I
supported.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you next I have
Representative supports the.
Thank you madam chair
I just had a couple questions
about that couple things.
Madam chair representative
Ferrari that the impaired health
care provider act.
The difference between that.
And the section that review.
in pharmacists what's the
difference in the process of how
to stop how would what's gonna
be the substantive change their.
To to.
Madam chair representative three
thank you so the entire pharmacy
staff
I think.
Frankly is deficient in many
regards and I think that is
outdated and specifically is
talks about pharmacists and by
definition those are licensed
with the Board what happens when
you get applicant whose impaired
do you not have the authority to
do anything what about insurance
what about technicians the
provisions that they are also
very outdated one of them is
procedurally the there's a
committee that will meet
pharmacists to try to
basically thank and intervention
the bill meet with them to try
to to get them to agree to that
they need to health and often
times with somebody who is
impaired and may not be
Cognizant of that degree of that
and where.
As an objective hi and vaults
expert third party is much safer
for the health and safety of the
public so the impaired health
care provider act is much better
delineated as timelines as
method and manner of service
center quotes applications it's
a contemplates and provision for
summary suspension.
so it it's it's much much better
outlay to and it's it would also
cover the applicants and the
entrance and the technicians and
that could be critical critical
for the safety of the public.
Impaired technician and there's
issues maybe with that version
it's an issue for health and
safety of the public on a much
greater basically decides for
themselves and then there's also
also risks to patients as well.
Thank you for that that's all I
have Mister chair.
Thank you next week vice
chairman thank you madam chair
of Medical Center I had my
question centers around just a
procedural matter so generally
when a bill becomes effective
it's an emergency clause white
acted sign or the beginning of a
fiscal year why did you choose
June fifteenth.
I'm going to defer to Mister
chair.
I have to defer that Legislative
Council Service we did not ask
for emergency clause.
That is something that the
council draft.
We did not ask for a and I I
will jump in I saw that
somewhere in that's the across
the I I always thought it was
the first day of the fiscal year
but I have seen in writing that
it's June whatever so I don't
know why the change but it's an
official change of madam chair I
think it's
Kind of a.
But they automatically do ninety
days after the session something
like that that would go.
Thank you madam chair just
wanted a clarification that that
was a bit of a head scratcher
thank you Representative Ferrary
and now presenters.
especially I mean the the thirty
day supply for emergencies now
wouldn't it be great if we could
actually get in contact with our
physicians and our pharmacists
within three days I think it's
something that that doesn't
happen so I'm thrilled about the
thirty day actually one of our
colleagues recently had to wait
over a month for a diabetes
medicine and what her sugars are
out of control so and she
finally got it he's doing so
much better so I appreciate you
offering this and I will say we
have a lot.
Representative K..
Matt that is the the address I
would like to make a motion to
okay a second.
Representative Jones.
Is there any opposition.
Seeing that you have a due
process.
Committee thank you.
And we are I I got a text from
The sponsor of seventy three and
she said later better get over
that and go to representative
Alice.
The one L. for.
And I have to apologize.
I went to bed early in the all
the stuff that was going on so
but we got it figured out.
My apologies thank you madam.
Everything works good good okay
that's what we like to go ahead
if.
Good morning thank you madam
chair members of the committee.
What to you before you miss more
it's still.
One four.
And that is making appropriation
would service department and to
provide.
Health mental health and
counseling professionals.
The appropriation would.
Three million one hundred
thousand dollars to vehicle from
the general fund for the Human
Services Department for
expenditure in fiscal.
For to provide clinical
supervision.
For behavioral health mental
health and counseling.
This would like to refer to.
The fiscal impact.
Madam.
That is really bizarre and.
All the security return
of.
New health services and.
Service department reports the
ministers provisions of this
bill is required one fifty
calculated at a band seventy and
the staff time of.
Zero three three if the
supervisor calculated that
seventy five totaling one
hundred twenty nine.
For.
One twenty million forty eight
thousand for salaried for
benefit and operational costs
and before you any further madam
chair representative to
introduce my expert witness
Kerem Kanter.
Very go through the six issues
before I referred to to
questions because
you start asking the questions
that's what Fastenal.
Yes.
Go through this.
The report.
The HSD reports and provide
supervision through the rubble
block grant in Las Vegas and
Phelps.
Supervises and supervisors
supervise these for more at a
cost of four hundred thirty
seven dollars fifty cents each
or fifty two point five thousand
annually the median salary
forces for clinical supervisor
Mexico is sixty three thousand
four hundred and twenty one
dollars and the.
Non independently licensed
professionals are required to
work under the supervision of in
independently licensed
professionals as required by the
regulation and licensing
department counseling and
through thirty practice for
social work exam report and
psychologists exam report the
point regulation requirements
for classification which there
for five credential.
The HSD would utilize that
procreation.
The appropriation that we're
asking for three point.
They would.
Right this in the following
ways.
First the work of New Mexico
in psychology fifty consortium.
Health services behavioral
health institute and developed
medical services which provide
supervision.
Psychologists find.
The.
Sanchez.
Health services to rural New
Mexico communities.
Excess expand access to codes.
University of New Mexico
community of.
Behavioral health services.
Also provide free monthly high
quality continuing education.
the by providers and the and the
essence of COVID terrible to
speak to you through the rest of
the.
All four of the last statement
on the other substances issues
that.
The HSS.
As the reports for them after a
real health professionals face.
The use of.
The statistics.
In light conclusion I would like
to say that.
I don't know if you remember but
I was here before you couple
days ago present the health
council so my priorities is for
safety and health New Mexico
this is another initiative that
of that goal and I really
respect the health care work
because they were there for us
and one of the darkest periods
of our time in the past two two
and a half three years so we
really owe it to them to help
them in any way we can we can
I know from my district during
the COVID season a lot of my
health care workers burdens
selves out into the smaller.
They would not come back to the
health care so
that is one of the reasons why I
introduced this bill in the US
so I would appreciate.
Careful consideration and with
that I would like to refers to
my profile expert witness Karen
Kennedy for any additional
culverts for any questions you
may have.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen Canaday with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter.
And I wanted to at but let you
know that that Mexico behavioral
health providers and she asked
Representative in Alison sorry
to sponsor this bill and we
really appreciate him taking
this on
behavior health counseling
therapy organizations and social
work organization and others
other organizations as was
mentioned in the F. R. have gone
decades with out any investment
for them and for infrastructure
and we're talking about
supervision is infrastructure
because we cannot get work
providers that will be able to
bill insurance and Medicaid
without having the supervisors
to provide supervision for them.
They started through recessions
behavior health crisis in a
pandemic without any significant
state funding to address the
gaps of the C. ten telehealth
and clinical supervision.
Their revenues dependent on
insurance reimbursement
including medical.
If we want to expand access to
behavioral health mental health
the counseling we have to invest
in these organizations this is
just one piece of that with the
clinical supervision.
Currently these organizations
are eating the cost of clinical
supervision in order to hire and
retain conditions or they are
requiring their their peeps to
go out there employees to go out
and pay for their own
supervision so that they can get
the licensing that they need and
in fact it's very common
clinical supervisor charge for
their time.
And social workers and
counselors and other behavior
health professionals have to pay
for that time to get supervision
to get the to get the licensing
and it's just not something that
happened the money that they
have so many do without or and
therefore we have a short you
know shortage of providers that
can actually provide services so
this is some of this to be so
important sort of build up bank
of supervisors so that we can
get more more apt Health Care
commissions.
Thank.
Thank you and that I just
realize.
Thank.
Representative Allison was my T.
and treatment to use on this
committee and I thank you for
picking up part of the health
care heavy weight it that most
people don't want to mess with
it because it's complicated and
intricate and so I'm just saying
this is all the other members
say it will year twenty to start
picking up health care
legislation so with that will go
to to the audience is there
anyone here in opposition.
Anyone here in support.
Okay Giuliana.
Yesterday.
Chair members of the committee
to to I am really lucky to get
to represent the New Mexico
behavior health providers
association I'm a social worker
and I feel really strongly about
this bill and I want to warn you
that this is just one tiny piece
of the infrastructure thank you
all for investing in behavioral
health unit bested tens of
millions of dollars with the
leadership our governor but
somehow that has not been
getting to these behavioral
health organizations if they
don't have the infrastructure
for telemedicine when we switch
to a and CEO system under
Medicaid each of those
organizations have to hire two
to three employees to chase
after building that's an
incredible cost that we have not
considered insane invest so this
is one really important piece
and I just want to be very
transparent and the fact that
we'll be back at thank you
representative Allison for
helping us do an tech how we
make the infrastructure bureau
halted state and and meeting
needs of New Mexico.
Thank you anyone else in
support.
Anyone on zoom.
No okay all right with that
we'll go so first I have
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for bringing this forward I
really appreciate it I was just
wondering I saw the list of all
the different professionals that
would be included
but does it help with the
appears for
People who are you know the
filling in for a lot of
difference.
Needs.
One expert one of the
organizations listed in there W.
medical services are on the
to mass and they they do spend
time and effort and money
individually and training
support specialists as well as
community health workers which
is another the same basic
category of people so they they
do spend around resources
impacts that them.
Right thank you.
Representative Kate Senate
harming up.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Allison eight I I
this bill it is only a provides
a service within these counties
it's not to the entire state.
I believe it's the the entire
state.
As I ins member to go through
the chair madam chair members
Madam chair representative K.
yes it is the art and and Madam
chair representative is the
and and so is it an individual
person will be in the F. T. is
not just hours to help.
Offsets
ours is supervision or is an
actual workforce of one person
the higher to provide speech.
that happy hours yes Madam chair
representative K. it depends on
the organization they can treat
this many organizations treat
this very differently and
sometimes I'll pay some major
into the great as supervisor and
has gone to the appropriate
visor training.
additional money to supervise
employee other employees other
times as I mentioned the the
person who's being trained has
to go out the rate kind of their
own pocket.
other times at other times they
just bring in somebody bring in
people do I hope but regions so
it it it depends there's a lot
of different delivery methods.
Madam chair representative thank
you for bringing this in full
disclosure I run.
Organizations companies the
legislative behavior health
services and I entered into the
internship agreements with
highland university and just so
you know just because a small
business I mean we know the
benefit of the we have to
support a workforce development
for behavioral health we're
going to invest in this
infrastructure behavior health
for small business if you have
somebody who is credentialed
enough to provide supervision.
You can have them to billable
hours and bring money in.
Or they provide supervision and
there's no money doing yourself
paying them but there's no money
being brought and no we always
saw the long term and so we've
made the investments but it's a
very it's very much a hardship
and I will tell you that I'm
sorry say that many of my of
Mexico organizations and you
would not entering such.
A devastating line of business.
Remained with with being able
counseling this money to to
supervise we saw the longer
we're actually building up the
infrastructure needed and so
thank you this is this will be a
process that can be applied for
this funding and and variety
different ways some separation
right in addition for that
telehealth species not all
not all of the telehealth
For not telehealth but not all
the different audio or video
the softwares are compatible hit
the compact vehicle compliance
and so you have to pay
significantly more for the head
have a compliant versions of
many of these many of these
softwares not support apps
whatever you want to call the
thank you very much for your
time thank you Representative
Allison and.
Thank you Representative Karmiel
Madam chair representative of
thank you for bringing this and
Representative K. actually
address some of the concerns
that I have so I I am grateful
to know that this will be
statewide and after actually is
a former director of a
children's advocacy program we
were unable to find a supervisor
so we were unable to build for
those services although we
provided some of the services so
in rural New Mexico it's
devastating to be able to to
really provide behavioral health
so thank you for bringing this
forward we can provide as much
as we want to but if we don't
have this in stature of people.
It's not going to go anywhere so
thank you again thank you thank
you Representative partly on
Representative Lord thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative Allison I fully
support bill anything that will
help us in New Mexico where dire
need it more behavior health I
fully support thank you.
Anyone else.
Representative been set.
Thank you madam chair
representative Allison.
Just real quick
Deserve backlog on mental health
I mean.
Is it is it like to live are you
are you know both the demand.
I'm madam chair members of the
committee and Representative
Vincent
There is a huge they it depends
on where you live backlog
because every county is
different in the number of
providers that rural areas are
hit particularly hard with this
I know
I know that some rural areas it
can be three six months before
you can see a provider and it's
it's and it's incredibly
difficult at the.
That different things that are
available for example the new
suicide happening everything
only provides very middle
services obviously phone based
services that kind of thing are
are not adequate to address it
but and and yet we're finding
all these new people that we
need to refer to behavioral
services and even when they're
suicidal sometimes they cannot
see people so it there's a huge
it's a crisis and it began
even before the behavioral
health crisis in two thousand
thirteen in the state I'm we
joked I hate to say it was in
crisis mode before that and then
it was on life support we and
the behavior health crisis hit
that we have comment.
And we have people you know
we're graduating from these
different schools you can get
the supervision that may need to
get in order to provide services
and once again telehealth at the
telehealth actions on where you
have to pay extra lot of extra
so that they can you know we
have a compliant so that there's
a huge shortage.
Thank you madam chair
Representative at I
You know how they have
travelling nurses deserve way
you know when when one County
our community is in crisis is
our way to get additional
personnel to them to get people
tend to so they don't have to
wait six months Madam chair
representative has been since
The Texan the million that is
something we don't have we don't
have either reciprocity here
interstate compacts in
behavioral health.
It is something that we are
looking toward we're we're
working on a national level so
that all the states can agree so
that there is that it's not like
with the nursing compact discs
this state is only ever approved
the nursing compact
and so we really need that
that's another piece of this
puzzle to be able to bring
people and whether through
telehealth or others in this
state one of the things that
they've been Madam chair
representative one of the things
that has been done is when they
call when you when you're on the
phone with behavior health
provider the first thing they're
gonna ask you are you in the
state of New Mexico because if
you're not thank.
Whether it be the provider for
that for insurance purposes you
can go to better help or
whatever any of the Telfair
health therapy.
Thanks but they can't build
their insurance and they can't
Medicaid can act of that.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Allison.
Do you ever see the light at the
end of the tunnel into the
communities like you're able to
take care of people I mean do
you ever ever get on taking care
of our reserve just never any
light at the top.
Madam chair again the checks.
Thank you for president it is it
at you do see in at times when
it's shows a slower than others.
however we we just can't meet
the needs.
To be a hundred percent honest
with you that's there.
At the this this this bill is
begin is one of the many
components to creating the light
at the end of the town to get
more behavioral health care
providers in the state.
R. and once again interstate
compacts or something that we're
trying to do and that's levels
at all states will agree things
like that it's all part of the.
It's all part of the pieces that
we need to get to get more
behavioral health mental health
treatment in the state Madam
chair representative.
I wish you all the best and and
I've got a hard for this so
thank you for pre built a year
that.
Thank you I thank you so much
for both of you do people tend
to.
I know it's going to be even
more expensive to go out of
state to get their supervision
do you have any data on that.
I'm madam chair members of the
committee in New Mexico under
social workers you can not you
have to have in New Mexico you
have given in order to get your
clinical hours they sometimes
will give you a certain number
of hours that you can get from
not a sort of social workers in
the state but it's a very small
amount of the overall a number
of hours I can't speak for the
other professions but in it with
social work that is that is in
fact the case thank you for that
and I've been hearing from other
folks that that we allow folks
maybe to do in state tuition if
they're in Clovis to go to love
it because it's much closer or
in.
Dona ana county to go to you tap
for four Texas tech wholesaler
has there ever been any
discussion of a carve out for
people who are closer to other
places.
Madam chair I had.
Okay good question.
Okay I can get that for you okay
Representative Kate I'm sorry
madam chair I've been working on
the bills I researched
systematic we have a reciprocity
agreement the state of New
Mexico that does allow certain
universities in Colorado Arizona
and there's a separate
reciprocity taxes for
individuals to get in state
tuition but we're but our
students are not allowed to
carry their lottery scholarships
there so they do get in state
tuition but they do not get in
the financial aid benefits of
the university from New Mexico
and I'm just thinking about
anything that we possibly could
do because that's been a battle
going on for I mean my son with
autism is will be thirty two and
we couldn't find a provider back
when he was a top situate so
it's that long standing problem
thank you for bringing this
stuff one and and for
Representative Vincent it's it
frequently is you know one eight
that the staff every six years
that we get done and
What we're trying to do better
but with that I will entertain a
motion.
So.
A second okay.
Okay is there anyone in
opposition.
Right saying.
You have a due process thank you
madam chair thank you to the
committee.
Yes.
Yes so we the Representative
Garrett for H. B. fifty three is
still hot.
Seven did seventy three what I
don't know what.
but she is still in her in the
Education Committee so as it is.
Trujillo so I am going to
present one thirty six for
Trujillo and if my expert
witnesses to come up because I'm
no expert.
Yes.
We need to thank you.
So take it away Representative.
Thank you madam chair.
Our house bill thirty six.
Thank.
Thank you.
And just as a yeah I tip for
freshman you can't be in seven
places at the same time so you
can prevail on your friends to
present realistic that an expert
witness in I'm just going to do
what we do I am here to.
Present house bill one thirty
six can hear my expert witnesses
and they're gonna take you know
a.
Thank you of would you like to
introduce yourselves please yes
good morning thank you madam
chair Representative.
The members I'm Dr Cosette
Wheeler.
I'm the director of the H. P.
the packages through for which
this bill is.
Representative the procreation
and
let's uh Dr Rebekah and
community service stuff we are.
The workforce leadership for the
organization.
Madam chair committee members
many I am the associate director
of the New Mexico human
papillomavirus.
History
now tell you about thank you for
taking thank you Mr.
So you all have him go and I
just want to point out to you up
in the left hand corner on every
page I'll try to guide you
through this but
basically also we're on page one
and it's just the title page
page one when we go through it
all try to point things out to
you.
so we're of public health
programs and we're focused on
the health and safety of New
Mexico's population what we do
is we conduct surveillance
across the entire state for
cancer screening and
vaccination.
and I'll give you some of the
particulars we are able to sue
the notifiable diseases and
conditions since two thousand
and six so we've been working at
this for seventeen years.
we partner with local agencies
the department of health we work
with the Human Services
department we work to generate
collaborations with the health
plans with Medicaid with
everyone but our main core
function is actually data
collection and analysis because
you probably never think about
it but we know a lot we all go
around and we know people are
recommended to get this the
other thing I get health care
just like all of you but we
don't really know what's
happening overall we we have we
know some things that we're
paying attention to mental
health now right but we don't
really know.
What are we really doing with
colonoscopy what are we doing
with other cancer screenings we
don't have data so we are
comprehensive data.
Covering ninety eight to ninety
nine percent of the entire state
for everyone participate okay so
let's go on to page two.
Specifically we focused and
created this program this is
what it looks like.
So success are.
The.
So we we focus on.
One of the only completely
preventable cancers you haven't
really heard much of that right
human papillomavirus is the
recognition that human papilloma
viruses for the cost of cervical
cancer and many other cancers
led to major medical innovations
in vaccinating vaccines being
creative and screening
molecular tests which we saw how
those a COVID yes we're develop
same thing HPV tests have these
kinds of tests okay that is all
please back to fifty years for
cervix cancer one of the
papillomavirus cause cancers
to the pap smear which you may
know your partner's your wives
and those their women have been
there done that for a long time
so papillomavirus isn't any
recognition I came to New Mexico
to do we did not know what
caused service cancer the whole
world did not know that we can
fully prevent so that's our main
focus and I want to say is that
one of the things that a stop
progress in this area is the
idea that HPVs and on the slide
you'll see the.
The incidence and prevalence of
many sexually transmitted
infections well you can see at
the top HPV are the most common
nobody recognized because the
stigma of that's like a sexually
transmitted disease I don't want
people to get a vaccine my kids
might become sexually active
they think they're protected X.
setter that's like saying is
there was a vaccine for HIV we
do not get that for your kids
maybe not but I would be there
right.
So HPV vaccines are cancer
prevention.
Screening with pap tests and HPV
are cancer prevention and things
that people don't know is these
viruses cover our bodies what we
know we have bacteria we have to
take baths we are covered with
viruses just like we're covered
with bacteria and all all
animals study to date including
humans have their own couple of
ours the fault with all of the
species that exist over
millennia millions and millions
of years so they're not like
other sexually transmitted
infections they are covering our
bodies so I wanted to point that
out and I've told you that the
two ways we can prevent any HPV
cancers by vaccination and
screening which is in the box.
So now to page three.
so what we know about
vaccination we know from this
graph that you all the top bars
where we achieved by twenty
twenty the highest level of
vaccination only is when
vaccines are mandated in schools
so the the dark line is tetanus
diphtheria acellular yes this
and those that that seem to that
kids have to get it to go to
school and get their boosters
otherwise you don't get in yes
you can get an exam.
The next line is Berman after
which prevents Monette meninggal
cockle disease.
Of those vaccines have
regulations for.
rules within school systems like
the university you need to get
this of your freshman you don't
have for.
So you can achieve things when
you put rules on the population
but it's been a decision to let
people make a choice to get
vaccinated or not can do is
lower lines correspond to the
great thing in here that dash
dots corresponds to what of the
United States population and
what percentage so about seventy
percent at the peak have
received one at HPV vaccine shot
or more.
What the next one is how many
people receive.
Three or more shots right.
The that drops down the line
right and then how many people
are what the CDC considers
update up today that's a little
lower so when you have freedom
of choice we know that health
interventions it can be about a
sixty percent uptake you don't
really get people up to nine
percent without that in the
bottom of this page three shows
you hear that New Mexico looks
like the national average so
I've given you the New Mexico
this is the nation okay so we we
track this there's a tracking
that goes on other than from our
group
that interfaces with the
department of health.
This next page page for.
Shows you that over the time
that in New Mexico this is data
from all the information from
the whole state that we have
collected that for different
birth cohorts.
That in other words people born
in nineteen eighty six these are
for women.
Versus people or women or
females born in nineteen ninety
six that's how much we reduced
infection with different viruses
over time the issues we went
from what if you were if you
were born in nineteen eighty.
Nine.
you would be a hundred percent
risk because there were no
vaccines for now that risk is
dropped down to
You don't know that data without
what we generate so far
investments committees are not
cheap there one of the most
expensive vaccines for
distribution is having an
impact.
The next page which looks like
those which is page I show this
to what are we doing as a result
of that vaccination and it shows
you in the green the four girls
that are a within twenty one to
twenty five diseases going down
this is pre cancer.
Right the green
and then for the the red I'm
sorry I should put my glasses on
cigarettes appear for the red
which is fifteen to twenty one
twenty years old if you get your
vaccines younger your budget is
great so they have really there
really lower so the population
is really having a budget that
information comes from us from
all the data collected and
analyzed.
We'll wrap it up okay I'm gonna
just say one last thing
and tell you that you can read
this I'm gonna wrap it up and
say this shows you how rural New
Mexico doesn't have free cancer
treatment because it requires a
specialist.
Page seven shows you that we are
spending too much money I'm
screening women over and over
and over because there are
recommended intervals at the
same time we're taking that risk
that people as we lengths in the
intervals are not going to come
back and we know that from our
data needs given to you here
I think you can read this page
eight of the state one thing to
sixty five percent of New
Mexicans that get cervix cancer.
Didn't get apoptosis didn't get
an HPV test or didn't get it in
the recommended in so there's
Fund on or under screen that's
the main problem we have to
solve you wouldn't know that
without as this bill looks to
Fund what we do for the.
Appropriations which is the
computer programmers analysts
statisticians and public health
sciences that run the program we
have demonstrated a sort of four
to one
Yield on investment if this is
is paid for.
The funding for operations is no
longer available through the
various sources we've called it
together and that's what this
bill would provide.
the big problem we have is that
we don't have recurring funding
some of you have seen me here
for a long time I'm I'm getting
very old and I I'll be back here
Dr Avenue will be back here
can't make this.
So we think was the greatest of
gratitude the full list of
sponsors we have
Representative Thomson Trujillo
for yes Garrett Lujan Thompson
we have twelve Sanchez which
we're so grateful for because it
demonstrates the.
The solidarity that we received
from the house.
I'm thankful for all of your
support and then we have any
questions that I'm sure.
We we we are open for questions
thank you.
madam position will go to the
audience is there anyone who is
opposed to this legislation.
All right is there anyone who is
it supporting the legislation.
Thank you ma'am would you please
stand would you like to speak
sure
by supporting it because I think
for New Mexicans it's very
important and for the younger
generation coming up it's really
hard to know what is being done
scientifically put to help us to
to so that we can actually no
where is this money that we're
all New Mexicans are pretty and
that's where's it going what's
happening and how you know we we
part of the issue that Seneal
people that have cervical cancer
and anything to prevent that
that's a horrible cancers funds
you get cervical cancer there's
no there's practically no
treatment for so it so I think
this program is really really
important thank you and for the
record would you state your name
yes more towards Martinez thank
you miss Martinez thank you that
will go to the zone is there any
anyone of those who would like
to speak in opposition to this
bill.
Is there anyone in favor of the
bills would like to speak.
I see no hands settlement of
presenters and madam
Share.
We'll go to the to the committee
Senate committee members have
questions.
Yes Representative Jones.
Representative I.
I'm really surprised I didn't
really see anything about the
vaccine specifically in the
bill.
of the HPV excuse me madam
chair.
So.
Yeah madam chair.
Can I and respond yes the lady
on the well I I I guess it
really didn't even for related
question but I I'm trying to do
that most of what you just
discussed with us has to do with
the vaccine is our reason behind
that.
I really didn't of this.
I was going to ask questions
about registry itself because
that's what this bill talks
about the allocation to.
Operational infrastructure for
the registry.
And so I'm just a little
confused at the loss of
presentation and how how the
vaccine actually plays into
this.
My for operational
infrastructure and registry.
There's a question mark.
Madam chairman of that yes
Representative Representative
Jones.
We kind of cut the screening
part and the needs part off of
continuing for time purposes.
The H. P. be part of the name
HPV pap which is the screen part
of is the name of that
formalized in in the New Mexico
and administrative code so it is
the New Mexico HPV passage of
state we conduct the collection
of information and analysis of
HPV based testing HPV based
vaccination and HPV and pap
screening or any kind of
streaming around.
For fifteen years.
Through my efforts cobbling
together.
Funds from.
Federal government and I. H..
Industries and private donors.
I of I call it this big Peter to
pay Paul to run the underlying.
Operational disruption.
While selling the reserves so we
would get four million dollars
to do and deliver research
outputs to guide the national
agenda we we serve as a national
model.
And it's no longer possible to
do that and so we can still get
the research money but we cannot
re directed to the operations
which pay for this bill would
help support about
the third a little more than a
third for five hundred thousand
dollars of the funds just to
collect the information and
analyzes.
So it would be staff.
Some hardware that holds the
data servers computers but it's
basically staff to run the core
operations in this I called
infrastructure it's people.
Thank you madam chair and
representative
So.
So again I really believe in the
action between what you're
saying the administrative costs
of reading and registry and
gathering all that information.
And what we saw here which is.
The.
The pro
promos that scene which would
ultimately prevent cancer
according to the research
So.
Thank you madam madam chair can
I ask one more question I'm
sorry yes Sir I've certainly
will but we'd have have really
get my questions answered
because I have so many that I
didn't expect but
so let me just say okay how does
the registry related to our
back at the same.
With when people get tax.
The weather tested for HCV
positive and it there on the
registry is that something that
that is required by the testing.
Yes for two.
Our report to the station half
report that information to the
state its mandate it's just like
many conditions are reportable
is reportable.
So it's not on a person person
individual basis its
conglomerate information that
it's reported to us
and.
Just like if you have another
reportable disease like let's
pretend respiratory syncytial
virus our state.
Whatever is a reportable is
reportable and it's not people
don't consent to reporting it's
it happens under federal and
state authorities.
Okay so madam chair venture this
is simply appropriations bills
all of the stuff in the slides
essentially was background
information so so we're not
really dealing work this is a
one page appropriation bill that
says we will give them five
hundred thousand dollars to keep
this registry going so all of
the stuff about vaccines it's
it's not included in this bill
okay that does answer that piece
of it since the pricing so thank
you for that so madam chair and
representative
does this mean that.
The the registry includes
individual names or is it just
data.
It.
The registry I run the registry
I don't know individual names
okay okay and that was that was
a big part of my question is.
As I I would have yeah more even
more questions if that were the
case so strictly for research
that you have this information
it's for public health
surveillance and protection
people from cancer and what we
do with this background having
been said as we say do you see
that there's no people over here
in Dona ana county.
That will do a procedure to.
We show we're health services
happening we're the population
isn't getting.
We show okay these five million
dollars being spent on vaccines
they're having a major impact
otherwise the all that happens
and line.
We don't know what they're doing
we're spending on it because CDC
said do it.
But we don't know what's really
happening.
Unless we have this.
Analytics let's call it court.
Okay all right thank you very
much thank you.
Yes Representative I think
that's all yes these thank you
we'll go to Representative
people are.
Thank you madam vice chair
Representative is this the same
billing number House committee
this was the same bill from
before.
That we have been excuse me
madam chair can I respond yeah.
Yes.
Representative Lord.
Requests we have been here for a
decade in every many committees
like I said I'm like the other
way if you see me ten times and
so what we really need is
recurring funds because that's
why we keep coming back and
right now LFC put a
recommendation in their budget
for the five hundred thousand
dollars that we're talking about
but
I I wish that I could say can we
amended in committee to
recurring I honestly about a
fish out of water I don't know
how to do that and I would not
want to interrupt the process
and risk anything.
But I can say the the problem is
here we don't have any
stability.
Except for the sheer driving
force of.
Me killing myself with us in
many come to stop me from.
Well to be there when are.
So madam chair I will add that.
If it is possible to amend its
FY two appropriations next the
main sponsor Representative
Trujillo is on probation and
knowing her she's probably
working her little tail off to
try and get it in there so
in every it's not it's not up to
us help with how they do the
money but but I'm sure she will
she had I'm sure she's been
working.
Thank you thank you madam vice
chair and representative I think
the thing that had stock in the
last time it came up with so
many emails I got from the L. G.
P. T. L. G. B. T. Q. plus
community the forecast this
there's a lot of concern I
remember a lot of people called
and they were very concerned
about registry and listen and
there was somebody who called
and who was very familiar with
how easy it is to pack into
systems
so.
That was like the biggest thing
for me because I got bombarded
in my emails and I remember all
the testimony from that that's
why I remember this bill so just
simply
I don't think you have any other
questions I just want to bring
that up that I just remember the
LGBTQ plus community was very
upset about this for some reason
about being.
Of.
Representative Lord I'm no where
without because we're fairly
integrated into the community
and actually it's what we see is
the opposite for L. G. B. T. Q.
they feel like they need to have
more cancer prevention and their
their lifestyles or whatever
they're not.
Their social needs are not
considered in many health care
delivery so I I would say that I
don't I hope we're talking about
the same bill when you ask me I
responded in the positive
because you did not bring that
up out that committee it was
that the only time this has gone
forth in the last year and
before
Madam chair representative no I
remember that there was nothing
major for session and there was
a bill on a registry for
papillomavirus that's why I
asked if it was the same public
percent before it was I just
want to bring it up that I
remember this member getting
emails and I remember people
called in the groups that I know
the people get upset they're
worried about the information
and data data breach and that's
very concerning I just remember
that very distinctly because
that was like my I think that
first couple weeks there to
dispose.
I expect that then up sentiment
vice chair I apologize and of
the speaker actually she's
actually is medical care and.
This is Madam chair of some
people speaker yesterday so
thank you that's all the
questions that I have thank you
madam chair and Representative
Lord at I I'm not sure if you
were in her at the time but the
doctor said that she the
registry doesn't have needs
essentially it's.
Locations and and ages and stuff
like that so if even if it was
hacked it would be like Joe
Smith has aids or whatever your
that concerns me.
Thank you of Representative this
thank you madam chair.
Representative.
I'm almost there need not I'm
I'm kind of with you bill right
now right now but I got a few
little things that I need to ask
you.
It has to do with the registry.
Is there anything in that
registry that could link that to
someone.
If it was at.
Guaranteed Representative and
sins check and madam chair.
It's like to be a fresh
I'm sorry I'm not good at this.
Hi the the answer to what you
just ask is yes there is of.
Folkways and a small chance that
someone could find out
information that would be able
to go back to a person but I
would like to say something that
would make something clear to
you that might speak to the
concerned.
The department of health under
which this operates has not had
public health databases half.
The security levels are at the
levels that are the highest
level.
And we subject ourselves to
commercial cybersecurity attacks
to make sure that it's secure so
we it's paid for to have that
happen.
we number number one number two.
in any information there is not
taking into account that in a
room for in the state but in a
room even.
We don't recognize that between
the ages of twenty five and
sixty approximately forty
percent of people are positive
for HPV.
One so it's not common that you
can go and people I I mentioned
don't really understand these
cover our bodies it's like a
misconception that this is a bad
thing it's so common you can't
believe it right it's just we
don't know that
number one number two it's very
similar people don't realize
this twenty five percent of all
women between those ages get
abnormal capstans so it's not
really like she has gone to Rio.
I I want you to be able to put
it into perspective and I just
don't know if that.
Way way is your concerns but I'm
trying to answer the best I can
thank you madam chair
Representative.
How accurate do you believe
your dad is from all the other
places that are doing data
because I know how hard that is.
Make correct and of I just like
to know on a on a percentage
scale from zero to a hundred
percent Madam chair
representative how how accurate
would you say your Daddy is.
Madam chair and Representative
was instances.
We have actually done manual
validation of tens of thousands
of records randomly selected and
we know the accuracies greater
than ninety nine percent.
We are one of the most rigorous
information systems for public
health in the country and we can
prepare our outputs like okay
here's what we see we've done
direct comparison with Kaiser
Permanente.
You know what to expect when you
do this in a population with the
largest integrated health system
in the United States Kaiser
Permanente AA.
We look exactly like Kaiser
Permanente say and we are and
have been chosen multiple times
by the U. S. national institutes
of health as a model for the
United States.
I hope that answers your
question but I appreciate that
you have an appreciation for the
inaccuracies and data without
major working quality control.
Thank you madam chair
Representative.
This money this money go over
you know we just a little bit
but.
I'm very for just that you're
able to.
Vent cervical cancer I did not
know that there was not a
that you couldn't fix circle
cancer if there's there's no T.
mobiles.
Anything like that and all of
the state where to one more
question mention both whenever
stuff is there plenty of vaccine
to go around.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative
incident committee members.
The.
By in large.
Human papillomavirus vaccines
are provided to the public
through the state through other
resources of the Human Services
department and the department of
health at no cost and that comes
as a result of negotiations item
zero cost
they're negotiated costs in New
Mexico probably costs for the
vaccine that is able to meet the
main target of young males and
females probably several million
dollars three million dollars
four million dollars they have
to allocated and the way they
allocated is they make that
choice the people the the into
that will benefit the most
they're going to make sure they
get and what that New Mexico is
a state that's pretty awesome in
terms of all the vaccines and
provides to its members it's one
of the only it's called the
universe.
Personal state very few exists
that that make sure it's
population has access to a
vaccine.
So that and then I wanted to
make one
one.
Comment further on what you
stated before you ask the
question
cervix cancer is has treatments
like other cancers chemotherapy
and all that but there aren't
other cancers where you can take
a vaccine or get a screen as
groups prevent it from ever
becoming cancer.
You can even remove carefully
without major surgery and
chemotherapy small cancers if
you're screening for them that's
the amazing thing about this
cancer why would anyone in New
Mexico died from one hundred
percent preventable cancer.
You don't have that option with
any other cancer.
To.
Madam chair representative
someone I'm gonna try as hard as
I can to limit playing on this
one right here so I'm teetering
right now.
I would feel way better about.
Help and fix the problem instead
of going to a database would you
shut would you help me get my
mind wrapped around the database
and I feel lied the way you know
because money is always hard to
come by and are we getting the
best bang for our Buck by.
Putting a database together or
are we getting the more bang out
of our budget for for.
Women and their health by
pushing more money towards.
The the vaccine to where we can
prevent it.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair and representative
the committee members.
The data we show you this used
to.
Make interventions cost
effectively.
In their areas of the state.
Verses we'll just pay for more.
Because we have a situation
where a lot of the population
has a free choice to get
screened or vaccination and in
that setting we have to go to
where the problems are we get
the data that allows you to do
that.
I hope that answers your
question you can't just stop
money out when you don't have
people.
That you can go we need to go
over here and really focus on
the uptake in Dona ana county
uptake in.
Even if cities Clovis.
Portales hops.
I hope that answers your
question the does madam chair
you'll thank you thank you.
Yes ma'am I mean that
Representative yes thank you
madam chair representative
There's a lot of information.
Clarify something that I really
like to.
The state and that is that the
first of all serve our goal with
early with the passing.
the HSD training yes shows that
if a person has aids research
shows that are more likely to
get cancer so they would be more
likely to get regular pap smears
to see if they actually.
And so madam chair
representative our.
I'd like to know why why why why
you're disagree saying are you
disagree saying madam chair
Representative Johnson
committee.
People have abnormalities
everything you said was
absolutely one hundred percent
correct but actually the problem
is people have abnormalities
that are afraid to go in to find
cancer so it isn't too that if
you have an abnormality they're
more likely.
Take for CENIC madam chair
representative exactly yeah I I
guess I was thinking of the
ideal.
If if you have this information
needs to be yes very valuable to
know I believe because although
there is some research that's
still out you know there's not a
hundred percent agree that that
on how much more likely a person
is to get cancer then not you
know with a have a H. TV there
is an increase just and so
ideally hopefully with education
money put toward education which
is which was you know what what
I really feel like we need to
do.
Education and that could be
across the board regardless of
where you know you find more
intense
deposit H. to the yes so so
Anyway
I just I just wanted to clarify
that wants to decision based on
an active mission.
Madam chair I will I will just
remind the committee this is an
appropriations bill that's all
it should be simple we send it
to appropriations they figure
out the money part of
essentially what we're deciding
is do we think that there that
funding this registry is a good
idea that's a no no all the
other stuff is important and
anyone can bring a bill on that
that wants to but four time
state I trying to keep us on
what's actually in the bill as
opposed to the universe in which
the bill read three sites thank
you and Madam chair
representative I think that's
great but we ended up talking
about a lot more things and I
just didn't want my need to make
a decision or anybody else based
on inaccurate information I
understand that thank you madam
chair Representative Jones.
Are you completely I am.
Any other committee members with
questions.
If not
We take out the commotion.
S. madam chair.
Senator.
I am the second.
Are there any opposition to.
Would you please take a role in.
Representative Kate.
Yes.
Representative Thomas.
Representative Ferrary.
Hi to me and yes.
Jones no.
Representative Lord you know
with the explanation.
Representative semansky yes.
Representative incentives yes.
Representative Thomson yes.
Yes.
Mr Representative explained as
well.
Sorry.
Your call is going.
But I just need to do some more
research.
The decision I'm really big on
trying to understand fully
completely.
Possible that was my reason for
that.
Thank you representative madam
chair may I just as well yes
Representative I'm
saying I don't feel like I fully
understand the.
So that's where.
I have.
Thank you thank okay and we
share and madam to.
The whole committee for your
time we're grateful.
So we will go on with high
school seventy three.
Here it worked out
to go buy a lottery ticket or
something.
We had a unanimous yes.
Education.
With both the on the floor
fifteen minutes.
Sassen snappy and everybody in
this room is very non with
Google.
People.
We're working on that.
Okay may I start yes okay so if
I'm here as one of the sponsors
of house bill seventy three is
the biomarker testing insurance
requirements and probably
for your experiencing that
increasingly there's filed
Parker yes state health
determined the best treatment
for a patient can include the
analysis of a patient's tissue
blood or another by a specimen
for presence of a biomarker it's
an important step in accessing
precision medicine so the
medicine is the best medicine to
diagnose or follow up on it
disease it includes targeted
therapies that can lead to
improved survivorship and a
better quality of life for
cancer patients it's an
expanding area it's been around
for several decades but it's
rather than just focusing on
oncology and auto immune
diseases it's one of the things
they're using and exploring
outsiders disease for example
and heart disease why is this
legislation important patients
frankly who are older people of
color especially African
Americans uninsured or Medicaid
insured are less likely to get
tested there's lower rates and
community settings versus
somebody that's at an advanced
research academic Medical Center
some insurance plans requested
so much extensive paperwork and
authorizations that a patient
can go wait for months well
there disease progresses so
that's important there needs to
be equity in availability the
availability for these tests you
know beyond social met social
can economic status reserves of
code.
I want to say this is personally
meaningful for me I stopped
breathing when I got a very and
cancer treatment I am a survivor
of cancer but I stopped reading
today yes.
Lucky me partially visible to.
But to date someone that
particular chemotherapy was not
the best for me today they could
do yes and figure out actually
she should go on this path not
that at also I've dealt with
infertility.
Years of testing and precision
you know different procedures.
Find the doctor said we need to
do additional analysis the
tissue.
That I can get pregnant but I
couldn't carry a child that
prevented thousands and
thousands of dollars of in vitro
fertilization expenses for me
and my insurance company so this
kind of testing.
Saves money for patients that
saves money for insurance
companies it has many.
Positive consequences I'm gonna
turn it over to my expert
witness to just say a little bit
on the bill itself when the
State Capitol.
Thank you Representative Garrett
Linda Siegel for the American
cancer society cancer action
network.
To explain particularly since we
have new members about the bill
looks really long and it's
really important because I
sections of the insurance code
and when we go in with changes
we have to go into every single
section with the same changes so
that's one of the reasons and
just to follow up a little bit
Representative Garrett said
she's took care of most
everything our topic wise all of
these tasks in earnest after the
FDA approved and then the
treatment for them have to be
FDA approve so this is current
management is precision medicine
and it actually we know that
statistically it is having an
impact on or in saving people's
lives and improving their lives
when when they get the the very
targeted precise treatments.
Sixty percent of all the cancer
drugs that have been approved in
the last five years require or
recommend biomarker testing so
this is file marker testing is.
It's been being used throughout
our.
Our health care facilities why
do we need a mandate for this
well the problem is that sixty
six percent throughout the
country of cancer providers
in a national study indicated
that insurance coverage is a
significant for at least a
moderate very yes we have doctor
Farber McEntee New Mexico cancer
she was
would have been here but she's
out of town and and she says
that the insurance issue though
there may be coverage that is
very it's sometimes difficult to
get to get the test when needed
because when you get a cancer
diagnosis good state you know I
don't want to have to wait for
the pre authorizations for our
the time it takes to actually
get that first tests so that
is for providers can identify
what is the time for the size
treatment to provide.
Unless the national Cancer
Institute says thirty nine point
five percent of us will be
diagnosed with cancer cell phone
we want the best possible yes
right now we have one point nine
million people in the United
States with cancer the ACS
cancer statistics center says
that in two thousand twenty
three in New Mexico will have
about eleven thousand three
hundred new.
Cancer K. and what's the number
one cancer breast what's the
number to cancer.
So I know that everyone in this
room would work to be receiving
vast property task you with the
best precision treatment and
that's why we're doing this
bill.
And with that insurance to
questions okay let's go to the
audience anyone here in
opposition.
Anyone here to support.
Dale.
Madam chair members of the
committee Dale G. here with New
Mexico pharmacists Association I
think you stand in support of
this bill because
we we need to address the world
is changing right now it's kind
of shocked that approach
sometimes
Representative so I think it
would be a benefit to the
insurance industry because
they're not.
Were if you do that are
protesting you know what's going
to work for that patient it
could be different from one
version to another I would like
to let you know we are we over
this last year we started doing
training for pharmacists to do
general.
let us of all the pharmacies
are.
Mexico they're actually going to
send their patients to a lab so
soon after that happened you can
do that yes then that will be
brought back to the pharmacy the
therefore we're looking at
positions and all that kind of
thing but pharmacists will be
doing that the first aired
mansard huge how you probably
read that that requires will be
permanent.
This is science fiction but I
think that will happen is.
Will be tailored that so this is
a start so if we support this.
Thank you Dale can.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee I just keep looking at
the I speak to you as a patient
advocate I thank you sponsor for
bringing this forward
facing cancer diagnosis is
terrifying I know because I'm
going treatment for breast
cancer I did not fortunate
enough to receive the farmer yes
but what if your doctor may do a
simple test to make sure you
have the best treatment for your
cancer biomarker testing doctors
can find out which treatments
will or won't work for mediation
based on markers working out
this information often allows us
to a very generalized treatments
like chemotherapy and radiation
which I undertaken and instead
targeted therapies allowing
doctors to identify the most
effective therapy which can
result in fewer side effects
better quality of life and and
and and and better most
important increased chance of
survival thank you for your
consideration today thank you.
Okay anyone assume.
Okay questions from the
committee.
Representative Lord thank you
madam chair is here in FY are
for this I don't have any
information.
There is
yeah.
Yeah thank you.
Well thank you.
Okay I
just want.
Thank you.
thank you madam chair.
Okay.
I know we're.
Here Representative so I called
my health insurance I I pull
from terms they don't cover
this.
It would be a medical necessity
maybe you know how that goes to
the chair and I would have to
fight that.
Thank you very interesting that
in my own private insurance
right this would be something
it's not.
Assurance you call him and go
offices in this code nineteen
ninety third access this is like
to know that we are.
I want this on line I know that
offices but I feel like to have
a time to time to questions and
just gain FY I do that more
the main thing I find that I
manage the Republican.
Would be my guess.
Madam chair representative board
made a very good point because
people have fought it for
example I was blessed I was
level of initially my insurance
company rejected surgery for
ovarian cancer so just without
testing I had to go through an
extra process so ultimately you
might be able to get
authorization from your
insurance company but that's
what we're talking about a
lengthy process if you have a
cancer that's fast growing.
When we one month makes a
difference thanks for following
up on your situation yeah madam
chair so I understand that I
know it's it's.
The billing aspect is that's all
you do is you send in your bills
and then they come back summer
paid summer denied you have to
either if you're lucky if
somebody wants to get paid they
will fight for you either that
or you to fight and there's
always a lot of fights with
restraining this it is very hard
when the doctors made the
decision.
The system was decision but it's
really all down to what the
insurance the pandemic.
I know the fans in this I just
don't have enough information
and I feel pressured for time so
I yield my time I'm gonna go
look at this thank you.
Representative did you have a
question yes so Madam chair
representative my question is
with respect to these bio marker
testing exactly how expensive is
it will pass the insurance
companies to cover it to run the
staffs
Madam chair representative for.
You know if the price is very.
The price is very for the yes
the prices very for what type of
treatment do you.
So you know these FIR is from
these are all state are ours
they don't necessarily take into
consideration that if you get a
targeted yes you're gonna
hopefully be better faster than
ongoing chemotherapy which might
work as well it's it.
Just depends so madam chair or
something to that Madam chair
representative so simple I was a
candidate for a teacher of
fertilization which is ten
thousand dollars a shot because
I had to shoot analysis I didn't
have to pay that money my
insurance company didn't have to
be billed for that so that
that's the importance of testing
as our pharmacists so eloquently
stated you get the right
treatment for you find out that
those treatments party we gonna
apply to you so that's why it
for once if you have the FY are
what it says in teacher Senator
Tallman indeterminate costs it
varies so much.
Thank you madam chair
representative that the I ask
this question only because for
many years when I do get total
synthesis which is a second
breast cancer testing but that's
after this have anything to do
with the pop up I longer those
women who have gotten five more
testing have been successful in
determining how to avoid cancel
Avenue so I'm just trying to
figure out if we're asking the
insurance companies to pay for
this I mean you he says in the
to but you must have a range and
I was just asking if you would
find that so that.
It was for a good information as
we have just one moving
insurance companies to move in
the right direction we got them
to move but Google services
kissing that took a little bit
of time and it should not have
been as well but that's just an
advocacy aspect of my life bring
import to you that we do need to
bring up thank you madam chair
and presenters.
And madam chair I can respond to
that you know that's what the
insurance companies always said
when we add mandate so it's
going to cost more money it may
cost more and they may have to
raise premiums right with what
we're talking about people's
lives we're talking about
everyone in this room who might
perhaps get cancer we all want
the most precise treatment we
can get and there are some
studies of that show it might
even be more cost effective to
do this kind of targeted
precision treatment when you're
not trying all these different
types of drugs chemotherapy this
one goes right for of course
some of these drugs because
they're new they may be costing
more and that's true in every
area of health care as as
pharmaceuticals start to improve
and and add different components
so that they're a little better
in their treatment of people
they faster another issue we
have to deal with in this
session the high cost of
pharmaceuticals but as mentioned
I will add that I've been.
Complaining about this since I
got here we never look forward
we never looked at you know it
may cost the insurance company
million dollars but it may save
them fifty million we don't have
that capability and so avid I've
been banging the drum for a long
time that we can't just look at
today we need to look at what's
going to happen and and it's
almost guaranteed that this will
save the insurance companies
money because they will be
targeted I mean and that further
along with cancer gets the more
expensive it is to treat and
stuff they can nip it in the but
with the with the biologically
developed medication chances are
good it will actually save money
and I just want all of you to
remember that point when it oh
my god it's going to cost this
we never know how much it's
going to say.
Representative Vincent thank you
madam chair representative.
It's still real sensitive to me
because
I just changed insurance.
And the insurance on my wife and
myself is fourteen hundred
dollars a month.
Which is ridiculous and I and I
ask people and there's about the
same thing and when we talk
about insurance premiums you
know it might go a little bit
we're talking about people's
lives well I gotta tell you that
I think one thing is it becomes
more common prices go down.
And again it's a question cost
versus savings
I told you my own case might
entrance Committee say.
Twenty or thirty thousand
dollars that's not true of every
situation of because we're each
you.
So hopefully it would raise
your.
Extremely high
premiums.
Madam chair representative and I
have a thirty two hundred dollar
deductible.
And and I don't I don't want to
just throw the the name of my
company out.
As I'm sure you all have the
same carrier.
However
It does it does affect people
whatever their premiums go up
and I am all about.
Well on the number of people I
don't want to be sick I want to
live I want to get early
detection I wanted to be cured.
And I think the only people that
really making all the money here
is big pharma.
And it's irritating because they
may get that let me get that
memo that we are people and we
we we want to live I do I want
to the the the law the older I
get the more I just want to live
I want to see my grand babies
grow up in in and for that
reason I I just if it.
I just I'm glad you told me that
it does is probably going to
raise insurance I don't ever get
refunds on my insurance it never
does go down it always goes up
and every time we get a cost of
living.
My insurance would go up so it
just kind of even out so I would
get excited about a raise and
then I would not be so excited
but at least I was even so Madam
chair representative thank you
madam chair representative I
think you're gonna get dozens of
phone calls following this
hearing for insurance companies
to the warning you.
And and the.
Representative been said it's
not just big pharma there's ten
thousand years of people who are
making profit on health care
for.
On P. B. C. yes the modem yes so
hopefully this does have them
contact me because.
Piece of my mind.
The offer you a cheaper plan.
Yeah okay so I remember
Representative Jones yes thank
you madam chair all I really
quick.
Time is an issue that she
Representative went to save it I
think you and I was really
looking carefully to because the
prioritizing the increased costs
versus the benefits and having
been oncology nurse for five
years I can just tell you I saw
that these are more protests
were were so important in the
development of certain drugs and
a yes research is super
expensive so these new drugs
come out they are very expensive
but often times they decrease in
price because they've absorb
that cost of all the research
that had to go into to begin
with so so I think and I'm
hopeful that if if there is a an
increase in premiums that that
does pay off and I I know for a
fact that pays off in in patient
outcomes and the people.
I are for self.
Thank you thank you for reading
this yes thank you
Representative Penske thank you
madam chair representative I've
often huge supporter of this
thank you for bringing it
forward I think you might need a
technical amendment before your
next committee so I would just
encourage you to look at that
FIR it looks like PPO Scott left
out more madam chair ma'am yes
Representative yes we have the
amendment but it went to
consumer affairs.
Mexico so we have.
Yeah in the end Representative
Garrett did come to me yesterday
and said you know I have this
ammendment but they prepared it
for C. pack so we just that I
just told her just hold on to it
and then it will be amended in
the next committee thank you
madam chair.
So do have a motion by some
Representative Ferrary in the
second by Representative Kate
is there any opposition yes okay
I called.
Yes.
The mid for R. E. yes
Representative huh meals yes
Representative general yes.
Representative Lord.
Representative so thank you yes.
Representative no with
explanation please.
minimized chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
And we will go back to
Representative thank you madam
chair the reason that I am not
voting for this is.
Like I told you I I have a heart
for people and I want to be
cured but because our insurance
is of for lack of better words
wishy washy and just like
Representative Lord then call
hers and they would not.
Cover her from mile markers.
That's a no for me and because
it's going to raise medical
insurance on the Mexican stuff
to know from me to
thank you so I would.
I think.
seventy one you have in the
past.
Thank you thank you.
This
is.
Really.
I have is that sometimes.
Right.
Yes.
Share our.
This is.
This is ours as.
I have.
We are in recess.
As we.
In the house.
To.
Yeah that.
And so.
One hundred dollar yes states.
And your.
As.
