True.
Present representative
Jaramillo.
Here.
Representative Jones.
Representative Lord
Representatives. Capan Ski
Representative Vincent
Hearing on time. No, no, Madam
Vice Chair present. Madam chair.
I'm here.
Okay, we will start with, um
Senate Bill 127, Senator.
Souls.
Go ahead and start whenever
you're ready.
Good.
I think we all hate these new
mikes.
Good morning and thank you for
hearing us bright and early this
morning, Um Senate Bill 127 is a
bill that last year went through
with no opposition and was
pocket vetoed by the governor.
So far, we have had no
opposition, most of it the
problem the governor had last
year is the prescribing
psychologist. We're going to be
under the medical board, and
that appeared to be the concern
that the governor had with this
particular bill that is now been
moved out, and they are under
the
Psychology, psychology board
Prescribing psychologists just
very briefly highly trained
psychologists that have
prescribing ability in the
psychotropic area. They provide
lots of the mental health care
in our more urban or are more
rural and frontier areas where
there is a huge lack of
psychiatrists, and so we didn't
get a message from the governor
for this bill. We believe she is
fully on board to support it, as
is and we're available for.
Um, let's go to zoom. Is there
anyone if you're on zoom in
opposition, please raise your
hand and we'll come back to you
in the room. Anyone in
opposition?
Okay. Come on up.
And we'll take one minute public
comment.
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee. My name is
Rick madam, a family physician
and chair of the Government
Affairs Committee for the
Academy of Family Physicians in
New Mexico.
Also speaking for the medical
society and opposition
And my concern, primarily
because of the injectables and
side effects that can occur
rapidly.
In a clinic setting
You must have capability.
To respond to an emergency from
an injectable.
And that happens much faster
than world.
So which psychologists have that
capability.
In their clinic is my question.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Is there
anyone on zoom in opposition?
Okay. Now we will go to those in
support of the bill. If you're
on zoom, raise your hand and
we'll come back to you. Anyone
in the room in support?
They're kosher, Sexiest Bill of
the Year award. Sorry anyone on
zoom
There's one, okay?
Leslie, go ahead.
Leslie, If you want to make
public comment, please on mute
and go ahead.
My name is Dr Leslie does Oh,
and I am the president of the
State Psychological Association
for the prescribing
psychologists.
And if we were to expand our
scope of practice to include
injectables and subcutaneous
injectables, we would, um,
record we would be required to
go through training that would
be
Um, approved by our board and
the board of Medicine, and we
would not do anything in a
dangerous way. If we were to do
injectables, I would feel sure
that
We would have the patients stay
with us to ensure that any acute
reaction would be handled in the
office and appropriate emergency
responses would be utilized.
Thank you. Doctor does Oh, so we
will go to the computer. Did you
have any comments? Are you ready
for questions?
Madam chair. The only comment is
these are highly trained
professionals. They get
specialized training. If they're
doing injectables, there is
many, many hours of specialized
training on exactly those kinds
of concerns. They are not.
Doing this just
Willy nilly or anything of that
sort.
Thank you. Thank you. Questions
from the committee.
Saying, Nah, yeah, you do.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Thank you, Senator.
So I I did have a question about
if so, if there was an
injectable and there was an
adverse reaction, what would
that is it a 911 call that would
be placed Or is there going to
be people their own staff that
would be able to take care of
the adversary Action, Madam
Chair
Manchurian Representative
Vincent again. These are highly
trained professionals. They have
been trained in whatever
reactions might be and what the
appropriate would response would
be. Certainly there may be
responses that we require a 91
month. 911 call there maybe
responses that are are less
extreme than that. That's where
their professional training
would kick in as to what level
that might be.
As with any drug is given in any
doctor's office. There are many
times that it would have to be a
911 called from the family
position or anyone else,
depending on the severity.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, senator. Out. So on the on
the meds, I'm not familiar with
the meds that they would be
giving. So if there was an
adverse reaction are you
talking? What kind of an adverse
reaction are we talking about?
Madam Chair, Madam chair and
representative. I'm not an
expert on what All those meds
would be so I can't answer that.
Thank you, Madam chair.
Appreciate it.
Thank you. I will entertain a
motion like to make an ocean for
do pass their second. Is there a
second? Okay, Thank you. Time to
wake up, folks. We only have a
few days left. Okay. Um, is
there any opposition?
Okay, seeing no opposition. You
have a do path.
Uh, H zero
Minutes. You guys passed, Bill
couldn't run fast enough to vote
on that we're now on Senate
Health and Public Affairs
Committee Substitute for Senate
Bill 14.
And
Thank you, madam Chair and sorry
that that call to wake up with
for myself. Um, so this is this
is the Healthcare Authority
Department Bill, we passed the
bill.
To create the healthcare
authority last year, and this is
kind of filling in some of the
skeleton. Um
So the healthcare Authority
department at Excuse me. Can you
pull the microphone closer? They
can't hear you in the back.
Okay, so the Healthcare
authority departments statutory
cleanup.
It that the Aspen
Oh, that's unusual.
I guess more people want me to
be masked more often, Um
So, the Healthcare Authority
department asked act was passed
in 2023 initiated the
establishment of the department
by renaming
The Human Services Department
and transferring various
divisions and functions from the
Department of Health and General
Services to the Healthcare
authority.
Senate Bill 14 is a statutory
cleanup bill that changes the
name from the Human Services
Department to the healthcare
authority.
Throughout the various statutes.
It also re compiles rearranges
statutes to form a new chapter.
24, a titled
Healthcare code consolidating
all sections currently found in
chapter 24 health and safety.
That pertain to the healthcare
authority. Any sections of the
lobbying amended may also
undergo technical cleanup to
remove outdated language and my
experts are carry Army Hill,
Secretary of
Are you officially Secretary of
Health?
Designate designation, Okay? And
and, um Gina diplomacy for the
healthcare
Policy person from the
governor's office. And if they
want to add anything, um
Go ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chair
members of the committee. I'm
sorry. My voice. I have just
getting over a little cold here.
So, um, apologies for the
scratchy nous, But I'd like to
thank
Senator stuff Phonics and
representative Thompson for
agreeing to sponsor this
important film. Um as
representative Thompson said
Senate Bill 14 finishes
establishing the framework for
standing up the New Mexico
Healthcare Authority, which was
created during last year's
legislative session essentially
transitioning into Mexico Human
Services Department into the New
Mexico Healthcare Authority to
be the single state agency
charged with healthcare policy
purchasing and regulation.
Mm.
So, as the representative
mentioned, most of the bill is
clean up. Um and so there was
last year. I just want to
clarify the context here. The
developmental disability
supports division and the
division of Health Improvement
are transitioning from the
Department of Health and the
State Health Benefits division
is transitioning from the
General Services Department.
Meaning that the health care
authority will take on
responsibility for purchasing
and contracting for healthcare
benefits for state of New Mexico
employees.
Um, the Human Services
department submitted a
transition plan to the
Legislature in November, which
laid out two key changes that
are contained in Senate Bill 14
that I just want to mention or
highlight today.
First, the bill redefines the
term consolidated purchasing for
healthcare benefits among the
agencies that constitute the
interagency benefits Advisory
Committee or the I back to mean
a single process for procurement
and contracting, and we believe
that this change will compel the
necessary collaboration of the
eye back agencies to work
together to advance improvements
in contracting for health
benefits for public employees
and retirees.
Well, also respecting their
existing autonomy, governance
and funding structures together,
these agencies collectively
procure and purchase health care
for more than 100 and 80,000.
New Mexicans. Our goal is simply
to team up to negotiate a better
deal for everyone and to provide
a more transparent view of the
cost performance and value of
New Mexico's health care system.
And second, the bill would move
the health care affordability
fund and its staff in
appropriations from the office
of the superintendent of
insurance to the Healthcare
authority.
This change will enable the
healthcare authority to better
coordinate health insurance
coverage for new Mexicans and to
maximize the state's health care
purchasing power while also
identifying and fixing gaps in
the system to make sure that
every new Mexican has access to
affordable health insurance
coverage Before I close. I want
to reiterate the importance of
this foundational bill. Actions
are being taken now by the
healthcare authority to initiate
the needed fiscal data and
policy analysis that will inform
recommendations and decision
making on a new purchasing plan.
That can be executed by July,
2025.
Senate Bill 14 will be the
enabling statute to advance this
important work to improve the
health care system for new
Mexicans. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee
Jeanette about blasting
healthcare policy advisor in the
governor's office. Um
Former representative Debbie
Armstrong, put together this
very nice index to help explain
the very large bill. The cleanup
bill roughly 203 pages and what
it does is, it will demonstrate
to you all of the, um, areas
within the bill, where there's
just a reference change from the
Human Services Department.
To the health care authority.
Um
In addition,
Uh, it also reflects the new
Chapter 24 A, which is the
healthcare code and also
demonstrates the recompiling of
the legislation again. Most of
this bill is just clean up other
than the few items that
Secretary Armijo spoke about
previously.
Thank you.
Madam chair. Just one more
thing. Um
To enhance coordination in the
purchasing of health care, the
director of the Health Care
Authority State Benefits
division will now join the
retiree Healthcare authorities
board.
In addition to drug procurement,
I back
Agencies must now jointly
contract We've talked about that
a little bit and we will stand
for questions, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Is there anyone we're
gonna go to zoom first? Is there
anyone else zoom who stands in
opposition to this?
Bill.
All right. Is there anyone in
the audience who stands in
opposition to the bill?
So we're going back to zoom. Is
there anyone assume who stands
in support of the bill, right?
Is there anyone in the audience
who wishes to speak in support?
Please come forward. You will
have one minute.
You will be timed.
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee. Patrick Allen,
secretary of the Department of
Health Appreciate the
Legislature last year already
having made the decision to
consolidate purchasing policy
making and regulation in a
single agency to help new
Mexicans get the benefit of the
triple aim of better health. Um
uh, and lower costs. This bill
makes important changes that
helped transfer the necessary
statutory authorities, along
with the with the H I and G VSD
into the healthcare authority,
other technical cleanups and
consolidation.
And for that reason, the
Department of Health supports
the bill.
Thank you.
Madam chairman members of the
committee. My name is Dale
Tinker, representing New Mexico
Pharmacists Association. Um, I
told Gina earlier that this bill
was too big that it was over 200
pages and I can't read that far.
The truth is, I did review the
bill. Um I do believe in the
administrative streamlining that
occurred last year.
The things that happened.
Looking great for the future.
And I want to thank Secretary
Armijo.
From being able to work with her
is mostly you know, I'm
retiring. And so it will be my
last time to work with Secretary
Armijo but congratulate her on
her future.
I do want to say I like the
streamline.
On the streamlining that lets
the
Authority in charge of
supervision of the eye back
Those things will streamline the
process of healthcare.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Morning, Madam Chair members of
the committee. My name is VR to
understand that
Okay, This is better.
Um my name is the iron Akiva the
acting life on how division
director with the Office of
Superintendent of Insurance. Um,
we think the bill's sponsor and
Secretary Armijo for bringing
this bill forward and fully
support the statutory updates
needed unnecessary to fully
empowered the newly created
healthcare authority. And we
urge the passage of the bill.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee, Marla shows
registered lobbyists for Blue
Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico
and we stand in support of the
governor's vision for the
healthcare authority look
forward to working with
Secretary Armijo and the
administration under generated
glasses, direction and as we
move forward into this
transition, thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, madam. Chair Members
of committee Larry Harun
registered lobbyists for
Presbyterian Health Plan and
Presbyterian Healthcare
Services.
We support the efforts of the
governor's office in the
Legislature to create the
healthcare authority, although
it's been a 30 Day session, so
for healthcare, we get a little
bit of a break with lots of
legislation.
This year. We've had lots of
opportunities to talk about. How
can we improve access and
delivery of health care on on
the bills we've considered and
we've had good open
conversations with the
governor's office with both
secretary and general glossy, So
we appreciate the collaboration
and coordination and we look
forward to continuing to work to
increase access to healthcare
and improve quality of
healthcare.
In the state of New Mexico, So
we urge your support of this
legislation. Thank you, madam
Chair members of the committee.
Thank you.
Morning, Madam Chair members of
the committee. My name is Marco
Gonzalez, and I'm the registered
for Molina, faithless sponsor
for the department and the
administration for bringing this
important bill together. It's
really the engine for the
mission of the department and
for
The foundation for the Vision
and the attainments of its
goals, which is a better care of
our most needy, understands, um,
older to shoulder with the
administration and the
department in in those goals. We
thank the sponsor for bringing
forward and and ask for your
support. And thank you, madam
Chair members of the committee.
Thank you.
Morning, Madam Chair members of
the committee. My name is Yvette
Ramirez Amerman, CEO of the New
Mexico Primary Care Association.
We represent 350,000 rural and
underserved New Mexicans. We
stand in full support of this
bill. We certainly as the first
line of safety net, the first
line of defense and health care
where also the smallest fish, So
we look forward to having better
information and transparency
with this.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee, Linda Siegel
represent many different
healthcare providers, nurses,
doctors, OT psychologist and,
um, we're grateful for this bill
sort of bringing everything
together under one agency and
really appreciate the leadership
of Secretary Army hope and
Fixing some things and Medicaid
that we've been working on for
years. But and and as far as the
eye back the coalition of
bringing together all the
insurance that that government
has having been on the community
College board for years, so many
problems with getting good
health care insurance and
getting good prices and bringing
all these insured
Entities together, I think is
really gonna help with the
delivery of health insurance.
Health care. Thanks.
Thank you.
Right. Well, now go will Now go
to the committee. Are there any
questions from the committee?
Alright, well, first go to
representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
hardly ever first, but this is
great. It's good. Thank you,
representative Thompson
Secretary Armijo Gina
Appreciate, Um
Anything. We can do it toward a
common goal to make me Mexicans
healthier. I have a lot of
questions about this. Probably
more than we have time for.
Um
And Yeah, it's huge.
Um
First thing I guess I want to
ask you is is how do you think
new Mexicans have? Or can you
give me examples of how new
Mexicans have benefited from
What we did last year and
creating this department.
Madam Chair, representative
Jones. I think we're at the
early stages. Still, um, as you
know, um, Healthcare Authority
was created last year, but we
needed to have an inaugural
budget request to go with that
consolidation. So this is really
the first session in which we we
submitted a budget request to
the governor as the health care
authority in September.
Um, that is really going to go
live in July and so we will be
standing up the New Mexico
Healthcare Authority in July,
Um, with this year, having
really been focused on the
transitional components, the
work that needs to be done, we
have begun all of the data and
fiscal analysis in particular
around improving the purchasing
plan for New Mexico.
Um and so we are sort of in
those early stages. Still, the
identity of the agency, um,
recognizing that we serve a
million new Mexicans, Um, we
will be standing up with that
new identity in July. That was
not something that we could do.
Uh, this year, we really had to
kind of get through these
transitional components.
And so starting in July, you'll
start to see that our new
identity will be the healthcare
authority. Um, and from there,
you know, we anticipate having
purchasing plan with a new
procurement sort of in the fall
of 2024 with the plan to execute
that new contracts for
purchasing benefits in 2025, so
we are moving forward and
marching ahead, but
A lot of the work has sort of
been the foundational pieces to
get the work going.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Secretary.
It's hard to imagine this huge
effort all at once. In fact, I'm
I'm really
Thinking that maybe it would
have been better to do it a
little bit at a time.
Um, why? Why do you can you give
me some ideas about
Or your thoughts about
The difficulties so far. What I
hear you say, saying is that we
really haven't made any progress
since last year toward seeing
benefit from what we did.
In reorganizing and am I
correct, Madam chair? I would
just disagree with that. I think
we've We've submitted a
transition plan. We've brought
the stakeholders together. We've
done a lot of the work. You
can't you can't change the
health care system overnight. It
requires a plan. I'm very
acutely aware of the impact of
the plan, and so I want to have
a very data driven process with
recommendations for the
Legislature for the governor,
um, that involve, like a set of
options for better purchasing.
Um, for new Mexicans, and I
think that involves a lot of
data analysis. But I've learned
over the past year is that
There's not that much data and
that there isn't a lot of, um
Questioning going on in terms of
how the purchasing goes, is
happening for the state of New
Mexico. And so it's my job to
ask those questions and get
answers to those questions and
to develop a plan. Um and so I
think that you know that does
take time. But as I mentioned,
we did submit a transition plan
to the Legislature, and that was
what was directed with the
previous Bill. The Healthcare
Authority Act with that
consolidation, and we did submit
that
Thank you, Secretary and Madam
chair.
So you're you're saying
basically over the last year?
What we've done is just as
planned and gather information.
Figure out how this is going to
move forward. Is that the case?
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Jones. We have on boarded a
number of experts, um, in the
field of purchasing, so we have
an actuarial analysis underway.
They're going to be giving us
options for comparing what's now
the state of New Mexico. The
state of New Mexico operates a
self insured model, so we do
not. We absorb all of the risk
for the purchasing of coverage,
and we just pay claims. We're
gonna evaluate whether or not we
should be moving to a fully
insured model. What the savings
could be What that looks like,
Um what's the pricing? What is?
What are those options for?
For potentially saving costs for
employees.
So that actuarial analysis is
underway right now there, it's
pretty rigorous. There's a lot
of data analysis going on where
we've on boarded, Uh, an expert
on the self insured market to
evaluate the procurements and
make sure that they are making
recommendations on terms that
will be favorable to the state
of New Mexico. Right now. Those
contracts and the procurement
It's my understanding do not
have favorable terms for the
states that they'll be making
recommendations around that that
will go again into that
purchasing plan. Um, and then
we're going to be doing a claims
Integrity audit for the
performance on the current plan
that has not been done before.
so we have We have a lot of work
to do, but it's all underway.
It's um There's a lot of
progress being made right now.
Ah, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Secretary. I can only
imagine this is a huge project
So help me understand? And I'm
not trying to waste time here.
I'm really trying to understand
this.
You're telling me that the
benefit of of reorganization is
Causes saving money.
Is that right? Madam Chair
representative. I think that's
one of the goals. But certainly
I also think we have to really
be measuring quality. Um, and be
more transparent about the
outcomes that patients are
getting in the health care
system, and that's part of the
intention as well. Um, we also
recognize that the health care
system
The players are not working
together today, so you've got a
very siloed system in which
patients are caught in the
middle, trying to navigate their
own care so really trying to
make sure that all of these big
players with all of the money
are working together to
Enhance patient outcomes and the
patient experience. Uh, that
also is a big part of it, So
it's definitely not just about
saving money. It's also about
making sure that we've got
enhanced value and quality,
better transparency and a better
experience. More coordinated and
seamless system for new Maximum.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Secretary. Me who
Um, I looking through all this
pages and pages, one of the
things that jumped out to me.
Because we dealt with this in
the health care in the
Um
Rural health care tax credit
bill that we've we've got in
this session was the definition
of rural. I feel like there's a
poor definition of rural and
section 38.
What page representative?
Okay. Page 68 line.
Two through seven.
That's where it is.
Oh, this is really difficult to
read, isn't it?
Small
And I don't have line. Oh, yes,
I do. Have line numbers slides
two through seven.
Representative Jones and Madam
Chair it's in the second column.
This is existing law. We're not
changing anything there. Yes,
well, you know, I think we do
need to change that. That's one
of the things we did in that
that tax credit. Um
Bill has changed the definite
issue of rural and so I'll just
bring that up as an issue.
Because what happens is when you
when you evaluate by counties,
um
Evaluate the number of people
per county. You're leaving out.
The fact that many of our every
one of our counties has a
populated
City in it like Santa Fe,
Albuquerque, even last. Cruces
has areas in that county that
are rural.
And so we I think we're matching
that That's just something we
can talk about the future. Maybe
matching that with the federal
definition would serve our
people better.
So, but I do understand that
So, but I do understand that's
existing well, so I'll move on.
It just did jump out with me
because I think that's an issue
all around and everything we do
in healthcare here in New
Mexico, we need to to consider
that their rural areas in every
county not just
Those that don't have a big city
so
That's one issue. Um
So thank you.
For listening to that, and
My questions.
So I have a question about page
15 line 13.
Removes the New Mexico Health
Policy Commission from H C. A.
Where is it going to be?
Madam Chair representative
Jones, the health policy
Commission, um, currently
resides with Department of
Health and we are not moving
that.
I'm sorry, and you're not what?
We are not moving that to.
They're not moving that remains
Department of Health and on
Madam Chair.
On page 16 line 10
Allows the governor to appoint
other advisory committees as
needed.
It seems very broad.
Doesn't it seem
Autocratic and subject to see a
more instability. Doesn't that
seem to
Make more instability with
changes in the the governor.
When we have a change in the
governor.
Madam Chair, representative
Jones. That's correct.
What about page 26 line 21
through 22 states that one
member of the board will be a
member selected.
By the New Mexico Coalition of
School administrators. Is that
the same as
The New Mexico Coalition of
Education leaders.
Madam Chair. Representative
Jones, could you please? Um
Redirect me to which aligns your
line 26 and 21. I mean, it was
sorry page 26 9 21. I'm sorry.
Yes, 21 through 22.
Madam Chair, Representative
Jones? Yes, this was a
correction by the bill drafter
that is now called the New
Mexico Coalition of school
administrators.
Okay?
Okay. Thank you very much.
Okay, Um
Do you think Madam Chair and
representatives Secretary Jeana?
Do you think that this the
changes here the cleanup you
Proposed here will result in
better transparency and if so,
Please explain.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative.
Yes, I think it. I think it
will, um, in a lot of different
ways.
I think we need a more
transparent purchasing plan that
is not occurring right now. All
of the entities that are part of
the back are sort of doing their
own thing. Um, they're required
to do a procurement together,
but it sort of everyone goes off
and negotiates their own
contracts. It's kind of hard to
tell.
How we're monitoring performance
and value when that's happening,
so I think we'll be focused on
sort of streamlining that.
Um my vision is that we will
have
Performance outcomes and quality
measures, Um, with a score card
that will sort of show how the
carriers are performing and what
we're getting. What's the
healthcare looking like here in
New Mexico? What do patients get
for the value and that that will
be very transparent? We actually
have that in Medicaid today we
have
A lot of transparency. We can
show you how we're performing on
prenatal care. We should be able
to see that with the other, um,
with the other rest of patients
here in New Mexico with those
other funds, But we can't see
that today. And so that's really
where we're headed.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Secretary. So when Show me
or tell me how that looks like,
When do you think we'll be able
to see those changes and those
benefits next year? You have an
idea about that? Um, Madam Chair
representative. I think we're
starting with recommendations
for that consolidated purchasing
plan. That's where we're going
to begin. Um, as I said.
Our goal is to and the target
date is to have a new
procurement that we can release
in the fall of this year.
Um with sort of a target of
execution by July of 2025 that
will have a whole set of new
contract requirements. Um, and
so from there, I think you know
that's really the first target
date. Is that July 2025.
Obviously, you know, the agency
is working on some other things.
There's there's pieces of
You know?
Building out from there, but I
really want to have a good set
of recommendations for all of
you. I think that that's what we
need, and I don't think that's
been done. And so it's really
going to start with. What is the
what is this analysis? Tell us
about where we could be making
improvements. Other states have
done this work. Um and New
Mexico wants to be
With those states and sort of
leading the charge here, um, to
try and get more value out of
this system and to understand, I
don't think anyone here can say,
um what those funds are
purchasing today, and so I think
that's the problem that we're
trying to fix. So I'm really
targeting that July of 2025 for
that purchasing plan, But you
know the other pieces that are
coming over to the agency. Those
that's immediate. We're going to
be working on improvements right
away for D, D s, D and D H I.
Um, so there's there's a lot of
components, so it's not just
limited to the purchasing piece
of it.
I guess. Thank you so much. I
appreciate that, and I
appreciate your enthusiasm and
hopefulness that this is going
to make things better. I I guess
my hesitation is that I've never
seen making bigger departments
bigger government.
Um, proved to be beneficial. And
so I'm hesitant about that. But
I do appreciate all your
efforts. And I hope that what
you're looking to do actually
happens. So thank you very much
for the conversation. Thank you,
madam Chair.
Thank you will Now go to
representative Lord. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Hold on.
I want to prove that for
represented experts. I'm also
feeling a little under the
weather from yesterday, so I'm
just like, Whoa, I don't feel
good today, but it's important.
I wanted to ask these questions,
And I only have a few. So, Madam
Chair representative. I know
that
The Senate side and represent
Jones asked a lot of the
questions already, but in the
Senate side, they had a lot of
concerns about the impact on the
private sector and independent
providers, and that was a very
significant concern to them. Can
you explain to me? Can you spend
more on that? Please?
Um, Madam Chair, Representative.
Lord, I think a lot of the
questions which hopefully will
clarified, but I'm happy to sort
of have that conversation here
as well. Um, were that we were
going to be putting everything
in with Medicaid. And that is
that is not what we're doing. We
are really maintaining separate
lines of business, still
maintaining the private market
Just
Having those within one
contract.
From my perspective, the state
needs more negotiating tactics
with these carriers than just
provider rates, So I think there
was concern that we would find a
savings through cutting provider
rates and that also is not our
intention. Our intention is to
really look at how we're
managing risk for these
populations. How can we? What
strategy is? What tools can we
use?
To do that better, and I think
there are other levers that have
just not been deployed, but that
we could be using there. So we
are, really I just I think
Um, I want to reinforce that
we're maintaining the private
market. There's not a plan to
consolidate everything with
Medicaid. But there is
purchasing power to be had, um,
and negotiation power that comes
with having 875,000 covered
lives. Um, we do. There is a
possibility of getting a better
deal. But it doesn't mean that
we're going to be blending
everything you know, public.
Yeah. Insurance coverage. Okay.
Thank you, Madam Chair. An
expert. Yeah, nobody wants to be
in the Medicaid races are the
worst of the worst. You build,
100. You're lucky if you get
$20, so, Yeah, nobody wants to
be in that category.
Um madam chair, ribs and experts
So in December of 2023 the LFC
hearing they had the LLC
dashboard.
And HST and multiple
unsatisfactory reviews. For many
of the functions. Um
How will it 18 manage Ease
deficiencies while transforming
the entire department.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
Lord, I'd have to look at
exactly which deficiencies
you're talking about. There are
certainly some operational
challenges. For example, we've
had the Medicaid and snap
unwinding has occurred in 2023.
And so we have had
unprecedented volume of cases.
So our timeliness uh
Which has been at 95 to 98%
Panda or pre unwinding took a
dip this year and that was
expected. We are very
transparent that that was going
to happen. We anticipate getting
back to back to normal
operations, and there's no
reason that we would think that
that would be an ongoing
situation, but we're just in an
unprecedented time.
I'd be happy to go through all
of this performance metrics with
you and kind of talk about the
plans for those, Um, but by and
large, I think you know we have
we're addressing them. There's
probably some reason that we
could explain why there is some
data lag that's not captured in
some of the metrics, but I'd
have to go through those or you
have to have those in front of
me to be able to explain my
point.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative, I I kind of
agree with, um
Represent Jones in the rollout.
Maybe it should have been in
smaller increments instead of
because it seems like there's a
lot maybe would have been a
This is a party. We're going to
focus on this, and we're going
to focus on this and make sure
everything is streamlined all at
once. I think the last question
actually have two last
questions. Um
And I don't know if this is in
the sub still, but one of the
definitions of rural counties is
less than 100,000 so
Um the definition would then
include Los Alamos that only has
a poverty rate of 8% and
Sandoval and San Juan County
would not be in this, but they
have a poverty rate of 37%. How
do we amend for this?
Madam Chair, representative Lord
that language the jury for ring
to his current law that was
passed with the rural Healthcare
delivery fund last year. We've
heard some of those concerns. I
think there's an attempt in
house built to to go back and re
look at that definition. I
haven't seen the language. Um
but we've we've heard that
concern. But that was current
law from last year when we
passed the real healthcare
delivery fund.
Okay. I think that's something
Madam chair represent experts,
and we should definitely look at
because we need to just not take
the population. But the poverty
rate, too, because you will end
up with these situations where
you have
And then also with Los Alamos.
there's parts of their poverty
that are different from where
the people live in actual Los
Alamos, so there's going to be
have to figure out some way to
differentiate with all that
with, um with taking into
consideration. How much money
people making that county um and
also the other question, hand
membership representative and I
think some of these questions I
had were on the previous on the
sub. But the Department of
Health
Um
So I'm thinking was page 175
line tend to limit completely
removes the Department of Health
from the Developmental
Disabilities Council had
I was up, play out. What is
What is the intent on that Madam
chair and representative Lord?
That is because the development
disability supports division is
being moved from Department of
Health to the health care
authorities, So it's just
basically putting the department
excuse me, Madam Chair. Would
you move your microphone a
little. Turn it off and then
move it a little closer. They
can't hear in the back.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Lord, so the fact
that the development disability
supports division is being moved
from Department of Health to the
Health care authority.
It makes sense that the
secretary of D O H no longer be
sit on the D V Council but that
the secretary or their designee
of the healthcare Authority.
Thank you, Madam Chair. It's all
these questions. I had
Thank you, Representative. Next
we have representative Vincent.
Thank you, madam Chair.
So this new this new healthcare
authority?
I haven't seen a diagram of it,
and I'm kind of the command type
guy. So I want to know what the
diagram How does that? How does
that diagram looker? Is there
one that we could possibly look
at Madam chair?
Uh, manager Representative in
center is, um every happy to
share it with you. There is a
full transition plan that was
submitted to the Legislature. We
submitted an initial transition
plan that included an
organizational chart in November
as required by the Health Care
Authority Act, and then we
submitted a final plan on
January 2nd.
I'd be happy to share that with
you over to you. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you
representatives so
That's got to be a complex or
chart.
Madam chair and representative
and the thing that I always
worry about is when you start to
set up an organizational chart
that's so complex like that.
Um and you start taking, you
know the person that's gonna run
That's the head person in
charge, and then it comes down
and breaks out. What? How many
people are you gonna be
supervising? How much? How many
people does one person
supervise?
Madam Chair representative.
Uh, Madam Chair representative,
and soon that me very, However,
it is going to be a large
agency. I think our total
employee FTE count will be about
2400 employees, so not the
largest in state government, but
one of the bigger agencies, um,
have a rule of thumb for myself
and for my leadership team that
we know that don't supervise
more than five or six people. We
always sort of try to make sure
that we're covered because I
think if you do more than that,
You kind of end up.
Only doing supervision. You have
time for anything else, And so
we kind of have a role of them.
I don't know. I mean, I have to
look and see what the exact
count is for each employee in
terms of what they supervise,
But that's the general rule of
thumb that we tend to abide by.
Thank you, Madam chair and
representative, and I know
that's what we try to to go with
and sometimes are
We have other duties as assigned
and before you know it. You're
managing so many people that you
can't really get a grip on
things. And so I look at this
complex organizational chart,
and I think
You're trying to pull everything
together. You have your order
chart.
How are you going to get all
those people to communicate?
To where we have a good loop
system. Madam chair and
representative.
Madam Chair, representative
Vincent really good question. I
think it's impossible in any
organization to over
communicate, so communication is
very important to me. As a
leader of the agency. We have a
lot of cross divisional teams
that we meet with all the time
as I've got, like an operations
team that consists of some sets
of leaders that we've gotta
stretch strategic team within
the agency and that right now
we've been bringing in the other
divisions that are joining us.
At the agency. We've been doing
that for several months now so
that they feel like they're part
of the team.
Every month. I have a manager
all manager meeting within the
agency, and then every quarter
we have an all employee meeting.
So we try to really make sure
that we are communicating as
best we can I send monthly
communications directly to all
agency staff. That does not go
through my communications
director. Those are directly
from me about things that I
think are really important. And
then we have a communications
office that does inner inside
the agency communications as
well.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative.
And the reason I asked, that is
that is a huge undertaking that
I know a lot of you are gonna
take take on.
And I don't want your hair to
look like my beard in the next
three months because it seems
like that's what's going to
happen. That is a lot of work in
order to get that going.
Um, the next question I had
Madam chair and representatives
on page 15.
Line 13 removes the New Mexico
health policy commissioned from
H C, A. Where it's going to be
And why? What was the rationale
behind that decision?
Madam Chair representatives.
Madam Chair representative
Vincent Li or not, so the
original bill
Iran is your honestly had it
moved to the healthcare
authority. We are keeping it at
Department of Health.
Thank you, madam Chair.
And, uh, let's see here on page
33.
Okay. So on page 33 does not
include child facilities under
the sea. A. What's the reason
for that?
Madam Chair, representative
Vincent
That reference is to C Y F, D
and E C. E. C D. That was that's
current law.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative.
Okay. So on to page 35 lines, 15
through 17 allow the CH to do
all other things necessary to
carry out its duties as defined
by law and rules promulgated in
accordance with law.
Doesn't disallow the agency to
circumvent the legislative
process.
I don't. I'm not.
And the reason I say that is I
don't like that process to get
circumvented. I think we need to
be a part of that. Madam Chair
representative.
Madam Chair, representative
Vincent Now that is current law.
That's current law, okay?
There's a lot of current law.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative. So, um
One of the other questions I had
was on page 62.
Lines 22 and 23.
Stipulated that emergency
medical services stays with the
Department of Health.
Why am I? Why would emergency
departments and stroke centers
be moved to HC? A.
Madam Chair, representative
Vincent There's a comprehensive
Um, stroke program that is run
by the Department of Health. You
see that it's standard. We see
that across other states as
well. So we've kept that over
Department of Health.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair and
representative. What about
emergency medical services?
Madam Chair representative
Vincent. Same answer. Okay,
Thank you.
And then my last question, Madam
Chair representatives. Why are
we replacing aid?
To dependent Children with
temporary assistance for needy
families on page 99.
Lines 14 and 15.
Um, Madam Chair representative
and said. That's just the that's
the name of the program in
federal statute changed from F.
D. C to 10. If
Okay?
Years ago. Thank you, madam
chair and representatives.
Thank you, Representative. Next
we will go to representative
Chavez. Thank you, madam Chair.
Um, So I have a couple of
questions with regard to the
transition. When will all of
this speak Madam Chair? Um
representative Chavez, So I
think the the the budget for the
new agency will go live July
1st.
Um the work between now and
July is really on making sure
that the brand identity of the
agency is correct. So I have to
make sure that every notice we
send out says the healthcare
authority that every sign on our
office building, says the
healthcare authority. I do not
want my customers to get used
about where to get their
benefits.
So that is what's happening now
that that part of it is
happening now, so that we are
basically stood up like our
website. All of that is changed
by July, 1st.
But the some of the pieces you
know in our agencies will be
coming together. So officially d
D s d d h I. The employee
benefits They will be hcea
employees. As of July. 1st, Um
The other pieces around like the
purchasing the strategic items
around those that we're talking
about a couple of years we
really are talking about a three
year plan to kind of get where
we need to go overall. Um so I
think I do really want to
acknowledge the statements that
have been made in the concerns
around is this too fast? We're
very focused on the state of New
Mexico benefits right now.
That's within our immediate
scope of control, but really
making sure that we're also
stakeholder in with other
buyback agencies. I'm very
interested in learning.
From them about what they're
doing right now. I'm not going
to assume that we know we have
all the answers, but I really
want to learn.
What they have what their
incentives are, What's important
to them, So that's where really
in that phase, But I would say
that the shortest answer to your
question is that July 1st. We
will stand up as the New Mexico
Healthcare Authority and the
work will have been completed
for all of those operational
details like the letterhead and
the All of those things will be
done by July, 1st.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair
representative. And then the
next question I have is
In terms of reporting back
Um, I'm assuming that during the
interim, you will come before.
The interim committee to report
progress and any issues that
have come up one of the problems
that I have found during the
interim committee is that we
will often ask for information
sometimes will receive it. And
but most of the time we so my
question is when you come to
report report progress, but then
also, um
My expectations. I'm sure
expectation of the other
representatives is also that if
we ask for information that we
will, um
Receive it. I think that's part
of transparency as well.
Absolutely, Madam Cherry
Apologize if we missed anything.
I think we try really hard to
follow up directly with with
people who ask us questions that
the committee hearings and we
will make sure that we do that.
Um, So if we miss anything,
please, just let me know. I'm
apologize if we've failed to
follow up with you in the past.
Um, the other question that I
have, Madam Chair representative
is in terms of this transition.
Um, are there
Any plans to reduce the number
of employees that are working in
any of these agencies that are
going to come under the health
care?
Authority.
Madam Chair, representative
Chavez. No, We're not looking to
reduce anything. If anything, I
think some of those areas are
probably a little bit
understaffed, and I think only
getting eight employees from the
General Services Department to
do all this purchasing, and I
think in order to get what we
really need.
Probably need more. So I we
looks like we're standing up the
agency. Hopefully, we had a
request also to make sure that
we had sufficient program
support because when you
transition 400 employees over to
your agency, you need things
like payroll and HR staff. So it
looks like we're hopefully
getting to a place where we're
getting that support. But at
this point, we're definitely not
looking at reducing anywhere.
So, Madam Chair representative
and I have a follow up question
to that. Are there any, um,
plans to increase employees in
any of the agency's I remember.
During the summer, there was an
issue with the number of workers
and I s d. The workers who
process um things like Tana food
stamps, those kinds of things
and what the agency did or what
the department did. Madam Chair
representative is that they
hired a number of, um temporary
or contract employees.
So my question is. Is there a
plan to, um
Staff up
And some of those areas that
have been, um
Plagued by, you know, too much
work and too few workers. Yes,
thank you. For the question.
Madam Chair representative
Chavez. There is a plan. Um, we
did how to augment the
workforce, um, with temporary
workers during the Medicaid and
snap and winding that temporary
workforce is going to be off
loaded. It is not. It is just
for this period of time, with
the unwinding going on. So it's
a 12 month period. We're really
looking at sort of an off
boarding plan for most of those
But we want to keep ones that
want to keep working for agency
and use, you know, fill
vacancies. We've actually been
pretty successful of reducing
the vacancy rate of caseworkers
in this past few months, so been
doing a good job vacancy rate at
the agency is just about 12% so
not not too high at this point,
so our plan is to always
potentially have
The need for some augmented
staff during times of flux, But
really, I think we're going to
get to a place of stability in
our operations and just really
keep focusing on that case.
Worker retention. There are very
valuable resource to our agency.
and I appreciate them everyday
for showing up and doing this
hard work for New Mexico and,
um, we'll keep
This sort of making sure they're
adequately resourced. Okay.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Thank you, Representative
last on the list. We have
representative Cates. Thank you.
Chair and and thank you,
presenters. Thank you,
Secretary.
Our meo and and and Mr Blasio.
Um, I, uh, I understand the
movement for the healthcare
sword E and I see the support.
Um Everyone is very, um
Tend to believe supportive in
the theory that this will help
streamline and maximize the
budget.
I, um I'm just, uh, as you know,
maybe you don't as I've
communicated before. I see that,
uh, d d s d and and the waiver
as uh, have many issues and are
broken in so many ways.
Um
Awesome joked myself is that no
one has ever hired me and my
career because their business is
doing well. They always hire me
when they're on the verge, and
and this is an inherited issue,
um of of this new adventure in
the health care authority. I
like to know what um, Your plans
are
On reaching out to provider
groups, which are falling away
and massive.
And, um, addressing a and e
concerns and the reports and the
follow ups of those as well as
even the $10.2 million this
legislature granted last year
and has yet to get to providers
a year later, the emergency
funds
Um are you do you have plans to
bring in stakeholders? Um Or
have you already done that? And
you have, uh, at least the
beginnings of a systematic
approach to address these
Quite frankly, life and death
situations within this program
that serve our most vulnerable
in New Mexico. Thank you.
Ah, Madam Chair, representative
kids, Um, I feel like there was
quite a few points raised in
Ah, Madam Chair representative
kids, Um, I feel like there was
quite a few points raised the
Ah, Madam Chair representative
kids, Um, I feel like there was
quite a few points raised in
like questionnaire, but, um, so
I'll start. I just want to. I
want to start with the 10.2
million because I think it's
actually a really good
illustration of of why it's
important to consolidate. I
think what we saw is a little
bit of
Like which agency is the lead.
Um and if it's all in one
agency, we know who's
accountable, and I think that's
a little bit of what happened
with the 10.2 Million to be
really honest. Not acceptable.
Not okay. We're waiting for
federal approval for that, But I
think what I saw when I really
looked for find out what was
going on with the 10.2 million
is a little bit of like we
aren't the owner happening at
both agencies.
So that's why I think we're
going to get a lot of synergy by
moving together my expectation
and you know, d d S D is a
Medicaid.
Program and so working together
with the Medicaid team and the
Medicaid financial team, I think
it's going to really help. I
think we won't see things like
that. And I made it really clear
that, um my expectation is that
the divisions will work together
and we will be timely. We're
already thinking about the
appropriation that's contained
to get the work done now, so
that we, um
Get the work done, and we don't
have a delay in getting executed
provider read rate increases out
in the future, So I want to
highlight that as a potential
opportunity for improvement. I
am very happy to work with any
provider group. Um it's really
important to me to hear from the
provider community. I think, um,
you'll hear from other provider
groups that I worked really
closely with them. And so I
really look forward to doing
that, with the DD population as
well.
And that's how started to
happen. But you know they're
They're still working with the O
H as well. Um and I think you
know, in terms of abuse and
neglect and exploitation that
has become a real focal point
for DDS. D, um, we know that we
have to do better. We cannot. We
need to really be managing risk.
And so I think that's going to
be a focal point. I would love
to come back and talk more in
detail about that during the
Inter home and talk about the
agency's plans for addressing
that.
That there's a lot of data that
we're pulling to do you
projected
Analysis on risk and things like
that so happy to go over that in
greater detail.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you for
that. And and I look forward to.
I mean, we want to to move
forward. This is never going to
work unless we all are working
towards the same goal and so and
and I hope to be able to do that
with you. Just as a follow up
and I understand that you were
not the secretary of Health Care
authority last year.
But you mentioned all there. The
10.10 the $10.2 million. You
know, there was some confusion
of who has the lead on that. And
when you're waiting to hear back
from CMS of whether or not it
was approved
Do you know the date in which it
was requested to CMS for
approval? Uh, Madam Chair
representative Kids, I'll have
to go to get back to you and
that I don't know the date that
it was approved, but I don't
think I think it was delayed.
I'm not. I'm not.
I apologize. I don't think that
that was done correctly, um, by
either agency and I think part
of the responsibility is with my
agency. And so I just think the
team's got kind of caught up in
Hmm. Uncertainty about where
that resides and who was doing
what? And that will not happen
again. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you for your answer,
And I know that that that was
not, um under your leadership,
and and but I appreciate your
transparency and I look forward
to your interim committee
reports and, um
And working forward with you on
follow up with a and e concerns
and other issues with the DST.
Program. Thank you.
Thank you. That concludes our
committee discussion. I would
entertain a motion.
I'll make a motion for do pass.
Okay. We have a motion for a do
pass after by representative
Cait stuck it by
Representative Chavez. Is there
any objection to that?
Okay, Miss Hill. Would you call
the roll, please? Thank you.
Representative Cates Yes.
Representative Chavez.
Representative, Harm ill.
Representative Jones.
No.
Representative Lord No.
Representatives. Capan ski Yes.
Representative Vincent No with
an explanation, please.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Okay by a vote of five in the
affirmative, three in the
negative house.
Excuse me,
at Senate built 14. But it is a
committee so
Oh, here we go.
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 14 has passed
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative Vincent to
explain his vote.
Thank you, madam Chair.
And representative and
Ladies, I the reason I'm gonna
vote mainly No is because this
is a huge undertaking. It's a
very complex deal and believe
this or not, word on the street
is yellow, Pretty good employees
and all I keep hearing is how
we're burning employees out,
and, um
I'm voting? No, mainly because
of you two. I We don't need a
vacancy. So that's why I'm gonna
know.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Either. Madam chair.
Representative Jones. Yes, I'd
like to point out that I don't
think we ever adopted this.
I don't think the motion it was
adopted in the Senate. Okay,
Okay. Thank you for that motion.
I want to make sure that the
motion was correct as well as I
think we all agreed on that. We
just need to make sure the
motion was do pass on the
Senate. Um
Um, yes,
It's fine. Yeah. Page. Thank
you. Okay. Thank you,
Representative Jones. As I say
it takes a village.
Okay, and we will go on to our
last bill, which
So we have a, um
Committees Senate Finance
Committee We have, um
Committee substitute by the
Senate Finance Committee that
was adopted on SB 161. And we
have, um, Senator Woods. Please
have a seat and
Whenever you're ready.
Thank you, madam Chair.
I, uh I have a bill in front of
you. It was committee substitute
and Senate finance.
And what this bill does.
It allows for eligible health
care facility to apply annually
to the healthcare authority.
For quarterly substitutes
subsidies to cover revenue
losses due to providing
emergency medical services.
Impatient, maternal child and
family health care services.
Increased medical malpractice
premiums, increased property
insurance provide for inpatient.
Acute care.
To maintain that I want to tell
about this bill.
It allows for nonprofit Stay
county owned acute care
facilities with fewer than 30
beds to apply to the healthcare
authority.
And it also gives a list of
those particular hospitals.
And we went out to each one of
those hospitals.
To determine the amount of need
they had.
Uh,
It's not
There's many hospitals in our
state or there's some hospitals
in our state that are operated
by
Ah, large medical
Managers.
And those particular hospitals
are covered in this bill.
These are
More or less.
The
Privately managed hospitals.
Adam chair.
Um, I'm sure there's questions
to be asked
So I'd be happy to hear
Stand for questions, Madam
chair. Thank you, Senator. So we
will go if you're on zoom in
opposition to this bill, please
raise your hand and we'll come
back to you.
Is there anyone in the room in
opposition?
Okay. Sing. None. Is there
anyone on soon?
Okay on Zoom. If you are in
support, please raise your hand
and we'll come back to you.
Anyone in the room and support
Come on up. If you want to
speak, please.
And you're limited to one
minute.
You can just stand back. Yeah,
there's microphones in the
ceiling. Catch it. Thank you,
Madam Chair and committee. Troy
Clark, president, CEO of New
Mexico Hospital Association. We
appreciate the sponsor bringing
this bill while we would like to
see all of our rural hospitals,
regardless of ownership
structure. Ah, covered in this
bill to make certain that we
have the continuity.
We find this bill to be actually
very supportive of the hospitals
that are included to get us. Uh
what we are considering the
bridge until Centerville 17.
should it pass through the house
as it is moving forward as the
long term solution to help
maintain the sustainability and
viability of our rural
hospitals. We urge your support.
Good morning, madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Marco Gonzales and I
represent McKinley County County
is one of those rural hospitals
that has, uh
A very great need in our
hospital is very much in danger.
McKinney County has had to take
extraordinary efforts to keep
our hospital open. Everybody in
the community agrees one thing
If our hospital dies, a
community dies. That means
McKinley County and the City
gallop.
And so we're very appreciative
Senator Woods and also chairman
Munoz, who have taken this issue
on on behalf of the legislature.
The needs are critical. We
really need this bill, too, As
was previously mentioned, get a
bridge to the future, which is
the Senate Bill 17. That's gonna
help everybody. So we greatly
appreciate the legislators
focusing attention on this
issue.
We ask for your support. Thank
you again, madam chair and
members of the committee and
thanks again to the sponsors for
taking this issue on
Madam Chair, Madam Chair members
of the committee Charlie Marcus
Lobbyists, registered lobbyists
for both city of Gallup and
Union County General Hospital.
Uh, these all these rural
hospitals are really in dire
need. They're shutting down
critical components of the
hospital and limiting the
services that they provide
within the community.
As Mr Gonzalez stated in the
city of Gallup. That city will
die without
And there's been stories about
individuals having to travel
some so many miles 150 miles
Just get weekly checkups for
Pregnancy.
And so I think that's a shame.
We need to do something about
that today and we thank the
sponsor for bringing this
forward. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you. Senator.
Do you have any comments before
we go to the committee? No. Um,
I'm ready for the foreign loan
chair. Where's your mask?
Representative? Let me see.
I'm sorry, Vincent Jones.
Pinsky.
Chavez. Okay, Go ahead.
Representative Vincent. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Senator was the only question I
have is this in the budget?
Yes.
Thank you.
My kind of question. Um, Next,
we have representative Jones.
Hmm. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Um
I'm curious to know how I think
you you did touch on this. It's
not really in the bill. But how
did we decide who is eligible
for these funds?
Okay, what we did. We went to
Every hospital that would meet
that criteria.
In that criteria.
Has to do fine. I'm sorry I
should have had that brought up.
I assume that was going to be a
question. And I'm sorry. I
didn't bring that up right on
the top. Okay, madam, what we
have here We went to these
facilities and we tried our best
to determine which one of these
were were.
First hospital with 30 beds or
less.
They were
Either county state or or
Trying to think of the third one
anyway.
They are not managed.
By for profit industries.
You know, I'm and I have nothing
against them.
I've got a hospital and Quay
County.
That is managed by Presbyterian.
That
They bring in those specialists
they need on rotating basis, and
it's a great service for the
42 can carry four Quake county.
But I've got a hospital in
Roosevelt County that was
managed by Presbyterian and
Presbyterian, pulled out.
And they had to essentially
Build their own hospital and
redo it.
And and now they're struggling.
And so
I don't mean to say there's two
tiers of hospitals.
But these privately owned and
managed
Facilities County owned state
owned, You know, and includes
the miners. Miners hospital up
in
Right tone.
You know in minors Hospital is
one of the beneficiaries out of
the land Trust as you know,
State Land Trust.
But it's a simply a problem of
not enough patrons coming into
that hospital.
Those hospitals just don't have
enough. We've changed the way we
pay better care and Medicaid and
because we did that, And as you
know, you're in that profession.
Because we did that We are not
now.
Paying enough.
For opening the doors of these
hospitals.
And we're losing critical
services in those hospitals
Because what do you do when you
you running the bottom line?
You have to eliminate the
services that aren't paying
enough to keep them open and
that hurts a community.
You may not have that many
people needing it, but those
people that need it need
extremely bad.
And most of these people like in
Union County, you know they have
to travel all the way to Raton
will rat tones in trouble, too.
So it's it's
Critical that we keep these
small hospitals open hope that
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator.
It does. It's a good
conversation. I'm especially
concerned about the criteria
because I don't know if you know
this, but I serve a large rural
district and we have one
hospital and it is corporate Lee
owned and we are one of the only
small hospitals that continues
to provide obstetrics care.
When I toured the hospital
recently, I was told by a we
have we have to hire a lot of
traveling physicians and even
some traveling nurses.
But I was told by the
obstetrician who was working
there that of all the rural
hospitals that he travels around
two in the state that we have
the best obstetric unit.
And, uh,
I was really proud of that. I we
are hospital, Madam Chair,
senator serves
Uh, and underserved population
were 30 miles from the Mexican
border. We have to operate on a
budget that's acceptable to our
corporation, and we struggle but
we continue to provide really
good care and I don't I don't
think it's fair. It's not
equitable to be targeting. Um
Basically targeting the patients
that we serve, because
ultimately that's what my
hospital does is served people
we serve indigent people we
serve, uh, women who and and
families who often can't afford
care, and I just don't think
it's equitable to target
hospitals.
Just because we have a different
ownership. Um, we're not to to
to to think that our to even
insinuate that somehow we're
swimming in money because we're
owned by a for profit
corporation is wrong And I think
it's a disservice to
Two new Mexicans, especially my
district to target and and to
not consider us viable part of
providing
Quality healthcare in New Mexico
so
I'm not opposed. Madam Chair two
and Senator to, um, giving these
funds to these other facilities
I've had CEOs reach out to me
and asked me to support this.
I'm going to support your bill.
But I hope that in the future we
look more carefully at how we
can
How that by by not allowing
equitable service, equitable
funding to everyone in New
Mexico that were actually
hurting new Mexicans. We need to
stop doing that. So I appreciate
the conversation and I am going
to vote for your bill, but it's
with that understanding that I
think in the future, we need to
look at this more carefully and
and see what's the end goal by
leaving out certain small
facilities that are struggling
as well, because, you know
My
It's my hospital dies. My
community dies to my whole
district dies if my hospital
dies, so
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Thank you.
Representatives of Polanski.
Thank you, Madam Chair. It's
great to see you in House Health
Senator.
Um
I really appreciate what you are
doing with this bill, too.
Create a bridge to hopefully the
passage of a longer term
solution.
Um
And I think it's important that
all of these hospitals are
located and
Smaller communities where people
really do depend on them for
Everyday services as well as
emergencies and certainly
maternity and
Um prenatal and post natal care
very important.
Um, I did. I would be remiss if
I did not raise that. Um, I
believe that there are some
issues in this bill with the
anti donation clause in the
Constitution.
I don't know. Senator. Madam
Sharon. Senator, if you have
Examined that already. Um, but
I and I was reflecting on it in
the light in light of, you know,
we we've had a lot of requests
and and one of the requests
we've been
Thinking about is food. Banks
and food banks also providing
very essential services. But
To find food banks. We have to
select a local government
entity.
Or select a state agencies and
the funding to that state
agency. That state agency or
that local government contracts.
I mean, we we go into the in,
We're tying ourselves in knots
to get
Food onto people's table. Um, I
I am not a big fan of our anti
donation clause has it exists
today?
Um, But Senator, I wonder if you
could
Reflect on that because I have
not seen us directly appropriate
to hospitals before and I would
love to get your
Um and take on. Yes, that was
one of the first things that
came up.
And
The fact that these are very
critical for indigent care.
And ended you care is an
exemption in our constitution.
So that's the way we looked at
this. This is
I keep bumping this table and it
keeps ringing up. Apologize. I
used my hands too much better
chaired.
But Madam chair and I'm leaving
you out of this conversation. I
apologize for that chair and
representative
Yes, we, uh
We did. Look at that.
And we believe because we do
have this service for indigent
care, And that's about the only
place in many of these areas
that you can get into care. We
believe that it is
constitutional.
Um
Madam chair and and Senator, Um,
you may want to look at adding
some language to that effect and
looking and looking at the bill.
Um
I think there are a number of
things that are specifically
identified that I think you
could
Um
Justify under the second
indigent persons portion of the
anti donation clause, but, um, I
am not sure where items such as
paying your on your cost
increases for property insurance
might fall or
Um
Paying year on your cost
increases for medical
malpractice.
Premiums. And so you know, we
recently amended a bill in this
committee to address the anti
donation clause that was
attempting to also provide
assistance specifically on
medical malpractice premiums.
Medical or maybe the medical
malpractice.
Fund.
Um, but I would suggest is as
you are moving forward that
perhaps that language is needed
because while I'm sure the
The vast majority of the
services provided at these
facilities as
For the care of sick and
indigent persons. There are also
a whole slew of elective
procedures that some of them may
be offering and I don't want us
to
Run into a problem where we
believe we've been able to do
this, and then
Um, it turns out we needed to go
through a whole different
mechanism to address that anti
donation clause.
Um, the other
Question I had for you, madam
Chair in, Senator, Um
Was, you know, some of these
hospitals are locally owned, but
some of these hospitals are not
locally owned and
I think it's a
I think it's a very important
point, as we think about
Who we are providing assistance
to with taxpayer funds that we
consider the ramifications of
Providing funding to
Local organizations that have
been built on the ground here
and are locally owned and the
and the profits and the or maybe
lack thereof in this case, But
the work is all being done
locally versus some of these
that are managed by out of state
corporations or are owned by out
of state corporations that don't
really
Aren't are less accountable to
those of us in communities when
they make decisions, not even
maybe having met
You know, one or two people from
that community that they're
making decisions about.
Um Senator, would you Madam
Chairman, Senator, Would you
mind commenting on that and and
and your thoughts, sharing your
thoughts on that?
So from what I understand
You're asking me. Why are we
supporting institution that is
locally owned?
Is that the question, Madam
chair. I think in this bill,
there's a combination of locally
owned as well as out of state
owned.
Facilities.
Ah, I don't think we have any
other state facilities on this
list.
Oh,
Senator. I think she's speaking
about the ownership, not the
actual facilities.
I didn't know that we had out of
state ownership on this list.
Which one is that?
There's quite a few. Let's see.
I marked him stable A general
either either the ownership or
the management is out of state.
Cibola. Holy Cross with
McKinley.
And, um, normally.
Okay. I will check on that.
Because I I I thought we had a
very
Tight curriculum.
You're that not Madam Chair and
Senator, I would appreciate you
looking at that We do have some
publicly owned rural hospitals
as well as locally owned.
Rural hospitals that, um
That also may make this easier
to deal with in terms of the
anti donation clause. Um
Whereas this list is as madam
chair cited includes some out of
state owned or operated
facilities and
Um, I would just appreciate your
consideration as you, um,
continue to work on this
legislation so
In my hearing.
Madam chair in representative,
There's more that need to be put
on this list.
Madam Chair, representative.
Potentially, um I did not come
prepared with it with a list.
I'm not trying to, um
Add additional facilities, but I
do believe there are some
locally owned facilities that
are not on this list.
And there are some, um
Non locally owned facilities
that are on this list, and I
don't know.
With how you selected these
facilities. So you know, I'm
happy to work with you after the
committee this committee, um if
the bill moves forward to if you
want to discuss that I'm happy
to be helpful to you as I can,
but, um, I do. I do have some
concerns with the criteria that
we've set up. I thought we were
Various specific if if we've
overstepped that criteria
I'd be happy to work with you.
Thank you, madam Chair in
Senator.
Thank you, Representative
Chavez. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I have some of the same
questions that representatives
of ski just raised as far as I
can tell. Maybe the only
hospital that that doesn't fit
under the criteria that you're
talking about in this bill,
Madam Chair senator would be
maybe the miners Hospital.
Um, I'll point out that Holy
Holy Cross Hospital is managed
by an out of state of
corporation and as a matter of
fact, the community there just
past the G R T. Uh and all of
that money will be going to the
hospital. Um, so I'm not sure
why they need an additional
amount. Um, but the question
that I do have, um and I share
again. Like I said, some of the
same concerns. I don't
All of these hospitals that are
on your list or managed by, um,
other corporations.
Um, they're not necessarily
locally owned and operated. So
the other question that I have
Madam Chair Senator is how did
you arrive at these amounts?
The amounts that are listed in
the bill.
We? We went through the criteria
that was
Stated in the bill. Do you want
me to read them to you? Um yeah,
pointed out to me. Sure.
But answer to one of your last
questions that you stated about
someone else managing the
hospital.
They are nonprofit managers is
who we're talking about.
So, yeah Medical church that was
in the criteria. Mature,
Senator, I would disagree with
that.
But go ahead. Go ahead, okay?
Alright. We're talking about the
eligible healthcare facilities
that may apply annually to the
healthcare. Please give us a
page in law, a line and a page
and learn number pages. Wellman
Page one.
And starting on page 19.
An eligible health care facility
may apply.
And so I guess the first
question you're gonna ask me is
what makes it an eligible health
care facility. Madam Chair,
Senator. Maybe I didn't state my
question correctly. My question
was with regard to Page three.
There are amounts attached to
page three and actually page for
their amounts attached to each
of the hospitals.
And my question is how did you
arrive at the amount that each
hospitals that are listed on
pages three and four would
receive
You know, I have to apologize to
you little on that one because I
was actually in the room.
When they made these
determinations.
Uh, of the best I can do is is
to ask your forgiveness and
Personally get back to you as to
how these amounts were.
We're done.
Sure, thank you.
Um Hmm.
The other piece of this bill
that gives me heartburn is, um
Pain, medical malpractice
premiums.
We've had that conversation.
Um and I'm not sure why we're
continuing to raise it and slip
it into other bills.
Thank you, Representative Cates.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, senator for bringing this
forward and and I'm sorry to
keep harping on this one issue,
but I just want clarity or at
least I look forward to your
continued conference station
with whips Opinsky on this
matter, Um, so we've established
that the hospitals that were
identified you were identifying
them as non profits or ones with
under 35 beds.
And now we've established that
will some of them were corporate
owned and operated, and some are
locally owned and operated.
Um, and that there are concerns
on the anti the dreaded anti
donation clause that we all have
difficulty with, Um
I will just also asked for
information that
If this is the list of rural
hospitals that you want to stick
with, how do you ensure I
understand the argument of
Um
Medical provider anywhere in the
state.
Benefits the entire state. That
would be my argument on the anti
donation clause.
And that, um
But how do you ensure that that
money stay in the state when it
is owned and operated from a
corporation outside of state.
And if you if you don't know
that answer, I understand, but
that would be one of those
things that, um
Uh, as you work on
The anti donation hurdle.
That could be another approach.
It's either removing the
corporate
Owned and managed hospitals.
Or having a clause that ensures
Um, that our state funds are
staying within the state. And
how how would you do that?
And and and and I know that
that's a bigger question than
maybe you can answer right now.
And so I understand if you
can't, but I wanted to make sure
that we have it on the table as
you move forward, and thank you
again, Senator.
Representative Lord
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
I do have a question. Hello,
Senator. I want to make sure you
call your representatives know,
switching over
Mm. Share. Senator. I know that
there was a gentleman here.
earlier spoke Troy Clarke with
the hospital association. Does
he have information on how these
Hospitals are owned and managed
because I know that there was
something brought up about
Lincoln County. Uh, the CEO of
the person running that was
making 3 million. It turns out
they only made 200,000. So I
want to make sure that we're
understanding.
Who's owning and who's managing.
This is that Is it possible to
have him come up and explain
some of that for us, So we have
more clarification. Venture
Senator. Actually, I have some
numbers here, so I will just, um
Hmm.
Read them out so Holy Cross
Hospital.
Is owned by the Taus health
Systems, and the management is
Quorum Health Resources, or Q H.
R.
The network. Revenue of that
hospital is 153 million.
And the CEO. Compensation is
410,000.
Um, on Robert McKinley itself
owned managed by Community
Hospital Corporation Consulting
the hospital worth is about 25
million CHC management company
1.98 billion
Um
And let's see. See, UH, Union
County General Hospital.
Clayton Health System
Incorporated is the owner
managed by Community Health
System Corporation. As I said
before, um
1.9 billion and the CEO
compensation is 1.4 million in
other income board members make
25,000.
Villa General can ask you.
Where's your source and whose
expert on that Because we had
the other day we had somebody
claimed that a CEO may 3 million
and they drove up here to
clarify that they only made
200,000 years. So do we have
those numbers are those assets
And what is your source?
My source is, um
That's that's a good question.
But these, um
This was a chart that was put
together for the LHs, and I
can't remember the source.
Um and Guadalupe.
Um, count? No, not what Civil
war general. Um, I said before
members Memorial
Is a private equity firm, Golden
Tree Asset Management. Davidson
Kempner, Nashville Capital
Network, Brentwood Capital
Advisors. Grant Avenue Capital
managed by Q H. R in Tennessee
and New York. And there, um
Rep Network is 1.7 billion.
Sorry, madam Chair and Senator
That didn't really answer my
question with every possibility
that you can bring Troy Clark
up.
Here Who's here from the
hospital association to explain
to us as an expert how these are
owned and managed because I want
to make sure that what we're
hearing is correct. And I want
to get some more information on
that, Senator. Representative
Lord, we're not. We're not going
to bring up Mr Clark. What I
would suggest maybe a because
there are so many questions and,
um
That we roll this bill until
Monday and and give you a chance
together. Information give
members a chance, but before
before I do that I still have
the floor. I'm still asking
questions. Please,
Representative I will come back
to you. I'm just representative.
You interrupted me, which we
know in Mason's. You can't do it
like to finish asking my
questions so I could just finish
this and then you could go on
with your
Conversation, please. Thank you.
I still have the floor.
Representative Lord, I was going
to make a suggestion.
Uh, Senator Woods. Um, my
understanding is that in another
bill and Senate Bill 17.
There was an amendment to ask
that the dollar stay local. Is
that something you would be, uh,
amenable to consider.
Senator and Senate Bill 17 is is
a different bill. I don't have
in front of me. I'm sorry,
madame. Just 100% 1st on on
every healthcare bill, I
apologize to you on that. That's
okay. And And in this
conversation, please provide me
with the information that you
just gave
Because I don't have that
information. And I'd love to see
you know, again, your
information and your source of
that information because that is
really different than what I
have been presented. Madam
chair. I'd like to take back my
floor time because I still have
the floor and you keep
interrupting me and I understand
you have a suggestion, but I
would like to continue with my
question. So Madam Chairman,
representative Senator needs to
change mature. You interrupted
me. I told you per masons. You
can't
Do that. If you'd like. We can
call royal tours and have him
come up and make a decision on
this committee chair and I make
the decisions. I still have to
abide by rules and by Masons,
You cannot interrupt me that is
right in the rules. You cannot
interrupt me, Madam Chair. You
interrupted me while I was
talking. I'm trying to take my
floor time back, which I still
have. You can ask all the
questions that you're finished.
You have as much time as you
need exactly by House rules.
Yes, and House rules says you
cannot interrupting matter
chair.
And I would approve house your
tone and continue with your
question. I'd appreciate you
stop interrupting. So madam
Chair and Senator
What I'm concerned about is that
where there's some questions
that were brought up
The manager brought up all her
sources as expert, But I don't
have that. I guess what I want
to ask you is
How was this able to pastor
Because I'm looking at was
passed through.
Everything on the Senate side,
including the Senate floor 37 to
0. Why are we having such
hangups here when it passed
unanimously with Republican and
Democrat support?
Well.
You know many questions that are
asked today are very legal
questions. Very constitutional
Questions very, uh, ownership
questions. Uh, many of these
things.
Have been answered. I thought
Maybe I'm wrong.
But when this bill was
formulated
The reason we formulated this
bill, there's actually some
healthcare hospitals that are
going under.
That will not be there some
question as to whether mouth
practice insurance should be
brought in on this, but when a
hospital tells me that they've
had no malpractice claims, and
their insurance is gone from
90,000 a year to 400,000 a year
to 800,000 a year
And to say that shouldn't
matter.
That shouldn't matter to a small
hospital.
That is trying to
Service.
They're people.
So I am wondering, you know,
there's there's a thought that
some of these are or were
providing.
Money.
For corporations.
For for profit corporations.
And we're trying to create a
service.
Two.
Are small communities.
We're just trying to keep their
doors open.
For two years until we can have
other bills, as was mentioned.
Senate bill.
17 is mentioned here.
That particular bill will help
on hospitals.
And you can say that that
corporate
If you want.
But what it is, it's it's
Using monies.
To to use Medicare match three
times medical match to get back
to those hospitals.
That's what that bill does.
That's not this bill.
But that's two years away.
So how do I keep my hospitals
open for two years? That's the
question. I'm asking.
Now you can. You can criticize
the way I'm trying to do it.
But that's my objective. Uh,
Madam, Chair and
representatives. Thank you,
madam. Turn centered, and I
think
I think the issue at hand is
even my doctor. I don't know how
much longer he's going to stay
in business, and he was a former
senator.
Um, he's struggling to make his
malpractice insurance. It is
skyrocket, so that is an issue.
We have issues where
We have got small hospitals are
going to close down and then
what do we do?
You know what is the end result
from that?
Um
To me. I don't want to go off of
anything except for I know that
in this very
In this very committee. Someone
had misquoted somebody of making
$3 million a year and they make
200,000.
I don't want to make decisions
without seeing this evidence
that has brought been brought
forward without me, seeing if
that's really true.
I wish I could have talked to
Tony Clark so that he could give
us some more information on
that, because I'm sure it's not
exactly the way it was just
spelled out.
So at the end, I guess we have
to make a decision because on
the Senate side past 123
Committee or two committees
finance and it passed
unanimously everywhere in the
House floor, and now suddenly,
there's an issue.
Um
What I don't want to do is make
a rash decision to where we lose
our hospitals. We only have what
Six more six more days of this
seven more days. And if we don't
move that forward, I guess, um
Madam chair
And Senator. My big concern is
that this doesn't move forward
with this band Aid, which is
feels like what we do have the
time this health committee is
band AIDS If we don't
Then I could definitely foresee.
An issue with hospitals closing
down and not having support and
closing it down based on
hearsay, So I don't want to say
this. So I'm going to support
your bill, even though I'm not
for bigger government, But I
also understand and our cases in
New Mexico. We have got to make
sure that we keep our small
hospital opened, even if it's a
band aid for a short period of
time until we can figure out
what is going wrong and where
the actual real stuff is.
And I would suggest after this
past and we didn't look at a
task force to go in and try to
figure out
What is the issue and what has
really happened? But
I don't want to scare hospitals
close. I will vote Yes to
support this because I don't
want to be part of that.
Okay?
Thank you.
Thank you. Um and just
The the and the answer was
provided to me that the numbers
that I stated were from the I. R
s 990 forms.
And I will make sure that you
get those and it appears that we
have lost quorum. And so we will
adjourn for today and put this
back on the agenda for Monday.
Madam chair, I will send staff
that's got knowledge.
I apologize for not coming into
the committee with with the
knowledgeable staff to answer
those questions. I will have my
staff tried to contact each one
that have questions here today
and so that they can sort
through this and
We will have a better
conversation. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you. Thank you.
Meeting adjourned.
