Presented Cates here and on
time
representative Chavez.
Representative Ferrari here.
Representative, Harem Eo here.
Representative Jones.
Representative Lord
Representatives, Capan Ski
Here.
Oops.
Representative Vincent
Madam vice chair here.
Madam chair here, And with that
we will We have seven folks, and
so we will start with HB 94
representative Cates and
Representatives Cates and Luhan
health data collection and cost
study.
Thank you, madam Chair and
members. Um, I today I'm
presenting myself and
representative Luhan House Bill
94. Just as a refresher we
successfully passed last year,
Um, House Bill 395 that was
signed by the governor in March
of last year.
To perform data study every two
years for direct care providers
of individuals with
disabilities. This is a similar
bill only is for direct care
providers for the elderly. Um
understand that we need data
regarding the workforce and the
openings and median.
Wages, educational requirements
for us to make recommendations
to the Legislature of how we can
support those workforce. I'd
like to take a moment to, uh,
have my expert witness
introduced themselves and also
for representative Luhan to make
a statement. Thank you. Good
morning, madam Chair and
committee.
This is a bill and thank you to
our our sponsor and our expert
witness for being here with us
today.
This is a bill that we've been
discussing and as mentioned, and
we've we've gone through interim
committee and getting some
support around this interest
understanding that when we have
good data, we can make better
decisions and better policy, and
I hope to
Through our presentation that we
earn your vote today. Thank you,
Madam Chair and committee.
Madam chair members of the
committee. Adrian Smith. New
Mexico Caregivers Coalition.
Thank you to the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward. This
bill goes to the heart of the
personal care services worker.
That's the Medicaid funded
caregiver who works day to day
with. Typically, people who are
elderly, and this bill will do
just three things. It collects
Workforce data on this low wage
workforce. These are the people
who are on average, earning 12
to $14 an hour.
Um, it will establish regular
biennial every two year cost
studies.
And so the legislature
legislators and the public will
know and be able to see what our
who our workforce really are and
who's delivering the work.
And what it really costs and
third, it will establish that
the personal care services
worker herself or himself that
person delivering the day to day
care.
Um, be valued in that cost study
at 150% of minimum wage.
Um, the for was the fiscal
impact report was developed. Um,
with our input yesterday will
have, um more to go into about
that with them and have been
asked to work with them as we go
forward, but just a couple of
highlights institutionalized
care, According to the New
Mexico, our partner on this
Bill, New Mexico Association of
Home and Hospice Care.
Cost more than $9000 a month,
whereas the personal care
services if people can stay in
their homes, people who are
elderly is 30 on average 3500 a
month so this bill will save
money as your trade association.
Megan Laurino, New Mexico
Association of Hospice and Home
Care will often tell you if we
can keep people in their homes.
Both those who are elderly and
those with developmental
disabilities. That's where the
number one prefer to be, and
that's less expensive. But we
need need do need to get a
handle on the cost number one
and number two. We need to pay
these workers better.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, madam Chair and
members if you stand for
questions
Thank you. Let's go to the
audience and zoom if you are
here to speak in opposition, or
by a show of hands in the room,
Anyone in opposition, Okay,
seeing no. One if you are in
zoom and in opposition, please
raise your hand.
K. It looks like there's no one
on zoom people. People on zoom
who are in support. Raise your
hand and we'll do the life
first, and then we'll come back
to you so people in the audience
who are here in support
Okay.
It's better than hearing the
Senate ed, but it is a little
distracting.
Okay, So okay, So if you would
like to speak, just kind of come
to the middle aisle there are um
I am so sorry. There are mikes
in the ceiling so you don't have
to bend over the mic. Just come
on up and you have one minute.
Um well,
And please be brief and, um, and
don't don't be repetitive. Okay?
go ahead dot since 2019 to 2023,
or minimum wage increased by 60%
here in New Mexico and our
personal care service providers
were only recognized for the
increase in that cost of minimum
wage, but not for the ancillary
costs.
That are included, such as FICA
Social Security, uh, their tax
unemployment taxes, workers
comp, etcetera, as well as
overhead costs. Um, we believe
that a caught cost study is
essential so that because our
providers work hard to give the
very best level of service
quality staff oversight in
education.
Cost study will build
transparency so that New Mexico
Human Services Department and
the Legislature can fully fund
adequately staffed personal care
service provider agencies. Thank
you so much for your time.
Madam chair members of the
committee. My name is Modi's
Segovia and I am a member of the
New Mexico Caregivers Coalition.
We represent nearly 60,000
caregivers in the state of New
Mexico and I am a unpaid family
caregiver hearing from my
grandmother and along with my
father.
You are the only two people here
in New Mexico. Ah, that can care
for her.
And what we've had to do
actually is, um, in order for
myself to be able to work full
time in order for my father to
Go back to work from retirement
and work part time.
We need to have caregivers to
assist us in those periods of
time that were unavailable.
For her, and we've been able to
attain some incredibly
competent, um, carrying and
knowledgeable caregivers to
assist. However, we believe that
those caregivers deserve a fair
wage for the work and the care
that they provide. We, in fact.
Pay out of pocket through some
sacrifices that we've had to
make in order to pay a fair
wage that compensates. Uh what
the Medicaid is not covering
first hours time.
Good morning.
My name is Vanessa Morales and
I'm a member of the community.
I am also an unpaid caregiver
for three people. My two sons
who are disabled without his
own.
And I was a caregiver for my
grandmother was also her hospice
nurse.
She passed away November 11th
and we buried her on December
16.
Um all of us are gonna get old.
And need a caregiver at some
point.
For me. My concern is that I
have to disabled Children, and
they won't be able to do for me
what I did for my grandmother
and caregivers need a fair wages
so that they'll take the jobs.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee. Jim Jackson, a
longtime disability advocate.
Um, I think we're up to about 25
to 30,000 people who received a
personal care or attendant care
and similar services through the
Medicaid program. These are
elderly and people with
disabilities other than folks
who are on the DD waiver.
And it's really hard to recruit
people to provide those services
because of the low level of
wages that we're paying. So this
bill outlines three kind of
simple steps the Legislature can
take to deal with it. It calls
for a rate study to figure out
how much is it really costing to
provide those services? It calls
for some data collection and
some reporting so that you all
know what the status of our
workforces and then it asks the
Healthcare Authority Department,
which sort of operates the
Medicaid program and the
services in particular.
It asked them to ask for enough
money in their budget so that we
can pay the direct care workers
of reasonable salary. It will
still be up to the Legislature
to figure out how much money to
fund the program. But this is an
opportunity to for you all to
address the fact that we're just
not paying our caregivers enough
money and we need to do
something about it. Thank you.
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee Ellen Pines
representing the Disability
coalition, the workers who are
the subject of the spill. Direct
care workers are the people who
help seniors and younger people
with disabilities who need help
with activities of daily living
in instrumental activities of
daily living, and without that
help, they could not live in
their own homes and communities
before Stine to nursing
facilities, which, as the
sponsor and her expert have
pointed out, are much more
expensive.
And they're also not where
anybody wants to go.
This is a really essential part
of our workforce, but it tends
to get a lot less attention as
we focus on the you know, we
worry about not having enough
doctors and nurses and those are
legitimate concerns, but this is
a key part of the workforce. It
doesn't get that attention, and
this bill would bring that
attention to bear so we can
address the problems with this
workforce. Thank you so much.
Madam chair. Good morning. My
name is Stephanie Welsh for the
New Mexico Center on law and
poverty. We think the sponsors
for this bill and we stand in
support because the people doing
this important caregiving work
needs to be paid a fair wage.
Unfortunately, the boy has many
of these workers received. Do
not match the importance of
their work the difficulty of
their work.
Nor the health and safety risks
they face too many of these jobs
provide low pay and few, if any
benefits because this fear is
this care is funded by state and
federal government. The funding
right now actually works to
suppress wages by setting the
amounts that are paid to
providers. People who were
taking care of others should not
have to worry where their own
next meal will come from, or how
they will pay their rent.
The reporting requirements in
this bill would help the state
developed sound policy to ensure
the workforce is adequately
supported to provide these
importance.
Thank you any
Remarks, or should we go to the
questions?
Okay. Ready for questions. Oh,
thank you. It always takes a
village. Um in the morning. Is
there anyone on Zoom? Oh, I see
Chris LeRoi and Rick. Oh, how
many hands do we have?
For we can do four.
Madam chair. Respectfully Can I
ask how many are I know you're
gonna listen to poor But how can
I have a number of how many ants
were okay? I think there was
four hands raised.
That many points participants.
Madam chair.
And members of the committee.
My name is Sherry Dotson and I
am a volunteer advocate for a
RP for the raisins previously
stated, we do support the house
Bill 94 and ask you to pass it.
Thank you.
Christine.
Christian
Hmm. Christian Hurry.
Not anyone hear me.
We can't We can't hear you.
Okay, good.
Um, you're You're kind of like
you're in a barrel or something.
I don't know what we can here,
but we can't make out what
you're saying. Hold on. I'm
gonna put on headphones. Maybe
if you get the mic closer to
yourself.
Christian. Try again, Please,
Christian. We are not hearing
you. So we're going to skip over
you. Um, you may try logging out
and then logging back in and
when you get back in, we will
come back to you.
Kitchen.
Oh,
Hello? Kinda Go ahead. Good
morning, Madam Chair. This is
kinda Lukowski from Alamogordo,
New Mexico. I am a caregiver
Paid cake. You know for my
daughter, indeedy Weybridge.
He's 44 years old. I just want
to mention that we are in the
baby boomers generation and we
also need help, You know, Take
care of us when we when it's
time camel. Okay. This is the
the bill that will support us
when we get older and for my
daughter, so I just want to make
sure that
You passed and support this bill
for us and for developmental
disabilities.
Communities. Thank you. Thank
you. Kinda. Rick, go ahead.
Alright, this is Rick Madden and
I'm speaking in support of the
bill as a father of a long term
recipient of care through group
homes. My daughter is really
benefited by having stable staff
of knowing more about the costs
and trying to improve the pay.
Will help that situation for
more stability that makes such a
big difference in her life. So
thank you, Madam chair and
members of the committee in
support.
Thank you, Rick.
Christian in the other Christian
back on
Christian Christian. Go ahead,
Christian.
Christian. We can't hear you if
you're speaking.
Huh?
Uh, go ahead. We'll do our best.
I'm sorry. I'm trying to be near
to the mike and you guys hear
me?
Yes.
A little reading to be quick and
louder.
Mm hmm.
Madam Terra members of the
committee. My name is Christian
phone.
I work for Dona Ana communities
United and I am in support of
1894.
Because we are one of the
country's going to prepare for
the United States that the
president was
caregivers, and it's like
everybody said that you are on
the page.
I myself have become a caregiver
lady. My mother has become their
own.
Likewise, he has to carefully
because I was born expect them
and like it is very hard work.
So I vote.
So I mean support of 1894. And I
hope you guys as well.
Okay. Thank you, Christian. We
had a hard time hearing you but
the closed captioning showed us
what you were saying. So we we
did now we will go to the
committee. I have so far.
Representative harm meal.
And Jones.
Go ahead representative for her
meal, Madam chair and
representatives. Thank you for
presenting this bill. So when I
look at this, we have 62,000
employees in New Mexico under
Uh, this umbrella.
They're paid $12 an hour.
My local McDonald's pays $17 an
hour. Can you tell me what the
reimbursement rate for for
Medicaid is for this service per
hour?
Um, Madam Chair representatives.
I'd like we are missing one of
our expert witnesses. She was in
public comic and she can answer
this question. Thank you.
I'm sorry, but
I wish Madam chair members of
the committee. I wish I had my
reading glasses on.
I don't know.
It takes a village in this
building.
So, Madam Chair members the
committee. I'm so sorry. Um,
based on our own calculation,
the reimbursement rate is
currently at about $18.90 an
hour and just for context when
this program first started over
20 years ago, the reimbursement
rate at that time was $20 an
hour.
Mhm, Madam Chair. Uh,
Meghan, Um
So there has been a decrease
over the last 20 years and what
has been paid for reimbursement
for care of our elderly in New
Mexico. Is that what you're
saying?
Go ahead. Yeah.
Madam Chair, representative Harm
meal That was correct. And, um,
Madam chair and representatives.
um, the base that is set for the
state to ensure that, um, that
Medicaid reimbursement does not
go any lower is $17 an hour
reimbursement in my correct
Uh,
Madam Chair representatives. You
are correct representative harm
you.
So, um, so we're almost at
McDonald's wages. Um, but that
doesn't cover the cost of
employees.
So, um, Madam Chair I just want
to share for transparency that I
used to work in this field and,
um, during the pandemic, we were
frontline workers.
And during that time
Me and my son were tasked to
work at Alamo Navajo Indian
Reservation.
And to assist that community and
we quickly found that the ers
were not the front line workers.
These individuals were the farm
frontline workers.
During that time.
We lost 72 patients in the
community of 30 or 3000, rather
We lost six employees.
During that time.
On March 13th 2022. My Children
lost their father.
And on March 14th 2022. I lost
my father.
We are community in crisis.
And during that time
I cried. I begged. I screamed,
and most people in these halls.
I learned my name.
Because I knew that we were
dying for $13 an hour.
I don't know what everybody else
was doing during the pandemic,
but I was sure that we were all
going to die.
As we move through through this
system, I see how unfair it is.
To our workers.
And I know that what our workers
do is they support these
individuals?
Not because it's an easy job.
Because McDonald's may be
easier, but because they love
our people.
They love the elderly.
They love the individuals who
are disabled.
And I thank them every day for
the care that they gave
Not only to my community, but to
those people that I loved, but
also
To support me and my son, who
are also working alongside them.
So thank you so much for
bringing this forward.
I know that this is much needed
and a focus should be put on the
fact that we need as a state to
reimburse these services in a
manner that is respectful to our
elderly and disabled because
that is they have earned that
right. So thank you so much for
bringing that forward. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you both reps. Skates and Luhan
for bringing this forward. I
know this is one of our, um when
one thing we kept coming back to
during the interim was we need
to pay direct care workers more
than work they do is invaluable.
It is
So, um, challenging both
physically and emotionally, and
they're absolutely necessary.
They're the foundation of our
healthcare Agree with
representative harm. You, um
So, but I would like to look at
the bill and what I think might
be some some issues we need to
to address and I just need
clarification on
Um
On Page three. There's a long
list of requirements are longer
list of information for the
healthcare authority that they
must collect. Um what will the
administrative burden be for
this? And this is a yearly
effort is that correct?
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative Jones. Yes,
We, um, developed this bill with
Cabinet secretaries input to
ensure that we were covering the
FTE s that she requires to be
able to gather this data.
And representative Jones in in
the, um on page one line, 13, it
says, by and by any of so every
other year study as opposed to
annual study Correct Messenger
then I am Madam Chair.
Ah, Long day ahead. Um, it's
every other year. Not every year
for the study of the first page
line, 13.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair. I
want to make sure I'm looking at
the right information here.
Okay, so so since there since
they're gathering the
information and analyzing the
data, shouldn't we try making
them make the recommendations
before we hand that over to, uh
A third party for study.
Melchior representative, Um
I'm not sure who them is an and
and um and I
So I apologize. I think I may
have looked at it too much and
confused myself about how often
it was required.
Um, because I was thinking that
I wanted to avoid the basis of
my questions where I was
thinking I wanted to avoid and
the administrative costs that
were not necessary Just because
of obvious reasons. Like we can
use that money. We can always
use money elsewhere if it's not
necessary.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. Correct. I
mean, it truly takes the
village. Um everyone who's
sitting up here had input in the
whether it was operations and
what was needed for the data to
our appropriations expert here
to, um myself, who was saying we
always have to work with our
state agencies to ensure that
we're not asking them for an
administrative burden without
being able to
Get the F T. E s that they need.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative Cates,
representative Luhan appreciate
knowing that there was a lot of
input. Um, the next concern I
had, and I'll just go on
principle since I can't seem to
get myself organized with this
particular all the notes that I
made.
Was was I am concerned. Madam
Chair representatives about what
effect this would have on
private, um providers and
whether or not it would cause,
possibly a decrease actually, a
decrease in providers if we
mandate or if we begin paying
state, um
State workers more and how that
would affect the big picture.
What can you, uh
To say about that. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
representative. So the purpose
of this bill is to gather data.
It is not a conclusive bill of
what we're going to pay or what
we're going to do is to gather
data so that we can come back to
this legislation and and be able
to make, um
Uh, recommendations. I, uh I
don't know if there could be a
world in the state of New Mexico
were Medicaid providers get paid
more than private sector
providers.
Um, but but that's not the
purpose of this bill. And then
I'll also get to decide. Right.
All right. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you so much. Thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you
for answering my questions.
Appreciate it.
Representative Vincent and I
will just point out that the
first page line eight for the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee, so this was
endorsed by the health and human
Services Interim Committee.
Thank you. And then, um Chavez.
thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you representatives.
On Page four line 22 through 25.
There is a requirement for a
third party study.
How much is this going to cost?
I understand 400,000 is that
correct?
Um, um, Mountie Representative?
Yes, that that is. Obviously
these are estimates, but, um,
because we were able to
successfully pass a house Bill
395 last year and also a similar
data driven cost studies in the
Medicaid program. We were able
to be able to come up with that
estimate.
Um, the and so yes, 400,000.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, madam chair for pointing
out that biennial because I
completely red right over there.
I thought it was a yearly study.
But
And I like that. I like the
biennial. I'd like to see it
about every third year, but
biennials good.
But what if you will refer on
Page one?
And it's going to be line 14.
It says, requiring the
healthcare Authority Department
to implement the cost study
recommendations.
Why doesn't
Why do we need a third party?
Why don't we do it ourselves as
a state?
A C A D. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, representative. This
standard with most cost studies
in the Department of Health now
that the health authority, um
are done by independent
contractors to ensure that there
is no bias in the statistical
data gathering.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair, So
what I see is
Whatever the third party says.
We must do its where required to
do it. Is that right here, Madam
Chair representative Noh. The
third party provides, um
Uh, for for the purpose of this,
The third party will provide
data and which probably this
team will bring towards you in
the coming years to inform on
other legislation on how our
Medicaid providers are paid and
credentialed.
Um, it is never other cost
studies. Maybe state agencies
will usually rely on that. But
it is never a requirement. It
always requires legislative
approval.
Okay. And thank you, Madam Chair
in the last question I have is
just on that topic.
It says on 14, requiring the
healthcare Authority Department
to implement the cost studies
recommendations.
Required.
It doesn't give us an option it
says were required.
To go off of what the third
parties says.
So thank you very much, Madam
Chair and representative. It's
my understanding. And I will. Um
I will concede to my expert
witnesses, but it's my
understanding that the
requirement is that the, uh the
health authority is required to
gather the data identified here.
In the cost studies. They cannot
Uh uh, um, makeup, other data.
This is the data that's driven
and so I'll defer to my
I would add. Are you looking at
the introduction lines 11
through 16 on page one? Yes,
ma'am. Madam Chair.
So as we as we have our bills
set up. That's just the sum
summary of information.
The facts and the guidance and
the actual work of what
Is, um
Given in that first introduction
portion of the bill is what the
what we have to do so this is
just a general
Guideline of what the bill is
going to, um actually say and
sure. Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Buck
whenever I've gotten to the
point where I read these bills,
I go line by line, word by word,
and whenever I see
What I'm seeing. It's telling me
that were required to go off of
what the third party says. And
what if we don't like with the
third party says, are we still
required to move on with that?
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, representative. This bill
will take away No legislative
authority. Thank you. Thank you.
And then the last thing Madam
chair is who's the third party
and how will they be selected?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. We are in
this bill. Piece of legislation
were night selecting the third
party. What is tasked as the
state agency sends out an RFP.
They do have a Medicaid cost
Study group date typically used,
but we are not requiring them to
use that or any other one. They
can follow their own process.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
We're not gonna go with low bid.
Are we do we go with low bit or
we do is I mean, we always talk
about we get what we pay for.
How does how are they selected?
Is it a little bit process?
Um
Really?
Represented Vincent that's kind
of an agency question. It's not
contemplated in the bill. How
that will be, but it's a process
that has been done over decades
for the DD waiver for sure, and
probably for this this workforce
as well. That's it's not in the
bill because it's it's basically
the rules of
What will be their H cat?
Okay. Can I have just a second?
Okay, That's all I have. Madam
chair. Thank you, Representative
Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd like
to move a do pass.
Madam chair is still have
questions. I didn't get a chance
to raise my hand. I have a
second
A second.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
I know how important it is to
have
Our healthcare workers in
Mexico, But I do have some
questions on this bill before it
can make a decision.
So second
Okay, so we're taking the
Healthcare Authority department
to collect the data That's on
the first page.
Relating to direct care worker
workforce.
And then I When I go into the
F I R it states in there that
there's going to be
Two.
FTE. I'm not sure what is FTE.
I'm sorry. Didn't notice if I
saw that before Time employee
An additional staff will be
needed to set up a contract to
make these studies needed.
At an annual cost of $113,100.
Eight Sandy Cates remainder of
the 400,000 appropriate would be
sufficient to attract potential
contractors to the job. So is
that included in this and that
extra staffing costs? Is that
already in the budget to cover
that? Thank you, Madam Chair
representative. Yes, it is.
Sorry. I didn't. I'm sorry.
Okay. Sorry.
Very hard of hearing, so I
apologize.
Okay, okay.
Okay. Going back to the FR Madam
chair represents experts, it
says on the F I, R and Page
three.
If the contractor found that
there were many vacancies and
the direct care workforce and
that potential workers were
frightened away by the very low
wages. How in the study, are
they going to look for very
frightened?
People don't understand how that
gets included into a study.
So thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So, um, as
we've drafted this bill, we
didn't draft the f I r. So we
don't use that terminology of
frightened employees. Your
drafter of the F I R so you
would have to ask them, but I
will state that we are looking
at vacancy openings so that we
can get not an actual cost, but
the real cost of things were
adequately funded and
adequately. Uh,
Um, employed okay.
And Madam Chairman. Can you talk
just a little bit louder. It's
really well. I guess I could
read it up there, but I can't
read and look at you and look at
this the same time to speak up
Just a hair. Okay, so manager
represents so when they go into
the study, um
What pool are they looking at?
Where are they pulling people
from? What data are they looking
at? Are they just looking at
vacancies and how are they going
to extrapolate that data to
determine why there are
vacancies and will they be
looking at certain areas or are
they trying to contemplate the
reasons why there's vacancies?
Representative Lord? Those are
questions for the people who do
the study. That's not part of
the bill. But if you want to
answer
You're kind of getting into the
the the independent contractor
work, and I would guess the
sponsors are not part of the
independent contractors that
will be hired. That is correct,
Madam Chair. We will not be a
part of that. But I will say on
Page three of the bill gives a
list of the data in which is
going to be collected. Okay. So
on Page three, hold on.
Page three line.
Was that line seven madam chair,
the number of vacant direct care
worker positions.
Okay and sorry and looking at
Madame Chair 37 B.
As far as the data. I'm so
sorry, Madam Chair
representative. Can you repeat
that? Because I'm having a hard
time hearing you as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair. These
new microphones and not super
impressed with that. We got not
impressed at all. Page three. It
looks like
Line 21. The format for data
reported shall provide for
sufficient confident we'll talk
about confidentiality.
But I don't see where it talks
about. On this page. You were
saying Page three talks about
the data other than that it well
above that, says the number of
vacant direct care worker
positions at the personal care
service provider age she had not
filled. Is that what they're
looking for? That's what I was
trying to get at the entire
saying You manage chair the
entire page Three is a list of
all the data in which
We are asking to be gathered.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair.
That's what was kind of getting
too Because whenever we're doing
these things, we need to make
sure that the studies are
comprehensive because having
I took scientific method enough
and college to know that there's
lies, lies, lies and statistics
so we can change anything. We
want to get the outcome on
statistics. So thank you, Madam
Chair representative. That is
why a third party company who is
profession over decades of
statistical gathering is hired
for this process.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So, um,
I do have a question because
this is going to affect has
Medicaid or Medicare made a
statement on this and how they
will be feeling about the
reimbursement if this is
increased.
Madam Chair, representative
Lord we worked with Medicaid,
the Cabinet secretary designee
for the incoming healthcare
authority on the numbers for
this bill, Okay, say that say
that last part again. We worked
closely with the secretary
designate of the new Healthcare
Authority on this bill, and on
this number, Okay, So you work
with Medicaid man chair Did you
reach out to Medicare? Medicare
is not affected by this. Okay,
so it's just Medicaid might the
slot.
The population of caregivers in
our state is the 62,000. This
bill goes only to the personal
care services caregivers which
is more like there are 32,000
care recipients in that program.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair in
the last committee rumor and it
was too loud Now I'm straining
to hear everybody, Um
So, Madam Chair representative.
Has anybody looked at the Delta?
The difference between
I mean, I would rather people
stay at home and get health
care. But is there a difference
between
And price just purely numbers,
not not a humanitarian level. Is
there a difference in the price
of what it would cost to raise
that level to have home health
care versus if somebody had to
go into assisted living? What's
the difference between that and
far as cost? Thank you so much,
Madam Chair and members. I, um I
would look forward to having
that input after we have the
data from this bill, but that
that
That that doesn't relate to
this. This bill is to gather
that data.
Madam chair and representative.
I appreciate that. I
I would like to see when they do
the data to add that in. Of
course you can't add in the
human element to that, so, but
I'd still like to see that data.
Um and the other. I think the
last question I have. Is there
going to be
Madam chair any legislative
oversight once this is all put
together.
Is it coming back to us and here
so we can look at it to say.
We agree or don't disagree, so
that we don't get stuck with.
Okay, We're going to raise them
50 cents an hour versus $5 an
hour. Thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you members. This bill is,
uh, if past is to gather data so
that we can come back to the
Legislature with this data, as
well as the data provided by HB
395.
To inform a structure for the
Legislature to improve, approve,
Okay, Representative Lord, if
you look on page five line 21,
if sufficient funds have been
appropriated to implement the
reimbursement rates, so if we
don't appropriate the money it
doesn't essentially doesn't
matter what the study says that
we can't force people to do
something that we're not
funding.
Okay, so Madam chair and and
represents an expert. So on that
Of course, everything boils down
to can you get the money in the
budget? Can you get the money of
appropriations at the end of the
day?
Um, so if sufficient funds were
appropriated
And the rates recommended by the
most recent cost department
shall adjust. So in so
So again if it shall
Required. I need to know Is that
explain to me the process
between you guys have to come
back. You guys got to go through
all the summers and going to try
to get the money. But this is
shell.
Do we have any input? Because
it's a shelf. Do we have any
input on that? Because when it's
a shell versus May
Representative Lord, As I said,
if sufficient funds have been
appropriated, that's where we
have control.
Okay, So Madam Chair
representatives that correct
Thank you, Madam Cherry. Thank
you, Representative. Yes, Let me
see. I think
I'm just making sure
I believe that's all of my
questions. Thank you. Thank you.
We have a motion on the table
for a do pass in a second on
house Bill 94.
Um, please call the roll.
Representative Cates.
Oh,
Yes.
Representative Chavez? Yes.
Representative Ferrari. Yes.
Representative, Harem Eo.
Representative Jones. Yes.
Representative Lord
Yes.
Representatives. Capan ski Yes.
Representative Vincent Yes.
Madam vice chair.
Madam Chair? Yes.
By a vote of 10 to 0. You have a
do pass on house Bill 94.
And next week, we'll move on to
house Bill 104 representatives
of Penske.
We just keep ourselves in work
in this committee.
Okay, and there are some
handouts being passed out.
So as soon as your you and your
experts are
okay, you can go ahead. OK,
Thank you, madam chair and
members.
Um, I am very pleased to present
with you. House Bill 104 House.
Bill 104 would create statewide
public health and climate
program at the Department of
Health.
Um, one of the reasons that we
are bringing this forward is we
have seen, um
Arise and extreme weather
events. Heatwaves, drought
flooding
Wildfires. Um and
One of the gaps and services is
really
Who are the experts that can
help local communities plan for
the types of services plans
facilities that they might need
In the event of one of these
unfortunate events hitting their
community? Um, the public health
aspect here is key because as
temperatures are changing
That may, um in addition to some
of the natural disasters and
extreme weather events that we
may find, it can also lead to
changes in the kinds of
pathogens that are in our
communities, whether that be
virus viral bacterial, etcetera,
um and can lead to changes in
just the the biomass of local
communities. So
Um, what this bill does is it
establishes the, uh
The public health climate
program in the environmental
Health Epidemiology Bureau at
the Department of Health. Um and
then it sets up a grant fund to
allow for communities to access
those funds, Um, to assist in
planning and development of
local services to address this
Um it also prioritizes rural
communities. Um so that we make
sure that the experts at the
Department of Health are really
leveraging those resources for
the communities that may need
the most help in planning.
Um, I'd like to also introduce
my expert witness, Shelly
Manlove, and maybe have her
makeup brief statement as well.
Madam Chair.
Thank you very much. Madam
Chair members of the committee
and Really, thank you so much to
our sponsor Representatives,
Opinsky.
My name is Shelly Manne Live I
know have been before this
committee many times in my role
as a public health leader here
in New Mexico.
I'm currently the executive
director Volunteer of the New
Mexico health professionals for
climate action and have worked
extensively with New Mexico
voices for Children in the
development of the spill. Um,
two years ago, uh, in response
to a resolution from the House,
the Public Health Infrastructure
task Force which was made up of,
you know 35 leaders from around
the state representing all kinds
of communities.
Identified developing and
implementing an office of Public
Health public health climate
program as one of their top four
priorities. Public health
infrastructure.
This committee bashed your voted
in favor of this bill, and we
are here again before you
because
Climate change hasn't gone away.
Each one of you have had
experiences and I'll share a
little bit of data. Um, I so
appreciate what representative
our sponsor representative
Lansky shared. But we know this
is the hottest year on record.
New Mexico amongst the 48,
continental United States.
Has the hottest change the
greatest increase in
temperature.
2.7 °F. That was as of a year
ago. And what we know is you
turn to the next page on your,
um in your PowerPoint.
That they
Impact on our emergency rooms
and our health systems are
profound. And when you look at
the state, and we
Grateful for the 0.2 FT. E That
means eight hours a week.
Of Stephanie Morada Makelele
from the Department of Health
and the bureau that currently
exists in the Department of
Health.
Extremely limited staffing they
have identified this data about
emergency room visits, a
doubling of heat related
emergency room visits from 2010
to 2019 and another doubling in
the last couple of years, and we
can expect that to just
skyrocket. These changes aren't
incremental, right? They are
exponential as we have
increasing heat events.
I live in Santa Fe. You each
have your own story from the
south from the North East West,
Whether it's wildfires, extreme
heat events, we have an
incredible tracking system
nationally that shows you know
50 to 60 plus additional
wildfire high wildfire risk
days. All of those have health
impacts. We have four and
probably more state agencies
that are addressing these
issues.
We need interagency
collaboration. We need an
emphasis on equity. We need data
and we don't need data that's
reported to us two years later
or a year and a half later. We
need data. That's timely. That
creates warning systems
evaluates our strategies. And,
of course, is supplemented by
the expertise that would allow
our communities, tribal
communities, rural communities
and larger communities to
develop the plans and implement
strategies.
Just so you know, when you look
at this data, it is expected to
be an undercount of 30 to 50
times.
So thank you so much.
Thank you, madam Chair with that
that we conclude our
presentation.
Thank you. We will go to zoom if
you are on zooming opposition,
Please raise your hand and we
will go to the room and then
we'll come back to zoom so only
if you're an opposition, raise
your hand in the room. If you
are an opposition, raise your
hand. Okay, seeing no one. Is
there anyone on zoom?
Okay, so in support if you're on
zoom, raise your hand and in the
room if you are in support,
raise your hand. If you would
like to speak, Please come to
the middle.
Friends.
I am sorry for this, but go
ahead, Madam Chair members of
the committee. Um my name is Dr
Wendy Johnson. I'm a member of
In Mexico health professionals
for climate action I'm also been
working at, um El central family
Health in Las Vegas for the last
few months.
Almost every patient I've seen.
There has been
Affected by the fire.
There's mental health issues.
Um increased rates of strokes
and heart attacks, which we
can't quantify because we don't
have this expertise, but I see
it every day exacerbation of
lung issues, Many are not are
still not able to access or live
in their homes or are living
part time or full time in with
relatives or Arby's.
And as you well know, the health
workforce is very ill equipped
to deal with this extra burden.
Um the feds have not helped
Almost two years later. There's
very little assistance. So House
Bill one of four is a way for
the state to help communities
build resiliency, especially
poor rural communities. So we
aren't so dependent on federal
support, which is pretty non
existent in these situations and
to help rural communities in
other parts of the state.
Build resiliency. So if
something devastating like the
hermit peak fire occurs in other
places, it doesn't take two
years doesn't essentially
devastate communities and take
more than two years to rebuild.
Heard you all to support a
reminder we are limiting to a
minute.
Go ahead. Charles, Madam chair
members of the Committee. Thank
you very much for the
opportunity, especially thank
you to
House whipped majority Whipped
Penske is a sponsor. I'm
speaking to you today, I'll be
half as a board member, and, um
Volunteer board member of the N
M. V. C Action Fund, a C four
organization We work to advance
Children and Families Center
policies.
And leadership that support
measurable and meaningful
improvements in the well being
of New Mexico's families. This
bill will do just that.
You, uh, surely in the handouts
presented, there's a list on
Page four. The handouts a list
of possible examples of what
local communities might possibly
apply for with the grants. Um
and I would just add to that, um
You know the note.
Fine would be available for any
political subdivision of the
state and Indian nation tribe ER
Pueblo to apply to
Um so school districts,
irrigation districts, others as
well as cities and counties
could apply.
I want to
What's the highlight the climate
psychology alliance in North
America time? Uh,
Climate.
I'm sorry. Thank you very much.
Lordy, madam chair and members
of the committee. My name is Dr
Eric Reeves. Summer I'm here on
behalf of the New Mexico health
professionals for climate action
and on behalf of the New Mexico
Nurses Association. Um I've had
the opportunity to be had the
opportunity to be a second
generation Mexican. Thank
goodness. Um, I've had the
opportunity to work in Los
Alamos.
Um, managing, protecting and
remediating environmental
concerns. I've had the privilege
of
Being a bedside nurse to new
Mexicans who have been impacted
by many of the things that have
happened by environmental
issues.
Um, you know, by creating
This program within the state.
Will
Allows them to
More robust systems. You
monitor to respond and to be
able to, um
Improve the health and
resiliency of our communities.
So I'd like to thank you for
your time.
Madam chair and members of the
committee. I'm Alyssa. Kenny.
Geir, Uh, former chair of
housing and human services in
Oregon and vice Chair of
Healthcare Committee. I know how
important your work is. So thank
you for your service with a
masters in public health. I'm a
volunteer here with the New
Mexico health professionals for
climate action, and I'm speaking
today on behalf of Sierra Club
The Rio Grande chapter with
39,000 members we at this year a
club normally work on trying to
to reduce and climate change,
but we also recognize the
devastating impacts that are
already happening. Our
communities. I just want to
point out that this fund does
not require a match for local
communities to access it, but it
can be used to match federal
And other grand dollars that are
often left on the table. The
fund for direct support is also
accompanied by much needed
planning, coordination and
technical assistance, especially
in smaller and disadvantaged
communities, who right now have
little state support to respond
to these climate crisis. And if
we're waiting for FEMA to come
in and save the day we all know
how bureaucratic and problematic
that can be.
Some of the specific adaptation
measures highlighted in this
bill. Um, our safety measures
such as purifiers, whether
ization air quality sensors,
indoor thermometers, outdoor
thermometers.
Blair. Smoke flooded wildfire
shelters, backup generators and
electric electricity storage
services. Another really great
list in the bill. So, um, I
fully support the bill. Thank
you so much.
Chairman Committee. I'm Ken
Hughes with the Coalition of
Sustainable Communities. One of
our members is lost Croesus
where, according to the staff of
the city
Who have to blow income
residents of that city have no
air conditioning.
It's just an example of the
kinds of conditions were looking
at continue to increase.
Feels
Goals. Objectives are really
laudatory and support.
Thank you. We will go to zoom.
There are nine hands. So if you
are on zoom, be ready.
And, um, we will take the first
nine.
So, Bill, go ahead.
Morning, ma'am Madam chair and
members of the committee Bill
Jordan's with New Mexico. Voices
for Children. Um and we urge
your support for this bill. We
know that local communities are
perhaps best able to plan for
the consequences. Uh,
Of climate change, and, um,
that's exactly what this bill
would allow them to do. Thank
you.
Thank you, Bill. Next we have
Nate.
Madam chair and honorable
members of the committee. My
name is Nate Matthews, Trig
McClement Health researcher
based in Albuquerque. I'm also
the father of a three year old
son. The research is clear.
Climate change is getting worse
in our state is incredibly
vulnerable and unprepared. The
United Nations has called
climate change the greatest
health threat to humanity.
And the other state has no
public health program to address
this threat. There's incredible
urgency to protect the health
and safety of our families, our
communities and future
generations. I hope our state
has the leadership necessary to
prevent deaths rather than
respond to mass tragedies on an
unprecedented scale. This is why
I strongly encourage you to
support this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Next. We have Rick
Go ahead, Rick.
Can you hear me? Madam Chair?
Yes, we can go ahead.
Thank you. I'm speaking as a
family physician on behalf of my
patients and supported this
bill for their future health as
well as things that are
happening right now. Thank you
very much, madam chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you, Dr Madden. Next we have
Joanne
Joanna.
Go ahead, Joanna.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Joanna Strother and I
serve as the senior advocacy
director for the American Lung
Association As a leading public
health organization. We are in
support of House Bill 104. New
Mexico is already home to
historic drought, wildfires and
rising temperatures in fact due
to climate change. New Mexico
starts largest wildfire in state
history this past year
The long associations 2023 State
of the Air report ranked
Albuquerque, the 24th most
polluted in the country for
ozone, but it's not just
Albuquerque. The problems are
statewide with Las Cruces,
seeing more days of particle
pollution and the 14th worst in
the country for ozone. A report
also found Eddy County is the
only one of two rural counties
in the country in the top 25
most polluted
These dangerous levels of airing
climate pollution, Exasperated
debate, respiratory and heart
conditions and especially
harmful to Children. Persons
with asthma, COPD, pregnant
people and those with diabetes.
Even healthy people can
experience symptoms. We need to
do more to act on our climate
crisis, creating a public health
and climate resiliency program
at the Department of Health to
build capacity and expertise,
support the development and also
establishing a public health and
climate resiliency Fund to
assist
And enable local and tribal
communities to adapt to climate
change That Madam Chair we
support house Bill 104. Thank
you. Next. We have Giovanna.
Good morning.
Giovanna Giovanna, You're not
muted. There you are.
Hi.
Go ahead. Morning, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Good morning, madam
Chair members of the committee.
My name is Giovanna Rossi. I'm a
mom of two. And I'm here today
on behalf of the close to 20,000
moms Clean Air Force members in
New Mexico, and we stand in
support of House Bill 104 the
impacts of climate change are
wide ranging and Children bear
the brand.
From increased asthma attacks
and other lung issues to heart
concerns, too low birth weight
to developmental delays and
learning disruption to various
kinds of cancer.
Creating a statewide public
health and climate program at
the Department of Health.
Um, and support the development
and implementation of response
systems, Um, improving inter
agency collaboration. This will
all help improve health outcomes
for our Children across the
state. Thank you.
Thank you. Next. We have Glenn
Good morning, Madam Chair and
representatives. My name is Glen
Weichel. I'm an electrical
engineer specializing in energy
systems. The sad news is that
New Mexico and United States are
significantly behind and
reducing greenhouse emissions
sufficiently to meet either the
governor's agenda or the 2015.
Paris climate accords to keep
global warming under two °C as
the second largest oil producing
state in the nation, expansion
of oil and gas extraction in
this state has caused a major
setback. We now must shift our
tactics to building resilience
to build natural to survive
natural disasters, including
killing heatwaves, far reaching
water shortages and large scale
forest fires. HB 104 is the
first of many steps this
legislature will need to take to
protect new Mexicans.
From the increasing damages to
public health caused by the
worsening climate crisis.
Please invest today rather than
tomorrow, so New Mexico can
begin building strong health
systems for addressing
increasing natural disasters
caused by climate change. Thank
you for listening.
Thank you and good timing on
that. Next we have, and we will
have three more.
So we have
Sammy Sammy.
Yes. Good morning, madam Chair
remembers. My name is Sammy cow.
I'm the climate energy director
with conservation voters in
Mexico, and we also stand in
strong support of the bill. For
all the reasons laid out by the
sponsor and the expert and my
fellow supporters, our
frontline, you rural and
underserved communities must be
prioritized as we work to
address the climate crisis.
Thank you. And I urge all your
support for this bill. Thank
you. Thank you.
Next. We have
Bridge. Oh, Enrique, I'm sorry.
I think I need new contacts or
bigger print. Go ahead, Enrique.
Good morning, everyone. Thank
you, Madam. Chairman and
Representatives. My name is
Enrique Cardell. I'm the
director of the Health Equity
Council and Bernalillo County.
And I'm coming in support of
this.
And I want to keep it short and
two things that have not been
said one of the populations that
is most impacted.
By climate change are housed
folks, people who have to live
outside who don't have air
conditioning who don't have
heating don't have proper
shelter.
And they're already, uh, dying
at greater rates due to heat and
cold, and so this is very
important to help with
All the things that people have
said, but also the health equity
of making sure that those most
impacted
Will be the ones that get
support. So I wholeheartedly,
uh, ask you all to be in support
of this bill. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, Enrique. And this
will be the last one.
Josie.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Josie Zuniga and I'm
here as a spokesperson of Yucca
Youth United for climate Crisis
Action Climate emergency
campaign has thousands of
members and supporters across
New Mexico. I'm a member and
leader in the Permian Basin,
specifically calling in from
Eddy County living in Eddy
County. I can speak personally
till the illnesses we are
experiencing living on the front
lines, and none of these
illnesses are even often
irreversible. We strongly
support this.
Bill because we know that the
climate crisis is already upon
us. Many of our families and
communities have been devastated
by unprecedented wildfires and
flooding in recent years. We
need to act swiftly to stop
fanning the flames of the
crisis.
But we knew Mexicans are already
feeling the consequences of a
warming climate inaction. Today
we'll have rippling effects felt
by new Mexicans for generations
to come. We will be experiencing
longer and deeper droughts,
water shortages, wild fighters,
desertification and flooding.
All these have public health
impact. We know that the cat
catastrophic
Okay, catastrophic events caused
by climate change not only
affect our bodily safety, but
also our mental health distress
for those displaced when crisis
is hit and the grief and the
loss we feel is our lives are
forever changed cannot be
overstated. This act begins to
put resources forward to help
our government agencies respond
and to equip communities to
prepare and respond. It is just
the beginning. But we supported
strongly. We hope you will, too.
Thank you.
Thank you. Okay, so we will go
to the committee. First. I have
representative Ferrari. Thank
you, Madam Chair and
Thank you, Um
Uh,
Representatives. Japan's key for
bringing this forward in your
expert Shelly Manne live. Um, I
was reading about the, uh from
the Climate Psychology Alliance
of North America.
They were urging states to
address the urgent psychological
dimensions of the climate and
ecological crisis and polling
shows climate anxiety,
especially in Children and young
people and their beliefs about
whether government is responding
appropriately to preserve
A healthy future. Um and how
that has a huge impact on their
overall well being.
So I'm wondering, um, could
districts use their funds to
address the threat to student
mental health in these times?
And, um
Have probably, uh, you know
programs that under that will
generate creative and locally
created solutions.
Thank you for that question,
Madam Chair representative
Ferrari? Yes, Absolutely. And
certainly kids. Mental health.
it could could be a priority
that was selected by a local
community.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I sorry,
Didn't address you the first
time. Um, I think this is
something that
As we're looking at the whole
being of people, not only the
climate impacts on our health
and but also on our mental
health is going to be something
that's really important and to
relieve some stress and in our
Children's lives so that they
can learn better be more less,
uh, worried about different
things in the world.
I think this would be really
important. Thank you.
Thank you next to have
representatives Jones, followed
by Vincent. Thank you, madam
Chair.
And thank you, representative
pants, Ski and Shelly.
Appreciate, Um, your
explanations of the bill.
Um So let me just clarify.
From the beginning. This makes
an appropriation for a new
program and builds a new fund
Start up $1.1 million.
And continuing cost of $10
million per year for five years.
Is that correct?
Madame Cheron, representative
Jones. That's correct. Thank
you. Thank you, madam Chair.
So the first thing I see in the
bill is is that there are no
definitions and and especially
since there's a lot of question
about what what actually is
climate change. How does it
actually affect
Um, health without any
definitions. I find that
Is a problem. It's not very
specific. Um
Especially for terms that are
vague, like extreme weather and
extreme weather events.
Had you thought about, including
definitions to make it more
clear to
Why we're spending this money.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative Jones. You know,
I think that's part of the
beauty of including this in the
epidemiology division is that
Um, there is a breath of
research on this topic that can
define what is an extreme
weather event. For example, um
I also don't know if my expert
witness would like to add to
that. But, um
Part of the other issue is that
we have
Different, uh, whether patterns
in different areas of our state
and so it's important on going
on your extreme weather Example.
It's important to allow for that
to be regionally adjusted.
Um, Shelly, would you like to
comment?
I think that's exactly the point
in terms of expertise and
interagency collaboration that
climate change is very much a
local and regional issue, as
well as obviously an
international issue, especially
in terms of adaptation and
response.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
Shelly and representative. How
can the state be sure that the
fund is used for people
experiencing extreme weather and
not merely weather? I guess that
that does go back to the fact
that we don't really have
definitions for that.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, Um
You know the way that this is
structured as that you will have
this program at the Department
of Health. It is
Compiling research and
statistics through the
epidemiology program. They will
also be providing grants to
local communities. So you know,
in the end in terms of the
grants to local communities, it
will really come down to
oversight management by those
entities at the local level to
ensure that those funds are
being directed in the way that
they desire. They're not
required to
Use these funds to only address
extreme weather. For example, if
your community was more prone to
flooding, for example, and that
was the priority of the local
community.
They could focus on being ready
for potential flooding potential
evacuation potential public
health, making sure that people
have a medication distribution
plan. What is the stress and
mental health resources? Um, so
I think the part of this is is
having that local control so
that
Communities can prioritize what
they are concerned about and
what they need assistance in
preparing for
Thank you for that. Thank you.
and Madam chair and
representative.
How is health equity related to
climate change, and that would
be on page 28 Line eight.
Mentions health equity help
improve interagency
collaboration focused on health
equity.
And I'm just wondering if you
could explain that connection
between health equity and
climate change.
Um Madam Chair and
Um, Madame Cheron
Representative, Um
One of the connections there is
that the way that communities
experience climate change may be
different, based on the factors
that they come in with, right
how rural is the community? What
is the income level? What kind
of community resources are
available? Um, the nature of the
infrastructure and that
community reflective of the
property tax base or the
The available revenue streams
from that local community, so
that's one set of examples.
There's um depending on the area
of the state. We know that
communities of color may have
specific, disproportionate
impacts of climate change, Um,
depending on the location. So,
um, it's
The inclusion of health equity
is really just about ensuring
that we are trying to level the
playing field No matter where
you live. What zip code you're
in where you where you come
from, and that that
That Department of Health is
uniquely positioned to assist on
that. So when we're talking
about inter agency
collaboration, Department of
Health should really be bringing
that resource to the table to
assist other agencies as well.
Thank you, representative and
Madam Chair representative based
on everything you just said.
Um, it seems like that My
district, for instance, would be
favored. Um, if you if you if
what you say about equity and
climate change are, um
It is true that you know we have
all of those problems. So you're
saying that some areas would be
favored over others?
Madam Chair and representative
Jones. Yes. And if you look at,
um let me just find the, um if
you look at the page five lines
20 through 23. It includes
another reason why, For example,
Luna and Hidalgo counties would
be favored because
At least 50% of the grant. Funds
must be awarded two counties
with populations of less than
100,000. So our two locations so
for example of the city of
Deming wanted to apply. They
would then be fine be preferred
under the script fund. If that
makes sense, interesting.
Thank you, madam Chair.
So I'm noticing that, um
There is no provision for
investment of this money. Um
Based on inflation, and I see
inflation rate currently is
3.4%.
So the fund must make at least
3.4% to avoid losing value due
to inflation.
Without a provision for
investment of the money
unexpended funds sit there
losing value because of
inflation.
So would it.
Why wouldn't we be addressing
that as to avoid, you know,
losing money and and be better
at spending it wisely.
Madam chair. It's It's It's
Representative Jones is a very
good point, and I would be happy
to
Ah, work with you on legislation
to create an automatic CP. I
adjuster for the state's budget.
Um, because I think there's a
lot of programs that face out. I
mean, it's a very good question,
and I smile because it's um I
feel like every program in our
state's budget comes back every
year with information about how
their costs have gone up.
Inflation has gone up.
Uh, and so the amount that they
were allocated last year is no
longer adequate, Just standing
still, but unfortunately, I
don't serve on appropriations.
And so I I don't want to guess
at how they address that, but it
is. It's a very good point.
Thank you. Yes, I see. We can
agree on spending our money.
What wisely?
So another thing I'm concerned
about is there seems like
there's just a lot of
redundancy. I especially as a
nurse who's worked with patients
for my whole life. All of these
issues that we're addressing
already exist.
And and we have all agreed as a
committee that those those
problems every diagnosis every
issue like homelessness that we
just heard on the Webcast. All
of those things exist and we're
addressing all of those in other
ways.
Why do we need another $51
Million department and program
to address them? Are we
duplicating ourselves?
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Jones. So
I would say yes. I think there
are many, many frontline
healthcare providers and workers
that are addressing each of
these issues individually with
patients, and we heard testimony
to that effect to in terms of
People coming in with office
visits. Post the hermit speak
half Canyon fire, for example.
Um, however, how are we building
the infrastructure so that
Potentially if we had been able
to foresee
Um, the wildfire risk in that
area, and we had been able to
have resources so that not only
were we evacuating, creating
prescription distribution
programs at all of the community
centers
Creating hotel voucher programs
that people have places to say.
We also had counselors on call,
for example, so that or
counselors on site that we're
visiting with people and helping
them work through the urgency
and then setting them up in the
aftermath with continuing visits
on the on the mental health
issues at one of our
Doctors noted. So that's just
one example is like how do we
invest in setting up that
infrastructure so we're not
Putting all the burden on our
front line healthcare providers
to pick up the pieces afterward.
Thank you very much. I really
appreciate that. Answer. Um
I can't help but point out that
You know? Yes, we need to be
able to respond to crises like
this. But I do know that we
could also, um, on the front
end. We could address why these
are happening, and I think
there's no argument anymore. If
you look at all the data that
shows that our forest fires are
not only a result of what
Some call climate change, but
they're also a result of forest
mismanagement. And so we need to
look at on the front end
addressing why how can we stop
these forest fires? We can
manage our forests, you know,
And so so, whereas I see the
need to to take care of people
when we do have crises and, uh
Forest fires, for instance, we
if there are ways we can stop
them to begin with. Why wouldn't
we do that? You know, so that's
just a concern. I have to point
out, um
That we could
We could fund Forestry
Department to take care of
forest and that would address
air purity. Air purity sensors
purifiers need for for smoke and
fire shelters and so on.
Um so we need to be looking at
the big picture. Definitely. How
are the dollar amounts? Madam
Chair? How are the dollar
amounts determined?
Um, how small a population can
these grants be given to ask
Shelly to respond to that Madam
Chair, representative. Dollar
amounts could be as anything
below 250,000. This is designed
for small grants again that can
be used to as matching funds for
larger opportunities or directly
again in our smaller
communities.
Uh, $100,000 25,000 dollars can
make a huge impact.
Thank you. Thank you. Shelly.
Madam Chair and representative
and Shelly. So the price tag on
the bill is $51 million. How
will we know if we've gotten our
money's worth?
It is and it's a wise use of our
resource.
Um, Madam Jaren Representative.
I just wanted to
Address that number. It's
actually about 10.1.
Millions. So the appropriation
that you see on uh, Page six.
the second one of $10 million.
It's a one time appropriation
that is allow that is permitted
to be used over those five
fiscal years.
Um so I just wanted to mention
that on the number
Um, you know, I have no doubt
that performance measures will
be developed for Legislative
Finance Committee to look at in
terms of the performance of this
program. It's one of the ways
that we would have as a
legislature to examine the
quality of the work and whether
this
Excuse me.
Whether this, uh
Uh, program is operating as it
intended.
Um, so that would be one way to
to examine the effectiveness.
Thank you very much. And thank
you, madam Chair.
Thank you, representative
Vincent.
Represent. Lord. Did you have
your hand? Okay.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Penske for
bringing this forward and I had
a question for you, Um
What is, uh, I was in the fire
service for a long time. And
what is a smoke shelter?
It mentioned smoke shelters.
Madam Chair and representative,
Would you direct us to page in
line, please? Just in my notes,
So I don't have it right here in
front of me because the
definitions
There, you know, uh
Representative Jones kind of
stole my thunder, but
A lot of the A lot of the
definitions were not in there,
and it talked about
Ah, cool air.
Um
And it said, I thought I wanted
to say is, said smoke shelters.
And I was just wondering what
that is.
Madam chair and representative.
We found it. So it's a on page
five minute. Ask Shelly to
respond to that.
Madam Chair representatives. Um
Ah!
Shelter from smoke, and what we
need is well stocked facilities.
We remember those of you who
have experienced wildfire which
is across the state, certainly
in our North East and Southwest
regions vary significantly as
well as the Southeast know that
we need to be prepared for many
events related to the effects.
Obviously, fire comes from many
things, but with 50 to 60 extra
wildfire risk days due to
weather
That is a significant risk, so
smoke shelter would include
things like not only air
purification systems where we
house people that also
protective masks, and I have to
say those were not available
despite covid in many of the
shelters, so people were at
increased risk, and those need
to be available for people in
communal areas, as well as high
risk individuals in their homes.
Thank you for the question.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Do we do We have a smoke
shelter.
In New Mexico or somewhere.
So Madam chair and
representative.
This is what our local
communities need to be able to
plan for, and stock with
equipment. And that could be a
school that could be a fire
department. In many cases they
have need for backup generation
as well because, of course, we
know in smoky conditions. Often
there's an overload of
electricity, so this is the kind
of planning and it's you know
with wildfires.
We do have an emergency response
department, but many of the
climate risks like drought
there. That's not an acute
emergency or disaster creates
ongoing conditions that need to
be prepared for so I am not
aware of any smokes shelters. I
am sure some communities have
plans for wildfire evacuation
and just like we need cooling
centers here in New Mexico.
We absolutely need to develop
plans for people in communities
and individuals who are at
highest risk.
Thank you. Thank you, madam
Chair.
And Madam Cherry representative.
Would this money help with any
kind of thinning projects?
Or is it just a study?
Madam chair and representative,
Um
This program is based at the
Department of Health, which
really wouldn't be the right
expertise to overseas some type
of fitting project. However, I
will say, um
Part of community could proposed
to use the funds for on Page
five. We list fire safety
measures such as clearing brush
for the elderly or for folks
with disabilities around their
homes just to reduce the risk of
a fire spreading to their home
structure. Um, but it would
really be
In the service of keeping those
individuals safe that are known
to maybe have some mobility
issues and things like that.
that might complicated
evacuation. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you,
representative.
And I'm very happy that we all
agree that wildfire is a
problem and I would love to work
on something with you to get
some thinning done and manage
our forests. You know, because
it is a problem and I come from
a
I read Also where I come from is
number two in the nation for a
catastrophic wildfire.
And it's always a problem. You
know up there and we've had big
fires and people do have
respiratory issues and you know
our hospitals smell like smoke,
So it is a problem. So thank you
for that. This is kind of a
little fun fact. But it's a
question as well.
And then had to do with how we
are going to distribute these
funds.
So, um, when we were talking
about representative Jones
brought up the health equity
related to climate change, um,
the highest temperature
Recorded in New Mexico in 1934
was right outside of my district
in or a grand
And it was 100 and 16 degrees.
34
And I don't know if it's a
climate, it seems like it's a
climate shift.
Um, whether it's climate change,
and why would we not focus on a
place like that? With a little
bit more funding? Madam chair?
Madam Chair and
Representative Sounds like the
fire risk and in the high
temperatures are going hand in
hand. Um, I yes, So in terms of
health equity health equity is
defined, as is in terms of
trying to bring everyone to
equal access and equal health
status. So absolutely, when you
look at things from a health
equity perspective.
It is.
Reto. So was continuous.
Certainly the elevated wildfire
risk alone makes that high
priority location but also, um
In the event of sustained higher
temperatures that has
disproportionate impact on
babies on the elderly. Um
Obviously, uh
Like a baseline of respiratory
disease.
With US smoke risk also means
that that needs to be looked at
in terms of health equity and
just ensuring that people have
access to medications. They need
other equipment.
Mitigating that. How? What are
the evacuation lines? What's the
shelter look like And is it
equipped to deal with someone
coming in with an asthma attack,
for example?
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all I have.
Thank you and I'm just going to
make an administrative
announcement for analysts if you
were pointing out to your
members, um
What
It would be great if you could
put a page and line number so
that the sponsors can go
directly to. So we're not
searching around. So with that
we'll go to representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chairman trying
to get this closer. Hold on. Let
me turn this off while I move
it.
It's trapped behind the books.
Okay. Um, Madam Chair,
representative expert.
Sorry. You're now
Representative apparently in my
head. I'm sorry. What was your
full name again? And who are you
with? And are you a scientist or
what is your degree in?
Madam chair and representative.
My full name is Shelly Manne
Lev. I have a masters in public
health and over 30 years
experience in public health.
Public health is a science and
the science of climate and
health is something that is
being given much, much greater
attention. I am also currently
serving as the executive
director.
Of the New Mexico professionals,
health professionals for climate
action. Um and, uh we are part
of a National Medical society
Consortium on climate and health
again because climate change is
maybe the greatest threat to
public health we've ever seen.
Certainly, there are many
experts who believe that
Won't Madam chair representative
experts There's many that would
disagree with you, including the
former founder of Greenpeace.
Who says this is there's no
scientific data for this.
So, Madam chair and
representative, Um
What I want to know when you
talk about so we're talking
about because there's half your
bill I agree with. I agree with
that. We need to have things in
place for public health.
But when you say climate
program are you saying that
you're basing this off?
Because we have a wide range of
scientists. Some say there is
climate change. There's a whole
bunch of scientists say there is
not or
They say that there is no proof
that humans are having any
impact you cannot prove or
disprove based on science.
So are you saying that this
climate program that we're doing
this is just based off of the
Scientists that are saying that
climate change is the most
important.
Explain to me why climate
program and climate
As addressed in this bill. Thank
you.
Have the cough. Sorry, madam
Chair and representative Lord.
Excuse me trying to
Not cough into the microphone.
Um
Uh, Madam, Chair and
representative. So the, uh
This program is is not about
Researching the genesis of
Climate variations or climate
change. This program is about
applying some of the best
research and learning that we
have on dealing with events
related to variations in climate
and climate change.
And how do we translate that
into local communities? So this
is not something that is going
to be researching the the
Scientific Foundation of
Uh, climate and and and maybe
this is part of my experiences
and old public health nerd. But
you know, the field of
epidemiology is really going to
be looking at How, um, how
trends in and changes and
interventions that you can make
an impact People's republic like
the health on a sort of
Population levels, so that might
be
As if we ensure that we have
these types of emergency shelter
services or if we ensure that we
have this type of local
medication assistance planning
so that in case of an emergency,
we have a real clear emergency
plan for how to get medication
to people who may have left home
without it.
Um And how do we maintain those
prescriptions in the event that
they have not been at home or
been able to return home for
months as we saw here up north
just recently. So those are the
kinds of things where you have
Access to research having the
national level of how do we just
how do we help people and how do
we help them? Maintain their
health? And how do we help our
communities Stay healthier? Um,
in during this time?
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative. I was just going
off of what Your expert had just
said that the climate changes
its greatest threat to humanity.
And if that's the case, then
that makes this bill a climate
change.
Bill more than it makes what I
want you to make it into. What I
think it should be made into is
preparedness and readiness.
Instead, we have this element of
the climate program in there,
which
Becomes problematic because we
have. Some scientists say that
there is proof that we're making
changes of other scientists says
there's zero proof because I
like to read data.
And I've read quite a bit of the
data.
And
This becomes very problematic
for a bill that I think you
would you were going in the
right direction.
But then it got off the path.
So on Page two.
Line two
We have administer the public
health and climate resiliency
fund.
Okay. Can you explain to me so
there's gonna be a fund that's
going just to climate resiliency
or explain to me how this fits
in with the money distribution.
Yes, Madam Chair and
representatives. So if you look
at
Page four. There is, uh, which
line I'm sorry. Page four. Line
eight. Madam chair.
Um
That is where we are, and I
really look at this part of the
bill is sort of
Laying out options for local
communities in terms of, um,
providing some ideas for what
they could propose.
For these grants, so you will
see items like
Planning. Ah,
Integration of public health
concerns with local emergency
plan. So, for example, their
husband for many years local
emergency planning that has
happened that is, um you know
and represented Vince and I sure
knows much more in depth about
this, and it's probably
participated, but that is, you
know, in terms of some of the
more
Uh, could be urgent could be
everything that ranges from
public safety threats.
Terrorism.
Um, wildfire or individual home
fires, etcetera.
So this is that that is one of
the options here is to integrate
public health planning into that
kind of public safety planning.
But there's also you know, I
just will. I don't want to give
you too long of an answer. Um,
but I would just point out on
Page five like this sections.
Five A, which started, um
Line four. But there's also um
online 14. These are some really
concrete examples, which I feel
like are very
Helpful in terms of
understanding. Um, how are we
gonna use these funds so it
could be for workplace safety?
You know if you have a major
manufacturing facility in your
community, for example, but
You need to figure out how to
equip those workers so they
could deal with 100 and 16
degree heat, for example, you
know, how can we? That could be
a public private partnership,
Potentially there, Um, backup
generators. I mean, I really do
love the vision. I'll just end
by saying I love the vision of
every community having a
resilient space that will hold
no matter what emergency is
occurring, so it's grid
resilient. It's got
Backup generation or battery
storage. It's got, um cooling
and heating capacity, so just
depending on what's happening,
and that there's and that
there's space for shelter if
needed.
And Madam chair and represented
before I go back to where I was
before I want to tell you. My
favorite is part of your bill.
Is, um on five fire safety
measures such as clearing brush
for the elderly and people
disabilities, widely roads for
evacuation and burying power
lines. Very important my
district because in the
wintertime, our electricity goes
out every other day and for
hours at times, so that one I
agree with you. That's my
favorite part of this bill. So
what you think I'm hating on
everything? I just
The part of the year direction
you're going in, agree with the
other part we start adding in
what is extreme weather. I don't
want that to get convoluted with
helping people.
So going back to, um
I think the definition and it
may be wrong. So when you were
on Page two, online five
See, this is where we get into
Okay, I'm just gonna say this
very straightforward mansion
ribs in if you had extreme
weather events, which can happen
because I have the most
beautiful ruins in my district.
There are amazing, but in the 16
hundreds they left because the
weather changed and that has
nothing to do with anything that
we were doing Their very little
people. There was nothing going
on with these extraneous things
that we're saying or making the
climate change.
So the climate change enough for
them to leave, But they're
beautiful ruins sitting there.
So if you would have said in
this
Taken out ongoing climate change
and anything to do with this.
I'd probably lean more towards
supporting the bill in general.
But I think what you're trying
to say with extreme Weathers,
Sometimes we have hot summer.
Sometimes we have cooler
summers is that what you're
trying to say? Is that if an
emergency comes up, but we have
a hot
Weather pattern.
But then when you say ongoing
climate change, you see where
I'm going with what I said
earlier. Madam chair represent
That's where you lose me in this
because I would support that
There are
For instance, and you live in
the north.
And you have a big dump of snow
right? Sometimes snow is very
deep, very heavy. Other times
it's not because weather pattern
change, but you add in all of a
sudden it gets hot, which is
about to do in the north, and
they're gonna have some severe
flooding. That to me, means
extreme weather advance had it
said that I wouldn't have an
issue but the ongoing climate
change ties back to what I had
said earlier.
And I believe madam chair.
Represented that, um
Ah ah!
I wanted to come by your first
name. Representative Jones had
already talked about the health
equity. Can you tell me what?
Okay, So when we say improving
surveillance
On line nine.
Improvement surveillance for
assessing excess injuries and
deaths related to ongoing
climate change.
Okay?
I have two questions on that.
Surveillance. First question be
easier by surveillance manager
and represent data observing who
and who's observing that?
Yes, Madam Chair. Uh, it
definitely we're talking about
data collection. Um, this is not
individual surveillance being
contemplated this bill at all,
Um
This is so it, uh, when
epidemiologists or conducting
surveillance they are observing
general trend, they could be
observing trends. Um, uncertain
health indicators. So are we
seeing a rise in respiratory
illness? Are we seeing a rise
on heart disease or stroke post
fire so they may be
Uh, as an example, I think it'd
be really interesting. I don't
know if the Department of Health
is doing this, but, um, to have
been measuring some of the
health indicators up in the
north for those regions that
were impacted by
Hermit's head. Calf Canyon fire
observing those up, too.
The fires and then now observing
what is happening and looking at
that change and trying to
understand
Yeah, that's sort of the
complicated complexity of public
health is you're trying to
understand what has had an
impact on what has not and
trying to control for all those
variables, so
Ah, that would be one minor
example of surveillance and
thank you, Madam Chair represent
and see. There's something I'm
gonna agree with you on like,
for example, when the fire
happened.
Which unfortunately it was man
made.
Fire and also I was looking at
the weather station. How most
fires start there by lightning
and then after that, it's
campfires.
Campers are leading cause debris
burning equipment.
Kids, kids human error? Yeah,
and real roads. I don't know
why, but it doesn't say anything
about climate change.
Representative, Um we understand
that you don't believe in
climate change, but that's not
It's part of the bill. So if you
could please move on from
Madame, your belief that climate
change does not exist. We share.
It's not in the record. It's not
a belief it's the whole point of
this entire bill.
Everything is ongoing Climate
change, and I agree with the
president Lord that has been
asked and answered. Yes. And I'm
when I'm trying. I'm Madam
chair. Just hold on one second.
I'll show you where I'm going
With this. You can show
pollution and extreme weather.
You can do it data.
Correlation between the two. We
have plumes of like with PFS.
We've got cancers and other
diseases. You can show them in a
fire.
That these people are affected
by the fire questions
specifically on this. Can you
show me the data of the
correlation between
Ongoing climate change and
disease. Because how do you make
that? You say This is a heart
attack caused by ongoing climate
change. That's what I'm trying
to get out with this Madam
chairman, representative
Madame Cheron and
representative, You know, I
think if you were an
epidemiologist, studying that
you'd have a lot of options for
how to design a study. Um, I'm
certainly not, uh
Equipped at this point, because
it's been quite a long time
since I was in public health
school to walk you through that,
but I think that is one of the
charges of this program is
really to look at
As we're seeing trends in
temperature in weather patterns.
What? What impact can we
predict? And how do we help our
local communities be ready for
that?
Okay, madam Chair and
representatives. So if you go
down to
Line, 23 says, making health
informed decisions.
On current and future climate
impacts.
Because we're gonna give some
money for future impacts. How do
we know what those future
impacts are going to be if we
know that we had people leave
because of the ruins because of
drought. Then things came back
to normal and the temperature
varies. How do we know what
future events are going to be?
Madam chair and representative.
I think that climate scientists
as well as epidemiologist
Will make their best
predictions.
And thank you, Madam chair and
representative, having lived in
The north where the weather
changes all the time. It's very,
very hard to make weather
predictions. I mean, you can ask
any weather person about what
it's going to be in the future.
So on Page three, Madam chair
and representative.
Okay?
Online seven.
We see providing appropriate
mechanisms for rapidly assessing
and reporting to access disease,
injuries and deaths related to
again ongoing climate change.
What do you mean by who are
those mechanisms? What
mechanisms and who are they
being provided?
Provided to thank you, Madam
shares. That's what I'm trying
to get it. And who is it going
to Madam Chair and
representative, So this regards
data that would be collected by
the Department of Health? That
is where this program is based,
and the mechanisms can vary, so
there's lots of disease
surveillance mechanisms already
at Department of Health, and so
Looking at expanding those to
some of these, uh access
disease, injuries and deaths
related to climate change, and
whether events I think would
just be an amplification of
existing data surveillance
systems. Okay, Thank you, Madam
Madam Chairman, Representative,
Um
Okay, so
I think you just explain my next
question on four. We're talking
about line eight money, the
public health and climate
resiliency. Fun. I still don't
quite understand.
Climate resiliency fund.
So responding to emergencies
related to extreme weather, and
then we go to Page five.
Okay, so
I want to ask on Page five.
Where line for we're they're
assessing the appropriateness of
potential adaptation measures
for community, including need
for that possible implementation
of okay.
Are you talking about? And this
is where I want to get the
breakdown, so the money goes out
and then they're going to look
at certain areas.
Where they may need
Workplace safety measures based
on whatever the data came up
with.
With these end up being
Mandated. Um Madam Terrorism
like you have a business this
big. You must fix it with these
things, Or is it going to be the
fund is going to pay for that.
Or suggestions? Can you explain
that to me?
Madam chair and representative,
Uh I think it would could be a
combination of the last two you
mentioned so you could have the
fund actually pay for, um
Safety enhancements or community
infrastructure.
Particularly if they're able to
leverage some federal funding,
which is always helpful to sort
of maximize the amount of funds
that might be available.
But secondly, I think it is
really about making suggestions
as well. So that
The local community is aware and
ready of
What might happen if you had a
large, for example, if you had a
large disaster near Intel, or,
um, near Freeport.
Ah, mine Or, you know some of
these large facilities where you
Really need to have that
preparedness. Uh and it has a
big impact on the community
because of the size of the
workforce.
Okay, Madam Chairman
representative, and when they
recommend things such as air
purifiers, I would going to
assume that that's going to be
because I don't
Maybe you can answer this
question. Can you keep smoker?
Clear smoke out of a building or
I mean, if there's a fire
What kind of elf are you looking
at? Big H back system or you're
just looking at small air
purifies. I guess that's my
question.
Madam Chair representative that
would be up for the to the local
community to decide.
So, Madam Chair representative
again, the part that you haven't
hear about fire fire safety for
clearing brush elderly
disabilities. Definitely. That's
that's the one part actually put
a big star and heart next
because I think that's a great
idea.
Um
So going to the last page.
Page six.
I want to make sure I understand
this.
So we have a line three a
$1,100,000 as appropriated from
the General fund.
To the Department of Health for
Expenditure and Fiscal years,
2025 to support the statewide
public health and climate
program within the environmental
Health Epidemiology Department.
Um
Is that okay? Is that a
reoccurring fund? Is that going
to be needed every year or is
that just to set up this whole
program?
Madam Chair representative. This
would just simply set up the
program for year one.
Okay? And then the second part,
the
$10 million.
It is appropriate to the General
Fund for the Department of
Health for Expenditure fiscal
Year 2025 through 2029.
For the public Health Climate
Resiliency fund, can you I know
I asked you that just give me a
little better definition of
exactly what that climate
resiliency funding because I
didn't quite understand. I
apologize.
Madam Chair representatives so
that fund would be set up within
the program at Department of
Health and you can see the
criteria. Um, that will be used
to prioritize the grant.
Applications of local
communities would apply for
these grand funds. And then the
criteria is what you see on Page
four and five in terms of how
they prioritize those
Okay, Got it.
Okay. And is that going to be
That's not going to be. That's
2025 to 2029 Is there a
sentiment doesn't end at 2029.
How does this work Madam Chair
and representative if we're
successful, and, um, getting
this appropriation that I would
expect that we would continue to
advocate for, um, the
continuance of funding to that
fund?
Give me one second. I think that
that's all of the
Excuse me one second. Look at
here.
Sorry. When you write notes all
over the place, it's hard to
fall into. And that's all the
questions I have. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you. I will
entertain a motion. Madam chair
moved to table.
Okay. We have a move to table to
have a second. You're not
seconding Representative Vincent
for the second.
K. Jennifer, Can you take the
role for this is a move to
table. So a yes vote is a vote
to table. A no vote is to
continue.
Representative Cates.
No to table.
Representative Chavez No.
Representative Ferrari No.
Representative Hammer her meal.
No.
Representative Jones yesterday
table
Representative Lord Yes to table
Representatives. Japan's key
No.
Representative Vincent
Yesterday, able
Madam vice chair.
No.
Madam chair.
No.
By a vote of 7 to 3. That motion
does not pass. I am I will
introduce representative Ferrari
would like to move for a do pass
for house Bill 104.
Okay, represent Chavez with the
second, Okay?
And you wanna collar roll? Yes.
Please call the roll.
Representative Cates Yes for do
pass.
Representative Chavez? Yes.
Representative Ferrari. Yes.
Representative Hawrami. Oh, yes.
Representative Jones. Yes, and
I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Lord No with the
chance to explain my vote.
Representatives. Japan Ski
Yes.
Representative Vincent No.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes. Vote of 8 to 2. You have a
do pass on house Bill 104, and
we will go back to
representative Jones.
And lower to explain their vote,
And I have read recently in the
rules that you get one minute.
Oh, that's plenty of time. So
thank you, Madam Chair. I just
want to avoid getting caught up
in the epidemiology that doesn't
exist. I want to try to avoid
some of the language I disagree
with and recognize that this
bill does address and it really
desperate needs with health
problems that already exist and
will continue to exist in the
future and that we
Truly need to address and, uh I
know that
I represent a district that that
I'm going to have to
We'll have to explain that to
them, which is why I really
appreciate all the conversation
that we had about the
connection to meeting these
needs and climate change. So
thank you very much. Thank you.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, Thank you, Madam Chair, So
I understand where you were
going with in some of the bill,
and I said, I do agree with some
of it. But when you go off into
The climate change, and I've
read so much information,
especially from the founder of
Greenpeace does not agree with
this scientific data, and I've
read a lot of scientific data
and it's not based on feelings
or emotions. I cannot support a
bill that is to vote for me.
We're just saying this is all
going to be a climate change
agenda and money is going to be
funneled over here for climate
change agenda.
Had it just said.
Extreme weather situations. I
would have been on board with
your bill, but I just can't. It
does not go with me with the
scientific mind that does not
agree, and especially when the
data shows there's no proof that
we as humans have affected the
climate change. It says There's
nothing too significant to
saying that we have so I can't
support this. But if it were to
change somewhere along the line,
I might change my mind on that.
Thank you.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you
Sponsor. And so we will go to
the next bill and and just a
announcement for the committee.
We have a hard stop at noon. So
appropriations and have their
room back so we will go as far
as we can even starting a bill
and not getting all the way
through it, and we will finish
it up on Monday. So let's see
how many bills we can get
through. So representative
little and Paragon.
Come on down. You won't win
anything but come on down.
Whenever you're ready.
When ever you're ready, ladies.
Thank you, madam chair and
members of the committee. I am
very happy to join you today to
bring before you for
consideration as house Bill 131.
An act which will make it
appropriation to the Healthcare
Authority Department to fund
state food banks.
Yeah, very quickly. I'd like to
introduce my expert witness,
Katie Anderson, who is the vice
president of Roadrunner Food
Bacon to Mexico.
To my left. I also have my co
sponsor, representative Paragon.
And joining us today as well as
Jason Rigs with Roadrunner Food
Bank who is a director of
advocacy and public policy.
Um
We are here again.
One more time to, um
Bring before you and act to
appropriate $25 million.
From the General fund to the
Healthcare Authority Department.
Um
To fund state food banks with
that, madam chair. May I ask
We would like to move this
forward quickly, and so I would
like to ask if, um, I may
If you would like to have the
questions directed towards me.
the representative on this, but
I will be for quite a bit to our
expert witness here. So, um
It's it meets your approval, uh,
could have her. We'd like to
request that she can respond
directly.
Just in the interest of time and
moving. This is fine. Thank you.
Thank you else, So I'll have
Miss Anderson begin with a brief
summary. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you so much for allowing us to
be here today and bring this
important issue forward. Um as
representative little
A little closer, not not too
much feedback. Um I am I'm also
the president of the New Mexico
Association of Food Banks this
year, some representing them as
well. Um, it is very important
for the food banks and our
network of over 500 partners
across the state to be able to,
um, received $25 million for the
coming year.
Um and we do ask that it be
considered to be a recurring
recurring amount moving forward.
When the pandemic began, there
was a dramatic increase in the
need for food as people became
unemployed, furloughed. We all
saw what happened, Um, host of
challenges and issues for people
in our state.
Many people lost their capacity
to be able to simply buy food.
Um, and what we have seen is
that that demand has not
decreased as the height of the
pandemic past. Um in fact, in
speaking to some of our partners
on the ground, some of them have
been reporting increases of 160
to 200% of people coming from
2022 to 2023.
It is certainly not gone down.
We are seeing increases in need.
In the state of New Mexico. Very
Unfortunately, we continue to
have challenges with hunger and
food insecurity. One in seven
individuals is food insecure and
one in five Children.
We tend to have when being the
top three states for food
insecurity for Children in the
country. It is an ongoing issue
for us for certain.
Also hunger and food insecurity
exists in every single county,
all 33 counties. There's not a
single county that does not have
someone that is facing this
issue.
The good news in all of this
After I've said all the bad
things is that there are food
distribution points in the
nonprofit network of the Food
Bank network. In all 33
counties. There is not a single
county in our state that is
excluded from that so hungry
people in every county have a
place to go. Uh, however, levels
of contributions that the
network is currently receiving,
and that does include donated
food as well.
We cannot continue to supply the
amount of food needed to ensure
that the needs of every hungry
person in the state are met. We
need the state's assistance. $25
million would allow New Mexico
food banks, then I mean network
to fully meet the meal gap.
We want to express our deep
appreciation to representative
Little and representative
Paragon further Co sponsorship
of this bill.
And we would like to urge you
today to give this your
favorable consideration. Thank
you, madam chair and members of
the committee.
With that, madam chair. We stand
for questions. Okay, we will go
to I will announce for people
who are on Zoom If you are an
opposition, please raise your
hand. If you're in support will
come back to you. Anyone in the
room and opposition to house
Bill 131.
Okay. Anyone on zoom
Not seeing anyone. Okay, we will
go again on zoom if you are in
support and would like to speak,
Please raise your hand and in
the room If you are in support,
raise your hand. And then if you
want to speak, you can come to
the middle. I'll no, no, no need
to speak If you don't want to.
Okay, so on zoom are how many
hands do we have?
For okay. We will hear from four
people on zoom so
Go ahead. Um Sherry.
Sherry. Good morning, madam
chair and members of the
committee again. This is Sherry
Dodson. I'm a volunteer with
AARP. And we are in full support
of, uh, hb 131. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you. Sherry. Next we
have
In there.
Thank you, madam Chair sponsor
members.
You just cut out and Oh, okay.
Can you please start over and
we'll start the clock again.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Net. Dean. I'm a person with
disabilities and also disability
advocate. And I am in support of
this bill. Thank you, madam
Chair members of the committee
and sponsor. Thank you, Nat.
Next we have
Bill Jordans.
Again. Madam chair and members
of the committee Bill Jordan's
with New Mexico voices for
Children and I would like to
address the misconception that I
have heard a few times this
session already, and that is New
Mexico's workforce participation
rate and the fact that
Um, are benefit programs might
be discouraging people from
work, and I just want to say
that the LFC data shows that we
have a higher workforce
participation rate among those
receiving snap benefits than in
the general population, so it is
not a deterrent to work.
And we encourage your support.
Thank you.
Thank you, Bill. And finally, we
have
Kurt.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the committee.
Kurt, We lost you. Um, can you
start over?
Yes. And my back on. Yeah, you
are. Good morning, madam Chair,
this Kurt rigor with Lutheran
advocacy Ministry of New Mexico
and we also expressed the
position of the New Mexico
Conference of churches and where
here to strongly support HB 131.
And urge your support as well.
Thank you, Kurt.
Now we will go to the committee.
I have so far I have represented
Ferrari.
Jones, Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair and, um,
thank you. Representatives for
bringing this forward as your
expert mentioned about the food
banks working during the
pandemic. Um I saw them in
action on zooms where they, um
work together to make sure that
any, um voice or were
That they were able to fill as
best as possible. And I know
we've been increasing the amount
of funding for the food banks
and they've been working hard to
expand their storage and
networking, and it's just
remarkable how resourceful the
different groups have been. And
the funding is needed to have
this great increase.
Because of the increase in price
of foods and also the increase
indeed, so this is something
that's really important for our
state. And there's not one
reason why anyone should go
hungry here in New Mexico. We
have the resources we don't need
to, you know.
Put it away.
That we need to take care of
people right now. So thank you
for bringing this forward. Thank
you, Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, representative little and
representative to hone and
experts. I appreciate this bill
and I would like to address a
couple of things, Um, on Page
one. It's the only one
subsequent fiscal years to fund
the state food banks, so it
talks about the allocation. Um
$25 million.
To the General fund.
But I would like to see us Look
at this every year.
Instead of, um
Instead of just putting it away.
As you know, something that
we've done, and we not that we
would forget about the need but
bringing it to us every year
would remind us that this is
Anita would help us evaluate
any. Um, whether or not we're
The need is decreasing or
increasing and that sort of
thing just to look at it again.
It's just the thought that I had
while reading it, But I do agree
Nutrition, you know, proper
nutrition is the foundation of
health and we
Should be really concerned about
that. And I know it's such a big
thing in my district. So I do
appreciate it. What do you have
any input on that? My concern
about seeing it every year.
Madam Chair, representative
Jones. Um, I would say I'm I'm
in agreement with you. I think
it's something that we would
like to to look at every year so
we can certainly go back and
add, add an amendment to that
and add some language there
around that. Um, but I'm I'm in
agreement with you. Yes.
I'm just going to jump in here.
That's what HB two is, is where
the LFC looks at every
expenditure, so just because
it's not written in the bill
doesn't mean it will just keep
being in the in the budget will
have to be funded in House Bill
two. So that's how we will
continue to look at it. Okay.
Well, thank you, Manager. Thank
you. I appreciate that. And
Madam chair would that be
Because of what you said. Would
that mean that we wouldn't be
able to look at it as a health
committee?
Representative Generally the
unfortunately I will say we
don't get much say in the money
part of it.
Um, so so they would not have to
come back with another bill for
this, which can get delayed or
wait laid. So it will it pretty
much we when we make
appropriations decisions, we we
don't make approach when we
recommend that the
Appropriations Committee Um then
it becomes a function of the
LFC.
I understand that and thank you
for explaining that here this in
interim if there was an
interest, just let the chair
know that this is something
you're interested in. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I still think even
based on you know your your
explanation that we should look
at that every year, but I
appreciate everybody's input.
Thank you.
Lord.
Thank you, Madam. Chair
Representative. I support your
bill set up front when people
get all wound up about what I'm
about to ask.
But I do have some questions.
So, Madam Chair Representative.
What? How much did we get last
year for our food banks, Madam
Chair and Representative Lord
Last year, the state allocated
$5 million to the New Mexico
Association of Food banks and as
well as the year prior to that,
Okay, and Madam Chair
representative because I'm a
numbers person.
Not questioning. How did we go
from 5 to 25 is just what data
did we drive that from?
Madam chair and representative
Lord, That is a great question,
And I'm happy to answer it.
What we looked at was the amount
of food historically that's been
coming into the food banks. We
deal with a lot of different
types of food and food sources
that includes USDA commodity
food, and it also includes
donated product donated product
has continued to drop off pretty
dramatically for a variety of
reasons.
Not for lack of trying to get
ahold of it. It's really
happening across the entire
country. So what we looked at
was what is the gap that exists
with the incoming food that we
have now? And if we want to
reach, reach everyone and and
address the meal gap in the
state of New Mexico, and I'm
very happy to provide to the
committee. The maps and Meal Gap
report which is really a very
important report that we rely
heavily on
That's how we determined the
amount of additional funds that
we would need in order to get
the amount of food in to meet
the meal gap for the state of
New Mexico. Okay, Madam Chair
Robson. So next year, if there
was like extra, then you would
come back and ask for maybe a
little kind of adjust it based
on what you're asking. Yeah,
that's fine. And I got it. Okay.
The reason I was, I do have one
more question.
Um
Explain to me how when the money
goes out, because you're going
to give money to different food
banks. My food bank is East
Mountain Food pantry. I love
them. I give them so much money,
especially during the pandemic
there the top of my list because
it's super important, especially
during covid. When you actually
go to the food banks and you see
who's getting it and you talk to
the people that work there. It's
very eye opening.
We ended up actually having they
saved a veteran's life that was
living in a shack that nobody
knew about until he came down
and asked for food and they were
worried about and they went up
there. He was on a shocker, No
electricity, no plumbing. No
nothing. So I love our food
banks because their boots on the
ground
Can you explain to me when the
money goes to you guys? How How
is it divided? How does it get
into my district like is it by
need or percentage? Can you just
explain that to me?
Madam Chair, representative
Lord another excellent question.
Um, what we do is right now
we're utilizing, Um, the
percentages per county that is
determined by the USDA for
commodities. So, in essence,
what we do is take that $25
million and we divided up and
that amount is based on a number
of food insecure people in the
county.
Unemployment rates. There are a
number of different things that
come into play there, but just
to let you know, uh for Bernie
Leo County, which technically
East Mountain Food Pantry is in
the amount that would be
available for Bernie Leo County
would be about 2.66 million. So
on top of that, we also look at
the network partners that we
have. How many people there
serving and what their need is
as well.
We work very closely with all
those partners to ensure that a
good amount of food is going to
them, so it's really supporting
them in their community. Okay?
And thank you that I just was
curious on how that works, Madam
Chair Robson and please keep in
mind when I give my capital
outlay.
Um, the governor scratches out
my East mountain to give to you
guys, Please understand when
you're getting the capital
outlay for me. I was trying to
get it to the East Mountain. But
every year she crosses out East
mountains, So just please keep
that in mind that they're not
getting the capital outlay the
deserve so thank you, Madam
Chair.
Actually, just a clarification.
This this this has nothing to do
with capital outlay. Um
Representative Vincent
Thank you, Madam Chair reminds
just a statement. I wanted to
let you know if you're ever if
you ever have a problem with the
heavy lifting that police and
fire always like to go and help
you, So I just want to let you
know that Thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you. Mis. Mister Heart has
grown two sizes too large or
whatever. Whatever you're
wonderful quote was last year.
So, um, I will entertain a
motion. Okay? Representative
Chavez and all second it. Okay,
Representative Cates, it's the
sea. The sea reps. Um, So if you
would call it is there any
opposition?
Okay, seeing none. You have a
tin zero do pass.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Committee
members.
And we will move on to house
Bill
Represent private home in your
expert whenever you're ready,
and please feel free to jump in
and answer questions, you don't
have to differ. You know, you
don't have to whatever. Thank
you, madam Chair.
I'm here to introduce today.
House Bill 149 medication for
juveniles and treatment
programs. And to my right is Dr
Nathan Birnbaum.
All of us today. Here? No, a
teenager.
Some of us are parents to
teenagers.
Some of us here. We're teenagers
Awhile ago, Dr Birnbaum and I
were teenagers just a smaller
while ago.
And this bill is really about
teenagers who we love and those
who suffer from addiction of
opioids.
And while there is a treatment
for opioid addiction that is
proven to be safe is proven to
be effective. Only 3% of teens
have access to this life saving
medication.
We really need to change this in
New Mexico, which is why both of
us are here.
And I'll hand it over to Dr
Birnbaum to introduce a little
bit more. Um, he is a dedicated
and committed doctor who has
been working to make sure every
teenager has who needs access to
this life saving treatment has
it.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Nathan Birnbaum and a family
physician at University of New
Mexico, though I speak only for
myself today.
The rate of opioid overdose
deaths among teenagers has
increased by over 100% over the
past two years.
And people are not getting the
treatment that they need The
treatment that is evidence
based, is medication for
addiction treatment, and it
reduces the risk of overdose
increases retention in care.
And decreases the spread of
infectious disease and decreases
crime, despite the fact that the
American Academy of Pediatrics,
the World Health Organization
and all other major medical
associations say that this is
the standard of care, we know
that there are programs here in
New Mexico that are depriving
adolescents and their families
and their communities of access
to evidence based treatment.
This can no longer be the case.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Um
So we will go. I'm gonna warn
the folks on zoom if you are
here in opposition, please raise
your hand and we'll go to the
room and come back to you. So is
there anyone here in opposition
to house Bill 149.
Okay. Anyone on zoom? Okay. And
so we were again if you are on
zoom and in support, now raise
your hand. Anyone in the room in
support?
Okay, if you want to. If you
want to speak, please feel free
to come over to the center
aisle.
And again it's one minute.
Thanks. Thank you, Madam Chair
members of the committee. I'm
Grace Phillips, general Counsel
for New Mexico Counties.
Organizations supports this
bill, um, counties as I'm sure
you all know are responsible for
operating adults and juvenile
detention facilities in the
state of New Mexico and as we've
been moving forward from, uh
Not just continuing medication
for people who are booked into
facilities but actually
connecting people with treatment
while they're in custody. One of
the huge challenges to making
that effective and meaningful is
that when people leave the jail,
either to go to prison, um
corrections, or C Y F D. They're
unable to continue their
treatment because the state has
not
I got into the point of standing
up those programs or is this
bill would address when
individuals are released into
the community?
Sometimes they can't continue
their care because there are not
those programs in the community
and what this bill would do with
respect to youth, leaving our
four juvenile detention
facilities in the state is it
would hopefully give the
opportunity for them to if they
initiate treatment or continue
treatment while they're in our
care, Um, continue that when
they get into the community, and
so
Um
We really hope that there's
broad support for this
legislation. We think it's a
practical way to make
meaningful the investments that
counties are trying to make in
our custodial settings.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Lillian Dinneen. I am a
medical student at U and M and
I'm here to speak in support of
this bill. So my statements do
not represent the university in
anyway. Um I would like to
continue my residency training
here and my future practice as a
physician in this state, and I
feel like can only do that if I
know that the governing body for
my community is committed to
ensuring that taxpayer dollars
go towards evidence based
treatment.
That are known to improve
chances of recovery and you use
disorder.
It isn't growing crisis, which
requires a comprehensive
approach with legislation like
this so that providers and
future providers like me can
ensure that these vulnerable
youth in our state get the
treatment that they need with
results.
Which we can result invest
outcomes for their health and
recovery. You madam Chair
members of the committee. Many
Ms Denali Wilson, Um, a staff
attorney at the New Mexico and
the U. Stands in strong support
of this legislation.
No one should be denied
essential in lifesaving
No one should be denied
essential in life saving health
No one should be denied
essential in lifesaving
healthcare, including medication
for addiction treatment, and
that's true for for young people
who are in state custody in New
Mexico, a substance abuse
disorder is a disability and
when it comes to treating
substance abuse and opioid use
disorder, no tools should be off
the table in this bill.
Ensures that that's true.
Denying patients medication for
opioid use disorder is not only
cruel and life threatening, but
it violates the Eighth Amendment
in the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
The law requires essential in
life saving health care be
provided to patients, including
Children in state custody, and
we're proud that New Mexico took
this step last year to ensure
that treatment would be
available in our state prison
facilities, and this is the
natural next step.
Thank you. Um, we will go to Oh,
we have four on zoom.
So okay. Five.
So if you are, if your hand is
raised, we will hear you. If
not, um, we'll move on Emily.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee and I'm
like Colton back with the drug
Policy Alliance. We stand in
strong support of house Bill
149 drug use because of our
unregulated and underground
supplies, becoming more and more
dangerous. In fact, in
Bernalillo County, uh, it's one
of 19 hotspots in the country
where overdose deaths of
adolescents are significantly
higher than the national average
and drug overdose deaths. Rates
are nearly twice as high among
native out of adolescence, but
unfortunately being young and
being
A person of color is associated
with lower odds of receiving
medication assisted treatment.
We need to close the treatment
gap here in New Mexico House
Bill 149 is a step forward and
addressing this deadly crisis.
We urge the committee support of
house Bill 149. Thank you.
Thank you, Emily. Next we have
Exactly Melody.
Oh,
Oh, Nate, Go ahead. I mean, Nat.
It's already thank you, Madam
Click.
Thank you, madam Chair members,
the committee and the interest
of time I am a person with
disabilities and disability
advocate and I stand in support
of this bill for many of the
reasons and about producing been
stated it accesses equity and
equities access. Thank you very
much. Sponsored. Madam Chair
members of the committee. Thank
you, Nat. We'll go to Melanie
Melody.
Never mind. We'll go to building
Madam Terry. This is Bill
Jordans.
Go ahead, Bill. I'm sorry.
That's okay. Bill Jordan's with
New Mexico voices for Children I
really want to thank
representative Pelajaran for,
uh, identifying this issue and
bringing this legislation
forward. Uh, we strongly
supported and believed that we
really need to give our
positions and substance use
providers the tools that they
need to affectively.
Help our young people. Thank
you.
Thank you, Bill.
Uh,
David
Good morning, Madam chair and
members of the committee and my
name is David Burke and I ran
straight in Mesa Youth Recovery
Center. We stand in the strong
support of this bill M 80 is in
evidence evidence based form of
treatment as defined by Samsa.
And we have seen the impact
personally. M 80 has on our
youth who choose to use it.
Those who suffer from opioid use
disorder and especially those
who use fentanyl M 80 has proven
to be the most effective way to
provide treatment for our youth.
This bill will help save lives
in treating opioid disorder
without medication is more
harmful than no treatment at
all. Thank you.
Thank you, David.
Melody.
Hello. Can you hear me now? Yes,
we can.
Good morning. Thank you, madam
Chair and members of the
committee. I am Melody Avila.
I'm a professor, family nurse
practitioner and the medical
director of the Union Adobe
program. I worked closely with
youth facing substance use
disorder and navigating
discriminatory challenges in
medical treatment. The proposed
bill holds significant promise
for youth.
Offering them access to
potentially life saving
treatment that can profoundly
influenced the trajectory of
their lives. Extensive evidence
indicates that M 80 not only
enhances mental well being and
physical health but also
contributes to a reduction in
crime, ultimately fostering
positive change within our
community.
I encourage you to support this
critical bill recognize its
potential to make substantial
impact on the lives of our youth
and the well being of our
communities. Thank you.
Thank you. Questions from the
committee.
Okay. We'll start with Herndon
Chavez, Um Jones.
Lord
everybody
Okay?
Sam Vincent.
Okay?
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you. Presenters. So Doctor bomb
playing
bourbon renamed you So thank you
for your being a part of this
legislation.
So on last week, we had 140
students visit the state
capital.
And their focus was on just what
you talked about. There was even
a young woman who came who had
been addicted to opioid in
middle school, and she talked
about how she was able to get
support from one of her own, Um
classmates. So my question to
you focuses on, UM, school based
health centers.
And so in terms of getting the
assistance that is needed for
these students, is that one
place that we will be able to
look and what were you thinking
about?
Madam chair and thank you for
the question representative as a
part of this bill, That was not
the intention this is addressing
specifically licensed substance
abuse treatment programs those
that are both inpatient and
outpatient programs. Though the
provision of medication within
school based treatment,
including
Treatment centers, including for
addiction treatment could be
something that experts address
moving forward.
Thank you for that, and and
And Mr Presenter. How do we get
the students to a treatment
center as opposed to treating
them where they are in school?
Tell me, how does that process
look?
Madam chairman representative.
It's important to identify the
barriers here. We know that if a
parent was to call treatment
centers around the country, they
would have to call 29 centers
before they would reach one that
provides evidence based
treatment for individuals who
are 16 years and younger. What
we really should be focusing on
Is transparency, and that is
part of the reason why this bill
includes reporting
responsibilities to the interim
committee every year to ensure
that the healthcare authority is
updating the committee on the
provisions of this treatment and
access to it, because the
reality is is that that access
is not there, and it's not easy
to find.
So, Mr
Of Madam Chair and Mr Presenter.
That's my concern. It's not easy
to find some worried about
students who orient. For
example, title one schools and
there they there is some
introduction to substance abuse
and open yard addiction, and
parents don't have the money,
nor sometimes they don't have
the ability to make the calls
that you're describing.
How is there something in the
bill? I don't want to detract
from the bill. Is there
something in the bill that will
help them And is there a
Medicaid aspect?
Of this bill that will direct
and assist students with respect
to overcoming this opioid
addiction.
Madam chair and representative
Herndon, two elements. One is we
are creating a fund that will
allow donations, other forms of
funding to go into that, um,
funding source and therefore
then be able to create programs
that would make programs such as
this more accessible. Um, for
instance, the 988 crisis line
that many people call I called
it myself to trying to see what
they would refer me to
Um, and it was very difficult.
So I think creating the fund
that is in the bill will help
with this.
Okay, representative in in the
interim health and human
services. We discussed how
The state is funding programs
that are not using evidence
based treatment. There. They are
adamantly anti medication
assisted treatment, so that is
the the goal of this bill is
that we don't spend state money
on programs that are not using
evidence based practices. Okay.
Thank you, Madam chair Well that
we now have three programs and
that have been presented to this
health.
Uh,
Committee, which all of them are
incredibly important. So what is
going to be
Uh, it as we move forward, what
is going to be necessary to make
sure that we connect all three
of these programs together and
every single one of them
absolutely focuses on juveniles
and making sure that they are
included in any type of
Any type of program that is
included when you have this
before the interim committee and
is I'm looking at the fiscal
impact report. It does talk
about the fun being.
Put together, but it says no
appropriation in the fun. So
what were what was the basis for
putting them?
The money in the fund to get it
started.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative. The reality is
is that opioid settlement
dollars are flowing into this
state, and I can think of
nothing that is a better down
payment on the downstream costs
of addiction to our communities
than addressing adolescent
substance use. The reality is,
is that some substance abuse
treatment programs may have not
had the infrastructure nor the
funding in the past to be able
to provide this evidence based
treatment. We do not believe
that this bill should purely
Be regulatory, but also offer
the opportunity through funding
for places that want to do the
right thing, which is to provide
evidence based treatment to be
able to do that, And sometimes
that is funding.
And Madam chair. My question to
you with is the reason whether
as we're looking at this fund is
one of the read.
The answers to creating this
fund, actually changing the
language in the opioid fund that
already exists, but it it
addresses the issues that about
fourth in this legislation.
And Madame's here. We can
actually think about that. I do
believe that there when you're
putting together is absolutely
necessary, and those 140
students who came forth and
brought and and brought to us
their concerns. Alright, is the
evidence that we need right now.
That's something does need to be
done. And how do we address it?
I do think that it's really
important that we have these
conversations. Stronger
conversations with these
individuals who are in school
and who are asking
For this type of treatment, and
I will tell you as I told the
last group that presented before
this committee, one of the
requests that was asked for by
the students themselves.
At one of the schools in the
state here in the state of New
Mexico, they offer something
called an advisory program and
then that advisory program
students can sign up for it. And
then this one case the young
woman who had been on opioids in
middle school did sign up for
that class. Others in their
became her support group so that
she continued to stay. Alright.
as she as she moves towards
graduation, and she is
definitely headed in that
direction. So I just give you
those things to think about, and
thank you.
Madam chair. A as we continue to
look forward to this great bill
and how to implement it.
And going forward.
Thank you and just to remind
her, let's stay. I mean, we all
have. We need to do this. We
This is one bill and we're going
to stick to what the bill does
because we could all go on all
day about what we think should
should be done so in the
interest of time, Bring it up in
the interim. Yes. Thanks. Thank
you.
Yeah. Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Madam Chair representative, um
and expert witness. I have one
question and that has to do with
kids who are incarcerated. Um
and so
In terms of of those, um those
kids who would be eligible for
this. Do you have a sense of
one? How many they there are and
then to would there also be, um,
therapy for those kids who are
receiving the medication while
they are in where they're
incarcerated.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative. I do not have
exact figures as to the number
of Children who are currently
incarcerated in the juvenile
justice system here in the
states who have opioid use
disorder. However, what I can
tell you based off of personal
experience is that providers are
reticent to start kids on this
medication if they think that
that
Um, individual will be sent to a
treatment facility that will
force them to withdraw from
those medication, which is the
experience of a number of
providers who I work with, Um,
in terms of
What we need for therapy. We do
know that for adolescents that
medication for addiction
treatment is best done in
concert with therapy. But we
also know that these medications
without therapy still had a
death reducing effect.
Thank you, Representative Jones.
Thank you, madam Chair.
And thank you, representative
Paragon and Dr Birnbaum. We saw
you in the interim, didn't we?
Yes, I I appreciated your
presentation then and
And appreciate the work you do.
Um, I know how important it is
for us to get this right?
And so I have some questions
about some of the wording. Um in
in the beginning of your bill
here where it says substance
abuse treatment. I know we're
primarily talking about
Opioid addiction, Correct and
forgive me if I don't say all
the right terminology. I It's
really hard to, you know.
Make that transition, But, um, I
hope you can understand. You
know, you know what I mean? So
we're talking about substance
abuse treatment and this
I've done a lot of work in the
hospital with, um people do
toxic from alcohol, but I really
have not focused in on these
medications and dealing with
opioid. Um
Um, abuse treatment or substance
abuse treatment. So this is
broad the substance abuse
treatment language.
As it as it connects with
minors. So that's my concern.
Really. Do you think that needs
to be more specific, since it
can be applied to almost any
kind of substance?
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative. I think that it
is inclusive for a reason,
because treatment facilities
market themselves as substance
abuse treatment. Now many people
we are seeing are there is an
increasing number who have
opioid use disorder, But this
bill is not restrictive to the
treatment of opioid use
disorder, for example, with
alcohol use disorder.
There are three FDA approved
medications for the treatment of
alcohol use disorder, and
nothing in this bill would
restrict, um, the regulatory
powers here from making sure
that those medications are
available in the same way with
opioid use disorder that
medication for addiction
treatment reduces. Ah
Rates of relapse. The same thing
does apply to medications safer
alcohol use disorder. Thank you
for that answer. I appreciate
that.
Um
Madam chair, Um and Dr Birnbaum.
So if you look at, uh, page two
Online five.
Another concern with the
wording. Uh, where it says,
Well, the beginning is would be
aligned Three medication
assisted treatment means the use
of Federal Food and Drug
Administration approved
prescription drugs for the
treatment of substance use
disorder and
I would. I'm just kind of struck
by the fact that it doesn't
include four miners instead of
just
Um, treatment Matt treatment, It
doesn't focus in on minors
because I'm sure you could go on
and on about the differences
between treating adults.
And treating younger people
because there are in the way
they accept drugs with their
needs are so do you think that
we should include? Or does the
FDA actually differentiate Matt
treatment for adults and for
minors?
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative. They don't
differentiated. But the FDA has
approved specific medications
for adolescents and have taken a
different stance on others. So,
for example, buprenorphine,
which is often included the
medication called Suboxone has
been FDA approved for the
treatment of opioid use disorder
in adolescents since the year
2002.
Methadone can be used in
adolescents, but the opioid
treatment centers because of
stricter regulations have to
apply for waivers every single
time they use the medication.
The third, the third line
medication called Naltrexone is
still used off label. But as any
clinician will tell you, we use
many medications off label to
treat our patients every day.
And just to remind her to folks
that we are
Uh, 10 minutes away from a hard
stop, so if we can keep our
questions and answers brief,
Hopefully we can vote today. So
I hate to rush you, but that's
I, Madam Chair. I understand And
I get I feel the pressure to but
I really do want to understand
this and so on a point of order,
um
Motions and limit debate should
not be allowed, and there's no
limit on the number of times any
commitment member can be pursued
for a minute to speak,
Representative Lord I didn't
There was no motion to limit
debate. I'm asking people
Two.
Move as fast as they can so that
we can get the vote on this man
is not we will have the vote. I
made a ruling. Thank you, madam
Chair Point of order. That's not
what the rules say. We can ask
questions We're trying to make
A very sincere vote on your
bill. And for that, we need to
ask questions. Thank you.
Representative, You need to be
recognized for a point of order,
and I did not recognize you.
Just for the record, Madam
chair.
And for everyone, I'm not
directing it specifically at
you. I really do need to know
this information and I just
don't know if I can vote on it
unless I do ask these questions,
So I'm being sincere, and I
understand that members I just
and if we don't get through, we
don't get through. I just wanted
to reminder that if we can get
through that will have us less
far behind than we already are.
Okay, So thank you, Madam Chair,
So, Yeah. I do agree that we
need to modernize this. We need
to make sure that
Our miners are given the
treatment they need. I have, and
it's so complicated, but yes,
this is a good first step.
I just want to make sure that if
another thing and you maybe you
can help explain this to me that
by passing this bill that we are
not prohibiting.
Providers from
Treating minors as unique
individuals and making sure that
we're not imposing a treatment
on them in any way or making
them take medications by law
that they really don't need or
that we're not tailoring a
program of treatment towards
specific individual miners.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative. Nothing in this
bill mandates treatment in any
specific way for adolescents.
That is a decision that should
be made between a provider,
their family and the patient.
Thank you very much. Doctor
Birnbaum and thank you,
Representative Powderhorn and
Madam chair. Thank you,
representative Lord Jones,
representative Lord
Thank you, Madam Chair. So,
madam chair and doctor because
I'm not going to butcher name. I
apologize.
Um okay. Can you explain to me
with this bill?
So currently right now, my
understanding is minors are not
getting some sense Abuse
treatment is that what has
happened is that the purpose of
this
Representative Lord, I would
Point you to page two line 14.
That basically is explains what
this bill is intended. Madam
chair representatives and
experts. That correct is that
what this bill is for?
Madam chair and representative.
Substance abuse treatment
programs are available in the
state of New Mexico. What we are
pointing out is that many of
them restrict the use of the
standard of care, and what we
are seeking to do is bring that
into the light and to subsidize
the provision of that treatment
and the expansion of the
opportunities to take advantage
of evidence based treatment.
Okay, so Madam chair and
represent Dr Birgit.
Lost in. That is so they are
receiving, but it's not to the
Standard of care. Is that what
I'm understanding?
Madam Sharon representative,
Only one in 12. Adolescents with
opioid use disorder in the
United States actually received
treatment unless than 3% of
those received evidence based
treatment, which is in this
case, Medication for addiction
treatment. We know for sure that
far there is far too little
access to evidence based
treatment for substance abuse
treatment at all in the state of
New Mexico.
MHM chair represented type.
That's such a sad state of
affairs because fentanyl is such
a huge, huge
I think it's the number one
cause of death right now. For
men between
16 to 40. It's a huge amount of
number, so it's it's. The reason
I ask is because it's very
surprising. We don't have this
So Madam chair represent experts
so when they go into the
treatment facility
Is it Medicaid that is covering
the cost of this evidence based
treatment or who is paying for
that cost?
Madam chair and representative
In some circumstances, it is
private carriers in other
circumstances. It is the state
Medicaid program.
About what we are saying, is
that any state dollars that are
subsidizing programs that
provide care or advertise that
they provide substance abuse
treatment to minors should not
be able to restrict the use of
evidence based standard of care
treatment. Okay, so that leads
to another question, Madame
Pierre Ripston doctor, So if
it's Medicaid, that is covering
it, are they? You know how
insurance works.
Our health and church. Are they
going to be the ones that are
deciding like you can only have
this?
Treatment.
And if they say no? Then how
would that be covered?
Madam Sharon representative. The
decision about whether to
recommend medication for
addiction treatment is the job
of a physician or a clinician.
What we are saying is that
Medicaid dollars through the
state should not be going to
programs that deny access to
this treatment. Okay, Thank you,
Um
Madam chair of Sam, Doctor, But
you know how that I'm just
concerned. If if we're making
this happen, then we're going to
end up in situations where the
doctor says this in the Medicaid
may say, no, we don't want to
pay for that.
So, um, Venture representative
somebody brought up a great
question earlier, would you
consider
Or is it possible to add
incarcerated juveniles so that
they're also
Getting this care that is so
badly needed because that's kind
of our hub, right?
Those are the kids right there
in the
And the juvenile detention that
need that care. Would would that
be said, because you have
medications and treatments
outpatient substance.
Could you add incarcerated
juvenile so that we're
addressing those that that
population
Uh, representative Lord, um,
since representative part of
wholeness, so new, that would be
a different bill that would
direct
The Department of Corrections,
or C, Y F, D, or whoever
oversees those that this is just
that essentially, state monies
are not going to programs that
do not have the capability or to
to do medication assisted
treatment. There could be a
separate bill for kids who are
have been adjudicated.
Okay, So, Madam Chair members.
um so when we go on to page two
line, 14
By the end of fiscal year. 2025.
We're going right here to see
why F d
Should not operate or contract
with inpatient substance abuse
facilities and outpatient
substance. Use that
Restrict. That's correct. So no
So see what D what you're trying
to say, See wife because it's
very important to me and say
with the issues they can no
longer say you're going to go to
treatment facility A if they're
not using the medications that
would help them with their drug
addiction treatments. That what
I'm understanding
Madam chair represented. What
we're saying is that Department
of Health and C Y f D cannot
contract with or operate
facilities that have policies or
procedures that specifically
restrict the use of that again.
It's not a mandate on saying
these medications have to be
used as our individual
decisions. Okay? Yes. Sorry. I
apologize. Madam Chair. I
understand what you're saying. I
said that incorrectly, they're
restricting the use.
Um
Which again I go back to find
amazing that there's certain
places that would restrict
things up work. So I'm trying to
wrap my head around that and
then the same thing goes and you
just answer that question.
Madam Chair representative
about, um
Be think this is where you say
the
Hold on one second Madam Chair
representative. Impatient
to restrict you have three
minutes left at three minutes.
I'm going to have to cut you off
and we'll continue on Monday and
I agree with you and I
understand it's just a warning.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
Um, I'm just gonna stop right
here. So we have time to do our
closing up and wrapping because
I know that other people have
questions.
I guess what is just completely
blowing. My mind is that
I don't just seems so archaic. I
mean, it seems archaic that we
don't already have this that
people should be referring
people to a center that is
evidence based, and you'll be
seeing evidence based, um
medications and treatment.
So the last question I'm gonna
ask because we have, like two
minutes left.
So where are the because I need
to know to make a decision on
this. So where are the kids
going out? They need treatment,
and they're going to places that
are not doing standard of care.
Is that what I'm understanding?
Madam chair and representative
under certain circumstances,
That is the case.
Sorry. I'm just shaking my head
because I can't understand how
that is happening or how that's
been happening for so long. So I
agree with your bill actually do
have more questions, but
probably what I'll do. Next time
I'll give them to represented
Vincent so he can ask the
questions. But I do support
this. It's just
I just don't understand how this
is. We're just around getting
around to this when we should be
doing full service treatment for
our youth that definitely need
the medication and the therapy,
which I hope they're using
things like cognitive behavioral
therapy and whatnot. What? Good
thank you, and treatments
actually work. Thank you. Thank
you. It is now 1159.
So we are going to stand
adjourned. Um, and on Monday, we
will start with this bill, and
it will be representative
Vincent and Cates with
questions. Then we will vote and
