Vice chair.
Here and finally madam chair
thank you.
I don't see our first
presenter our first well are
only bill there's there's
Representative Montoya in the
I'm I can do that okay.
Did send a text to
Representative Serrato but I
haven't heard back yet.
Madam chair my apologies this
morning I always seem to be in
some sort of forgotten corner of
the world is not allowed in is
analysts so with the leak it
just doesn't let me in right
away I'm not sure why can that
be corrected.
Representative mentira not sure
what.
Thank you and only.
Okay Representative Serrato with
signing in now so she should be
with us in just a minute.
And and just there is a
committee staff that was sent
out Saturday evening.
And Karen has had a chance to
look at it so we will
Once Representative Serrato gets
on will.
We'll hear from her.
And I re did my analysis to
major analysis you know or are.
The confusing person it hasn't
L. which I think is
Representative process and it
says Representative Gail
Armstrong.
By.
How are you madam chair okay.
Fine you just start in under
Representative Gail Armstrong
name let me get back and let me
try again.
Right.
Okay we have Representative
Serrato how are you feeling
today great thank you for asking
sorry for the delay no that's
okay every time you're not
Johnny on the spot I think the
baby have a change of heart in
the state.
It is she's working on it also.
So it's good to see you so go
ahead whenever you're ready.
Thank you I chairwoman and thank
you to the members of the health
and Human
Human Services committee I also
do have to expert witnesses I
should we bring them in as well
them to please yeah just let ME
know who they are okay they
would be timing Hernandez with
the Alzheimer's association and
to secretary action hope Katrina
hold from Lopez with aging long
term services department wait
for them to get promoted and
then you can go ahead with your
bill yes.
Miss Lopez in the.
And I did just come out the
other.
We can get started you know she
she more the meeting or
something.
Whenever you're ready
Representative thank you so I
have before you all state house
built that one seventy five that
would support expanding
information through the aging a
long term services department to
rural and underserved
communities regarding
Alzheimer's disease and dementia
and also what it would do is it
allows them to access
funds from the survey dress
Trust Fund to utilize these in a
in a program I'm I do have a
committee substitute that I
worked on with the department on
and if I could bring that
forward as well.
I will move that for discussion
go ahead Representative thank
you I'm with the committee
substitute does it make some
moderate changes that the
secretary requests it changes
the amounts that is a lot of the
survey to see your dignity Fund
from four hundred thousand two
hundred thousand and to run this
as a as a pilot program so that
we can begin the process of
engaging in community based
culturally appropriate outreach
you know what we found is that
the communities that are most
impacted by Alzheimer's and
dementia often are the ones that
are underserved and so
especially as we talk about so
many home care givers that are
taking care of our seniors at
this time we wanted to begin the
process and give our aging long
term services department the
opportunity to begin that type
of outreach and see what works
and then from there you know
grow from there as well it also
encourages to participate in
Programs and and and in
treatments as well so that we
can get more information.
This is a companion bill to
what's going on in the US Senate
are senator Ben ray Lujan says
the next bill that encourages
this innate American Community
specifically I'd love to head
over to my expert witness Tommy
Hernandez who can kind of get to
were details about these things.
Representative go ahead tell me.
Thank you so much madam chair
members of the committee and I
want to begin my time also with
thinking Representative Linda
Serrato for working with our
organization among with other
stakeholders at the ageing
Department to to bring this very
important and necessary piece of
legislation forward there's not
much I can say that won't sound
as an echo to to the
representative I think she
captured the intended the
reasoning behind this bill very
very well but I will go and add
is that members of this
committee certainly don't don't
need to be reminded that here in
New Mexico we have a very
diverse population and that
includes a very robust and and
very large population of both
Hispanics as well as native
Americans belong to many
different tribes and pueblos so
that makes our state unique in
the fact that we know that this
disease Alzheimer's and other
forms of dementia certainly need
to be addressed and culturally
appropriate with all tools
Pacific messaging among these
population groups and the reason
for that the Alzheimer's
association just last year able
to analyze through a massive
data collection of of people who
have been diagnosed with the
disease as well as as other
factors showing that both
Hispanics and native Americans
are among the most likely of
ethnic groups to develop
Alzheimer's disease or some
other forms of dementia now I
want to point out that there
certainly is not a difference
between Alzheimer's and other
dementia dementia is the
umbrella term we use Alzheimer's
disease the most common form of
of one of the major when it
comes to that so in New Mexico
the you know there are upwards
of eleven percent of the state's
total population identify as you
know native American belong to
one of the one of the tribes or
pueblos or Navajo Nation so this
speaks to the importance of
moving this bill forward why our
partners at the aging a long
term services department have
adopted a state plan which is
essentially a three to five year
strategic plan of initiatives
they.
Will be carrying out there
throughout the course of those
three to five years among that
plans initiatives include
culturally appropriate and
sensitive messaging to make sure
that folks in our tribes in our
pueblos and Navajo Nation are
receiving education are
receiving outreach that is both
community based and it is
culturally appropriate to make
sure that they are aware of the
early signs and symptoms other
you know risk reduction
techniques as they age all of
this to help improve better
outcomes among these underserved
communities I think but with
that addition I hope it brings a
little more clarity to the
intent of the bill as well as
the positive health outcomes we
know can be achieved through
passing this legislation one
plus myself there thank you
madam chair members of the
committee.
Thank you madam chair that's our
presentation okay so we will go
to the audience a first for a
whole so Emily if you could put
up the pole.
And please vote what do you
support or oppose this this
bill.
To give you a few more seconds.
It looks pretty stable so it's
eight out of eight are in
support so just in case there is
anybody in the audience who is
in opposition who would like to
speak you can raise your hand.
Okay I didn't think I'd see
anybody it people in support
who'd like to speak.
Okay we will start with
keen Hambrick.
Good morning madam chair good
morning gene how are you I am
wonderful and you good good.
Well as you know I need to hear
more about it here advocate with
a a RP New Mexico Sicko A. A. R.
P. New Mexico serves the fifty
plus population statewide and
representative families with
members who have Alzheimer's
disease and other forms of
dementia HM one seventy five
will help the aging and long
term Services Department serve
our fifty plus population and
their families in rural and
underserved areas we urge ado
passcode thank you.
Thank you need next is Pamela
Stafford.
Thank you madam chair woman and
members of the committee I'm
Pamela Stafford I'm with the New
Mexico care givers in action and
we have members who are family
caregivers
living in rural locations and
spat providing care for adults
with Alzheimer's and they talk
about the building of isolation
not having help not knowing
about resources and so on behalf
of those members I stand in
support of this bill thank you.
Thank you Pamela next we have
Joseph Prada.
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee.
I am just following and I am a
tribal members of the public
heinous I am a volunteer and
serve as one of the many
educators for the New Mexico
chapter Alzheimer's association.
I support the House Bill once
and I because passing this bill
would allow more educators like
myself you reach more home care
givers who are already
underserved and families who
care for loved ones with
dementia.
It is meant native American
communities are in much need of
cultural appropriate to K.
electronic talk about because of
certain barriers including
language already in education so
it is important that the house
bill one seventy five moves
forward and thank you for your
time and for your or your work.
Thank you Joseph next we have
Valerie soci.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members I am also
Valerie so see a member of the
Navajo tribe in a community
educator with the fall without
summers Association I am in
favor with the bill as well as
the communities have a language
barrier and needs special
attention being that we don't
have much resources on the
reservation as far as having be
cultural sensitivities and
special.
Jan would make that.
Communication so much better and
getting the awareness for our
tribal communities.
Thank you again for your time
and I'm in favor for the bills.
Thank you Valerie next we have
Julie Rodriguez.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee I'm a
volunteer public policy advocate
with the Alzheimer's association
and having been a care giver and
living in Santa Fe I know how
difficult it was to provide
resources to know where to turn
for support and so in a rural
native communities this is so
much harder it is desperately
needed because you are in a
state of desperation frustration
trying to find what you need how
to care for your loved ones I
stand in solitude poured this
bill what this bill to go
forward thank you all for
everything you did for us.
Thank you.
That is all the public comment
we have so I will go to the
committee and no Representative
Montoya.
Representative you are muted.
And you better watch out because
you may have to fight that
Representative
Matthews for the title of.
Champion so go ahead
Representative madam chair.
You don't on the substitute yet
that they came in or did I miss
that.
Your did not miss that I will I
will move to accept the
substitute second.
Okay is there any opposition.
Okay seeing then we have a
substitute bill I'm sorry
Representative Montoya now madam
chair at could you repeat again
the second.
Seconded Anderson Anderson thank
you.
And thank you Representative
lord for helping keep me on the
straight and narrow go ahead
Representative Montoya.
Good morning madam chair
committee members and I just
think so gleefully the the good
work of set up though for
bringing this forward
Representative it's a really
great effort I have a couple of
questions
when you mention culturally
appropriate campaigns can you
describe what that would look
like I happen to Representative
one of the largest but was in
the north okay a Wingate and
also a large the Spano
population so it's important to
me to understand exactly what
that would look like.
I preface this this with my full
support it's a critically
important campaign just
described if you could in detail
what that would look like on the
ground.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for the
wonderful question I think it's
very important to consider that
and all at a time we get into
more details as well from his
experience and understanding the
seeing this nationally but first
and foremost is language on and
making sure that people are
being communicated with in their
in their the primary language so
that the understand the
communication aspects as well
and I think that's a very
important element to this and
also you know we found often
times that you know you want to
make sure the references or or
localized and so it's difficult
to do that with they are only a
statewide reference sheet you
know there's so much we have in
common in New Mexico but then
regionally their specific you
know at I don't is a slang but
you know just the dialects that
people you know speak in that
and that may be more appropriate
in those areas to to connecting
with folks and then also one
other piece all mentioned is
making sure the communicators
are those that are appropriate
right so on you know for example
in my community oftentimes you
know programs like big brothers
big sisters is probably the best
one on the ground to reach my
community but that is not
necessarily the same for for and
you know any of the other
representatives here on and so
you know we wanna make sure lot
of those communicators are the
ones that are reaching at
reaching different that folks
that may be impacted tell me did
you have any other ways that
culturally appropriate might
exist yes thank you
Representative Serrato thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative Montoya for one
practicing your support but that
also I'll be going to address it
a little a little further but I
think Representative Serrato
really really said it best with
that your New Mexico we know
that we have over twenty three
federally recognized tribes and
pueblos each one of them is
unique and and each one as we
have learned through through
interacting with many of these
community leaders members of the
community in general is that
there are different customs.
And and back to what we're
presenters throttle pointed out
you know so so well was that
language barrier what we have
learned at the Alzheimer's
association is that there is no
one size fits all when it comes
to messaging there certainly is
no one size fits all when it
comes to educating our various
groups whether the people
belonging to Spanish speaking
Hispanic populations people from
the you know Apache
to aim is published we heard
from someone speak in support
relief or two about to mysteries
soci from Navajo Nation so what
we intend to do with this bill
is is working collaboratively
with the aging long term
services department are
particularly their liaison to
you know Indian and tribal
affairs.
We know that together we can
come up with messaging that is
culturally appropriate that
really resonates and is
sensitive to their customs.
A quick example want to point
out is that in a conversation
late last year I had heard from
someone belonging to one of our
pueblos that there is no word
for Alzheimer's disease form of
dementia so they are adopting
something that is that is
certainly foreign and new to
them what we want to begin to
break down that stigma of what
cognitive decline is what memory
loss looks like and we know we
can only do that with reaching
them with culturally sensitive
and appropriate campaigns so to
give you a a pinpoint exact
example Representative monthly
I'd be happy to go ahead and get
some things down and over to you
rather than being long winded
and getting into that here in
the committee but I certainly
can can provide you some very
specific examples your through
direct conversation I can head
off to representative Raja we
can pass on to you but I think
the what what are answer here is
is that we recognize that
customs language traditions how
different tribes in bubbles
treat their elders you with
regard to respect as they age
all these to be taken under very
careful consideration that is
sensitive their culture so I
hope that answers your question
Representative month by thank
you madam chair.
Madam chair representative yes
the detail was sufficient I I
just want to close by saying in
working having worked on in my
tried for about fifteen years in
getting accurate and effective
messaging really engaging those
local leaders in each pueblo in
each chapter house so that those
voices are authentic and they
cut through to the urgency of
the message so thank you so much
for I yield back thank you.
Thank you Representative next to
have Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Serrato for
bringing us forward it's so
important
that we you know expand and make
sure that we can reach you know
not only native Americans
families but also those in rural
areas and I see this as a bill
that is going to not only help
families who want to take care
of their elders to understand
what a person and to recognize
what a person is going through
if they are having early signs
of dementia because I think a
lot of times we can also prevent
elder abuse if people understand
what's happening and how this is
affecting their loved ones and
so with this outreach I hope we
also include you know
information about the signs and
symptoms and and how to deal
with that
but also I think it's really
important that we make sure that
families understand the health
care it is available for their
loved ones you know in home and
to get the health care they need
so thank you for bringing this I
think in the next session we
might be able to expand it and
to support Alzheimer's
awareness and possibly someday
prevention so thank you very
much.
Thank you Representative next I
have Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair I'm my
apologies for being late this
morning I'm in transit at that
direction
wanted to make sure to
Let you all know how much I
appreciate this bill all rural
New Mexico suffers tremendously
from lack of services
I scream and shout hold my
breath stopped my feet all the
time for.
home healthcare and hospice the
lack of it in rural New Mexico I
believe that this and one of my
favorite people Tommy is is
helping present this bill and
Pat kudos to you all for doing
this thank you Representative
Serrato for bringing this
forward and I just want you all
to know you have my full support
thank you madam chair.
Thank you and I'll just step
along here at my grandmother had
Alzheimer's and it was that it
was it was really tough and my
mom also had dementia that was
not diagnosed as Alzheimer's but
and growing up a Navajo I did
remind you talking about the
cultural part of it I remember
when I was working on one of the
Pueblo was and I was trying to
get that that child care workers
to to place the baby in a
different way in the crib and
and they said we can't because
that's when we lay babies that.
People we look they are dead
with their heads in that way so
we don't lay our babies there so
instead of fighting about that
we just that well let's let's
make the crib north south so
that we can respect the
traditions and the culture and
still get what done what we need
to get done and so I think this
is a great way to look at that
so I will I thank you
Representative Serrato and Tommy
for doing this important work
and I will entertain a motion.
I would to do pass okay.
Is that do not pass on house
bill one seventy five and a do
pass on that help house health
and Human Services Committee
substitute of H. B. one seventy
five is that what you meant to
say Representative Anderson that
is absolutely correct also check
it out okay Roger either are
either Montoya or Ferrari for
expectant and go ahead and take
the role Emily.
Representative Anderson yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative.
I have a baby screaming.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Lord.
Yes Representative asos is going
to try to vote but he's also
presenting a bill right now.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative first.
Yes.
Thank you Representative Lord.
Madam chair yes.
Yes.
Thank you.
The first terror post thank you
and Representative took office
I'm glad you were able to I know
how hard it is to juggle I'm
glad you were able to make that
SO Representative Serrato you
have a unanimous ten to zero do
pass on your committee so.
And good luck in your next
committee
chairman thank you committee
Emily and thank you for being
here and.
Bills at this moment.
We're not for today but just in
general no not scheduled the
only thing is HB thirty three
was tabled awhile back okay okay
so members of the committee we
may get some referrals from the
Senate and or we may not so stay
tuned for whether we need on
Wednesday are not depending on
our workload and thank you all
for being here and I I will tell
you sometimes I think about when
we have one built about making
the committee along later to
give people a little more time
in the morning and then I think
oh my gosh if I do that we're
going to go a long and we're
going to be struggling so so
just stay tuned for next weekend
also you all on the floor thank
you all and we are in respect
thank you madam chair.
