Yes yes.
Good morning everyone you should
start out this is housing Human
Services house health and Human
Services Committee and
I as vice chair billion for our
chair
and Representative Gail
Armstrong Gail Armstrong.
Jennifer Armstrong well I this
is going to be a long morning.
Good morning Representative Gail
Armstrong I'm filling in for
Representative Armstrong so our
first bill have we gotten.
Representative Dow I don't see
her on.
Madam chair and you are okay.
A little bit little bit caffeine
in me so far I need we're gonna
make it.
Representative Dow do you have
people you need to move over us
with us yes thank you madam
chair if you could please move
over Dominic Silva.
And
What we're going to have to
repeat park out.
And don't forget we need to take
roll call.
Madam chair do you want me to
take local now yes please.
Everyone.
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Representative Anderson is.
Thank you.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Just barely hear.
Representative Nibert.
Same here.
Representative bash.
I'm here.
Representative Stephanie lord.
I don't see her.
Representative Marian Matthews.
I'm here but I'm gonna leave
very shortly for another
committee I have to present okay
Representative Roger Montoya.
Present day for the duration of
the meeting.
Representative Lewis that also.
Here I also have a bill to
present I'll be on and off of
the.
Okay.
Representative Liz Thomson.
Here and I have a bill elsewhere
shortly to okay.
vice chair Ferrary can we excuse
them when they're gone.
Yes please okay.
Vice chair Dr for our I'm
present.
Thank you.
madam chair Deborah Armstrong.
Jeez excuse right.
So Representative doubt if
you'll present House Bill three
seventeen.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee I'm
I'm I would just wanna get a
little bit of background during
my campaign my first campaign
when I was running in two
thousand sixteen if you all
recall it was the time when air
ambulances were really under a
lot of fire for surprise billing
people were being flown and the
range of those flights were you
sixteen thousand two hundred
thousand dollars and I think
even Representative Thomas
Thompson had a bill on this and
we're trying to figure out how
do we end surprise billing well
as we dug in in that same year
the air ambulance that was in
Sierra County one of three of my
counties was removed from our
county we have no helicopter no
air ambulance in Sierra County
any longer so costs are rising
surprise billing existed and it
was making a lot of press and
there is a lot of concern so we
ended up doing was working
really really hard over time
thanks to many of the members in
this body in bringing air
ambulances into MCO Network and
that has been very successful
and so for the last two years
the average cost out of pocket
to the consumer has been less
than two hundred dollars and
that includes copays and you
know whatever it maybe so.
That before this change happened
and we've also added consumer
education and we've worked
really hard for the NCOs we've
also increase the Medicaid
reimbursement because of course
over eighty percent of folks in
New Mexico their insurance is
covered by Medicaid Medicare or
B. I. B. I. eight there's no
copay for those there's no cost
to that so eighty percent of New
Mexicans have no cost for air
ambulance and those who do it's
their deductible and within
network with their NCOs now so
prior to me doing all this work
there were networks they were
what was called memberships so
people were buying memberships
for patients who relied on their
services and this was an
alternate to insurance costs.
When the pair was denied
reimbursement this membership
would kick in but because we
focused our efforts on reaching
in network agreements with
insurance companies and because
we lower the cost to either zero
or at you know the average cost
around two hundred dollars these
memberships are somewhat
obsolete what practically
obsolete so that the concern of
handling these claims in
transport and the assumptions
that used to be true are no
longer true and so what this
bill is a need to do is to bring
regulation to the memberships
and to put in consumer
protection by converting these
memberships to insurance
policies and bring it under the
supervision of the office of the
superintendent of insurance and
so I that is the background and
why we need it no one ever
weights when you're in an
emergency when your life is on
the line when you're flying in
air ambulance and to save your
life.
Is this part of my membership is
this error in if this particular
helicopter that arrived at the
scene in my membership and most
of the time the answer is no so
that's what the bill is aiming
to do and I'm going to turn it
over to Dominic Silva to explain
the workings of.
Good morning madam madam chair
members of the committee Dominic
Silva lobbyist with air methods
corporation we're the largest up
air transport company in the in
the country currently we have
thirteen bases in the state of
New Mexico over seventeen
aircraft but you know several
years ago as representative
Thompson knows and introduce a
surprise billing that.
it was a wake up call for our
industry and our our our company
took it very seriously so we we
took a three pronged approach to
try and solve the issues around
surprise billing of what one was
noted noting that over eighty
percent of our.
State is on Medicaid Medicare or
the government assistance
insurance so with that
are rates just we're not keeping
up with the cost of doing
business so in our efforts we
have since then been able to
increase our our Medicaid rates
which is.
Thank you the second thing is
what we try to bring an network
of our NCOs to to level with the
goods cost of doing business
with them the third thing is.
Consumer at advocacy consumer
protection and that's what we're
focusing on right now and it's
very important and these
memberships are need to be
regulated because quite frankly
it's pretty much a predatory
Salam.
A piece of that these companies
are doing so with that I think
we have reached the part with
their methods of.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
sharing this important issue we
do provide ICU level care so
Representative as Representative
Dow point out you know this is
not shopping for health care
this is not an instance where a
patient can tell their doctor
eight brought membership but
this company you can't dispatch
the other helicopter and to wait
for this one even though they
can read to transport needs
three hours from now this is
really an instance where we need
to put the care of the patient
first we're not seeing that
these membership products should
it be sold there may be some
people who feel like this is
actually really good additional
coverage for their family it's
just that they should operate as
a supplemental insurance product
they're also unique in that
aspect that they're being sold
by the provider there's not
really any other instances in
this of health care where you're
selling emergency care
additional supplemental coverage
from the provider and the
provider's billing your
insurance so because of that we
feel that it fits correctly
under OSI you can then look
further into the consumer issues
they can decide you know maybe
they need to regulate
reciprocity between planned so
that if a patient purchases one
of these policies it doesn't
matter what aircraft as it is
dispatched by the physician to
care for them you're gonna be
covered no matter what so we
feel that OSI is the proper
regulatory framework and then we
also really support that patient
advocacy and the disclosures to
Medicare patients you know
seventy percent of our Medicare
patients pay less than fifty
dollars out of pocket so because
of that I mean there's no reason
why the should really be sold to
seniors and seniors should it be
you know pressured into spending
their hard earned you know often
retirement income to buy
additional coverage that they
actually already have coverage
under Medicare for I'm happy to
answer any questions that you
may have.
Madam chair you know what I
forgot I think I was supposed to
be a substitute for the
consideration is that something
that I need to do now.
Yes okay and madam chair I I
would like to move that
substitute the committee
substitute for House Bill three
seventeen we consider to be
considered at that rate okay.
That madam chair if it's
appropriate I would move
adoption of the committee
substitute so we can continue
the discussion on the substitute
madam chair thank you is there
any opposition to accepting that
Committee substitute for House
Bill three seven we were.
Okay seeing none of your US
tested to.
Bill is expected can you is that
what you've been explaining
Representative.
Yes thank you madam chair yes
this is a generic bill and so it
it.
It's my first time doing a
generic bills had to be moved
out the substitutes and yeah
this is there's no changes this
is the first hearing and with
that we stand for questions okay
thank you.
we'll go to the audience and
we'll take up the whole.
Those who are in support and
those in opposition.
Please take the survey.
Okay we see how this.
The state even fifty fifty
With of.
Two people for two people yes
okay thank you.
All right we'll go to the
audience now of those who would
like to speak if you'll raise
your hand.
For those in support and
opposition we'll do opposition
first.
And do you have a one minute
to speak if you can see the
timer.
Let me see.
I don't see anyone who wants to
speak in opposition right.
Hello Weinberg from the office
of the superintendent of
insurance I thought I had raised
my hand to speak in opposition.
Madam chair okay I'm sorry it's
Gabby can you see the hands
raised it's not showing up on
mine amazing it again.
Madam chair.
Hey Representative I moved her
and her hand of up.
I'm oh I'm sorry I see it now
thank you.
Miss Weinberg if you'd like to
go ahead and speak in opposition
is that right.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee the
division director for the life
and health division
at the office of the
superintendent of insurance
thank you for taking my comments
today we read this propose this
bill with interest would like to
point out a couple of things
we're not
We're not seeing it not sure
that this is an insurance
product it seems the the bill
seems to of aides said the kinds
of regulatory topics that we
would be overseeing such as
whether there's reserves and
that there's proper you know
there's proper set up for the.
The for them as an insurance
company so we're not sure that
the OSI is the place to provide
consumers and consumer education
without having an insurance
product to regulate
the no surprises act that was
passed out of the.
Congress US Congress is here
late last year rather has the
note has a that was in the COVID
release bill covers air
ambulance now and that will go
into effect at the beginning of
twenty twenty two.
So this may this this.
Bill may be absolute be made
obsolete by then we are
concerned that these membership
bills can these membership
products are misleading that is
the individual has an accident
outside of the area that they
have the air ambulance.
They have a membership with that
particular air ambulance company
that there's they may think
they're protected but they're
they're not the OSI is
definitely interested in
discussing this further and
we're happy to have would be
happy to have longer
conversations about what could
be done to protect individuals
who
Maybe decide that they want to
be insured against excessive
cost for air ambulances and I
see my time is out so I will
thank you for allowing me to
speak on this and hearing of a
size concerns.
Thank you.
And are you going to be
available or
At.
Superintendent told we have any
questions further questions I
can be available throughout this
discussion and and and tend to
answer questions that you have
I'm pretty pretty sure I can
answer them okay thank you
appreciate that okay and.
And we'll go now to those in
support.
You'll raise your hand I'll see
at this time.
Anyway support who'd like to
speak.
Okay seeing none we'll go back
to the committee.
CP.
And we do like this I have any
closing words Representative Dow
and.
The words that you know right
before we go to the committee
thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee and
I think the fact that there is
not a at tons of people lined up
for public comment is a
testament to how far we've come
in the last five years in a
limiting surprise billing
Corinne the reimbursement rates
that we offer for Medicaid
Medicare and other at federally
and state funded coverage and I
do agree with the comments from
the secretary insurance that the
that the federal no surprise Act
makes members obsolete at but it
doesn't outlaw them it does make
them unnecessary but it doesn't
prevent them from occurring and
so what is the it insurance
product.
Is something that pulls risk
protects against financial loss
protects against unforeseen
health emergencies collect the
premium that is what these
memberships do you but they're
doing it outside of the
regulatory environment provided
by the superintendent of
insurance and so what we're
finding in New Mexico that are
senior citizens most of these
are sold to senior citizens
those that are already covered
and they're spending four
hundred dollars and more per
year for a membership to reduce
risk that is sold to create a
false integrity that is not real
they cannot use the helicopter
that that they that happens to
her transport them and in the
case of an emergency and at so
we're out of the superintendent
insurance help us close this
last step in eight ending the
the environment that had seen
predatory for air ambulance by
helping us regulate these
memberships and that'll stand
for questions.
Madam chair for some reason I
can't hear you.
I'm sorry of now we'll go to the
committee of representatives
Gail Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Dow for once
in bringing issues.
From rural New Mexico mostly
that that that come up so are
you are we the the one question
I I'm a little bit confused are
we talking about Madam chair
representative.
The insurance the additional
insurance it's called insurance
that people by to make sure
they're covered by hello if they
have to call helicopter.
Madam chair representative
that's the perception and that's
what people believe they are
doing when they buy these
memberships but what they're
actually buying is a membership.
And in New Mexico eighty percent
of the time it's not needed in
the first place because they're
either on Medicaid Medicare
covered by B. B. I. a war they
are and one of our NCOs which
all have air ambulance now in
their networks and so the
perception is that because in
the past there is these huge
bills they bought these
memberships it's not insurance
it should be insurance that's
why we're asking for it maybe
it's practically obsolete at
this point that's what we want
to superintendent insurance to
do so are buying this membership
for one particular air ambulance
company even though we have
multiple in our state so say you
buy one that's relevant to your
County and the helicopter parked
in your county it's a membership
not insurance membership with an
insurance would cover networks
these memberships cover that
helicopter.
So they're relying on people who
not need this in order to buy in
and then if you have an accident
you're in another northern part
of the state a different
helicopters there your
membership one didn't cover
anything it's not the right
helicopter company into you
didn't need it because you're
it's it's very very likely now
that your insurance covers it
anyway.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative Dow I
yes I by that membership.
I I by that membership not even
realizing possibly that
my daughter buys that ensure or
that membership and so it is pro
trade.
Like it's an insurance.
and it is
Promoted.
In my community.
Like it is an insurance and so
what you're bringing to my
attention is that I'm wasting my
money first of all
second of all the IAD and
several people in my community.
R. think they're covered in a
different helicopter shows up
they that membership doesn't
apply to any helicopter it only
applies to a certain.
Membership of for the certain
helicopter so
While I'm actually embarrassed
that I you know I didn't that
didn't come to my mind I thought
I was being safe for my family
living on a ranch in the middle
of nowhere
Accidents happen.
And.
God forbid any of us ever have
to call for the ambulance but I
just I so I don't really have
any questions but thank you for
that explanation and thank you
for looking out for I feel like
it's sort of predatory I'm
personally now I feel preyed
upon and and duped and I think I
think All My Children by it as
well by the membership so
they're making a lot of money
out of cost Magdalene in New
Mexico so anyway thank you I
don't really have any questions
but thank you for that
explanation.
Madam chair representative I
would just like to make sure
that if either one of my expert
witnesses if I have
misrepresented anything would
please correct me because I I
believe that if you have if the
helicopter Haaland membership
that you're part of if your
accident happened where the and
that helicopter picked you up
that company you would be
covered but any other Hawker you
up you would not that membership
would not cover you know
probably don't need it anyways
you should check with your
primary and CEO your primary
coverage.
Just ask to repeat it maybe
comment on that also but.
One additional comments is my
parents they're they're on
Medicaid Medicare excuse me and
they've been buying insurance
for many years and it's really
it's I needed so they cancel
their policy knowing that they
already have coverage but
received you have any comments
on that.
The representative question.
No Representative Representative
Dow you're correct it and from
the senior standpoint to enable
data that's actually been shown
on these products at the
national level is that they're
actually being sold to almost
ten percent one company is
selling on to almost ten percent
of the United States Medigap
market that's technically makes
on the second largest Medigap
products in the United States
except there's absolutely no
regulation over how much they're
charging you know especially
with the no surprises Act.
You know making these largely
obsolete because they should
only be covering copays and
deductibles if these are
regulated as insurance
technically once the payment to
cost ratios are actually
regulated by the state they
could be highly discounted
because instead of charging the
prices that are supposed to
supposed under right balance
billing liability now they're
only going to be on underwriting
copay liability so we think
that's another reason I was
higher in other regions you
should look at thank you very
much.
Thank you I just like to remind
our experts that you need to go
through the chair and and then
make your comment
so
is there anything else.
Okay next we have
Representative Anderson.
Thank you thank you madam
chairman madam chairman I'll be
short.
I just wanted to just the
sponsor something that I heard
in the and I hope that this is
not redundant to representative
Armstrong as I was.
Not listening Madam chair
representative I hear the
testimony of the federal.
Piece of legislation in and it's
going to take effect January
first I.
Two thousand twenty two.
and I think okay if we pass this
bill it'll go in.
Become law on July first and
then I wonder if by putting in a
six six month mandate I will
call it is I as I understand it
right now will that be helpful
or could it further complicate
things on January first two
thousand twenty two I hope you
understand my question thank you
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Anderson I
think I do understand the
question and what I would say is
that yes the federal no surprise
Act makes memberships obsolete
but there are air ambulance
membership providers they could
choose to stay out of network
and they could choose to
continue to sell consumer
policies but that is also that
would also be choosing to expose
can patients to higher costs
we've worked too hard for too
long to resolve the issue in
rural New Mexico to allow that
to happen so at the very member
anymore those air membership
policy premium should decrease
and they should only cover
copays and deductibles and it
needs to be regulated by the
secretary of insurance that it
is at that federal law the no
surprise Act.
Does resolve the issue but that
doesn't it doesn't close the
loopholes.
Thank you for that answer Madam
chair representative because I
believe it your answer is is
that not all the law is needed
because even after January first
two thousand twenty two there
are other elements within the
law that the federal law will
not be addressing is that
correct.
Miss madam chair and
representative that's because
the New Mexico these memberships
are unregulated.
I see so Madam chair
representative on that point
therefore this bill once it
passes and becomes law July
first is not completely think
again.
On January first two thousand
twenty two.
Because the provision that that
that requires the secretary of
I mean the insurance
the state insurance.
Secretary I'll call my no that's
wrong.
Of.
It will.
He will still be superintendent
thank you he will still be
burdened with the responsibility
and task and in analog that says
no no you still have to regulate
and in this insurance product
being sold in New Mexico
question.
Madam chair and representative
if we pass this bill then we
will be asking the secretary of
insurance to regulate this if we
do not pass the bill these
memberships will stay and
regulated and can continue to be
sold and so we what we've been
we've been.
Slowly picking away at the
surprise billing in the
exorbitant cost of emergency
flight of the air ambulance
flights and it important piece
of that was bringing all these
and some that work another
important piece was raising
enforcement right and so these
error ambulances can still
choose to stay out of network.
And they can still choose to
sell these memberships and we
need to regulate that because
the note we need to regulate
that because the the no surprise
Act gives a solution.
Maybe I.
I'd like to ask because we are
talking about the offices to
bring insurance if we could ask
miss Weinberg if she could weigh
in on this question.
Okay now I'm not muted thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee for me to comment on
this I I just want to point out
that these memberships are non
insurance products and nothing
in the bill and I want to say
first of all that that we
commend the Representative for
bringing this concern because.
It's really a misleading product
as Representative Armstrong was
talking about in feeling
embarrassed about but there's
nothing in the bill that you
that allows us to regulate this
product because it's not
insurance and that we would not
have it's like pre tend
insurance is really almost it's
not really a supplement because
it almost like a Medicare
supplement because it applies
only to one carrier one air
ambulance we are interested in
getting rid of or dealing with
these kinds of misleading
drugs that cause people to think
they are insurance again this is
not insurance and we have no way
of regulating it based on the
language in the bill we are very
interested in discussing with
representatives who who again it
has made great progress in her
work with others to rein in
these behaviors of air
ambulances.
But we need to sit and talk and
figure out exactly what the bill
should say and although the no
surprise that does go into
effect in twenty twenty two
there's no provision in there
that would prohibit these air
ambulances from continuing to
sell these kinds of membership
so we are very much interested
in New dressing the entire
problem
issue and I will say that I
believe in North Dakota and
Montana to states with lots of
wide open spaces they've banned
these kinds of products all
together and I believe other
states regulate them as
insurance which means they have
to have reserves they have to
meet all the regulatory
requirements and statutory
requirements that apply to a an
insurance product.
Thank you
I am I.
Wanted to let your other expert
Representative down to I think
you wanted to speak.
Madam chair members of the
committee that's the.
it's these things memberships
are being sold kind of as
insurance yet they're not paying
any of premium insurance premium
tax and the been scurrying I
mean when we're when we pay our
health insurance costs we have
to pay a premium cost any type
of insurance would pay in state
New Mexico we give back with we
pay into the general fund a
premium tax maybe it's not
general fund but it goes to the
offices of stupid insurance so.
And that's what we're trying to
say is you gonna sell it is
insurance and we need to you
need to pay your property taxes
on your premium tax and
so
we're simply under this simply
asking for consumer protection
on these products.
With the.
Thank you madam chairman this is
Representative Anderson
finishing his questions and with
the statement madam chairman
the path forward is not crystal
clear to me because we're asking
the superintendent of insurance
to
to provide consumer protection
and
create the.
Revenue to the state through
insurance premium taxes paid to
the state on a product that
arguably or I am confused as to
whether or not it's insurance
for membership and
I I think they Sanchez made in
an excellent argument for the
need and the therefore I am up
Finished with my questions thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Lord.
Madam chair can you hear me yes
we can hear you thank you so
much I don't know what it is
about this computer and I
apologize from day one I've had
nothing but issues with the
sound system so thank you for
that I'm so.
Interesting.
There's as well because I've
been working in the insurance
industry for ever and as a
motorcycle rider you get
bombarded in a minute I just
looked at the wording on how
this it because it always
telling you if you don't get
that that this life insurance.
You're going to be out in the
middle of nowhere you're going
to crash and you have no way to
get to the hospital so I'm
looking for here.
And it's insurance err ambulance
insurance air ambulance
transport insurance understand
air ambulance insurance and now
it's not an insurance it's a
membership and I almost feel
like there's a massive do being
of motorcycle riders because
this is they had us the most
they tell us you know you're
going to need insurance
Your life depends on it so I'm
kind of really frustrated with
that with the air ambulance with
with the way that is marketed
towards motorcycle riders but
neither here nor there my
husband was involved in a
horrific motorcycle accident we
were in Wyoming about forty five
minutes south of rock springs is
back tire blew out and I thought
he was dead and all I cared
about was getting him to some
sort of care and the first thing
I really spend no cellphone
coverage so I to get somebody
did right up on the top of the
hill go up the hill go call an
ambulance and then come back and
tell me that they did it I don't
know.
About forty minutes the longest
fourteen to my life for the
ambulance to get out there and
once the ambulance got out there
they then called for a life
flight and I'm incredibly
grateful that we have life
flights because that saved him
yet punctures long and broken
ribs and Brocard just fine and I
mean he had a lot of injuries on
that some incredibly grateful I
am kind of frustrated.
Because when it happened the
first thing I thought of his own
then we don't have life flight
insurance and how are we going
to pay this forty fifty thousand
dollar bill because it took on
it be life flighted to Salt Lake
City and it was an hour and a
half flight to get from Wyoming
to Salt Lake City and I was like
how are we going to pay this is
going to ruin as well turns out
Medicare paid for and even now
and that super very sing for
somebody who knows about
insurance and I didn't know that
Medicare was going to cover that
cost.
So I was incredibly grateful
that it was paid for we had no
cost I think it was between
chair and as secretary of USA a
that cover the.
Cover the cost but that this is
one of those real life
situations where I was nervous
from month waiting for this huge
bill to come in and it never did
and I was incredibly grateful
that it didn't so I think if
anything there should be I guess
truth in advertising maybe would
be applicable to this but I I
dress a lot about surprise bills
that I appreciate this bill
coming forward and thank you
that's all of us is going to
tell my story about how.
I didn't know about this be
covered under Medicare and I was
grateful that less so thank you
for that ma'am yup my time and.
Sorry Representative Trossachs I
keep muting because we have
workers making noise salaries
madam thank you so much no I
just I I learned a little bit
about that I also the self
have those kind of experiences
in thing I have a I have I guess
a membership will have to go
look it was surprised but I
think I'm thankful to
the representative for bringing
this legislation forward and
making us aware of what's going
on and so I am looking for
supporting her bill thank you so
much.
Your muted madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Armstrong did you have a follow
up question no ma'am but what I
would like to do is I'd like to
move it do passed with no
recommendation because it goes
to commerce next.
And so I would like to make that
motion madam chair I'd like to
work on it so.
I second second I would like to
make a substitute motion to
table.
Okay there's been a substitute
motion to table which
Alright and that okay and a
second so we will take a vote on
a motion to table I just like to
add that I think because this
isn't really an insurance
product that it's a really
not fair to ask the office of
insurance to regulate this or to
have the programs and
If we just.
So we'll go for the vote.
What we take calls will come.
Motioned to table Representative
Phelps Anderson.
No in to explain my boat thank
you.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
No with an explanation as well.
Representative Nibert at us.
Yes.
Representative Karen bash yes.
Representative Stephanie lord
no.
Representative Marian Matthews.
He's excused okay.
Representative Roger Montoya.
No to table but I'd like an
explanation.
Representative Lewis that are
assessed.
No to table I'd like to explain.
Representative Liz Thomson.
She's excuse.
Representative vice chair joined
Ferrari yes to table.
We have three ball and I am not
to.
Okay we will go back to the
first motion then to
two Purdue passed with no
recommendation we please call
the roll again.
Representative.
Anderson.
Yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong
yes.
Representative.
Representative.
Cost no.
Representative Stephanie lord
yes.
Representative Marian Matthews
is excuse.
Representative Roger Montoya.
No.
Representative Lewis off the.
Yes.
Representative Liz Thomson.
vice chair Joe and for our.
No.
So we were and for.
By and madam chair was excuse.
Thank you so with the time
though the forty four on the
motion for do passed with no
recommendation that the bill is
in limbo so would just have to
leave it.
Madam chair pointed
clarification.
In my mind means that for today
we've taken no action and at a
future date of.
Of Representative a member of
this committee could ask for
consideration to bring the issue
forward to.
In question.
Representative Anderson no that
just means this bill is in limbo
it is hasn't been tabled
for it to be brought back it's
just
And so to speak rolled over I
believe that I can get
clarification on.
Madam chairman thank you very
much for that clarification I
think it's sort hybrid of all of
our.
Interpretation of limbo but I do
understand that it is well thank
you madam chair thank you thank
you Representative Dow for
bringing this forward okay Sir
thank you members.
Next we have Senate bill one
twenty two as amended non
pharmacist used to insignias are
Senator Ortiz CD now.
Thank you.
Chairman and members of the
committee this bill is one that
you probably saw last year
a couple of times we brought
forward
it's a bill that deals with the
kind of a strange situation our
pharmacy board has set of laws
the government I don't know this
is one that says if you use
these words or the symbols you
you violated the law you you are
you are misrepresenting yourself
as a pharmacy.
One of those is the R. X. symbol
that we all come to see in many
places in many locations we see
those funds you see it on
exercise equipment you see it in
and and even medical cannabis
dispensaries use that are a
symbol it's taken a meaning
beyond pharmacy
so this bill is one that was
brought to me by a constituent.
It's money Gaddis who operates
owns and operates the system
you're in central time see in
Albuquerque.
Thank you Mr next door to her
pharmacy and she calls it remedy
remedy coffee shop and the our
hand as little tax on it.
The pharmacy board after we
received the some notice about
this Sen she couldn't use that
they wouldn't
Analyzer the issue is we simply
get a lot of amended and so for
two years we've been trying to
get the love amended.
In order to find out there it's
a little expanding now because
in the in the Senate the word
apothecary was also added to the
items being deleted from the
list of provision
words or symbols.
Because of this area is also now
so widely used in so many
different contexts it really
does not have the unique meeting
for our pharmacy owners in
Albuquerque received by the
Kerry lounge.
And and people had many examples
of the uses of the word I carry
so that was added to the bill
and I think my expert witness
money yet this is your madam
chairman if you're in there she
can explain in more detail what
we're trying to do is Senate
bill one twenty two.
You're you're needed madam
chairman.
Is going to have to leave it on.
I was a Gaddis if you'd like to
go ahead and say a few words.
I'm yes so my name is yes Mona
Gatiss again I'm with Duran
central pharmacy in Albuquerque
and the senator.
Image covered everything
I've been a pharmacist for
almost thirty years I did go to
the board and one of the board
members even and you know how
sad that wow this is an archaic
statute and it probably does
need to be sexist has there's a
lot of big corporations that use
that are at symbol as well and
it's going to be problematic so
the board of pharmacy to go
after all of these different
companies to
you know get them to change
their law governs our I'm or
there are use of the logo so I
would encourage you to vote yes
on this bill thank you.
Thank you I'm I used to work
downtown at QB TV and we would
go to Duran pharmacy for the yes
read us and our.
So anyway thank you
we will go to the audience and
of course Senate bill one twenty
two and is and take a poll.
Those in favor or
In opposition.
Do we have that there we go.
We have two people one of the
few more.
And support okay so it's
Changing.
Okay three people in support and
one in opposition let's uh is it
would anyone like to speak in
opposition.
They just called and those in
support.
Raise your hand please.
Lois Representative.
This is Amy and I'm giving you a
call from the dealer.
Okay I don't think anyone from
the audience would like to
speak.
And I'm seeing that correctly
calving.
Okay.
Representative Montoya did you
have we'll go to the panel again
in would you like to say
anything else as senator.
Gentleman.
Regis you Representative time
last year and we are
introducers.
Senator
allows for.
Okay thank you we'll go ahead
and go to the the committee and
I have of.
Representative Anderson first
that Representative Montoya was
there something you wanted to
add before we start.
No there there was not okay
thank you
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman of
Senator Representative
I listen to this bill for the
first time and thank
it sounds like we're on a on a
positive trail but I did have a
question and I'm going to focus
on the word apothecary and if
you could quickly review.
If this bill passes what happens
to the word apothecary being
displayed to the public where is
the restriction or are things
remain the same question.
Representative Anderson I
believe internet internet net
effect would be here there in
the currently all right for that
we're going to be used in
connection with a drug store but
in the restriction Center and
sourcing me is in connection
with any number of other
businesses
shout the.
It does not restrict.
As you is still means we're
faster Cherry one implied that
descriptions.
The soldier.
Thank you.
madam chair and therefore.
In the case of the word pots to
carry things would simply remain
the way they are now question.
Eight and then chairman and and
Representative from for most of
the the symbol of the R. X.
symbol and the word apothecary
place would go on it would just
mean that people who use them
would not be subject to the.
Possibility of penalty from the
pharmacy board.
Thank you
Senator madam chair that
concludes my questions.
Thank you Representative I don't
see is there anyone else
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator for your
presentation good to see you by
the way so one of the questions
I have is this a
I can't even think the word.
Like you know when you have a
business name.
And you someone else tries to
use your name and your hand it
right column like to copy right
or it's in in licensing some
kind of a proprietary terms yes
so is this I mean are we
removing.
That and allowing people are are
we going to get more of these.
You know what like the little
cross symbol that paramedics
have on their
and nurses and that kinda like a
doctor would have is that going
to be next for people and just
use that I'm just curious is
this opening a door.
To for more people to be to come
forward with things like this.
Madam chairman and and
representative Armstrong right I
mean I who knows what the future
holds you know we have any
number of examples of things it
used to be.
I have only one meaning it only
be used in that and then we
started passing laws to say that
you cannot use at eight seven to
that connection and this is an
attempt and saying we've we've
long since lost that connection
to these two things up I don't
know more bowls or the the.
Medics little process sees my
showing that in the future but
we know right now that neither
of good part of the hearing or
that are acceptable are in most
people's minds any longer
exclusively using connection
with the placing the issued this
self descriptions are very.
And so many other uses that
we're just trying to clean up
the statute information possible
for people like Mrs guest to to
use important her coffee shop
next order drugstore.
Okay thank you madam chair and
senator so yeah I would be like
a trademark almost.
Yeah and I think you Kurt for
texting me I couldn't find the
words like delirious currently
so anyway I that's my only
concern I understand completely
and and but you know like our
company has a certain trade mark
and so are we opening.
That whole notebook up sorry
just a concern but
I understand exactly where
you're coming from so thank you
madam chair and senator.
Thank you
Representative tur Office.
Thank you madam chair Senator
and I'm sorry center I've been I
was trying to do two things at
once and up not too good at that
I guess I have to Representative
bill one and and and trying to
trying to keep up with this
committee so Senator Madam chair
Senator so when you say I just
caught the kind of part of the
end so
You were some someone that
wanted to use the R. X..
Coffee shop next to her
pharmacy was up is that right
yes.
And and do you mind me asking
not madam chair US senator why
why she needs that.
Madam chairman maybe we we I
absolutely yes I left in the
status explain why this was
important.
I'm.
The reason.
And that this might be a little
confusing but so the R. X.
symbol has now come to signify
wellness and it's a it's a
remedy for wellness and we
thought it was inappropriate you
know part of the logo to to
signify this is a coffee shop
you know we're promoting
wellness and and you know good
spirit and that kind of thing so
there's no copy right I I just
want to say on the are
accessible
and its use for granola bars you
know there's an R. acts far
that's a granola bar there's and
our X. all and as the Senator
previously said there's spa's
exercise equipments there's even
trails Bernalillo county system
that are called our next trails
they don't dispense any drugs
The New Mexico pharmacists
Association which I'm past
president of use the are at
symbol in your logo they do not
dispensing the drugs so this is
this is just widely used and
it's basically it's against the
law The New Mexico law to use
all of this and so I'm trying to
get get rid of that and make it
easier on the board of pharmacy
so they don't have to go after
all of these people and I just
wanted to say one more thing
with the that the cross that was
previously spoken about that
minute cross.
In the pharmacy its use in many
things it's used for eight two
eight you know product you know
that that symbol is also
universally known as you know at
a merchant see medical but they
use it on different products
that use it on hand sanitizer
use it on a lot of different
products that no that's not
saving your life
a lot of these symbols are care
in widely used in we're just
asking that it doesn't matter if
people use of symbols.
Okay is there anything else.
Interest because my whole
computer discretion and came
back up so I just I heard the
last thing I heard was the the
pharmacist had you don't have to
go after these people and then
it just crashed sorry if that
was your side but for me was my
computer.
Representative right.
Basically just summarize what
we're saying is we're this is
cleanup of the so language in
our laws that really doesn't
make sense anymore and we're
trying to bring the law into
compliance with in the pharmacy
was what the real world is like.
Thank you madam chair thank you
center I and I'm sorry it just
crashed but I think that's more
thank you so much.
Thank you I'm just seeing no
other
Committee members of the would
like to ask questions what is
the will of the committee.
I move past.
Okay and.
All right Senator Senator I'm
sorry Representative Anderson
made a motion for do pass and a
second by Representative bass is
there any objection.
To do past.
Okay I see none
I guess we should take role
though so we know how many and
use all year
Diller's you go ahead and take a
role yes ma'am Representative
called Senator.
Yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Karen bash yes.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Yes.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Lewis that
awesome.
Yes.
Representative Liz Thomson.
She still excused vice chair joy
and Ferrary yes and that is the
total of eight.
Representative Gail Armstrong
did you say.
Yes I arrived back in time okay
good that's eight four three
excuse.
Okay thank you Senator Ortiz if
you know you have a do pass
On Senate bill one twenty two as
amended thank you madam chairman
would be possible to do my other
bill right away so I.
Going to my rules committee.
Yes Sir.
This Madam chairman.
Senate bill two hundred changes
is also one that you saw last
year yes excuse me before you
get started we'll go ahead and
bring in Gabby if you would
bring in Representative Eli
Senator Kernan is already here
Dr Scrase.
Paul Rick's mother Carl are
Kerry army ho.
Your need to loose.
Justice Judith N. B. hill and Dr
Jane David R. and then they'll
be ready for the when we're done
with this bill.
Okay go ahead Senator I'm sorry.
Thank you madam chairman and and
committee members this Senate
bill two hundred is a bill that
you've seen before
Passed the house passed the
Senate last last year actually
when I got to the governor's
office
Some of the.
We're not just in the state
trail hundred to to be sure we
exceeded we met with them we met
with the governor's staff we.
Change the language so much so
we're back again with the tele
dentistry Bill this is a bill
that comes to me tell industry
and regulation or legislation.
Parallel R. R. B. A. R. R.
telehealth legislation and.
We think we've got all of us
were gentry the I'm not sure
they're here to speak under the
dental association to dental
society said the supported now
and so we would like to to move
ahead with this and my ex from
witnesses about park and I think
she's in the room.
Yes.
Would you like to say a few
words Mr park thank you very
much madam chair good morning
committee members I'll part with
just of this half of the
American teletext Association
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino is correct
this is a piece of legislation
that passed the both chambers
actually was two years ago and
there were some issues with
respect to which making site
language that was objected to by
the orthodontist working with
the New Mexico dental society we
have removed all of the
objectionable language and
really this bill simply imports
the existing statutory language
from the New Mexico telehealth
factor into the dental practices
act to modernize the scope of
practice for dentists to be able
to provide care in rural
communities as well as to
underserved populations madam
chair with that I'll be happy to
answer any questions that you
were the committee.
Thank you is there anything else
Senator that you.
No that's it.
Okay well go to a poll of the
audience those
the survey.
If you're in support please
check that any in opposition.
Give them just a minute.
Okay there's one person support
one in opposition.
Okay will go to the audience is
there anyone you would like to.
Speaking in opposition to this
bill is just and so we don't
have people confuse this is the
tele debt dentistry definition.
Okay I see none any and support
anyone who would like to speak
in support of this bill.
Okay we have Mister strands
that.
Sorry yes yes madam chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Tom script some a dentist in
Albuquerque and the executive
director New Mexico dental
association
we are in support of SB two
hundred as it's been amended and
are looking forward to being
able to kind of expand the use
of tell dentistry and and so as
a result of the so thank you.
Thank thank you I see no other
people of what wish to speak
we'll go to the committee.
Are
there any questions okay
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair of I think
my question is it is so short
one.
And that I'm always interested
in
Rural friendly and up
underserved New Mexicans
receiving improved health care
including dentistry I can take
all my knowledge of the industry
and it would not fill a thimble
and that would be an
overstatement so Senator
we are merely
defining.
A new form of practiced.
That needs definition in order
to advance in order to advance
health ministry question.
Representative Anderson I I
think absolutely you use your
under center.
What we're what we're trying to
do is to do what we did with the
surgical health some years ago
and mental health all along as
well.
That is to make it possible for
the expertise of the dentist in
this case to be able to reach
injured parts of the country
side that otherwise would not be
able to be served by a dentist
another would probably still
have to be hygienist or dental
technician there to to do any
hands on substance needed but it
would be under the under the the
supervision and the and the.
The experience of the of the
dentist the service will be
provided and this line would
make it possible for that to
happen.
Thank you senator for that
answer and I wish you the best
of luck is this move forward I
hope thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative.
I see no other questions from
the committee I at
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Madam chair I'd like to move it
to pass.
Charles second.
Thank you have a motion for do
pass in the second.
Is there any opposition or what
will go ahead and take roll
call.
Sanderson I don't yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong
yes.
Representative Representative
Britney but I.
Yes.
Representative.
H. yes.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Representative Marian Matthews.
She still works.
Representative Roger Montoya
yes.
Representative Lewis at office
yes.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Going back to Representative
step in the lord.
Representative vice chair Joanne
Ferrari yes.
The total of eight and three X.
gets.
Thank you Senator you have a do
pass
I'm your house Senate bill two
hundred as amended.
Madam chairman and members of
the committee.
Okay next we'll go to.
We'll get you changed this will
be Senate bill one forty as
amended child support changes
thank you Senator Kernan for
being patient and let's see if
we have everyone
Brought in as your experts
C. Representative.
Madam chair I'm here this is
wrong and we live okay
and Dr Scrase I see Paul Ritz
smaller
Kerry army ho
Jeremy to lose just as students
Vigil is levy.
I'm sorry you changed.
I got it thank you.
Do we have I just promoted her
but right here I thought the
name was different yes.
We apologize judge levy
and also Dr Jean the nor.
He's here.
Okay there we go.
Yes would you like to present
your bills Madam well thank you
very right I'm gonna start I I
was going to I I will start and
then I will turn a reserves
replacement that's okay couple
things yep that for those people
that do not believe you can be
in two places at once they're
wrong in fact I see one of your
wayward members in my other
committee Marian Matthews is
over you're presenting and I
also and I can double top
schools rules chair to bills ago
you had a bill that's in limbo
anybody can bring that basically
out of limbo you were all right
and so good job on the rules.
You.
Very quickly and I will turn
over secretary during you have
seen this before in a house bill
one ninety which passed out of
committee unanimously
this is the child support bill
black in the Senate we've got
amended and so what we're gonna
talk about today are the
amendments to that bill and
since secretary I'm sorry
Senator Kernan and secretary
Scrase are kind of leading the
charge on that I thought it
would be appropriate should we
turn it over to secretary I
think and keep doing that that's
what's happened with three hours
of sleep
and I all right so I'm gonna
turn it over to Senator Kernan
and secretary Scrase let's start
with the senator madam chair if
you don't mind I'm gonna yield
her and we're talking about the
minutes.
Thank you thank you very much
Representative Ely and certainly
at madam chair it's really good
to be before this committee
again I've been listening I I
always enjoy participating in
just saying what's going on in
the house and Representative Ely
is exactly correct the bill did
get amended in Senate judiciary
and I do want to say thank you
to the members of that committee
they always I think make the
bill better and that's what they
did in this particular case so
you've heard that that the main
purpose of the bill I believe
earlier and at this time I do
want to turn it over to Dr
Scrase to cover what you through
the amendments from Senate
Judiciary Committee if that's
okay madam chair.
Yes please proceed yeah all
right.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee we appreciate your
patience having us back one more
time just want to have also take
a minute to thank all of you you
know I your our home committee
in the Human Services department
we take care of over a million
New Mexicans and we're really
all very impressive artwork
again this session little sleep
to improve the health of New
Mexicans and so thank you for
that I'm kind of your more order
mentally today you've got a
little deck of slides we we
prefer not to revisit that the
jets Development policies behind
the jail since you've already
debated that was ask great
questions will be those
contributed to make the bill
better and what basically this
bill is one that's necessary for
us to comply with federal got up
federal laws regarding child
support allows us to retain
almost a hundred fifty million
dollars per year in federal
funding and expands the
ultimately the amount of money
children in New Mexico get non
constructive parents that kids
can grow up being kids very nice
feature I am the Albuquerque
journal this morning about the
bills and sent out
Representative because of your
limited time and with your
permission I'm and that troubles
over to all right it's not our
general counsel we just briefly
walk you through the amendments
we're not trying to hurry this
but just respect your time and
more open immediately after that
in questions out an ad that
anyone has about the amendments
or if we need to the bill thank
you madam chair.
And with that I'd like to add
your number that on Wall
response.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for taking
on this bill one more time the
amendments that were made in the
Senate there were a few
technical amendments which I'm
not gonna go into they were just
cleanup for from the drafting of
a very long bill the two
important concepts that Senate
judiciary tackled was the
reserve raised in the bill the
original language that talked
about him shooting income or not
impugning income to the
custodial parent who had a
disabled child was caring for a
disabled child or child under
six we took that language and we
moved it or they moved it to
another section where that's a
consideration that the judges
have can give to imputed income
and it was a very important and
and
good amendment to the bill the
second substantive amendment
that was made was a safe by.
Representative Ivey Soto to make
sure that we didn't disturb
health insurance coverage and we
were following federal
guidelines are federal law on
health insurance coverage and
that was added into the bill as
well those are really the in a
nut shell the amendments that
were made to the bill as Senator
Kernan said the Senate Judiciary
did a wonderful job of improving
the bills and it's a it's right
to go.
Will stand for questions madam
chair.
Okay thank you will go to a poll
of the audience.
Those who are in support or
opposition please.
Do we know.
Came a condition other.
Hey there's two people and it's
fifty fifty.
So thank you include anyone in
the audience like to make any
comments if you'll raise your
hand if your are in opposition
to this bill.
And you would like to speak.
Okay seeing none at the person
who is in support would you like
to state the works.
Please raise your hand.
Okay no one would like to make a
comment so we'll go back to of
the committee are there any
closing remarks that
anyone on your panel would like
to make yes
members of the you just briefly
up you may recall Secretary
Blalock from CYFD and Elizabeth
Groginsky we're here speaking in
support of the last I may
volunteer their services again
but by Justin that I promised
them I would convey to you
they're on board support for
this important legislation have
the judgment Mexico thank you
thank you madam the like option
yeah madam chair except for all
those compliments of Senate
judiciary I totally agree with
the comments that were.
Dr Scrase and Mr Richmond so
thank you.
Thank you at Senator Kernan.
Know what will stand for
questions that I have a panel of
people ready to answer thank you
yes.
I think you almost out number
our our committee.
okay so and we will go to the
committee or the you see.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair I just got
that hand raising situation down
I moved to pass.
Wow that's is there are there
any no I see no other comments
do I hear a second because it.
Okay I think it was Roger
Representative Montoya is yes
you have the second so we have a
motion for a do pass we will
take a vote even though I think
it's going to be unanimous of
just to make sure we have a
remind you is present so of
dealers if you would take a roll
call yes.
Yeah
stand.
Representative pulp Sanderson.
Representative Gail Armstrong
yes.
Representative Britney but a hot
yes.
Representative.
H. S..
Representative Stephanie lord.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes I'd like to make a brief
comment at the end.
Thank you Representative Lewis.
Yes ma'am.
Representative Liz Thomson.
Yeah.
Representative Liz Thomson.
I am out again for another bill
okay Representative Phelps
Anderson.
Yes okay thank you
Representative Stephanie lower
yes.
Representative the Marian
Matthews cystic excuse.
vice chair Joe and for our.
Yes and I'd like to explain my.
So go to Representative hello
what is our count I'm sorry nine
and and to excuse
right Representative until it.
Madam chair and.
Madam chair and Senator Kernan
and not sure if she's still on
board yes yes she.
With us on behalf of New Mexico
and our children I I'm so
heartened to see bipartisan
bills coming forward you know
it's hard to not do right by
kids but this is really
important and that's it I I
yield back.
Thank you and I just like to
explain my vote that totally in
support I.
Let through this myself plus see
our next generation of grand
kids having to go through this
with their parents so I really
appreciate that this is going
forward and
and good luck getting through
everything.
You do have a due pass with
nine in favor and two excuse so
thank you all for being with our
committee what's more thank you
madam chair and I want to thank
the committee and if I could
just I want to thank judge lady
I know Dr Scrase is very pleased
at the fact that she was able to
be here as well as all the panel
and I certainly appreciate your
support thank you so much thank
you Dr Scrase you had something
I wanted to thank god judge levy
as well you're we've been
working on this for five years
and and all of that work is come
to this point today what one
more stop and were sat thank
you.
Okay thank you all very much
thank you madam chair.
You're welcome Representative
thank you to.
Senator.
Okay that was our agenda for
this morning
I'm not missing anything in my
the dealers are occurring.
My brain this morning but no
ma'am I like to go back to the
first but also it's just on
hold.
Right it's basically
tabling motion as our
Representative Eli.
Commented that as rules he would
know so.
Thank you.
Madam chair.
it probably goes without saying
that representative Armstrong
texted us this morning and stand
indicated there are no bills yet
for Monday so Monday's meeting
is a little bit
in limbo at the moment.
Thank you are yes that was one
of my announcements and I'm glad
that you can verify case you
would get them first
We won't be needing next Monday
possibly most pop.
Most predictably but if there is
are any changes
we can announce them tomorrow.
It from the floor having floor
session tomorrow so thank you
committee I think that was a
good morning and
and those of you who have more
built another committee of other
senator committees good luck.
Thank you.
And and thank you audience who
is here with us.
Thank you madam.
Out today thank you did really
wonderfully thank you.
Of.
I need more coffee yes.
You all have a good day.
