Representative Montoya.
Representative Parajun.
Representative Silva.
Representative Terazas.
Representative
Maddened by Cercadina.
Here
And Chante I'm here.
We have a quorum, folks. We're
gonna shuffle this agenda around
this morning. So we will have a
House Bill 548 on first, and
then we'll then, uh, I've, I've
alerted the other two
representatives that they will
go on 2nd and then 3rd, so
without the further ado as well,
uh, Chairman Small, good
morning. Thank you for coming
and joining us this morning.
Those chairs are a little funky,
they go down.
I think it's just cause I'm
heavier and they go down for me.
But um
Uh, you are on first with House
Bill 548 oil and gas
equalization Tax Act and the
floor is yours, sir, whenever
you're ready. Great, thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you committee.
Um, Mr. Chair and committee, I'm
pleased to be here today to
present, uh, I want to note that
we have Mr. Mark Chaikin, uh,
from the tax and rev department,
Miss uh Miss Jennifer Fabian,
who is our uh deputy chief
economist at the LFC, um, both
are here.
in sort of technical capacities
only uh but their expertise is
deeply appreciated, Mr. Chair,
committee, um.
Say a few things to start with.
First, we're extraordinarily
fortunate, uh, to be producing
record levels of oil and natural
gas right now, Mr. Chair, I take
a look as probably many in the
room do every morning at the
price, uh, and every week at rig
count last week, our rig count
was 105. Our prices are in the
low 70s, high 60s when it comes
to oil and in December,
according to the energy
Information Administration, we
produce.
over 65 million barrels of oil
after a 40 year history of sort
of 5 to 7 million per month.
Uh, that's extraordinarily good
for the state of New Mexico.
Mr. Chair, within how we, uh,
sort of.
Work within our tax structure,
there's been a um a lack of
horizontal equity. There's been
an unequalization in the way
that oil and natural gas have
been taxed, going back to the
mid-nineties, what our research
shows, Mr. Chair, Committee, a
brief explanation is that in the
mid to later 80s, the federal
government sought to incentivize
production of natural gas from.
wider spaces in doing so they uh
instituted a federal tax credit
and our research shows that in
the early 90s, um.
The state of New Mexico, uh,
sought to compensate for that by
raising the emergency school tax
for an MCF of natural gas from
3.15 to 4.
And that stayed in place ever
since several decades, uh, and
now at a time uh back when that
was when natural gas was
obviously one of the more most
valuable commodities now at the
time more oil in our place in
the world oil market is.
Really, really important. Uh,
we're proposing equalizing that.
Mr. Chair, um, wanna make sure
that it's understood by the
committee. I know it's this
committee's practice to sort of
look at things holistically as
you do, Mister Chair committee,
um, the current deductions that
are in place in New Mexico is a
state that uh to do sort of uh
has deductions on the front end
before taxes are applied some of
our other taxes, which can be
found in the FIR some of the tax
and rev.
s
Um, clarifying the uh deductions
of royalty, transport, other
tax.
Are taken in the same way if
this proposal were to go
through, uh, as they are done
now on all of the other uh tax
structures.
Secondly, and that applies to
property or to production,
processing, other things like
that.
Mr. Chair, committee, um, also,
uh, in our first committee it
was brought up and I think it's
a fair point. There are two ways
to equalize, sort of raising,
well, three ways, raising one,
so and that's what this bill
currently proposes to do to
raise the effective severance
tax on uh oil on oil to 4
equalizing with natural gas, you
could another way is to reduce
the tax on natural gas that was
proposed that would obviously
To be a fiscal impact reduction
to the state you could reduce
the tax on every MCF of gas
that's severed from the state
from 4% to 3.15%.
Uh, this 27% tax increase can
also be done by sort of
equalizing a little bit in the
middle, and Mr. Chair,
committee, I want to throw that
out there, uh, because that may
be a way that we can look at,
um, increasing revenue from
particularly uh when oil is
severed from New Mexico, noting
that we're the 2nd largest
producer, one of the most
attractive places in North
America and the world to produce
one of the most low cost places
to produce.
Um, and also long term.
Mr. Chair, committee, um,
improving, uh not only reaching
horizontal equity for these two,
but improving slightly or
significantly rather the um
Sort of the climate for
production of natural gas as
natural gas production is, you
know, New Mex or New Mexico is a
very large producer.
the United States leads the
world and that is forecast to be
a very important source of
energy, uh, over the next
decades.
I've closed, Mr. Chair, just by
saying again, production is
important.
Um, as I've been very clear
production is a play has a core
place and is a key part of New
Mexico, uh, in the past,
certainly now and very much into
the future. This bill and its
horizontal equity yields the
best benefits for the state of
New Mexico, uh, while at the
same time continuing to keep us
as a very strong partner for
production. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Uh, let's go to the
audience or to, um, let's go
online first.
Do you have anyone online in
support or opposition. We have
one person.
3. OK, now, OK, it's gonna go
up.
Sure.
What are we doing in opposition
or?
That's, that's, uh, please raise
your hand if you're in
opposition of House Bill 548,
and we'll call you one by one,
those online.
Carla Sontag.
Hello, good morning.
Good morning, sir. Uh, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee
are Carlos, president and CEO of
the New Mexico Business
Coalition and with all due
respect, we strongly oppose
House Bill 548. We think it
poses a significant issue for
New Mexico businesses,
consumers, and our overall
economic health. Well, the bill
specifically targets the oil and
gas industry with an additional
tax.
Its impact reaches far beyond
the sector potentially
destabilizing the entire Mexico.
Oil and gas is the backbone of
our state and provides for the
physical health contributing
over $13 billion in state
revenue and we need to take care
of this industry. We talk about
it being one of the top places
to extract.
It's not because it's easy to do
business here. It's because we
have, we are blessed with a lot
of resources, but imposing an
additional tax on this heavily
taxed industry is unnecessary
and counterproductive. This is
gonna ripple through the entire
market. The entire economy
because it's going to raise
costs and we don't need to do
that. We're in a situation of
high inflation as it is and in
Mexico doesn't need to
contribute to that and make it
even more.
for the people who are
struggling.
Is it a concern for businesses,
but the consumers are gonna feel
it heavily. We encourage you to
please vote no on this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. If I can remind folks
to please keep their comments
brief. We do have uh other bills
after this one as well as I'm
sure a lot of commentary on
this, on this bill.
Next, Paul. Paul, good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, my name's
Pauling. I'm head of Rio Grande
Foundation, a think tank that
Deal with economic issues in New
Mexico, uh, simply put, tax
increase on the oil and gas
industry is completely
unnecessary. Anytime you raise a
tax, you make it more difficult
for that industry to succeed and
uh state New Mexico is already
awash in revenue from the oil
and gas industry.
With 61 billion.
Dollars in various sovereign
wealth funds according to a
recent report from the Santa Fe
Mexican. We simply
Don't need to and should not
unnecessarily raise a tax at a
time when this industry is doing
well, uh, raising the tax will
make it more difficult
unnecessarily to do business in
the state of New Mexico. Thank
you very much for your time.
Thank you, Paul. Next.
Terry. Terry, good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Terry Cole, president and CEO of
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce. I'm here today to
oppose HB 548. We just have one
simple question and it's with
all due respect to the sponsor,
why? Next fiscal year revenue is
estimated at 13.6 billion 3
billion higher than HB2.8
billion,
which contains a 6% spending
increase.
This is more than enough money.
No one in the state should
receive a tax increase. No one.
What we've learned from history
is that the gas rate was high
temporarily
because of federal tax credit
that disappeared over 20 years
ago. If we want to equal, we
should lower the gas rate. It's
too high. This would be a great
benefit to production in the San
Juan Basin, and the area
especially hard hit by the
closure of a power plant and a
coal mine raising.
taxes even though hidden
ultimately flows down to
consumers. Consumers already
reeling from inflation sticker
shock. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Please vote. No members of the
committee. Thank you. Thank you.
Next.
Nick, Nick, good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
committee. Thank you for uh
giving me a second to speak, uh,
my name is Nick McClellan. I
work for a company called
Monzano out of Rossville, New
Mexico, and I'd like to speak in
opposition to this bill. I
think, uh, one thing that's not
been considered with the
breakeven prices that have been
referenced as low as $30 a
barrel.
I think when you're a small
company like Manzano, this text
can be particularly punishing
because we
We have a lot of trouble
deploying large amounts of
capital like the bigger
companies, so we have to pay
full price for
drilling rigs completion crews,
and everything. So our
break even gets closer to 50 or
60.
Dollars per barrel.
So, when you're a larger
company, you have a lot bigger
runway, you can keep these guys
going a long time so that it's
not, they can get a lot lower,
but for us,
And for a lot of small
companies, I think this can be
Very punishing, so I, I would
like to ask you to please do not
pass this bill. Thank you. Thank
you, sir.
Jennifer.
Morning Committee.
My name is Jennifer Grass and
I'm the president CEO of
Economic Development Corporation
of County.
We push operations other states.
This would negatively impact
every aspect of life in County
and would be devastating to our
local nonprofit organizations
who care for our most at-risk
neighbors. We ask that you
please post a still.
Thank you, Jennifer. Thank you
for your brevity. Next.
That's all. OK, those in support
House Bill 548 online.
If one
too
Camilla
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Can you
hear me?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, 5 standing in
support of this legislation.
Our oil and natural gas for that
matter are enlarged part uh
publicly held resource extracted
off of our public lands.
There are record profits coming
from the distraction to
companies, most of which are
located out of state. It is our
right as citizens of New Mexico
to to provide these resources to
private companies or private
profits at the rates we
establish.
Thank you and pleased to support
the legislation.
Thank you. Nextel.
Good morning and members of the
committee. Can you hear me?
Yes, yeah. OK, great. Um, first
of all, we're not gonna drive
business elsewhere because um
the oil and gas is here, so that
is a false uh argument. The
second thing I'd like to say is
our texts are not in line with
other states,
um, I believe that uh chairman
spoke to this um in the last and
that's what the facts are. Um,
and so I would ask you to
support
548 equalizes the tax on oil and
gas. Thank you so much. I urge
your support.
Thank you. Anyone else?
One more.
Alyssa.
Melissa, good morning.
Thank you my support Sierra Club
and healthy New Mexico,
and we're strongly supportive of
this. Thank you.
You. Anyone else? Let's come
back to the, the room in the
audience, those in.
Opposition of House Bill 548.
These uh formal line.
Our tendon will hold a mic for
us.
Then we can make comment.
Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Jim Winchester. I'm the
executive director of the
Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico. Um,
this is a major tax increase of
25% on oil production in New
Mexico, and it does, as
mentioned, target one industry.
Now, one of the theories out
there is that this will not
matter to the oil companies as
they will pay it because the
geology is so good and profits
are so high. Uh, I'm here to
stand on behalf of my members to
say that that is
discompassionate.
wrong. The independence, the
smaller companies that I
represent calculate that this
will have a direct revenue loss
overnight of 40%. And that kind
of cut cannot be swallowed by
small companies who either will
have to sell, leave the state,
simply lay off staff, cancel new
developments or even shut their
doors for good. And committee
members, this is not fear
mongering. The fear is already
real, because in a seven year
period,
The number of oil and gas
producing entities in the state
of New Mexico has decreased from
2017 with 518 to 2023 to 414,
already a decrease of 40%. So
for small oil and gas companies
operating on thin margins, HB
548 will further perpetuate the
pushing of independence of the
solvency cliff.
We pose this punitive tax
increase that does not consider
the full impacts of what it will
do. Thank you.
Thank you. Next.
Good morning, Chairman of the
Committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
for the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce here in opposition of
House Bill 548. According to New
Mexico EDD, our tax climate has
been recognized by Ernst and
Young and the Tax Foundation for
its improvement, but too often
these tax changes aren't giving
the the proper time for
implementation before the
goalposts are moved yet again.
Economic diversification and
development rely on a stable and
predictable tax climate. House
Bill 548 does the exact opposite
by disrupting the ability or the
stability by imposing additional
burdens that increase costs and
increase uncertainty.
Such instability will likely
harm existing businesses and
undermine our state's overall
economic growth. We respectfully
oppose House Bill 548, knowing
it will harm current industry
and create an environment
unwelcoming to new businesses
and development. Thank you.
Thank you. Next.
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs for the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
We represent over 200 member
companies.
House Bill 548 decreases the
economics of wells in New
Mexico, making our state a less
attractive option for
development and production. New
Mexico hosts two of the most
prolific basins in the world,
but this bill ensures that it
becomes less attractive for
business development and growth
potential.
A production loss means a hit to
the state's budget. Less
resources for environmental
stewardship, potential increase
in abandoned assets and a loss
of jobs. The bill will slow
innovation, research and
development and technology
investment in New Mexico.
This is another punishment on a
politically out of favor
industry that provides
continuous technological
innovation and environmental
stewardship, nearly half of the
state's budget, over 100,000
direct and indirect jobs and
affordable, reliable, and
sustainable energy production.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next.
Chairman, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza,
executive director with New
Mexico IDEA, the statewide
economic development
Professional Association. We do
stand in opposition to the
legislation. Tax increases no
matter the industry create
uncertainty, raise costs and
discourage investment.
The energy industry is a major
driver of our economy and
increasing its tax burden sends
the wrong signal, not just to
energy companies, but to all
industries looking to invest in
New Mexico. Economic growth
depends on a stable, predictable
tax environment. We must ensure
that
All industries, whether energy,
manufacturing, or technology see
New Mexico as a place where they
can invest with confidence.
House Bill 548 moves us in the
wrong direction by expanding the
tax burden in a way that could
have ripple effects on our
broader economy. New Mexico idea
urges a no vote on the bill.
Thank you. Thank you, sir.
Next, good morning, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee,
Mike Miller, Permian Basin
Petroleum Association, uh, most
of my points have been made,
however,
We just, we just learned of this
measure less than 2 weeks ago.
We just feel that the
significance of this measure
should have been vetted during
the interim process so that we
could have had a hearty
discussion about all of the
needs and all of the
implications of this tax, but.
Based on the comments made by we
also oppose. Thank you.
Thank you.
Anyone here in support of House
Bill 548.
See no one?
And come back to the MIDI, the
committee, excuse me, for
Alesia, Representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you presenters, um, and
again, Mr. Chairman, trying to
get my head around this spill.
I'm looking at the FIR, Mr.
Chairman, on page 4, and I'm
looking at uh the Appendix A,
which demonstrates the New
Mexico oil and gas revenues and
which type of tax.
Um
I guess for me, Mr. Chairman,
the whole discussion around
equalizing a tax code isn't a
strong enough reason for me, Mr.
Chairman, to support a bill like
this. I feel that, um.
We have a Swiss cheese code as
it is when it comes to tax code.
If we were gonna do this, it
might make a lot more sense, Mr.
Chairman, that we look at
everything as opposed to just
um.
Natural gas, but the question
that I had.
Um, based on this chart that was
done by LFC, and I don't see it
on here, I don't see a dollar
amount any anywhere I'd like to
know what the federal, uh, lease
payment was to the state of New
Mexico and how much that was and
when we got the last amount.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
I'll take that question. I have
our, uh, revenue forecast,
consensus revenue forecast from
December up.
Our federal mineral leasing
payment last year in FY 24 was
$2.847 billion. OK, does
everybody understand that with
the state of New Mexico
receives.
It's over $2 billion in a
federal lease payment.
And how often do we receive
that?
I believe we receive it monthly.
I think it comes in.
throughout the year.
But the point is, is that that's
an annual amount, is that
correct, Mr. Chairman? Yes. OK,
so that's on top of what's
already coming in with severance
tax, right?
Um, so Mr. Chairman, um, I'm
not.
By any means an engineer don't
understand how hydrocarbons work
and what the differences are.
But, um, when it says on page 2
of significant issues the bill
addresses a long-standing
discrepancy between the tax
taxation of oil and taxation of
natural gas.
Um, but there are two different
kinds of products. Is that
correct, uh, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, they are to,
certainly there are two
different products, Mr. Chair, I
said they're fundamentally
similar though because they're
both um natural resources,
hydrocarbons that are severed
from New Mexico, uh, once
they're severed, obviously that
amount, that volume is will
never be seen in the state, Mr.
Chair, representative, which is
why the um
Uh, the severance taxes are
imposed, Mr. Chair
the sort of the.
Um
Yeah, they, they are, they are
not the same. They are the sort
of the same route, Mr. Chair
representative as a hydrocarbon
and Mr. Chair Representative,
um.
The value both to the state and
globally on sort of global
markets.
I think is increasing, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Uh, in our opportunity to
slightly lower natural gas while
we equalize oil is one that
would have uh multiple different
benefits.
So Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman,
in both cases they're different
ways of production, is that
correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, I
can't speak to all the technical
nature. I will say, Mr. Chair
Representative, you will
particularly in southeast New
Mexico, there is a great deal of
associated natural gas that is
produced with the oil. Mister
Chair represented that's sort of
been the foundation of a lot of
the
Um
Different issues and efforts
around venting and flaring. The
oil has been extremely valuable,
Mr. Chair Representative, while
the gas at times has been a very
low value, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, so oftentimes I
think they will be found in the
same place, in particular in New
Mexico in the southeast. That's
very much the case, but it's not
always the case, Mr. Chair
Representative, and you further
I just add, Mr. Chair
Representative, my understanding
is that there's more
infrastructure associated on
the.
front end was natural gas
production, which is why um a
higher tax rate is actually
probably a little bit more
challenging for the gas, uh, Mr.
Chair Representative.
Mr. Chairman,
In northwest New Mexico, we
don't necessarily need to have
oil production to have gas
production, is that?
Mr. Chair Representative, I
would say that's accurate.
Um
So, Mr. Chairman, I just feel
that at this time.
Particularly because I know that
we're getting federal lease
payments. I know that two
separate kinds of processes with
hydrocarbons, and as I said
before, I'm not a engineer and I
couldn't explain it technically,
but I won't be able to support
this bill. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, presenters.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to Speaker Martinez. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair,
good to see you expert. Um,
thank you for bringing this bill
forward. I know it's, it's, uh,
it's getting late in the session
and it, you know, if it gets, it
gets trickier to every big
pieces of legislation. I want to
address a couple of points I
heard in public comment.
Um, the notion that this
industry is politically out of
favor, um, it's just not
accurate.
Um, I think that I as recently
as
Friday, sat in this chair.
And made some very supportive
comments about the oil and gas
industry.
And I will continue to do that.
Uh, even though I represent the
district, uh, that is not.
In oil and gas country, um, that
is very liberal and
God forbid the P word
progressive in nature.
Uh
I take a lot of pride in going
back home.
And discussing how important
this industry is to the state.
Um, that's why I think when you
see
Um
You know, a lot of bills that
moved through this, this chamber
or don't move through this
chamber, it it's, it's because
we take a very critical look.
At everything that's in front of
us. So if this industry were
politically out of favor.
Um
I don't know that it would exist
here anymore.
That's just a fact.
Having said that, uh, Mr. Chair
and and representative, um, I do
want to
Uh, highlight.
That in your bill
You're looking at an increase of
less than 1%.
Less than 1%.
Make that clear, less than 1%.
Um, we've done, I think,
incredible work over the last
few years in this house to
Um
reform the tax code and it's
easier said than done. Trust me,
I've, I've sat over there, um,
you know, for many years.
Uh, but we've made tremendous
strides.
The fact that New Mexico ranks.
17th in childhood poverty, where
once upon a time we were 50th.
In large part because of the tax
work that this committee has
been doing, uh, under, under the
leadership of uh Chairman Lente
Vier Karena, a former chair
Chandler.
former chair Trujillo.
Um
It's, it's a testament to the
fact that this committee really
takes
A very methodical, slow,
analytical approach to these.
So,
When I see this bill come in
front of us. And trust me, I
see, I mean, I see every bill
you all introduced, so I get to
read it in.
Uh, sometimes I'm like, wow.
Was that really thought through?
OK, but everything goes in a 60
day session, so gotta introduce
it, gotta read it in.
But as I read this bill,
Um, before I, I, I, I referred
it to committee.
It makes a lot of sense to me.
You're looking at an increase of
less than 1%.
Um, to an industry that is
Um, by all accounts,
Doing very well in this state.
Um, and it's a
It's a relationship, Mr. Chair.
And, and Mr. Chair.
That is
Um, productive, and that is
respectful, um, it is a
relationship that I think we
value.
Because in fact we are blessed
to have what we have in the
state.
So
Notwithstanding some of the
ideological
Um, differences, right? There
are some of us who just will
never support a tax increase,
and that's fair. I get that.
Um, you know, I'm also not one
to just willy nilly want to.
Uh, you know, propose or accept.
Any tax increase just for the
sake of it. But I think what you
have here is a very well thought
out idea.
Where you will be equalizing
these rates.
Um, and in fact, maximizing the
benefit both for the companies
that are engaging in this work
and for the state for the next
few years to come, because this
industry, as we know, is
volatile.
Uh
You know, we talked a little bit
on Friday about
Folks who will tell you every
time that this sky will fall if
you do something or don't do
something, and, and yet again
here we are if we do this,
companies will leave.
Well
The oil is here.
Right, the
Some of the most productive.
Oil tracks are here, so if you
leave.
You taking the oil with you.
Extract it somewhere else.
You're not.
Now
There are a lot of other bills
out there.
That um you know, I haven't had
the pleasure of necessarily
hearing in my committees, but
There's stuff out there all the
time and we hear every single
time that the sky will fall if
you do this, if you do that, if
you do this, if you do that, at
some point we've got to be
honest with each other.
And ask ourselves, is this guy
really gonna fall?
Right? And
Based on my 10 years of
experience here, I don't think
it is.
Um, so I will
Absolutely be supporting your
bill.
Um, I don't think it's unfair. I
don't think it's a gross
overreach. I think it's a very
measured approach.
Uh, to bring
A tax rate
to the same level.
I don't know and you know I
don't need to ask you this. I
just wander out loud. I don't
know when that discrepancy
happened. I don't know why it
happened.
But this is an opportunity to
make it whole.
Understanding that there are
1000 different ways.
To
I was gonna say skin the cat. I
shouldn't see that. There are
1000 ways to drill for oil. Um,
and there's always room for
negotiation, and there's always
sunsets that can be discussed
and there are always uh ha ins
that could be discussed.
Um, and quite frankly, I think
the fact that, you know, if I I
look, if I look at the two
sponsors of this bill.
There are not
two better people in this entire
legislature to be carrying
something like this, people who
are open-minded, people who are
well respected people who can
negotiate.
Um, at the highest levels.
Um, so thank you for your work.
Um, thank you for your work as
well, um, and Mr. Chair, I look
forward to
More discussion and debate and,
and to hopefully seeing this
move through. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, let's go
to Representative Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Obviously argued this bill in
energy. I'm gonna have some of
the same arguments.
Uh, against this bill here, um,
Mr. Chairman, I think, I think
what.
What was just said is something
that I, I, when I'm sitting on
this text and and rev committee,
I really appreciate it.
Because I do think we look at
these bills.
And really put thought into and
we just argued.
Most recently, the Social
Security and we decided that had
to go to an interim just so we
could understand the full
impact.
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Chairman,
when this bill was written,
How many um of the industries
that are gonna be affected were
actually consulted to understand
what it would do to them.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
the um as we've talked about
this bill came together during
the session, Mr. Chair
representative, so it was not
part of the interim process.
However, Mr. Chair,
Representative, in looking back
at the history, this is a
Um
31 year history at this point,
Mr. Chair, uh, sort of where uh
the unequalization uh began and
Mr. Chair Representative, um, so
it was not a, it was not a part
of a robust interim
conversation, which is totally
fair, and in a very fair point
to make, Mr. Chair
Representative, in terms of sort
of our understanding of the
fiscal impacts. I do have pretty
strong faith that we understand.
Squarely the fiscal impacts
given um there's not a ton of
moving parts, and there's a
great deal of data uh around
production and other things.
There's a great deal of
knowledge uh within those. So I
think there's confidence in the
in the numbers that are on the
page.
But there was not a lot of uh
discussion or interim process,
fair to say.
Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair, I agree
with the analogy we do here, the
sky is falling a lot on a lot of
different things, um.
So I'm gonna throw out a story.
I know some of y'all don't like
stories, but it is one that's
stuck in my head as a child.
And I've
Really listen to the wisdom of
my dad.
So when I was a little kid, I
had a pinata.
We didn't get them very often,
but for my birthday there was
one.
And we hit that pinata and it
started dropping candy, and I
thought that was the greatest
thing I'd ever seen in my life.
Because we hit this weird thing,
and he fell out.
And I kept hitting it and
hitting it and more and more
found that fell out and at some
point it quit.
And I hit it a few more times
and my dad said, what are you
doing? I said, well, it has
candy in there. I know it, so
I'm gonna keep hitting it until
more candy falls out.
And he said, son, you've hit the
pinata so many times, there's no
more candy.
And that stuck with my head
because, yeah, I hear the, the
sky is falling.
But at some point, if we keep
going after just one industry
over and over and over, and we
call it an equalization tax,
which I'm going to ask more
questions on.
At what point
Is there no more candy? Do we
think about that when we're
methodically thinking through
these kinds of tax increases.
Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative. I
think it takes us all back, um,
Mr. Chair Representative.
The idea of severance taxes,
which, you know, were instituted
in the legislature well, well
before our time.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I think, um,
acknowledge that these are, uh,
once the resources are severed
from the state and we're very
fortunate that they're being
done so.
That severance taxes are one of
the core areas to uh for a
publicly owned resource at the
end of the day to have value for
the state of New Mexico. Mr.
Chair, um, I would point out,
uh, I believe it's on page 2 of
the FIR for um from LFC New
Mexico is very much in the
middle of the pack when it comes
to our effective tax rate.
Defined as sort of the overall
total total volume, uh, total
taxable value divided by the tax
collected. That's uh.
And we're very much in the
middle above us right now are
North Dakota, Montana, Alaska,
Louisiana, and Wyoming. And it
actually really surprised me,
Mr. Chair Representative, um.
Louisiana and Wyoming at over
13% of total of the.
Total effective tax rate in both
places, Mr. Chair, I would know.
That um
The rig count has gone up
marginally, uh, yeah, I think
it's in the 30s and uh Wyoming
and it's probably a little bit
higher in Louisiana.
Mr. Chair Representative, back
to your analogy, um, the
Resource is extensive and it's
unique, very strong in our
state, world class, best in the
world.
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
disincentivizing production is
not something that I'm trying to
do. I don't think that's what
this bill does. But Mr. Chair
Representative, there are a wide
range of needs for New Mexicans
raising, you know, we, for
instance, one of only 2 states,
the taxes, gross receipts on
health care.
Uh, professionals and healthcare
transactions, Mr. Chair
Representative, there's a number
of other areas.
And so um once that barrel of
oil or that MCF of natural gas
is severed.
That's sort of the value for the
state of New Mexico and New
Mexicans all across the state.
So we're, I think equalization
is not sort of attempting to get
more faster, it's attempting to
get a fair rate for um what is
an imbalance rate for the state.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, when you
say equalization, can you remind
me, I think we heard it in some
of the discussion. I know we
talked about it in energy. Why
is it unequal right now? Why is
the gas rate a little higher?
Representative Henry, the gas
rate is 27% higher. Uh, my
understanding going back to the
mid 90s.
Well, again, to the 80s when the
federal government instituted a
large tax credit for natural gas
production.
That subsequently, Mr. Chair,
representative the state of New
Mexico added uh an oil and gas
emergency school tax added up to
the 4%.
Or natural gas, and then Mr.
Chair Representative left that
in place uh from the
mid-nineties on the federal tax
credit expired, my understanding
in early, in the early 2000s.
And so that's the history.
So, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, if the
Fed, if we raised it.
Because of that, there was a tax
break. The tax break is now
gone. I asked this in energy as
well, why did we not look at
when we're doing an equalization
tax rate, bringing the, the gas
tax down.
Um, and I know you said at that
time it would cost us, was it
100 Representative Henry, my
understanding is roughly $100
million if we reduced the um
natural MCF, the natural gas,
the 3.15 without any change on
the oil side, it would be a
reduction of about $100 million
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair.
If in the 2000s if we should
have re-evaluated that.
Now we're waiting 25 years to
bring oil up.
Um, you know, it was interesting
and energy and get another day
we finally did get, get some
folks to, to kind of admit that.
Government doesn't really reduce
very often. That's not really in
our thing, um.
In our bucket of things to do,
we always raise taxes.
If we were to reduce the gas
tax, do you think there could be
any spurred economic help with
that, you think up in the San
Juan Basin you might have more
folks actually utilizing it,
which would make your estimate,
I, I think the issue I have with
that is that's a guess if we
just lowered it.
But because we've done nothing
in the interim to find out what
that might spur.
Um, I don't think we really know
the answer to that, Mr. Chair.
Is that a fair statement? Mr.
Chair Representative, that would
be looking at dynamic scoring
sort of projecting that future
impact, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Um
I think you're looking at very
we're looking at world markets
here.
And Mister Chair Representative
sort of some of what we've
learned is that, uh, New
Mexico's um
sort of role in those world
markets is risen and is now more
important than ever, but Mister
Chair Representative, uh, those
world markets still drive and
dictate a great deal of action
on the ground, production. There
may be some localized effects,
Mr. Chair Representative,
particularly if you could find
ways to utilize uh some of that
natural gas in the state of New
Mexico right now, Mr. Chair
representatives, uh, fun.
In fact, it's actually more cost
effective as I understand it.
Take your gas out of the state
and process it as opposed to
processing the natural gas in
state.
Uh, which is maybe something
that we should be looking at.
Mr. Chair representative, um.
Uh, but the, the world market is
very much going to continue to
dictate, uh, I think production
on the ground, which is why I
actually have a great deal of
confidence in the numbers. So,
Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair, I'm
gonna back up just a little bit
because you did mention
Louisiana and some of these
other states. What other things
does Louisiana do for the oil
and gas industry.
On their tax credits, do they
have any?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
I'm not exact I, I don't know in
detail, Mr. Chair
Representative, one of the
important things that I can
speak to as I understand it is
that we uh reduce on the front
end, the cost of royalties of
rents of some the transport,
essentially we, uh before the
taxes applied on a severed
barrel of oil or a severed MCF
of gas.
a bunch of other deductions are
taken. I think that's unique to
some states. I don't believe
that those deductions are always
taken in other states, but I
can't speak to all of the.
Oh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, this
is again another reason I would
really be interested in in our
committee discussing this
because actually in Louisiana,
there's an a tax incentive for
deep wells, horizontal wells are
at 25% taxes.
But when we're looking at these
numbers and comparing.
I don't, we can't really say
apples to apples because even in
Texas, you can't say that word
less.
Because Texas, it's, it's every
single county has a different
opportunity.
We can't sit here and say, oh
well, we're lower or higher.
There's some important other
fact, Mr. Chair, Representative,
if I could really quickly
respond, Mr. Chair
Representative, um, it would be
my understanding because the
chart on page 2.
Um
This is the effective tax by
state.
And
Mr. Chair represents this is a
very important uh um.
graphic, of course this goes to
2018, so it's not right right
now, but this is 2018. Mr. Chair
Representative, this would take
into account any other tax
credits that were in place at
that time.
And so if there were a, if the
various deductions or additions
would be accounted for in this
chart because this chart, Mr.
Chair Representative, is taking
the total taxable value.
And dividing that by the total
tax collected.
So this would account for again,
Mr. Chair Representative, any
tax credits that were in place
at that time for any of the
states, including here in New
Mexico, they would be accounted
for and so it would still be an
effective rate. Now, Mr. Chair,
so yeah, in brief answer, thank
you, Mr. Chair, I'm glad you've
said up to 2018 and you had
mentioned Wyoming, they're
seeing better production, is
that right? More drill, more
rigs, uh, Mr. Chair,
representative, they are.
Well, here's another fun fact
for you, uh, severance tax
reduction, new oil and gas wells
drilled between July 1st, 2020.
In December 31st, 2025 are
eligible for a reduced severance
tax rate, the rate is reduced
from 6% to 4% for the 1st 6
months and 5% for the following
6 months of production.
You think that might help
Wyoming's red count go up?
Uh, Mr. Chair, that may have
some influence.
I would say, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, probably has a pretty big
influence if they were pretty
flat up to 2018.
2020, the state had to do
something and now they're seeing
an increase in rig count. I
would assume that might have
something.
At least help Mr. Chair, I think
it's fair, Mr. Chair. I'll be
happy to go back with the
committee and look at the
numbers. My sense is that it's
been in the very recent.
Um
The last couple of years,
certainly in 2020, 2021, uh,
Wyoming's rig count was far,
far, far below ours and they're
up in the 30s now, so Mr. Chair
Representative.
You know, of all these different
pieces, of course, the natural
resource drives.
Overwhelmingly, Mister Chair
representative, they're also
probably in a bit of a tougher
spot in terms of sort of
transport and other Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair, what would happen if
we had a 3% reduction in
production.
Do you have any of those
numbers?
Uh, Mr. Chair, and we could get
those numbers, Mr. Chair
Representative, um, I don't, I
firmly think that there will not
be a 3% reduction should the in
full equalization of this go
through, Mr. Chair.
Yeah
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, one of the
things that I know we talked
about it just, I don't know what
days we're on.
Um
Thursday, is that when energy is
Thursday we had a discussion and
I had brought up stripper wells
being 20 to 30% of the
production in oil and gas in New
Mexico.
As we've heard in a lot of the
companies that have reached out
to us are those smaller
producers and saying this would
have a major negative impact to
them.
So if the smaller producers have
a major negative impact and
they're 20 to 30% of production
in New Mexico, you don't think
that there could be a 3%
reduction. We're confident in
that number.
Ah, Mister Chair,
Representative, I, I am
confident there, Mr. Chair
Representative, we're seeing new
drilling.
Um, first, I don't think that
that would, that would assume
that all of those wells are
taking offline immediately and
I, that's Mr. Chair
representative in my opinion,
uh, very much not the case, Mr.
Chair Representative, new
drilling activity, um, we're
seeing very strong uh continued
uh drilling we're over 105 rigs
or we're at 105 rigs as of, I
think Friday, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Um, that's similar to where we
were a year ago at this time,
slightly above. Mister Chair
Representative also LFC has very
important um.
That sort of tracking informed
by Ryad Energy and a number of
other international energy
analytics.
It used to be that 100 rigs was
needed to maintain our
production level.
Mr. Chair and we're drilling
these.
Longer laterals, deeper wells,
more laterals that go off of
them. Mr. Chair Representative,
I think that is actually
changing in our favor in the
even as the volume grows and to
keep up with that volume you
have to produce more just to say
static.
The production value of our
wells is increasing
significantly, so I think the
numbers show us, Mr. Chair,
representative, in fact,
production is likely going to
increase, and that's what the
numbers that we're seeing, um,
again, 6, almost 66 million
barrels in December.
Um, I think the drilling pace
shows us that the production is
going to continue in a very
strong way. The federal
administration's emphasis on
production and drilling, uh, I
think is another factor that
tells us that that production,
uh, in the pace of drilling is
going to um continue perhaps
slightly increased.
Oh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, I, I
heard a couple words that kind
of worry me when we talk about
tech taxes.
His opinions and, and we feel
But again, I want to emphasize,
no stakeholders.
were brought into consideration
or talked to about this taxing.
So is that what we're operating
on, on it, and I'm not trying
to.
sounds rude. I don't mean to,
but is that, are we, are we
operating on an opinion and a
possible without talking to
stakeholders because to me, I
want to make sure that if this
was to go into place, how does
it affect?
And, and I guess where it really
starts to worry me is if those
smaller independents start to
reduce.
What does that do to my?
You know, because a lot of my
neighbors are those smaller
producers and or service
companies that service those. So
how many of those jobs will be
lost.
If those jobs are lost, how many
of those folks are now not
eating at our local restaurants
and shopping at our local
grocery store.
And if that stops, how many of
those restaurants stop having
being open because of it. The
down.
Stream impact that happens in
communities like mine because
I've actually seen it.
When, when you do have little
dips in oil and gas.
Even small dips in oil and gas
when I first opened my
restaurant, first year was
awesome.
The 2nd year was brutal because
we had a little bit of a dip. I
think that some of y'all were
probably here because y'all had
major cuts in your budgets, uh,
you were actually sweeping money
at the time. That was a small
dip. It was a major impact.
In my restaurant, my community.
Um, and to those around me, so I
want to know what are your
thoughts if those small
independents stop producing and
or slow down on their, their
project.
How does that impact everyone
else?
Oil and gas wise as well as our
community.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
the projections that I am
confident in in the FIRs show
continued production strength.
So I don't think Mr. Chair
Representative.
The production is driven by the
world market.
This is uh Mr. Chair
Representative, we'll stay sort
of in the middle of the pack,
increased slightly if the full
form of this or some form of
this is adopted, Mr. Chair
Representative, um, the world
market determines, uh,
reduction, Mr. Chair
Representative, the increase in
infrastructure, particularly in
southeast New Mexico has
continued to lower the cost of
production, Mr. Chair
Representative, um, the
consolidation that we heard
about has been at great
financial benefit to owners of
um.
These leases if they've chosen
to uh uh
You know
With the mergers and
acquisitions, those have been
purchased at a very, very, very
high premium, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Um
These are, uh, non-renewable
resources and we're looking to
create uh the best state
possible, Mr. Chair
Representative, and this will
not lead to a decrease in
production, the world market.
Chair, Mr. Chair, when you say
the, the world market does
production, doesn't the world
market more set the price of the
commodity?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
yes. So if Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
when the world market.
Is that, let's call it $60 a
barrel.
Otheroda still producing?
The world market dictated the
commodity price as Dakota still
producing?
Uh, Mister Chair Representative,
um, right now we're in the low
70s to high 60s, Mr. Chair
Representative, um, those
changes globally certainly
impact.
Local production.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
that's the benefit of being the
lowest cost place to produce,
uh, one of the lowest cost
places to produce in the world.
As competitive as any place in
North America in.
But, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, we,
we talked about this the other
day in energy. What is our break
even on those?
Isn't it somewhere around? I
think we heard 67, is that what?
60, no, but then when Murphy put
in those others mid-60s, I think
is where we landed
the, the numbers that the LFC
chief economist testified to
were in the high 30s to low 40s.
Or um
Break even prices, Mr. Chair
Representative.
For existing wells, if, if
If
That's the shut-in price, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, in
energy.
We all agreed that that price is
probably closer to the 60 to $65
range to break even.
Um, I'm pretty confident in that
number because one of the
gentlemen in there actually does
this for a living. So I'm gonna
I appreciate all the the
analysis, but I'm gonna go with
the with the folks that actually
do it. And that seems to be
where they are, and that's the
number I've always heard, even
in Artesia that, you know, once
this goes below 60, we start
slowing production because it's
not as profitable for us. Does
that sound right?
The Mr. Chair and the profit
margin would decrease, uh, but
Mr. Chair Representative, that
the breakeven price for new
wells. So, and we need new
wells, Mr. Chair,
Representative, the rig count is
very important to us because we
need new wells in order to keep
production, uh, at a sort of
stable and slightly growing
rate, Mr. Chair Representative.
And that um that new well break
even price.
is in the in the high 30s to
mid-40s, but we heard testified
to. There's a
Wide range from that to sort of
the uh low 60s and Miss Chair
Representative in terms of the
state's economic.
For the outlook, those new
wells, drill rigs, and, and new
production is.
Enormously important.
So Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair, I
can tell you at $60.
When we're creating budgets at
the county level and the city
level.
We get very nervous because
production, anything under about
62 $63 we see a drastic decrease
in production. I can tell you
that over the last 8 years of
creating budgets on the local
level.
So if we continue to tax this
industry in this new $400
million is actually put into
place. Do you think that
increases that breakeven price?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
this would increase, increase
that break even price uh if the
full equalization and no
reduction in natural gas, it
would increase it 85 cents.
Or if that the price of oil was
$100.
So Mr. Chair Representative, it
would increase that break even
price very, very slightly.
So, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, where
I'm getting at here, and I said
the same thing in energy. One of
the greatest things that New
Mexico has going for it. Why I
mentioned North Dakota.
we are a very stable.
Oil and gas industry because our
break-even price is so low.
Every time we continue to add
things that break even price
continues to grow.
As it grows,
Just like in North Dakota, when
it hits a certain price, they
shut down production and then
they have to figure out what to
do.
But we've got to take that into
consideration as we're looking
at taxes and increases and all
the things that we're doing to
an industry.
That they say can take it.
But at some point, when can they
not?
At some point, when did we raise
that breakeven point, even if
they can take it, when do we
move that break even point?
Because traditionally what we
see during this type of
administration is a lower.
Cost of a commodity. That's
always been the case. Is that
not fair, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair?
Uh, Mr. Chair, are you speaking
of the federal administration.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, I
think sort of weaker economic
growth, uh, federally would
suggest a sort of um.
You know
Slightly lower, potentially
commodity prices, Mr. Mr. Chair,
I wouldn't call it a weaker
growth typically when you see
certain administrations, you see
decreased regulations, things
like that, you see higher
production, higher production
usually means lower commodities
that probably right?
Mr. Chair Representative, I
think in this case, um.
Just briefly, and I know Mr.
Chair, you're giving a lot of
leeway, but Mr. Chair
Representative.
Uh, Saudi Arabia and some other
states.
Our 2% of global oil production,
Saudi Arabia, Russia, and a few
other states, uh, sovereign
states, they could fill that
production gap.
in a minute.
They choose not to OPEC plus
chooses not to. They keep
production artificially low at
what levels it's unclear in
order to keep sort of a price
floor and that price floor is
anywhere from like $70 to $80
they used to try to keep it
higher. It's now in the 70s or
80s.
Mr. Chair Representative, um.
Sort of that feature is.
One of, if not the most
important factors for that
global commodity price separate
from all of the other risks and,
you know, trade tensions and
other things.
Mr. Mr. Chair, I, I think that's
somewhat right. I think there's
other big factors that put into
that, that we've seen you, I'm
over time as administrative
change.
I do think the commodity price
probably will stabilize or even
decrease just a little bit, um,
because you're going to see more
drilling during this short
period of time, more drilling
normally means more product or
product usually means quantity
price is going to come down. If
our break even price becomes too
high, at some point, we don't
become as
Attractive as maybe some of the
other areas. So I'll move from
that just, I want real quickly
to touch on the ad adviarum tax,
which is another piece that New
Mexico has that maybe a lot of
other states doesn't, don't
have, is that a fair statement?
Mr. I looked to the deputy.
Mr. Chair Representative, we do
have an alarm tax that is.
Um, in lieu of a property tax
and other states also have
property taxes. So, Mr. Chair,
with that tax, what's so crucial
about that tax, especially to
the local economy, is, is that's
how they, they really do, let's
go back to my area. There's a
new school being built because
of the mill rates.
Uh, there's a new hospital
hopefully being built soon
because of the mill rates. Um,
schools actually are able to do
more because of the meal rates.
So I'm very protective of those
because as a body, we've, we've,
and I agree with it, we're very
um
Focused on increasing education
and increasing any kind of
Hospital type.
Industry that we can
Wrong word to use industry.
Healthcare.
Uh, we're trying to make better.
So if these, if this production
was to.
Slow down at all or or become an
issue for our communities. Not
only does it affect the folks I
just talked about, which I'm not
trying to be scare tactics. I
lived through it. I mean, it was
a true statement on
We did not take a paycheck
because we were paying everybody
else because it had dipped when
all's good, everything's great.
Um, other communities do take
that drastic hit, but I also
look at all the great things
that our school systems are
doing down there. With that,
with the drip dip in production
without that extra help, I'm
afraid they wouldn't be able to
do that. So, um, I just
I think I've, I've beat it more
than I probably should have.
But I think this is one of those
things that really need to be
discussed and much more detail,
as you said, this bill kind of
came up. It was an idea deer
session. Um, I think those are
dangerous. I think we need to
make sure we're understanding
how we're impacting local
communities, and I would love to
understand how if the natural
gas was brought down, how it
could also help the San Juan
Basin, a basin that we
desperately need more jobs in.
Um, I don't think that was taken
into account because we didn't
go talk to the stakeholders to
find out what this could do for
them.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I'm
sorry I took so much time, but
all of you.
Thank you, Reverend Henry.
That's just what it's for, you
know, take your time, ask your
questions. So let's go to
Representative Duncan.
Not as much time though.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm not an
oil and gas guy, so I, I, I
can't take as much time.
Um, I'm gonna, for sure, I'm
gonna talk about a few things
that I
That are
Relevant to my
And uh as we talked about these
things,
I think it's gonna, I think it's
gonna.
Segue into exactly what you're
attempting, Mr. Chair, and.
And these are real
Real time and
Real, real basic to me.
Um, my first question is, my
first statement is,
This is just bad tax policy to
come and say we need 400.
Million dollar increase, which
is about a 27% increase on tax.
Not a 1%, it's a 27%.
Without it going somewhere.
It's not added to anything. It's
not attached to anything it's
going into the general fund.
I can only assume then, Mr.
Chair.
Sure.
By the way, that just sounds so
strange. Sounds like I got a
stutter.
Um
So then we're, we're gonna
pocket this money.
I can't help but wonder what
other social programs or
programs we're going to get to.
Who, uh
Perhaps solar or perhaps wind or
perhaps any of those that aren't
adding a dime's worth of tax or
budget in any way, shape, or
form.
And wonder what if that's where
this is going to go. So, um,
I, I also have heard from
Big producers, small producers,
and everyone.
We weren't even invited to the
table.
I think that's
That lends itself to the other
part of this that we've got to
be fair. That's one of the, one
of the things that we do here is
we're trying to be fair.
I wonder why they weren't.
Invited to the table.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
I think as I, as we talked about
earlier, Mr. Chair,
this bill has come up. It did
not go through the interim.
Mr. Chair, Representative, um,
the, but these are very well
established rates, folks.
This has been sort of the tax
regime for a very long time.
It's been disadvantageous for
natural gas, Mister Chair
Representative, um.
I think there is, as we heard
about earlier, there are a wide,
you know, some of this is just
the fact that we have a 60 day
session once every 2 years.
And so Mr. Chair I amongst the
many different ideas. I think it
would be totally fair for
somebody to bring legislation
saying we should reduce the
natural gas tax.
That, that would be, you know,
this is, as I think as the chair
said, this is the proper forum
to have those conversations.
Mr. Chair Representative, um.
This is a very collaborative
committee and there are a bunch
of different issues that you all
take on a great responsibility
to to sort of tackle.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
the fact that this is unequal.
Uh, at a time where we're taking
on outside importance in
production.
Uh, at a time, Mr. Chair
Representative, where
You know, again, we're 65
million barrels of oil a month.
One of, if not the best place to
produce in all of North America.
I think it's very relevant to
have the conversation and that's
what we're doing now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair.
I guess my follow up question
with that would.
That would be
We have
Old load of money
Why wasn't it?
The discussion in this bill to
lower the tax on natural gas,
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative,
um, I at the beginning, I talked
about the weight, there's 3 ways
to equalize lower one, raise
one, lower one a little bit,
raise one a little bit. That
third way, Mr. Chair
Representative, I think is a
very attractive way and
attractive thing for us to
consider, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative again going back
to the.
Sort of the nature of these
natural resources.
Um, we have to balance.
Getting the best benefit for the
state of New Mexico, which
necessarily involves production.
Production is a central part of
that.
But Mr. Chair Representative, it
would be an even better deal.
For producers to lower both
taxes.
Lower them even more.
That would be a worse deal for
the state of New Mexico and for
all the citizens of the state,
so Mister Chair Representative,
I think proposing sort of a bit
of a middle path.
is an attractive thing,
particularly given sort of our
place within the industry.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, I
We're gonna
We'll take a sidebar here in a
couple hours and I want you to
tell me what attractive means to
you.
I think we have two totally
different definitions of
practice.
Um
It and I don't think anybody in
this room needs the experts
sitting next to you, although
she is highly qualified to
answer this question.
But when I'm able to lower the
taxes, when I'm able to lower
the cost of my goods when I'm
selling them out the door.
That generates more people
walking in the door. It
generates more people coming and
eating at this restaurant that
generates more people coming and
staying at my RV park that
generates more people able to
put gas in their tank and, and
drive and go to the ball game
they want to go to that's out of
state.
That's just the nature of the
beast. That's when um capitalism
shows exactly what it can and
will do.
So let me, let me take you to a,
um,
Real scenario that happened in
the Northwest.
the state.
So
When the energy transition Act.
And it was
brought it out and
It was again it was attractive
to folks as well.
All these jobs were promised.
We're gonna get rid of our plant
coal-fired. We're going to get
rid of the mine, but all these
other jobs are gonna be there
waiting for you folks.
All of them
Guess what, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair.
After those plants went down, my
school district faced a 700%
homelessness with our kids.
Those jobs didn't materialize.
They haven't materialist,
they're not going to
materialize.
And we are still facing the
effects of what we did.
West New Mexico as an elected
body.
I can promise you
When we do this, those same
things are going to be happening
Artesia and Roswell, Carlsbad.
San Juan County again.
Because of this right here. And
if we don't think that it
doesn't have an impact. I can
tell you production might be
driven by um the world market,
but taxes drive local community.
This is what will happen. This
will be the devastating part of
this.
When you have small producers,
because those are the guys that
generally give to the baseball
teams and the dance recitals and
into the community for a park.
When those guys are faced with
that as I visited with one.
Producer, one gentleman that
works in the field, this tax is
going to be $900,000 a year
more.
And they are right now.
That 900,000 last year.
Good portion of that went to the
community he lives in.
That will not be there. So it's
OK when we talk about this and
say it won't have any impact.
It's attractive. It is not
attractive, and it will have a
devastating impact of small
communities. I'm living through
that still to this day.
We haven't seen a bit of those
jobs that were promised to our
community.
And I can tell you when they
come when they decide to pull
out and say we're, we're pulling
out of here. Those jobs, those
are people, they have faces.
I mean, as the mayor of
Portland, I had family after
family after family come to me
and say, what are we going to
do?
What can you do for us?
I can't do anything.
I wasn't a state representative
that put this on and thought
this was a good idea.
Yeah, I wasn't the one who said
this is really attractive to
people to get rid of their jobs.
To get rid of the middle class.
In my community
I wish I would have been here. I
would have fought a lot harder
for it because I've lived it,
I've seen it.
And it's not fun.
I'm gonna ask the oil and gas
industry today.
Lower their
Production by 10% for the next 3
months.
Just so we can see what's going
to happen to our budget.
When this spill goes through.
We need to, we need to face
that.
We need to see that.
And I would ask them to do that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to Representative Montoya.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman.
And uh Chairman Small.
Um, we had a pretty robust,
robust debate in energy and
You're gonna get a lot of those
same questions.
Before we do, since this is the
tax committee.
Um
I want to walk you through a
couple of things. And, and those
are some principles that we
Go through every, every time
there's a new committee
assembled, we go through what is
good tax policy.
And uh, and Mr. Speaker,
Our Mr. Chairman and Chairman
Small.
Um
The, the first, the first.
Um
Level of good tax policies is
adequacy.
What do we need to pay for?
And we don't need to do anything
more.
Or less than the bills we need
to cover.
And, uh, that is, that is the
very first thing that, that,
that we need to do when we're
when we're thinking about
raising taxes.
there needs to be a purpose.
There needs to be a purpose for
raising taxes.
Whether that is we have
increasing costs. We have some
sort of a, a shortfall.
Um, or if there's a brand new
priority.
And generally the tax is
related.
Directly to
To that. And, and, um, Mr. Chair
and and Chair Small.
Um, we, we did talk a little bit
about this in the last
committee, and so I
It seemed like you were having a
hard time answering the question
then and spend a few days, so
maybe today, uh, you've got a
little bit better.
Idea of.
What would this 400+ million
dollar.
tax increase
What would we be looking to
spend this on, Mister Chair and
chair small. Uh.
Thank you very much Mr. Chair.
Thank you committee. Mr. Chair,
committee, that's the job of
this committee first and I think
Mr. uh, second, Mr. Chair,
committee, I want to note a few
different needs that are out
there as we've talked about New
Mexico is one of only 2 states
that taxes, uh, gross receipts
on health care.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, or excuse me,
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, and
Representative, uh, so, uh,
that's clearly a need, Mr.
Chair, Representative, the
Federal administration right now
and the budget resolution that
was passed federally has the
potential to reduce New Mexico
state budget by a billion
dollars plus dollars simply by
uh fundamentally uh attacking
and changing how Medicaid, um,
Uh, reimbursements flow to the
state. That's a huge uh
Edwin, Mr. Chair, Representative
that are out there.
Uh, I think the combination of.
Uh, continued state priorities
around affordability, making New
Mexico a more affordable place
for folks to live, expanding
healthcare affordability and
access.
Along with the fact that Mr.
Chair Representative, uh,
federally right now, New Mexico
faces a great deal of peril.
shows us that um
That if they're if we can apply
a principle of tax policy, which
is horizontal equity.
That is, everywhere else in our
tax code, everywhere else, Mr.
Chair Representative oil, a
barrel of oil.
An MCF of natural gas, basically
taxed the same.
The emergency school tax because
of this is the one place that
that's different.
And so fixing that horizontal
equity and having more resources
to face big challenges, attacks
on Medicaid, attacks on food
benefits, Mr. Chair
Representative, which we could
very much see in the state.
Um, so thank you.
Madam chair
And chair small.
Um,
Do you, do you ever watch the
movie Princess Bride?
Um, my, my patron saint, Madam
Chair is Enigo Montoya.
And there's one line in there,
he says, I don't think that word
means what you think it means.
I know that's the case on
horizontal equity.
Um
Madam Chair and Chairman Small.
I'm gonna explain the principle
of equity as it comes to taxes.
There's vertical equity.
Which is essentially
How does this apply fairly to
people of all economic stat
statuses.
Uh, for instance, if there's a
tax that keeps getting passed on
and passed on to the end user. A
lot of times, the person at the
very, very end who gets those
multiple taxes, the stacking.
The multiplier, a lot of times
is the poorest.
People in society.
So vertical equity is generally
what we, what we look at when
we're comparing one taxpayer to
another is the tax system fair
to them.
Horizontal equity
Um
Um, Mr. Chair and chair Small.
I is this tax fare between two
different taxpayers.
Of the same
Socioeconomic status, the same
ability to pay.
This doesn't apply in this
instance because
The taxpayer who is paying one
price.
On natural gas commodity.
Tax
And the other
Hanging on crude oil.
Is the same industry.
So horizontal equity doesn't
apply from one commodity.
To the next, if it's in the
same, if it's the same taxpayer.
This is just a tax increase.
This has nothing to do with
equity. It doesn't apply that
way.
It might be equalizing two
things, but uh, Mr. Chair.
And share small, that would be
like us equalizing the tax
between.
All beverages
Um
Do we think it's right that
water
And um soda.
And alcohol, let's say.
I'll be taxed
At the same level
That would be
That would be equity.
Because that would be
Essentially similar products,
not exactly the same.
Different markets just like
these are different markets,
natural gas and crude oil in
different markets.
That would be horizontal equity.
But if we're raising the price
of one commodity to match the
other commodity, and it's the
same taxpayer that has, that has
absolutely nothing to do.
With the principle of equity and
taxes.
Particularly horizontal equity.
Mr. Chair Chair Small to get
back to these other items that
you mentioned that the
that the dollars could be used
for.
these dollars could be used to
bring the price of health care
down.
Uh, these could be used to make
other products more affordable.
And
I believe the third item that
you mentioned was
That, uh,
Budget, there, there's things
that are happening at the
federal government.
That could cause us to have to
respond.
Um, and, uh, Mr. Chair and Chair
Small, I would also agree this
is not necessary for us to do at
this point, um, in part because
we don't get one bite at this
apple.
If
Uh,
something happens at the federal
level, Mr. Chairman.
And we end up having to cover a
budget shortfall, the easiest
way for us to do that is for the
governor to call us into a
special session or for we as a
body to call ourselves into an
extraordinary session.
It is extremely terrible tax
policy.
To raise taxes, particularly
25%.
27%, I believe is what it is.
27% on one industry to the tune
of almost
several years out, it's gonna be
$450 million a year.
For the possibility of maybe
blunting something that may or
may not happen at the national
level. That is, that is
extraordinarily awful tax
policy, in particular, when
we're sitting.
On money right now that we're
not, it's not needed for our
current budget to spend. We have
so much money, Mister Chair.
That we're able to
Put money into all of these
other funds.
We're in, we're in a position
right now, Mr. Chairman, where
we're, we're funding other
funds, the, the early childhood
Development Fund is going to hit
$11 billion next year.
So
I just
Before I go into my questions, I
just wanted to talk.
About
Good
Tax policy and why on so many
levels, this does not fit.
Just the very description.
Of good tax policy.
But with that, Mr. Chair, I'm
gonna, gonna switch.
And go to
The
The
was briefly mentioned earlier.
The history of this particular
tax.
On, on natural gas.
Um, once again, I didn't catch
the date. I know it's been
stated a couple of times, but I
was writing and I know it was
like 1920.
7, 1928 that this tax came in.
You have that, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, representative,
the
I don't know that we know uh if
you don't let's allow folks to
finish their statement before we
talk so first, Mr.
Cha, thank you.
Uh, second, Mr. Chair,
Representative, horizontal
equity in my opinion or I think
in this case does very much
apply Mr. Chair Representative
one, as was pointed out, you can
have natural gas without oil.
Increasingly in New Mexico, if
you have oil, you're going to
have natural gas.
However, Mr. Cherub said you can
have one without the other.
And Mr. Chair Representative,
it's my understanding that there
is a great deal more
infrastructure, uh, on the front
end associated with uh sort of
the recovery and then the gas.
And so Mr. Chair Representative,
I think having a higher
effective tax rate for natural
gas.
Uh, when it is likely more
expensive to sort of separate
and then move.
They're very much as a uh I
think a compelling case for
horizontal equity
or either at equalization.
Sort of up to 4 or sort of a
meeting below for at some rate.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
the unequalization, this was
horizontally equal.
The unequalization in my
understanding sort of starts in
the mid to later 80s when the
federal government institutes a
tax credit.
natural gas recovery.
That then leads to in the early
90s, the state of New Mexico in
1993, raising the emergency
school attacks.
Or gas to compensate for that
federal reduction.
Um, then that federal tax credit
goes away in the early 2000s,
but the state tax policy stays
the same.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That was
helpful. As a matter of fact,
that, that helps me get to where
I was going and and is that the
question is,
That's, it was called an
emergency school tax. Does the
emergency still exist?
Are we still having a hard time
paying for education in New
Mexico, Mr. Chair, or are we
covering that right now? Is
there a shortfall, uh, Mr.
Chair, Representative, uh, sort
of the all of the current um
direct oil that
Reduction tax, um.
Uh, rents and royalties, those
sorts of things.
Those are going into the
severance above FY 25. So new
production.
Uh, many of these taxes, um,
The increases in production,
that increased revenue goes
directly to the severance tax
permanent fund because of Senate
Bill 26 passed two years ago,
and that, Mr. Chair
Representative represents the
certainty that at some point,
because these natural resources
are being severed from the
state.
For whatever reason at a certain
point, they're no longer,
there's not gonna be any to
sever from the state.
And so Mister Chair
Representative, that source of
revenue is destined to uh
plateau and then decline at some
point in the future. There's a
lot of discussion about when,
where and how that happens, but
Mister Chair Representative.
It's vital that as a state, all
of our savings.
That we're doing right now.
That that's for the 2030s and
2040s.
That's, that's what that's for,
Mr. Chair Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Chair
Small.
When this became
When the commodities apparently
when the inequity or when they
became out of balance, when that
happened, it was when they
raised.
The natural gas tax.
Put it back in balance would
make sense to bring that back
down. Now I understand.
Mr. Chair, that that would cause
a budget shortfall of about $100
million a year.
So, uh, and we did talk about
the 3, there's 3 ways to fix
this, and maybe
Uh, so, uh, to get to
Balance to get to revenue
neutral.
During a time when we're at
At a great
Uh
Uh, budget surpluses in several
years in a row, uh, Mr. Chair,
um, to, to be able to do that,
um, finally got the numbers back
from Izzy.
At DFA and the number he gave us
was a 3.32% would get, would get
us to even.
Now that being said, if there
were extra and it were to flow
somewhere else. I, I do have
Questions that I did not get to
in the last committee because
of, of time.
But
There are two other
parts to this, besides the equal
equalizing nature of the bill.
There's also
The, the kind of directing the
money that is from the process
of equalizing.
Up to 4%.
That the extra dollars were to
flow directly into the general
fund.
Now
Now, as I understand the process
now, the money would go into the
Uh
Permanent into the permanent
fund.
But then the permanent fund is
capped at this point at a
certain level.
To where it.
It
Uh, then when it gets that max,
it flows into the general fund
as is.
Why would you not just let that
happen naturally.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative, Mr. Chair
Representative, the um, from our
permanent funds, there's a
distribution. I think it's
roughly about 5%.
That comes to the state general
fund annually, Mr. Mr. Chair
Representative, uh, that does.
Which is
Important
Uh, positive and means that the
more funding that goes into the
permanent funds, the more
funding that comes back because
it's that compounding 5% each
year. You put a little bit more
in 5% of that is going to grow
each year and it's growing at a
fast rate now, Mr. Chair
Representative, because we're.
And it's 800 and some million
dollars goes to the severance
tax permanent fund this year
projected.
I think it's 1.2 billion or more
that is projected to go there
next year.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
the new recurring revenue and
many of the important things
that this legislature and this
committee face.
That is um
The, the
That cannot be addressed.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative.
So Mr. Chair.
And, and
Representative small light.
As it is, we can't spend the
money we have.
On
Recurring. We we're, we're doing
a lot of one time, so is this
Just is uh Mr. Chair, is, is
this really that we need to
spend more money, that we we
need to raise money on this
industry, so we can spend more
money.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, non-recurring investments
around water, other
infrastructure, public safety
facilities and a wide range of
areas think are, you know,
important investments that the
legislature is making, Mr.
Chair, Representative, as we
look at uh recurring.
Uh, different priorities that um
this capacity
And Mr. Chair, yeah.
So, Mr. Chair,
And
And Chairman Small, that is
probably the biggest hang up I
have with this is we don't have
a purpose for the money that can
be, can be nailed down.
That this is what the money is
for.
And this is why we need it. And
if the biggest thing that we're
saying is that we're worried,
Mr. Chair, of what is going to
happen at the federal level, we
can address that in a special
session. As a matter of fact,
um, Mr. Chairman, the governor
said that, I believe, on Friday.
That
If, if certain things happen at
federal level, she'll call us
back in a special session.
And that I think if it's an
emergency that comes up like
that, I, I believe a special
session or us calling ourselves
back into an extraordinary
session would be the proper
route.
But Mr. Chair
Uh
To move away from that, to move
away from my, my concern that we
don't have the need.
There is, we don't have adequacy
problems right now.
The question that I have, and
it's been brought up a little
bit.
It is about whether or not
there's gonna be an out
migration of companies.
And something that was stated
earlier that I actually the
person who made the statement
during public comments, I got
back in touch with them to make
sure that I have these numbers
right.
But from 2017 to 2023.
We saw a reduction of small
companies, small independents.
Drop dramatically 20%.
From 518 to 414.
Uh, during that,
6-year period.
Um
So the smaller companies are
much more volatile.
Um
The big guys stick around a
little bit longer.
But the, the reality is the, the
greatest amount of money that we
make.
When we, uh, get a well into
production into production, is
that first year.
And Mr. Chair, this
And Chairman Small, this goes to
my next question, which is the
next, the third part to your
bill that I have a problem with.
Is the reporting. The reporting
goes up from quarterly to
monthly.
Um
It was mentioned by a colleague
of ours in the previous
committee that owns an oil and
gas company.
That he, they ran them the
They just went ahead and and and
looked at it as to what that
would cost them just for
compliance, Mister Chair, and
that went
That was gonna be a 40% increase
for his business.
Which
is about is about 20 employees
in the office, not including
the, the folks out in the field.
But that would, that was gonna
be a 40% increase, nearly a
million dollars more a year for
compliance.
Um, Mr. Chair and Chair Small,
that.
That's an oil well.
That's an oil well. It doesn't
go into production.
That is a uh that's
Uh, that's a big concern. So I
see you want to talk on that,
maybe that's something you want
to take out of your bill, Mr.
Chair.
Mr.
Chair,
representative uh
uh think we wanna ultimately
this should mirror the
regulatory compliance.
Uh, for the structures that
exist. So Mr. Chair
Representative, I think the
reporting structure that exists.
Uh, I mentioned this at the
beginning, the current
deductions that exist, royalty,
transport, tax.
I think all of those are good to
mirror, um,
And the sort of in the.
structure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate that, Chairman Small.
I, I, that was something that
seemed unnecessarily egregious
in in the bill as presented.
Um
Mr. Chair and Chairman Small,
um, I do have a number here. Uh,
I believe, uh, my colleague, uh,
started to ask this question,
and that was
What if there was even a 3%
decrease in production.
And, and Mr. Chair and Chairman
Small, as I just stated.
The greatest amount of
production isn't in.
The wells that are in production
currently, the biggest amount is
that first year.
That first year of a of a
well-being drilled that the, the
production is, is just off the
charts.
In the subsequent years, it
starts to, to, to, to wane and
then all of a sudden it kind of
hits a spot and it and it like
drops off of a cliff.
The reality is if we hurt.
Production
If we heard the, the
folks who they're gonna go out
there and drill that initial
well.
We do a lot of damage, more than
I believe what the numbers that
was given in the previous
committee was an an expectation
of a 0.3% decrease.
In, in production.
All you have to have, Mr. Chair
and Chairman Small is several of
these wells not drilled.
And that 0.3% production decline
is, is.
It's
Not, not anywhere close.
If it, if we were to lose
If, if
Uh, an oil company decides.
That it is just more profitable
to go across that imaginary line
into Texas and to drill there.
We know our rock is better. We
know our production is better.
But this goes beyond that. This
goes to the total cost to do
business.
Even if it's still
Good to do business here in the
sense that that it's that that
they're gonna make money. In the
end, it's a math.
Decision.
Can I make more money across.
The border
It doesn't have to be
What is break even? Break even
is the is the lowest common
denominator. After break even.
Then you figure out
Cost of compliance.
costs of, of, of everything in
place.
Incentives that may be in
another location for initial
production.
All that has to happen is it has
to just be a little bit better
deal there than here.
And especially Mr. Chair and
Chairman when, uh, folks when
these companies in New Mexico
just keep on begging for some
sort of consistent consistency
one year to the next. I've been
here, this is my 11th year. We
have not had consistency, uh, in
the oil and gas industry from
anything that could be counted
on.
Probably since 2000.
18, 2017, 2018.
And
Mr. Chair and Chairman Small.
It's, it's a business decision
and the biggest thing that keeps
on happening is
To industry is decisions are
made.
And we don't even get a seat at
the table.
When we do get a seat at the
table.
were outnumbered
10 to 1
By stakeholders that are not in
the industry.
And Mr. Chair and Chairman
Small, this, this goes towards
A feeling that that no matter
what happens, no matter what
agreement is made this year,
next year, the goalpost is
moved, and next year the
goalpost is moved.
And when that continues to
happen, Mister Chair and
Chairman Small.
Texas becomes a much, much, much
more attractive. I believe that
was your word earlier.
Attractive place to uh.
To do business, so I, I, I
believe you want to respond to
that, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Montoya. Mr. Chair,
Representative Montoya, um, if
we go back to 2019, January
2019.
EIA Energy Information
Administration says we produce
25 million95,000 barrels of oil
that month.
Uh, Mr. Chair, in the month of.
January 2024 over that time
period, we produced, uh,
according to EIA 57
million71714,000 barrels of oil
in that month.
Uh, December of 2014 of 2024.
We produced 60 according to the
EIA right now, uh, 65 million,
514,000 barrels of oil in that
month.
That'll likely be revised up.
And I would predict, Mister
Chair Representative that in
2025, uh, this first month and
the month that we just finished.
It's gonna be 65.
Potentially maybe even reaching
66 million barrels of oil.
Um
Certainly, you know, in the mid
60s, we should say mid to
Uh, so Mr. Chair Representative.
I think the
If we look at over time and we
look at our policy and the
collaboration, it continues to
show a very strong
Uh, sense of collaboration
that's benefiting the state
greatly as we acknowledge and
talk about, and Mr. Chair
Representative.
In New Mexico, the fact that
more production is happening
here.
Even as prices have sort of uh
steadied out and in the low 70s
shows that.
And Mr. Chair and just to go to
the sort of the decrease in
number of companies as chair
representative, I would strongly
wager that that much of that is
driven by mergers and
acquisitions.
That, uh, some of the largest
private publicly held companies
in the entire world are paying
very high prices.
The New Mexico families to
acquire the assets that those in
New Mexico families own um
And that is benefiting everyone
substantially.
Those New Mexico families whose
hard work and uh support of the
state. They are receiving a
premium for those uh areas, it's
not quite as high.
So yeah, so the just to
reinforce that all signs within
this industry.
Are in a positive direction, Mr.
Chair Representative, their
collaboration and their place in
the state is deeply important
and positive.
Mr. Chair Representative, final
point, um.
Uh, Miss Favian and uh uh Mr.
Torres I think this is roughly
about a 50% if the entire amount
is added.
About a 50 cent increase to the
break-even price, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Um, and I think that
And in that scenario.
The legislature, this committee,
uh, will have
The ability to support very
important policies for the
state.
And we will see continued
strength in production in rigs.
If I may pause this real quick,
we have to, we have a floor
session in about 10 minutes.
We're about almost 2 hours into
this discussion.
Not gonna stifle the the the key
debate, but I will have to make
note that the last two agenda
items will probably be rolled,
uh, just to make sure that we
have enough time for this
discussion here, so please, uh,
let's keep our comments brief
and, and try to get past this so
we can uh move on.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um
Chairman Smollett, as you know,
and also in 2000 and
10, I believe our budget was
about $6 million and we've more
than doubled that.
So, uh, and I was here, Mr.
Chair, as I believe there I look
around the room, there are
3 others, so there are 4 of us
in this room.
That were here in 2015.
When the commodity dropped to
$20 a barrel.
And during that time we were
sweeping dollars from everyone.
We were taking money away from
people who've been good stewards
with their money and just hadn't
spent it.
And we did that, and Mister
Chair, uh, just to give an
example, Chairman Small.
The, the, the number that was
discussed earlier when the
question was asked, but no one
followed through with it was if
there was a 3, even a 3%
decrease in production.
What would that, what would that
be?
This is just at $65 a barrel of
oil.
That would be over $350 million.
So, Mr. Chair and and Chairman
Small, what it comes down to,
and I finish up right here, Mr.
Chairman, is
The cost
The breakeven cost is not the
only thought.
That goes into a company doing
business in New Mexico.
And Mr. Chairman and Chairman
Small, it's a decision.
And Mr. Chair and Chairman
Small, I do believe.
If we pass this, there, it has
been expressed to me by many
small companies.
that are very unhappy with the
fact that the goalpost just
continue to move.
That at least if they go to
Texas, they know what they can
count on.
And they know that it's a, it's
a consistent.
Playing field
And Mr. Chair, Chairman Small,
without new drilling taking
place in New Mexico. We can get
to a 3% decrease in year over
year production very easily, and
I, I would suggest
The, the appetite.
Of being able to just absorb
this because like, as we all
stated many times, this is a
commodity.
Um, you can't raise your price
on the end consumer just because
your personal costs went up.
This 400+ million dollars dollar
tax increase can't be passed on
to the consumer, even if it
means that the company is no
longer profitable in New Mexico.
So I would, I would like to
state that on the record that
Once again, I've heard from many
companies that are
They're at the breaking point.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Let's go to
Representative Pajon.
Big Mister Chair and Mr.
Chairman and presenter. uh, I
just had a really quick question
on the FIR page 2.
I noticed there was a chart
there on the effective tax rates
by state.
And it looks like our effective
rate is 9.1, uh, Mr. Chair and
Mr. Chairman.
But on page 3 of the uh of tax
and revs analysis, it looks like
it the.
Um
That the rate is 8.2.
7%. So I was wondering if you
could discuss a little bit about
the difference here that I'm
seeing on the effective tax rate
versus this statutory.
rate.
This Fabian
Chair Representative, so the
chart on page 2 of the LFC FIR
is basically an analysis that
takes total tax receipts from
all these states and divides it
by the total production, so it's
an effective tax rate. TRD
calculated kind of stacking all
the rates that we have, what it
is in statute.
So it's just a different
methodology to try to compare uh
effective or actual tax rates
across states.
So Mr. Chair and Mr. Chairman,
so is this effective rate, um,
effective rate with the new tax.
Is it lower actually than the
Then, um
And what it says here.
Or could you just discuss a
little bit about effective tax
rates.
Mr. Chair, I think that um my
sense is that.
Uh, we always, we want to be
sort of, we don't want to be uh
the lowest. We don't want to be
necessarily way out of balance
in the highest, Chair,
Uh, we always, we want to be
sort of, we don't want to be uh
the lowest. We don't want to be
necessarily way out of balance
in the highest representative,
and so this chart, I think what
it shows is that we would remain
sort of in that middle of the
pack, even as we equalize,
particularly Chair
Representative, um, if we, if
equalization means uh some
increase in oil, which is by far
the most valuable commodity and
a some decrease.
And natural gas, uh, which is an
important commodity, not as
valuable right now on the world
market, although Great. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Let's go to
Representative Silva.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, chair small. Sorry, my
voice is a little uh bad this
morning.
But one, I just wanted to name,
um, I think that we.
have to take into account the
global dynamics more than uh
0.85% increase that might impact
uh our fossil fuel industry here
in New Mexico.
I think, um,
Understanding whether we.
Whether the Trump administration
lifts Russian sanctions is
important.
Um, I think the tariffs that
Trump is imposing, um.
We could also impact uh oil and
gas industry more than um less
than 1% tax increase ever could.
And so I think looking at these
national and global.
Uh, dynamics is gonna be really
important.
Um
I also think this new, this
potential like very distant
peace agreement with Ukraine is
gonna have a big impact.
On our oil and gas industry in
New Mexico.
And so paying attention to those
things.
I think it's much more important
than what HB.
548 is proposing.
I also think treating this
industry like a mom and pop.
I just vastly underrates the
amount of power that the fossil
fuel industry has in in the
state.
Um, the US tax code on its own.
Offers
tax breaks to the fossil fuel
industry.
Um
That our our real mom and pops
don't get. So they get.
A percentage depletion
allowance.
Uh, tax break.
They also get, uh, they get to
expense intangible drilling
costs.
Uh, IDCs, which means they can
deduct labor and materials from
drilling.
Um, I don't know about you, but
I don't know any other business
in New Mexico that can deduct
its labor.
And the oil and gas industry
can.
And so
If we think
That we are at the same table.
As oil and gas.
When we are just trying to
negotiate our peace as New
Mexicans.
Um, as they extract our wealth.
From the state
I think we sorely underestimate
the amount of power, the fossil
fuel industry has.
Um
And I think we're just trying to
meet them toe to toe.
And so, um,
So I'm wondering, um, Mr. Chair
and Chair Small.
Um, do we have, do we have the
number for the tax expenditure
in New Mexico for um.
That the tax expenditure for uh
fossil fuel industries operating
in New Mexico. Do we have that
number?
I don't,
we don't have that number, but
we can certainly get that to the
committee.
Thank you, chair, uh, in our
report, I read it said something
like 86 million in 2022 was one
of our, our tax expenditure for
um for New Mexico and so, um,
for all of these reasons, um,
that's why I'm supporting uh
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Sillo.
Representative Chandler,
Chandler.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, um, Chairman Small and um
Jennifer, appreciate all the
work you did on this. I just
wanted to kind of bring back the
conversation to some of the
discussions we had the summer
our colleagues, um.
So every year we get a tax
expenditure budget.
Well, we have since now.
Um, we have had tax expenditure
budgets, uh.
Wherein we looked at what, what
uh LFC and others felt was an
appropriate number that we could
absorb as an expenditure through
our tax system.
This year we're not receiving
such a tax expenditure and I um
have deduced that that's
probably because the senses we
need to start trimming back.
On how we, um, view, look at tax
expenditures, the need to invest
in the various funds that we
have created and plan going
forward, um, that's my um
understanding of why we probably
don't have a tax expenditure
budget.
So knowing that.
We are all sit here to charged
with thinking about how we're
going to pay for some of what
I'm going to refer to, not as
candy, but one could, I, I think
with some of the tax
expenditures that were being
asked to take care of, but with
fruits and vegetables. How are
we going to pay for our fruits
and vegetables that we're
looking at here. And so, for
example, we're gonna be looking
at some things that we're gonna
do to try to support the medical
industry in the state, was that
a fruit or vegetable or is that
a candy? We'll have that
conversation, but we need to pay
for these.
things
And we have been not having to
in the last few years, so we
need to look, look at ways to
balance the
Policy decisions we're making
with spending so that we're also
raising and given the fact that
this seems like a very small.
Increase with respect to the oil
industry. I think it's a very
meritorious thing to be talking
about in terms of helping to pay
for some of the other things
that we want to do to help
families and children and um
other expenditures that we've
been looking at, um, Mr. Chair,
and, and, and representative.
Um, I also just want to talk a
little bit about what we've been
doing for the last 5 years
because I think there's been a
little misunderstanding, at
least for maybe some of the
newer members.
We have been cutting taxes for
the last 5 or 6 years, routinely
every year, we've cut the GRT
tax, we have lowered our income
tax, um, for middle class lower
income, and even some upper
middle class uh individuals in
the state. We need to be looking
at that. Maybe we need to be
thinking about raising taxes on
higher income individuals if we
want to be paying for our fruits
and vegetables that we are have
been um.
lining in our various bills that
we've been seeing every year,
um.
What else have we dropped the
tax on? We've increased the
working families tax credit,
which is yet another um great
program I think where we're
helping working people who
actually do spend money and keep
the economy rolling, unlike
perhaps some of the higher
income people in the state who
have the ability to save all
that money and not spend it. So,
um, you know, I'm very
supportive of the idea of
looking for ways fair ways,
which I think this is to
increase revenues so that we can
adjust
what we have in terms of a very
regressive tax system through
the GRT system so that we can
help support the fruits and
vegetables that were all taking
account for Mr. Chair, and we'll
be looking at in the tax
package. So um appreciate this
as one potential, Mister Chair
and thank you for the time to
speak.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Let's go
to uh Representative Terazas.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh.
Uh
here. Um,
I was listening to all the
conversation all together and
I've been listening to.
Fruits, vegetables.
Candy pinatas, negotiation. I
thought it was at the mercado.
And so I, I, I was, I was
thinking, you know, we, we have.
We're blessed to have a cash
cow, uh, in oil and gas.
And it's a symbiotic
relationship between what we do
for our state and what they
produce and how much they, they
are part of that.
And
You know, I was.
I've just been listening to that
and I was thinking.
Um
Man, I said, you know,
I think we're missing some
things here that didn't get
discussed.
And some of those things as
we're saying, well, we're the
lowest, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
we're, we're the lowest in, in.
tax rate or a little bit lower
than metal.
But I would remind this
committee, Mr. Chair.
And for sure.
There's a cost in having
environmental standards higher
than anyone.
In the country
That is a cost.
The state of New Mexico has
decided that it's worth having.
Spent having that cost.
Having the cleanest barrel of
oil in the state of New Mexico,
or excuse me, in the country,
probably in the world.
In lieu of higher taxes.
And hired other higher costs.
I would say, Mr. Chair, um,
chair, that although that is
part of the equation, we're
leaving out a huge part of the
equation of what it costs to be
the cleanest barrel of oil in
the world.
And I think we need to stop for
a minute and think about that.
And when we start easing that,
it costs something else, um that
cost comes from somewhere else.
I'm gonna tell you a story and I
know we're in a hurry, Mr.
Chair, but I'm gonna tell you a
story, um.
That happened in my office, and
I had a guy that showed up to my
offices, do we I want to open a
mortuary just like you.
I said, OK
How can I help you?
I'm always trying to help a guy
that's in, in, in small business
and he comes up and says,
How much
You make on a funeral.
I said
It baffled me
I said, well, I can't really
answer that.
Because you're asking me in the
context of.
How you're going to put your
business plan together.
And I said, and it doesn't work
that way.
Because
My business and your business
plan or your business will be
two different things and
including any other business in
the state.
I may have debt, I may not have
debt.
Have a bigger building, more
employees, less employees.
Bigger fleet
Or investment in in in in what
I'm producing and to to give
that funeral, maybe my standards
are different.
I said, so I can't answer that
for you.
And so this is what we have to
think about, Mr. Chair.
He
is we're looking at, we do have
2 different types of producers.
We have the big large producers.
We have the small ones.
And what can be sustained.
Sometimes by a large producer
can't be sustained by a small
producer.
Here's my question, Mister
Chair. Uh,
He
Of the percentage of all the the
production because I'm not an
oil guy, I'm just a guy that
knows business pretty decent,
but
What
How much of total production
comes from small producers.
Yeah.
Uh, Mr. Chair, represent Razas,
uh, deputy, uh, chief economist.
Um, Ms Fabian said 15%.
So Mr. Chair Representative, I
think what I'm trying to say
here is.
is if we impact those that are
on a thin margin, we got to
remember what
What happens? We're thinking
about when we talk about 1% or
0.85%.
It's a percent that equates to
an overall percentage of cost.
The 1% of what?
percent of a dollar, 1% of
Of 4% which equals closer to 27%
of where they're getting this
this figure.
Essentially, Mr. Chair, we're
increasing their costs by 25% by
25%, 27%, whatever that number
is.
And so I worry about that. I saw
this in the banking.
Mr. Chair.
When I was on, on, uh, uh, on
board.
Where when
Bob Frank passed
They passed regulations, all
cost, whether it's tax or or or
new regulation where it stifled
the the industry with new rules,
God bless you.
Whereas it it stifled.
The industry and the small uh
community banks were stifled the
most because we had to still.
Uh, follow the regulations, the
big banks could that could carry
that because they were so large
they could have 11 person taking
care of uh.
Making sure that we were meeting
the reg the new regulations that
were coming out almost every
other week.
Whereas the smaller guy had to
pay for.
For that same person, but had a
smaller.
smaller size of a business.
So I worry about that, um, Mr.
Chair, what, what that would do.
We all, they have what my
understanding and you can.
Help me with this if I've got
this wrong. My understanding is
that large producers.
Brill the wells
When they stopped producing very
well, and they sell them to
smaller producers.
And then later on, when they get
Have some stifling issues. They
sell them back.
So that they can use the, the
larger producers.
Uh, technology to extract the
rest of that. Does that even
make sense?
Uh, Mr. Chair, um,
representative, I think.
I don't, I, I can't say to sort
of go into uh each and every
dynamic, Mr. Chair
Representative, um, I, I think I
can very much speak to the fact
that
We're our production has grown
pro rata more than any other,
uh, certainly any other place in
the United States.
Our production has grown
particularly since COVID at a
faster rate, Mr. Chair
Representative, that comes
alongside as we have a cleaner
barrel of oil, uh, in part
through regulation, Mr. Chair
Representative, quick point on
that. That's expanding markets
that producers in New Mexico can
sell to, as there are global
markets that realize uh and
value sort of a lower carbon
intensity barrel of oil or
MCF of natural gas that actually
expands the markets that New
Mexico producers can sell into.
Um
And Mr. Chair Representative, I
think the innovation and the
ability to drill deeper and do
more horizontal wells.
is a remarkable positive
innovation. I don't know that
sort of the uh what may have
been 20 years ago, sort of like
a.
Uh, uh, standard that we could
apply. I don't know, Mister
Chair Representative, if that
standard applies now in say 5,
1015 years in the future when
through technological and
innovation.
And all of the things that make
us the lowest cost place to
produce.
Including our our geology. I
think maybe it's sort of really
shifted.
What the, what it looks like and
in a very positive way and Mr.
Chair Representative, that's
been a come back to the sort of.
Reduction levels because that to
me, particularly in my position
carrying HAFC.
That rise in production.
Oh is a remarkable story and one
that
shows every sign of continuing
on.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, I think
what you're saying there is is
the production has increased
really nice and it's helped us a
lot. And why so my question
would be, why did this and
respectful is respectful as I
can say this.
I, I looked at the bill number
and I said this is a last minute
uh.
Um, it seems to me to be wrong.
Mr. Chair, chair.
Why did this all of a sudden
come up.
And, and I'm gonna also, so
because for the, for the, the um
for time purposes, I'm gonna
also ask uh or, or make a
statement or ask.
Um, what made you, Mister Chair,
Chair.
Change from the process that you
normally do because I've heard
you in in in make statements
that the process is very
important interim is very
important. Conversations are
very important.
What changed and why did we do
this all of a sudden.
Mr. Chair represented Assas.
Uh, first, during the interim
and for several interims, I've
had individual conversations.
Asking sort of about the balance
between sort of regulatory
burden and the financial
benefits to the state, such that
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
I'll give you an example that
I've had in conversations
individually which is, should we
consider setbacks.
Or based upon um uh ephemeral
water sources in southeast New
Mexico.
For example, which is a proposal
as a way to better protect New
Mexico's water or Mr. Chair
Representative.
Are there direct financial
investments that we can make in
water conservation, watershed
restoration, water quality and
water quantity,
and I posited the question,
Mister Chair Representative
basically uh sort of thinking
that maybe it's better to do a
direct financial investment.
Based upon large um
As opposed to a sort of a
regulation for a certain part of
the state that may make it, uh,
may make it harder to produce.
Mr. Chair, I've had those
conversations for several years
running now.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, in
answer to sort of the specific
bill.
The fact that this has been
buried in our tax code for 30+
years.
Uh, when I learned of the fact
that this was in the tax code. I
thought it germane enough and
important, Mr. Chair
Representative, um.
I can, that's as plain as I can
say it.
Mr. Chair, here.
disrespectful as I can say, I
always try to be understanding
stuff.
We all have bills that we put
in. I mean, I'm, I'm not gonna
act like it, you know, I don't
come up with something like or
all of us.
Mr. Chair.
There.
You know, you had those
conversations.
It sounds like more with a one
on one rather than all of us.
I would say that as respectful
as I.
Um, Mr. Chair, also.
Um
I, I think
You know, tell my son when we're
doing.
I'm teaching him to be a
business guy.
It's important to understand
Only make money
One of two ways.
And that is you make more.
than less.
do
Just as simple as it is.
And so, um.
That when asked Mister Chair.
Why wouldn't we just let things
go in as a reductions
increasing, we're getting more
money.
Why would, why would, um, we not
maybe.
Permit some more so we could get
a couple more wells or I don't,
you know enough we could pick
this up rather than making more
rather than.
In the other way, Mr. Che uh
very fair and important
question, Mr. Chair
Representative, based on the
policy that we enacted in uh I
think back in
Um, I guess 20.
I think it was 2023.
Mr. Chair, Representative, 2
years ago.
Uh, after FY 25. So after uh the
budget that we're after that
budget FY 25.
All additional direct oil and
gas revenues instead of coming
to either the general fund or
going to the early childhood
trust fund or what have you, Mr.
Chair, Representative, those are
go directly to the severance tax
permanent fund.
Mr. Chair Representative.
Or the important tax policy and
other things that can help make
life affordable for New
Mexicans.
That they, that money is going
directly to the severance tax
permanent fund.
Because Mr. Chair
Representative, at some point,
whether it's the whatever point
that is, and that could be some
people say the 20 30s. I
increasingly, Mr. Chair
Representative,
Because of production, uh,
fossil fuel, the, the, uh,
How it's in everything,
hydrocarbons, I see production
stretching into the 2040s,
perhaps the 2050s is where one
of the most productive places in
the entire globe to produce.
That policy all new money.
After FY oil and gas.
Goes directly to the severance
tax permanent fund.
So, Mr. Chair, on chair, is that
why you created a new way to to
tax this rather than just going
out there and raising and that
not that I want it done, but.
You created a new way rather
than just equalizing it out, I'm
assuming because of what you
just said that it would then go
in, in, into the ferment,
Mr. Chair, in order to give the
legislature the ability to work
on affordability for New
Mexicans and work on these
important priorities, whether
that's health care or some of
the others.
That that is right, yes.
Mr. Chair, chair, I um, I would
say that uh.
We've all gotten drunk on oil
money.
Uh, this legislature has.
And we like it.
Because we can do more for New
Mexico.
I think I would, I, I will not
respectfully support this, but I
would much rather us look at
what we passed last year in in
making a.
an adjustment to that and
opening up our ability, Mr.
Chair, Chair, to understand how
important oil and gas is that
we're seeing like, oh no, wait a
minute, we made this and we
directed it only one way, and we
should curtail that back.
Support exactly what you said,
and, and you know, like I said,
Mr. Chair, here, all of us, um,
Enjoy our ability to help our,
our communities, our districts.
And, and we have a lot of work
to do here.
But uh we definitely might want
to look at that in in in doing
that. So last, just to close
out, Mr. Chair, Chair, I want to
remind again the committee that
there's more cost than just tax.
In doing business.
And Mr. Chair,
Our New Mexico is.
I
As pride in producing that
cleanest barrel of oil.
Believe that we aren't giving
that, there's nothing in this.
Conversation that included the
cost of being that.
And I would.
Really, really ask the committee
to take in consideration.
Um, that
Cost
Where we're at
What it means in the, in the
world market where we stand in
in the tax structure of other
states.
Say we might want to stay where
we're at right now because we're
enjoying increases left and
right.
And, you know, and remind them
that, you know, it might sound
like just 0.85%.
But it's actually about 27%
that's increased. I got a friend
that's in the uh in the grocery
business.
And his margins are only 2 and
3%.
So when we charge a percent.
depends on what you're doing.
So with that, um, Mr.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Tarasas.
Come to the end of our list.
Thank you for the uh vigorous
debate. I, I appreciate the
conversation that we had this
morning. Uh, we will roll the
next two bills, but I want to
just close out with a couple of
things, uh, after taking lots of
notes and, and after hearing the
discussion from both sides, uh,
it's apparent to me that
This is not just something that
you thought of, uh, last week
and and thought to draft a bill
last week and then brought it to
us and it's flown through the
through the process. It's,
that's not the case, right? To
your point that you made,
representative Chairman Small is
that
You saw a discrepancy in the tax
code.
He flagged it, and you thought.
probably affect this in some
way. It also sounds in your
discussion that
This way could be perhaps fluid
in a sense too. So I can
appreciate that as well.
Um, I can, I can already hear
and, and, and see the, the
narrative being written on, on X
or Twitter as it was once called
that uh Democrats hate oil and
gas. Democrats, uh, think it's,
it's a dirty industry and the
only, the only one I use it for
their, their own purposes,
right?
But I think if if that was the
case, then you wouldn't see the
oil boom that you see today,
knowing that the Democrats have
And in the majority for the past
You know, several years,
right? You don't see that,
right? You, if, if it was in
fact the case, and I do believe
that the speaker brought this up
in his discussion that if that
was the case then we would
likely have seen oil and gas
ushered out of the state a long
time ago.
That is not the case. The case
is the fact is that oil and gas
continues to thrive in this
state. When I say not just, I
say thrive, not survive, but
thrive. These guys are, you're
thriving in this state.
And I appreciate the analogy
that Representative Henry
provided about the pinata.
I get it.
I love those kind of analogies
cause I get it cause I, I, I see
it, and you continue to hit this
industry and all of a sudden the
candy stops falling out.
But when I think about this
industry, I think about
What allows this industry to
thrive in this state, and, and I
have a question for you,
Chairman Small is.
Once
This resource.
is taken out of the ground.
Does it regenerate itself.
Mr. Chair, committee, no.
It is
very
very much.
Appreciate that. And so once
it's gone, it's gone.
Right? And so, in a capitalist
society, if you want to, if you
want to consider it that way.
You, you strike with iron is
hot.
And in in in this case, for the
state to not look at these
measures for you as the chairman
of appropriations to say, hey,
there's there's a discrepancy in
this tax code that we are
actually leaving money on the
table or saying things are not
equalized or things could be
looked at differently.
That's, that's providing due
diligence to the state. That's
providing due diligence to this
body and to the citizens of the
state. So I can appreciate that.
And so when I think about
The analogies that that went
further and I, and I heard the
discussions about the Permian
Basin.
And, and I think Chaman Ma, you
can appreciate this and it's a
simple question, but is the
Permian Basin to oil and gas
what maybe
The San Juan River is to fly
fishermen and women.
Uh, Mr. Chair, yes, uh.
Uh, the Permian Basin and
particularly our share sort of
the Delaware portion is, uh, I
think.
Going back to when I first heard
this in 2017, or excuse me, in
2018. I'm sure folks were
thinking about it long before
then, particularly 2015 when oil
export embargo, 2014, 2014, 15
when that was lifted, uh, it is
the sort of
Place in North America and.
If if the San Juan is the best
trout fishing in North America
and maybe competitive globally,
then the answer is yes.
Thank you, uh, chairman. So when
we talk about apples and apples
or apples to oranges, it is
quite in fact apples to oranges
when we're talking about, well,
let's just move production or
maybe
Wyoming is better or Texas is
better or other places in this
nation could be better because
matter of fact is that unless
we're talking about maybe West
Texas, there's probably not a
better place to be searching for
this type of resource anywhere
in in.
In the United States and so when
we talk about this, I I'm
reminded when I
Talks to our legislative finance
economists that it's about about
95% of the big guys and I say
quote unquote big guys that
produce in this state, um.
Export, you know, that that that
those are people that are
outside.
of New Mexico's boundaries.
And then when I think about is
this good tax policy, right?
Generally as a state, we want to
export taxes as much as
possible.
Right, as much as possible to
non-New Mexicans.
This tax
If you want to call it a tax
increase.
is mostly
95% of it towards non-New
Mexicans to benefit.
Citizens
Of this state.
When I think about that, I think
about those benefits and we can,
we've gone around the table and
talked about those benefits and
Chairwoman Chandler to brought
this up in terms of
Benefits we've seen and enjoyed
most recently, right? The
reduction of of of lower GRTs,
the reduction of of of the
income tax rate.
Expansion of of working tax
credits and and the list
continues to go on and on and
the benefits that many of our
citizens continue to, to
appreciate that is.
Protection of water, protection
of, of clean water, protection
of water for farmers.
Health care benefits, public
safety.
And then last but definitely not
least, is is the uncertainty in
regards to what we're faced
against with the federal
government, right?
And I have to say once again
that when we talk about the
dangers of of the oil and
gasses, not the Democratic
Party, but it's
It's got to be these mass
deportations that will take
away.
Vastly the workforce.
Of the oil and gas industry.
So when I think about these
measures, I can appreciate where
you've come from, the thought
you've put into this, the
Diverse discussion that we've
had this morning, and, and, and
I appreciate the work that's
been put in over the past 2.5
hours because this is what it's
about.
And so with that being said, I
would ask our our our madam Vice
Chair one, please make a motion.
Mr. Terry move that we
temporarily table.
It's between 58.
Motion made is there a second.
I could.
Is there opposition to the
temporary table.
Seeing none
Appreciate the conversation this
morning.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman.
Yeah. Are we gonna take up that
Rita bill today or no, we're
not. Oh, OK.
