Representative and then this.
Thank you.
Representative.
I see her signed and she just
waved at us.
Yes allowing.
Representative my assessed.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Romero.
Representative Scott.
Thank you Representative
Stansbury.
Thank you Representative
Strickler here.
Thank you.
I.
Here.
We have a quorum.
Thank you very much for that and
I would know I don't know if you
picked up the line that but
Representative Harper is here
yes I just saw that thank you
okay great very good
So welcome everybody very good
to see you this Monday morning I
hope you've all had a restful
weekends
I would like to call the meeting
to order and let everyone know
who's here for house bill thirty
six that bill is going to be
rolled at least tentatively to
Wednesday so if you're here for
that yeah
You're free to continue with us
but if not you're free to go
first on our agenda for today is
house bill ninety and I believe
we have a secretary Schardin
Clark with us Alain.
But no I don't see how long do
you she is so she's here.
Just need to see her now thank
you.
She's going or by check okay
very good secretary Sharon Clark
do you have anyone else with you
that you'd like to be elevated
into the meeting.
Hi madam chair I just got within
thank you no I don't have any
other staff members to let in
just me today great thank you
very much so we are on now on
house bill ninety tax penalties
and remedies we consider this
bill on Friday and we discussed
it however there was an
amendment which we deferred
actually voting on until today
so people would have an
opportunity to take a look at it
we will be talking about that
amendment first I believe that's
amendment twenty one ninety six
forty one dot two and my did I
get that correct Representative
Harper great okay so I'd be
happy to entertain a motion to
Consider the
the amendment for discussion
purposes.
So moved.
Their second.
Thing we will be talking.
Any objections to discussing
this this amendment no objection
Representative Harper you have
the floor.
Thank you madam chair.
so this is the we we discussed
this amendment on on Friday.
really a good suggestion of
our analyst Mister Moore and Mrs
right.
just make sure that.
This.
paragraph
Leave it
Follows the same structure this
paragraph six of the same
structures I and for of it.
And I think there was one word
knowingly was in there twice and
the point to
just moves strikes that first
one and use it as an at the end
Otherwise it's the exact same
amendment we discussed.
Earlier was that manager yeah
for questions on the amendment.
Secretary do you have anything
to Representative Harper's
comments.
No madam chair and members of
the committee thank you.
Thank you I will look to the
audience to see if there's any
comments on the amendment I
don't see any hands raise anyone
opposing the amendment.
Don't see any hands raised.
With options.
Thank you very much
Representative Scott is there a
second.
I see Representative lu Han
raising her hand as at a second
second second thank you thank
you very much discussion on the
amendment.
Madam chair can you just clarify
what the two oh two numbers on
that please for sure twenty one
ninety six forty one dot two.
Thank you.
I see no discussion on the
amendment any of objection to
adopting the amendment.
I see no objections to adopting
amendment the amendment is stop
adopted we're now on the bill
house bill ninety as amended.
Representative Harper do you
have any comments you'd like to
make on the the bill itself.
I just want to thank the
secretary staff for.
reviewing the amendment and also
for their great work on this
legislation together.
I think we discussed it in
detail on Friday so I'm going to
to the bill content again but I
stand right answer any questions
great.
Secretary park any comments on
the bill itself thank you madam
chair I I agree that we had a
full some discussion on Friday
about the contents of the bill.
Thank you
audience members does is there
anyone that opposes house bill
ninety as amended.
Is raise your hand.
Seeing none a to health
attendees are the are there any
comments and in favor of house
bill ninety.
I see none.
we'll go back to the committee
any additional discussion of
house bill ninety.
I see no hands raised.
I'm happy to ensure an emotion
on house bill ninety.
I'm sure I'll move it to pass.
Okay if there is a do pass
motion by Representative Harper
we're still having waiting for
coffee to get can I think we
need a second.
We.
Very good the second from which
representative I'm sorry record
thank you very much
Representative Strickler so we
have a due pass motion by Harper
seconded by Representative
Strickler are there any
objections to this passing the
bill.
I see none.
Bill has passed committee
unanimously.
Thank you very much for your
attendance Representative thank
you very much Secretary for
being here we are now on house
bill eleven.
And it's my understanding that
we have secretary keys and W.
secretary John Clark in in
attendance if we could have them
elevated that would be great.
Great I see secretary teens and
I see that the secretary Clark
is is there anyone else is Mr
Roper going to be in attendance
with us so I could we get Mr
Roper avail elevated as well
Elaine.
Thank.
I will be presenting on this
bill well I'd like to ask
Representative Stansbury to
chair this portion of the
meeting until the bills done or
secretary chairman Martinez
returns if that's okay.
Yes madam chair sorry I'm I'm
also in another committee but
I'll I'm sorry I know I'm ready
let's let's go okay.
Very good thank you very much
As I said I'm here presenting on
house bill eleven there is a
committees there is a committee
substitute that was sent out
late Saturday early Sunday
morning it's dot two one nine
six six three one two.
Secretary and deputy secretary I
got that right did I not.
Yes chair it's two one nine six
six three dot two very good okay
thank do we have a motion to
move the substitute for
discussion.
So moved.
The second.
Yes.
Okay
the second came from.
I believe that was speaker egolf
madam chair.
Excellent okay and we are on the
substitute for explanation.
And the bill.
thank you very much madam chair
it's a as your to be here was
secretary on fees and W.
secretary Clark I am here to
provide some comments on the
bill as presented and I believe
the my colleagues on the panel
have some comments as well this
bill will provide each immediate
economic assistance to small and
mid sized New Mexico companies
and will also create a long term
more sustainable way to bring
large companies to New Mexico
that will have major economic
impact and create a significant
amount of jobs.
Over the past year between
federal and state assistance New
Mexico businesses have received
over three point two billion
dollars in economic assistance
however more than two thousand
businesses.
Business locations closed
permanently and twenty twenty
and many more are still
struggling trying to keep up on
rent payments and re hire
employees.
House Bill eleven provides two
hundred million dollars to
support small and mid sized New
Mexico businesses that need it
the most and encourage those
businesses to re hire workers
and create new jobs something
that we need desperately this
this money will come from the
general fund research shows that
the hardest hit types of
businesses are not necessarily
traditional economic based
businesses that restaurants and
small retail shops like closing
like closing in those in those
will can all qualify for these
recovery grants.
I'm now going to hand over the
next piece of our presentation
to secretary keys thank you very
much thank you Representative
Chandler and madam chair members
of the committee so basically
that's still has two components
that both expand how we can use
lead up to help businesses and
create jobs but the two parts
are completely separate so the
first one provides immediate
economic assistance in the way
of requests for thousands of
small and mid sized businesses
to use for mortgage rents and
lease abatement so they can re
hire workers or new employees in
speaking with businesses
recently are team discovered
that this is the number one
concern the debt they have
incurred on their rents as you
know Leda is job creation fund
and so the businesses that
accept this money have to commit
to hiring back or bringing back
a specific number of workers and
EDD will monitor these
benchmarks as we do for all
other the the investments we
would utilize the NMFA
application process which is now
already in place and the money
would be paid out through EDD's
Leda funds which permits
assistance for buildings
including mortgage rent and
lease payments.
So then the second part of the
bill provides as a tool to be
able to incentivize larger
companies like big
pharmaceutical companies or
manufacturers to come to New
Mexico for by providing a
partial share of G. R. T.
revenues during construction at
the approval of the selected
county and municipality of these
large companies would not be
eligible for the recovery
requests I just mentioned so the
additional funding will make our
state more competitive for big
job creators it will also ensure
funds are available with great
opportunities arise the
recapture of G. R. T. is limited
to the construction phase of the
project to a portion of the G.
R. T. revenues for projects over
three hundred and fifty million
dollars so really really large
projects these projects don't
come along very often in New
Mexico and they do bring long
term economic gains to the
community so the question has
come up about the G. R. T.
sharing why can't it be used for
smaller developments we have
lead a balances for those
smaller projects what we really
struggle with is winning bigger
deals from other states the goal
of this change is to make a
sustainable we need to balance
so we can move forward with
investments all around the state
thinking that really is kind of
big projects Fund little
projects.
I'm not depleting lead up for a
Facebook or incentive the Asian
a deal we just did in Roswell
our other very large projects we
can say yes to most of want us
to see for farms to hi plains
processing and so many other
smaller projects in communities
across the state and this
provision also uses some of the
new revenues these bigger deals
generate to help us with those
smaller projects so really we
need to do it all and this bill
gives us that to all I'm gonna
go ahead and pass it over to our
deputy John Clark to expand a
bit more on the
constitutionality of this bill
and why we're using leave that
as a mechanism and also to talk
a little bit more about the
process of using G. R. T. funds
and how counties and
municipalities will have the
ultimate decision about whether
they participate.
Thank you Secretary keys and
Good Morning madam chair members
of the committee also the bill
does address across the the key
question that might be raised
about the issue of
constitutionality of how do we
help our businesses messing anti
donation clause leaders granted
an exception to the anti
donation clause of the New
Mexico New Mexico constitution
as long as job creation is
involved so that's why we're
going through the legal process
but also one of the bill
requires job creation for
typical leader deals the EDD
will provide a portion of lido
money up front and then the
companies have to meet certain
milestones set the contract to
receive the additional tranches
of money.
This bill continues that seem
framework by providing one of
the four quarterly payments up
front and then requiring
companies to meet hiring
requirements to receive all or a
portion of the additional
quarterly payments.
One of the constitution requires
leader funds be used for land
building infrastructure and this
can include mortgage rental
lease payments which we know is
a significant concern as the
secretary mentioned.
I also want to talk about is
your teacher and portion of the
bill this allows us to decide
together EDD the county and
municipality if we need to use
this mechanism to attract really
big deals that we couldn't land
other ones all three have to
agree or there's no deal so it's
optional for the local
governments this takes a little
more than half of the New Jersey
revenues generated during the
construction and allows that to
flow back to the project through
the normal legal process in
addition a little bit extra from
the state's portion only for a
total of seventy five percent
will remain in the we to fund so
using some of the New Mexico
revenue generated by the company
to attract other projects or
help local expansions additional
allows a quarter of the revenues
generated to flow to the state's
general fund and nearly half of
the local revenues to stay with
those local governments so this
is a win in terms of jobs and
investment but it's also when in
terms of revenues this is for
occasional really big projects
that we can't land on the wall.
This is a quick example look at
the jobs investment and economic
activity let in Los Lunas is
seen because of Facebook what if
we didn't have enough
uncommitted leader dollars to
compete for that project if we
couldn't deal with the other way
we could have all agreed to use
this it's just a way to make
sure the big kids still passes
by.
With that I'm happy to answer
any questions.
Thank you Jim Representative
Chandler and madam vice chair
and would you like to also take
a moment to explain the steps
to.
yes madam chair and I'd be happy
to to to for that item to W.
secretary Clark if you don't
mind thank you yes please madam
secretary.
Thank you madam chair
representative I'm happy to
answer that so the substitute do
you have in front of you makes a
few key changes the most notable
one is that it changes the
funding source from the
severance tax permanent fund
over to the general fund as a
result of that were also be able
to take out a lot of other
pieces of language throughout
the build relating to tax
documentation requirements
proving that this is an
investment for the state now the
only tax documentation that's
required is just to show that a
business had a decline in
revenues of twenty twenty and
NMFA is going to use that to
prioritize funding to reports
those hardest hit businesses
beyond that the other changes
were adding and mortgage
payments as an allowable expense
in addition to rent or lease
payments.
And then also taking out a
little bit of language that
previously required the entity
to be current on the river lease
payments that language actually
sort of acted against the rest
of the bill in trying to help
businesses get back on their
feet they do still have to show
that they are using these funds
on mortgage rent or lease
payments because that's required
under leader but they don't have
to become current in order to
receive the additional quarterly
payments and those are the only
changes that you see in front of
you and again with that I'm
happy answer any additional
questions.
Thank you and before we move to
the public for comment on the
bill itself would someone like
to move the adoption of the
substitute.
So madam chair.
Thank you.
I can't.
Right thank you so much and we
are on a motion to adopt the
substance you and is there any
discussion about the substitute.
Madam chair I think care proper
motion would be to move
consideration of the committee
substitute not adoption at this
point but that comes a little
later in the process.
Thank you Representative Scott I
think we were gonna try to adopt
the as substitute before before
going to public comment.
The madam chair yes.
So I'm maybe a little rusty the
my understanding is you can
adopt amendments that way
substitutes usually.
We'll have discussion by the
public and the committee then
we'll move a do not pass on the
house bill to pass on the
committee substitute.
Okay.
All right well then that we well
am now move to public comment
and so if you would like to and
speak on this bill or or speak
against this bill please raise
your hand in that purchased an
area and our staff will give you
the opportunity to speak do we
have anyone the public gets like
this becomes bills.
It looks like we have two people
currently with their hands up
I'm first is Brent more.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Brett
for I am a registered lobbyist
for Albuquerque economic
development and today we stand
in support of the provisions of
house bill one of the well we
haven't been able to see the
committee substitute they've
been described in general
Albuquerque economic development
is very interested in the second
part of the the changes that the
secretary that Secretary keys
described the ability to to go
after larger projects would be
very much of a boost to the
state we think that that would
be a great addition to the need
to act and we're very
sympathetic to the the changes
that occur in the first part of
the bill so Albuquerque economic
development stands in support of
the provision that house bill
eleven thank you very much.
Thank you so much add next wave
Jareth by check or.
Yes madam chair a.
Mr project early last year's
your audio Sir thank you for
allowing me to speak on this
bill
We seem to have a bad
connection.
Yes are you now chair.
Yes go head.
I'm sorry Representative the
border yes madam chair.
We can hear you go ahead.
Representative industry
association.
And if with the.
Seems like we might have some
technical difficulties.
The target it's down here in the
executive director of the
international businesses order
manager Community.
And yet Mr projectors are you're
coming in and out.
Trying.
I apologize but we standard we
we stand in fair.
Okay hopefully Mr checker can
get.
The version on the chair.
Thank you so much I'm next up we
have missed the career.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Missy career and I sat on the
New Mexico partnership board and
work with the economic
development corporation of Lee
County I stand in support at age
eleven the goal of the
partnership and the EDC LC are
not only to attract new industry
to New Mexico but for their
attainment and expansion of
current businesses due to the
economic hardships we are
currently facing HB eleven would
allow for New Mexico businesses
to not only have a chance for
recovery but ultimately future
expansion economic development
and diversification are always
crucial but now they are more
important than ever there for I
stand in strong support of HB
eleven to support this current
business and future expansion
development and diversification
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee for the
opportunity to testify.
Thank you so much next that Mr
fitzgerald.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm Sarah
fitzgerald senior vice president
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce the chambers
in strong support of this bill
in both of the two distinct
pieces of it we think the
Sanchez for bringing this
measure forward well we haven't
seen the substitute it does
sound like the biggest benefits
of this bill are still there so
we're we're comfortable standing
in support of first we want to
applaud the legislature's
creative way of getting grants
and the heads of businesses that
have experienced hardship due to
the pandemic.
We like transfer the beginning
especially for businesses in the
tourism and hospitality industry
who can't take on additional
debt and you haven't had a a
positive outlook they haven't
turned the corner and in all
likelihood they they won't for
quite some time an important
need of this grant monies that
spread over the year.
Which could sustain these
businesses
more longer term as we open our
state back up and then of course
we're also in strong favor of
the other piece of the bill that
will allow the city county state
to forgo some tax revenue and
pour it back into a particularly
large economic development
project you don't know when the
next time the Facebook sized
opportunity will come our way so
we want to be ready for it and
that's this bill which use our
strongly favor this bill it will
provide for the immediate needs
of our struggling businesses now
and the future of our state's
economic development and we urge
the committee support thank you.
Thank you so much next that we
have no less than what has.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Melissa hottest I am the project
manager for the Rossell Chavis
county EDC and thank you for
allowing me to speak and I just
want to say that we are in favor
of both parts of the bill and we
support and are in favor of
House Bill eleven thank you
thank you next up we have Steven
and I yeah.
Madam chair out my name is
Steven I out with the New Mexico
association of realtors and we
stand in support of House Bill
eleven.
For all the reasons given.
Thank you so much and last step
we have Jason Espinoza.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico technology council
and we stand in support of the
legislation thank you.
Thank you that should include
our public comment
Representative Chandler do you
have any closing thoughts before
we move to the committee
thank you madam chair I just
want to emphasize how important
a bill this is with businesses
still struggling and moving
towards recovery this bill is a
really creative way innovative
way and I want to compliment the
secretary and the deputy
secretary for their their
insights into how to assist
businesses and I think it's
critical that we provide the
support that is in embedded in
this bill and addition on the
issue of
The G. R. T. sharing I think
that too is an incredibly
creative and innovative way to
try to not only attract larger
businesses to the state but to
supplement Lida Fund in such a
way that small businesses across
the state can benefit so I want
to thank you for your your time
and attention and I really
appreciate and I look forward to
the discussion thank you thank
you madam vice chair and it
looks like we have and
Representative Harper on the
board.
Thank you madam chair and.
Madam vice chair thank you for
reading this bill.
the original bill I had some.
Serious issues with the specials
regard to the funding mechanism.
I'm very happy to see the change
the funding stream to not
include severance tax permanent
fund.
For for those of you for maybe
newer to the committee
Our severance tax permanent fund
is not.
what I would call it a healthy
place we made some changes to
that
Of funding stream for the for
that fund the about six years
ago that help strengthen those
are really hard bill to pass.
and and a lot of the projection
show that this fund over time is
not growing but shrinking so I'm
really glad to see that we moved
away from tapping again the
severance tax permanent fund.
So I guess my first question
madam chair and and
Representative Chandler so this
is now a
In addition to this new
mechanism it's a two hundred
dollar two hundred million
dollars appropriation from the
general fund into the media
account I understand that
correctly.
Madam chair representative
that's correct.
And madam chair of social or I'm
sure that's a one time
appropriation do we know has
this.
I mean this is a new change the
bill so it's not as as of now
it's not going to
appropriations.
Have we talked west
Appropriations are making room
for this the budget.
Madam chair representative
believe we are in I'm I'm happy
to defer to my co sponsor on
that particular answer if he is
available.
egolf.
Your available.
I am available.
Speaker Egolf I believe the
question was is there and room
in the budget to accommodate and
this change in the bill yes so
we have in thank you for the
question we have discussed this
with the appropriations
committees will set finance and
with regard to the framework
that's been adopted and with us
with things works expected to
come this week with regard to a
nonrecurring revenues we think
there's plenty of room to
accommodate this and that it
made long term fiscal sense to
move this from the severance tax
permanent fund to the general
fund not because of the
uncertainty with regard to
future revenues into the
steppers Tax Court
would be there is capacity in
that in that sources well but
just in terms of planning and
long term outlook yeah we think
it's it's prudent to use some of
the one time money remember
we're looking at thirty six
percent reserves and we got
plenty of us.
We're gonna check thank you
thank you speaker and
Representative Harper you still
have the floor.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr speaker.
Okay so
going into some of the the meat
of the committee substitute.
the first question I have is in
regards to that I guess we're
on the first section of the bill
the requests for mortgage ranch
Lisa basements.
the first question
Is this.
temporary.
Every provision in the bill that
will last throughout the
pandemic or will this be.
Permanent of.
Optional leader can use funds
for.
Mr chair representative I
believe there's a time frame
that that I'll ask of the
secretary Clark to address
specifically thank you for that
question madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair vice chair
and Representative Harper so
that provision allowing this to
be used for that it is a
temporary provision essentially
all of the provisions of this
bill that relate to the
disbursement of the two hundred
million dollars our temporary
it's into your project and this
will give the legislature a
couple of opportunities.
In future sessions to take a
look again at how the programs
going if there's any need to
extend it could be done but at
this point essentially it
sunsets in two years and leader
goes back to how traditionally
works but with this added a
G.R.T.  Suren component the
G.R.T.  surely component of this
bill is really the only
substantive piece that would be
per.
Thank you madam chair and the if
you secretary Clark I appreciate
that I'm I was hoping that would
be the answer I can definitely
see the causes of putting this
in
In the league Act for next year
too but want to make sure we
were.
Adding a mortgage is something
that we could cover indefinitely
so I'm very pleased to hear
that.
And then also in regards to the
section of the benchmarks for
higher slash re hire.
madam chair and Representative
the security can you go into a
little bit of detail on how that
is structured.
Feel free.
Madam chairman vice chair
representative Harper all right
so at the bill that you have in
front of you it provides us with
guidelines saying that we have
to come up with a set amount
per.
Employee it is either we hired a
newly hired but it provides us a
little bit of flexibility to
determine a set of calculations
would provide that number but it
provides us with guidance saying
that we need to take into
consideration how hard the
business was hit by COVID
nineteen by looking at the
reduction in revenues from in
tax year twenty nineteen to tax
your twenty twenty as well as
taking a look at the wages of
the jobs that are created this
way this will give us a little
bit of time to work with the
business community and run
through a series of draft
calculations of what that might
look like Mr chair that we are
able to actually get the money
out the door to the businesses
that needed the most while still
putting in place those job
creation requirements to ensure
that this needs the the leader
statutory framework.
Thank you madam chair
representative and deputy
secretary.
yes I'm.
I haven't had time to dive into
this framework in this the
substitute really understand a
deeply.
I understand the reasoning
behind it right to the this we
the statute requires that there
be some.
benefits
and this is kind of how you
don't run afoul of the anti
donation clause.
I also want to be careful that
were.
one not not penalizing
businesses that I'm really
struggled and did what they
could to keep as many people on
staff as they could so that now
they don't qualify because they
can't hire on the amount of
people that is dictated in this
formula.
but also
you know I was to be that that
intent of Rita so.
I guess I just.
I mean do you have a.
Talk about that and I'm sure.
Madam chair members are
representative that's a good
question so no businesses that
have to lay off employees
because of the circumstances are
being penalized by this at all
the bill specifically directs us
only to consider the employment
level from the date of
application for the grant moving
forward so you ways that they
had to lay off because of the
extreme economic circumstances
will not be a detriment towards
the business's ability to
qualify for the grant in fact it
would likely be the reverse
because if they were hit so hard
that they had to lay off a lot
of staff they likely also had a
significant reduction in
revenues and that's was this is
the first thing we need to take
into prioritization of the
funds.
Yes thank you madam chair and
the W. secretary and I
appreciate during that
maybe let me rephrase the
question I had a slightly
different new wants
to it so let's see there's a
business that.
Instead of letting go a lot of
its staff.
I'm really just cut down to the
bone.
So that they can keep their
staff on.
What they.
Then not be able to qualify for
assistance
through this mechanism.
Madam chair and representative
however they would still be able
to if they are essentially cut
down on the hours for their
staff so that they were still
keeping them on board still
trying to help them out with
something keep their budget in
place for example if you're
through the help of this bill
provides they're able to bump
them back up above thirty two
hours a week said that there
full time that will qualify
under this bill because we're
only looking at full time
equivalent employees so exactly
any business that have to reduce
hours for staff had to you know
change a lot of them to part
time if they're able to bring
the office full time they will
qualify.
Excellent
thank you madam chair thank you
Secretary.
All right and then.
In this provision as well
I imagine the clawback
provision.
It is in effect
that was my first or second bill
I passed with clawbacks on your
funds.
and purposely was not
prescriptive in that so that
should be proportional budgeting
puts a a and a question in the
bill.
can you speak to how that
clawback provision plays with
with this proposed provision.
Madam chair representative
Harper and the way the bill is
structured in the way we're
defining terms under here there
are two parts of need and that
typically apply to every single
project we do that would not
apply to this the two parts are
providing security for the funds
are provided in this case the
companies would likely would
have trouble getting security
that's the reason they need the
funds is because they're having
trouble getting back on their
feet of the second part that
does not apply to this specific
provision is the clawback
provisions to put in place while
I ate I absolutely agree with
those club Act provisions
ordinarily building in place and
I know you and I had a great
discussion that during the
session that you put them in
place.
And they're not in place for
this specific two hundred
million dollar project for the
simple fact that the business's
first have to make those.
Those hires in order to get the
additional quarterly payments so
in that way it's a bit post
performance rather than giving
them all the money up front and
then relying on the clawback
provision to make sure they do
what they say they're going to
win this case to get any of
those three additional quarterly
payments they have to do the
hiring what also if the business
is tearing they're struggling to
get back on their feet if they
just barely missed the hiring
department and have to lay off
one person we don't want to go
back and claw back the money
which might in these dire
circumstances actually push them
over the edge.
Madam chair representative and
and thank you secretary it I
appreciate that answer very much
if if this was a permanent.
provision I I think I have some
some.
Heartburn was removing yes
application of that
collaboration.
But that for the reasons you
mentioned first that this is a
you have to
host performance they have to do
the work beforehand that's huge
and also knowing again at this
is temporary
It was the approach he took and
I'm thank you for this awfulness
thank you and and the secretary
and and your team used to
developing that.
Okay
I'm sure it's all right just a
few more questions on the second
provision.
Yes Representative Harper I
believe we have quite a number
of bills on the agenda this
morning so and if we can keep it
brief that would be great thank
you.
Madam chair you're you're you're
very welcome I think the other
ones with a little more quickly
this is a big one we make sure
we get it right.
so.
This second provision of looking
for ways to incentivize larger
companies I believe you said
that.
we're looking at three hundred
fifty.
Million dollar plus.
Construction investments.
And looking to.
do something a little creative
with our gross receipts tax on
those construction costs.
Could you you may be compare
contrast this program to the
existing said program.
Madam secretary.
Thank you madam chair and said
the secretary I'll defer that
question to you.
Madam chair representative I
believe mark Representative one
mark if you'd like to take this
you're welcome to otherwise I'm
happy to take it sure the.
Madam chair Representative
Harper members of the committee
up there it's been this loose
comparison of kids to this G. R.
T. share.
And I would I would suggest that
it's and and it's not anywhere
close
to the same thing.
The the idea behind this was
hopeless born out of the faced
with project itself for the
village of Los Lunas didn't have
general fund monies.
To put towards the project in
order to land that were planted
but the two seventy five percent
of their local G. R. T. share
from the construction portion of
that project to the project
itself what we're doing is we're
expanding on this idea to
include the county and also
include the state's share or
make voluntary to we're all
three parties have to agree to
it we've set capita fifty six
point two five percent so I'm
like I'm like to wear it goes on
and goes on everything it's only
the construction of this project
and it is not it is not on going
it's only for the time frame of
the construction and only
specific to this project any
ancillary activity that happens
because of this is not subject
to this as the tiered would be.
Madam chair representative just
to add to the great information
and Mr Roper just provided I
think another key difference is
that two eight can be used for a
wide variety of purposes and you
know from Martin from things
that I wrote in my prior job I I
think a lot of people are well
aware that I've had some strong
feelings about certain uses of
of Ted's and both that they can
be used very well for very good
purposes but they can also be
used in cases where they're just
not needed where the project
would happen anyway or where
it's for retail development that
might be you're taking revenue
away from existing retail
developments in this case it has
the requirement that it has to
be an economic base industry it
has to be a company that isn't
supporting the local is in
support of our local demand and
so it's a company that can
locate anywhere so therefore by
definition we're competing for
that project and as you Mr river
mentioned if this is such a
large project you are at least
three hundred fifty million
dollars in construction and
infrastructure expenses yes this
is something that we're going to
have to compete very hard for
and there just isn't an existing
mechanism that really allows us
to do that.
Madam chair
Representative Secretary Mr over
thank you for the answer that
question it is.
So so too is a tax increment
districts have been you
successfully for some projects
and not so successfully for
others and they have their
challenges.
everything from being a proofed
by
you know.
Somewhat political entity.
to.
You know.
Like you said these dollars not
indirectly used for perhaps what
we would call economic
development.
so I'm glad to see the
differences that you spelled out
here in this program I want to
make sure that.
were being sought for that we
don't.
Have some unintended
consequences starting this this
program.
Without looking at lessons
learned from to so I'm I'm
really pleased to hear that
you've you've done that.
and then could you just go
through the breakdown of G. R.
T. how it's structured here what
percent of local what percent of
unity what percent of state.
and where those let's go.
Groper over said deputy
secretary Clark could assist
with that answer that be great
yes madam chair I'd like to turn
it over to you and Mr occurred.
Madam chair of Representative
Chandler Representative Harper
of the bill the bill anticipates
fifty six point two five and as
being a maximum of local I G. R.
T. and that's a that's general
fund disbursement that doesn't
count specials.
That would be applicables to the
the the municipality of the
county it also allows up to
seventy five percent to
disbursement into the lead a
fund of the state funds but we
also anticipate that being a
maximum of fifty six point two
five percent out of the state of
funding to that particular
project and the reason that's
that we feel that significant as
US secretary Keyes previously
mentioned it's it's a way of
providing a funding stream into
the leader of program that it's
kind of a benefit from one of
these large projects when we
landed to allow us to help staff
project have that project tell
local expansions smaller
projects that that we would be
able to help through traditional
leader funds so it's in up to
fifty six point two five percent
of all revenues a general fund
revenues not specials and then
the balance would be placed in
the in the stateLee to fund for
future projects.
Madam chair representative
Harper just to elaborate a
little because your I know
you're very detail oriented you
might ask why fifty six and a
quarter percent of the reason
why it says that in the bill is
the idea was that seventy five
percent of the new tax revenues
generated would go into the lead
to fund and then all of that
seventy five percent seventy
five percent could then flow out
to that particular project with
the remainder staying in there
that that seventy five percent
of seven five percent is that
fifty six and a quarter percent
you see in the bill however yeah
we didn't want to hold on to
local government revenues in our
leader fund so the local
government revenues flow
directly to the project only
that additional slightly under
twenty percent of state revenues
would stay in the fall.
Madam chair and.
Representative and.
Mr over Mister park thank you
thank you for anticipating my my
question that's exactly what I
was looking for that
understanding.
and so the the quarter percent
does left over
Is that a state and local
additional me understand that.
Or just the.
Madam chair and representative
Harper this so the for the new
revenues generated by this
project twenty five percent
would still flow through to the
general fund okay but the almost
fifty percent it would be forty
four in the point seventy five
percent
of the would flow to the local
governments for these.
Got it okay so that that twenty
five percent of the new revenue
is just goes to the general fund
correct okay.
Right I I understand that the
construct now thank you for
taking the time to explain that
and I see that the wisdom in
that that you are still looking
for new revenues to the to the
general fund your you're also
still allowing new revenues to
flow through the Yunis for the
same time taking a fortune of
new revenue.
And having it sent a significant
portion of the revenue going
back to the project as an
incentive.
And it's still a small portion
that new revenue going to lead
us so I can help on other
projects.
It's it's a fascinating
construct and I hope I hope it's
a hope it works well.
I will go ahead and thank you
for the time and you know the
floor back thank you madam
chair.
Representative Harper looks like
we have Representative monthly
next please.
Thank you madam chair
I do have a.
I I I like where this is where
this bill is going but I do have
concerns I'm not sure and this
question might be for.
For the department but just
putting.
Something under lied under the
title Rita.
does that alone.
Get us around the anti donation.
Concerns I mean
One of things I'm I'm very
concerned with that we that we
do something.
but in the end it's challenged
and and overturned.
At.
I'm just wondering just putting
it in that under leader if that
alone is enough to get us past
the anti donation concerns.
Madam chair of Representative up
a let John Clark elaborate but
point I would make is the bill
specifically requires job
creation and I think that's a
key element of leader Madam
chair representative but all I I
know John is much more
conversant in the actual details
thank you.
Thank you madam chairman vice
chair and Representative Montoya
you're correct we can't just put
it under Leda and have a
qualified there does have to be
that job creation component
which is a big part of why that
is in here
the the constitution does
require that in order to be
valid under the lead Act section
to the anti donation clause that
there has to be job creation
associated with it so that's why
we have that requirement in
place.
Thank you madam chair and and
Mister Clark I guess my concern
is it from from just.
Putting it there and saying that
job creation needs to take
place.
If there's no security and then
there's no clawback provision.
But it just seems to me it's
just a direct give away so
that's my concern is is I think
that were under Lita.
With the regular.
Requirement so I I can see how
that might be able to be the
case
And I know we're all desperate
to get money to the folks as as
a as a mom I am just concerned
that that minus the those two
provisions.
It's really nothing more than a
grant and no guarantee that any
of that takes place could you
elaborate on that Mr Clark.
Madam chair representative
Montana.
The bill does require that the
businesses and do the job
creation first and then we would
give them additional quarterly
payments but you're correct
there aren't any clawback
provisions for to require that
that the company keep those jobs
long term
and and but again the reason why
that's not in here is because a
lot of these businesses are
struggling to have a real chance
to get back on their feet
They might have.
A little
we have to step back here and
there as they move forward and
we want to make sure that we're
not going in calling back funds
at the time when they're
desperate where we push them
over the edge but it is still
post performance they have to
you know in good faith create
these jobs the quarterly
payments take place over a year
so in order to qualify for all
of the quarterly payments they
do have to be adding jobs over
the course of the year we don't
just require that they bring
them on for a week or two are so
over the course of the year at
that point we feel like they've
made a good faith effort to try
to we hire people and we built a
business.
Thank you Mr Clark
So.
Madam chair and and and and if I
can still direct questions to Mr
Clark and I think he's the right
person for this
So a business that has been shut
down.
That is somehow hanging on still
trying to pay their bills
haven't brought any employees
back.
Yet.
They would be able to apply for
this even though they're in
desperate need now they would
they would.
Have to wait at some point to
bring on employees my my
concern.
Is is two fold that.
Because they're in that
position.
and because as you stated
earlier that
The employer could hire someone
back but if they were still
struggling.
That we don't want to punish
them for maybe what would be a
bad turn they had that left that
same employee go.
For an employer could take an
employee
who's less than thirty two hours
or thirty two hours and and move
them up to full time.
But that's at the time of
application.
That also appears at a a
business that.
House maybe a couple of full
time employees could take them
down below.
That and and making part time
for for just prior to
employment they're doing prior
to applying.
I mean I I think that's why
they're.
The provision that related now
to make sure that we're funding.
Long term full time employees
has the security on the clawback
provisions in place that's why
I'm I'm I'm I know what we're
trying to do and we're really
trying to get around
essentially.
The the anti donation.
Issues that we have in our
constitution.
I think rules reasons it is a
it's a concern especially for
those businesses the ones that
are in the worst shape right now
are the ones that are just not
allowed due to the governor's
health orders to.
Get back to work.
I think this can help some
businesses and I and I I I.
I know the limitations are
working in here.
I'm I'm just I'm concerned and.
I don't know that I'm gonna be
able to support this today I
hope as it goes along maybe we
can find.
Some other answers that could
could help I'm just I have a
hard time with something that I
that I.
C. as anti anti war against the
constitution.
Visions for for.
All.
Just giving money.
To to the to a taxpayer to a to
an entity directly it just seems
to me this is really just a
grant.
With.
Now I mean I can see in the
benchmark going forward but the
first time it seems like it's
pretty easy game.
I.
I'm gonna be working on this.
Madam chair and and and Mister
Clark I if we can make this work
were.
Greg get over the quote I think
a constitutional issues.
Like to support and I I just
don't know that I can do that
today without.
Maybe some further resist
revision so sinister Clark I'm
I'm gonna talk to you offline.
And see if there's a direction
we can go and just don't think
today I can I can support this
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative monthly
at we are now on Representative
Scott.
Thank you madam chair.
W. secretary Clark.
This two hundred million dollars
I believe I heard.
Earlier in the conversation that
it was
In addition to three point two
billion it has already been
directed at the so relief
efforts is the target audience
for this two hundred million of.
Similar pool.
Madam chair representative there
there've been a lot of relief
efforts targeted at various
groups this targets it at but
we're sort of businesses that
really need to requirements one
that they were the hardest hit
businesses in New Mexico that's
why the bill requires us to
prioritize funding towards the
businesses that have the
greatest revenue loss going from
twenty nineteen to twenty twenty
but also those businesses that
while hardest hit still have a
chance to get back on their feet
in addition to the job creation
requirements needing to be in
there in order to meet the
constitutional requirements
under Rita those requirements
are also there as a measure to
say does this business have a
chance to get back on their feet
the funds are used to help them
rebuild we hire and build their
business back up but there
unfortunately there will be some
businesses that just aren't able
to do that and even with help
won't be able to make it
it is absolutely heartbreaking
this is heartbreaking that over
two thousand business locations
have already closed in New
Mexico but this bill does target
those that are the hardest hit
also still have a chance to
rebuild and get back on their.
This thank you madam chair
Mister Clark president answer so
to get in the queue for this
money there will be some yard
stick with respect to.
Revenue losses that occur.
Madam chair representative yes
that that's correct.
And madam chair Mister Clark do
you have a yard stick with
respect to dollars of state
funds that will be expended for
jobs created or elevated.
Madam chair representative not
yet we'll be working on a set of
calculations it will be just one
set number since the bill asks
us to look both at prioritizing
funds towards the hardest hit
businesses but also looking at
the wages of the jobs are
created so what we will do is
we'll work to create an easy
simple calculator that will put
on a website it'll likely go on
NMFA's website because NMFA will
be doing the processing of
applications and payments and
the calculator your businesses
will be able to go and and and
say these are the jobs I'm going
to create these wages this is my
percentage revenue loss in
twenty twenty how much for job
does that mean for me and this
quick calculator will be able to
give them an answer so that they
know what to expect.
And madam chair.
Okay Mr Clarke.
What about.
What it provisions going
forward.
Are we relying on those business
owners to provide accurate
information.
Hello if any auditing will occur
on page being provided.
Madam chair representative we're
going to rely on the auditing of
provisions and ways the NMFA has
come up with to try to weed out
your false applications that
they they devised as part of
their application process for
the grant program last year.
Okay okay madam chair.
Mr Clarke this is with regard to
the big projects provision here.
Are there any.
Jobs created Mr sticks that go
with that or is it strictly
three hundred fifty million
dollar expenditure or greater.
Madam chair representative so
that your T. sharing provision
it's a new mechanism that allows
us to supply funding all of the
existing leader requirements are
there there's no minimum job
level that set there but it
would do everything under that
provision would flow to the
traditional leader process the
be subject to the local
governments issuing ordinances
we provide a lot of information
to LFC in DFA on each of those
projects and were scored by LFC
on our quarterly report cards on
both the dollars per job created
as well as the dollars of
private investment that we get
for each dollar of state
investment so you know we would
be keeping those in mind
whenever we set those
benchmarks.
Okay and just last question
madam chair and Mr Clark would
these.
Folks with these very large
projects also be eligible for.
The program specifically.
Industrial revenue bonds.
Madam chair representative yes
it would work the same way as if
we have the the leader funding
available to compete for that
project from the general fund
they would still be able to make
use of all of the other
incentive programs that are
currently available to.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr Clark very thorough
answers.
Thank you representative Scott
we have Representative Strickler
next please.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you a.
Mr Clark at.
I want to.
I need some help and and maybe
give me some examples the
restaurant industry been hard
hit
of the yet two thousand
restaurants is my understanding
five hundred closed.
And that's that's twenty five
percent of the total company
closures interstate two thousand
can you give me an example of
how this would help all of some
of those rock restaurants that
are you know in pretty bad shape
and I'm hoping that those
restaurants will be allowed to
vote soon.
That would be great but can you
cannot give me an example how
this program house bill Levin
will help the restaurant
industry.
Yes madam chair representative
this portion of the house bill
Levin two hundred million
dollars appropriation is
designed to help a wide range of
industries beyond those to
traditionally function under
need to so yes there the
restaurant industry would
qualify that the cut off there
is that you have to have fewer
than seventy five employees so
that most restaurants would
still meet that requirement
going back to an earlier
question that also relates to
yours we'll be looking at the
quarterly unemployment insurance
filings so a business can simply
be reduced hours for employees
right before applying and then
increase them above that
threshold after applying to make
them qualify will be able to see
that in the quarterly you why I
so that will be will have to
issue some rules in order to
give clear instructions on
everything related to this
program that will be one of them
of how we're going to look at
those unemployment insurance
filings but yes the restaurant
industry would absolutely be
able to utilize this a lot of
those restaurants have been very
hard hit and because the bill
asks us to prioritize funding
towards the hardest hit
businesses the likely be some of
the first in the queue.
Thank you madam chair and and
and thank you Mr Clark
no one particular restaurant
they're they're down to a
skeleton crew about eight eight
police their normal
employee counties thirty to
thirty five so they would they
would be able to take advantage
of this program is a first come
first serve it you know so they
need to is that right I mean.
To qualify obviously.
Madam chair representative we
wouldn't to immediately first
come first serve because the
bill asks us to prioritize based
on how hard hit the businesses
were rather than first come
first serve so we would work
with MFA to figure out
application windows and then be
able to take all the
applications and prioritize them
based on how hard hit those
businesses were but also the
bill tells us to set aside a
portion of funding for those
businesses that still aren't
able to reopen under the public
health order bill says the NMFA
in EDD have to estimate
what questions should be set
aside based on the number of
businesses that fall in
industries that are still
required to close and how many
employees represented by those
industries but that up to twenty
percent should be set aside
until public health orders allow
this businesses to Rio.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr Clark M. created.
Thank you it looks like we don't
have any other members on the
board and what is the pleasure
of the committee.
Madam chair like to the
substitute for house bill eleven
for adoption.
Thank you Representative Amanda
I think we need to get that
motion just so that or or mail
seconded the motion of a do not
pressed for House Bill eleven
and a due process for taxation
revenue can you substitute for
house bill that.
All right we're on a do not pass
for the subset of that house
bill eleven and to do pass for
the day and taxation and revenue
substitute I'm let's take the
role please.
Representative covenant.
Representative speaker you got.
Yes.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative numbers.
Yes.
Representative huh.
Yes thank you so much.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
No I'd like to explain member
of.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Stansbury yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
Representative programa.
Elaine I believe that
representative and then I is on
bone it looks like she's just
been unmuted.
Yes.
Thank you.
Did you get my vote.
No idea thank you thank you.
And madam vice chair Chandler.
And employees in did we get her
vote well.
And learn.
I'm sorry yes.
Thank.
Chairman Martinez.
Who is absent we have eleven in
the affirmative.
All right bye as well as the
eleven in the primitive one in
the negative is that correct
correct and that the M. House
Bill eleven does not pass the
house tax and revenue substitute
for House Bill Levin does not do
passed and we have
Representative month by ads here
explains that.
Thank you madam chair once again
I I am.
What this
Inventive way of trying to
address the issue before us am I
do have a very serious
constitutional concerns
especially since the money's.
Are going are are going for rent
lease payments and mortgage
payments where I I believe those
are specifically excluded the
dollars are supposed to go to
land buildings infrastructure
and equipment so.
I have some concerns of mine get
over those concerns I would like
to be able to support this bill
and in the meantime I Mr Clark I
will be reaching out to you.
Great thank you so much and with
that Jim I'm gonna hand the
gavel backed by Jerry Kammer
thanks everyone.
Thank you everybody for your
consideration of the prior build
very much appreciated thank you
on Representative Stansbury for
for carrying the gavel through
that that discussion we are now
on house bill forty nine exempt
so security from income tax and.
Leave the presenters are
Representative Brown and gal are
they available.
Representative brown has been
promoted I don't not do not see
Representative Dow okay.
Nice to see you representative
brown what are you
going solo today on this bill.
Thank you madam chair I I
believe we will have
Representative Dow joining us
and I'm not sure of
Representative Gail Armstrong
will be able to but I hope she
will.
So.
Please proceed Representative
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee will
good morning to everybody I'm co
sponsoring house bill forty nine
we have all together I primary
sponsors on the bill and quite a
few
Who are supporting the bill R.
as well.
madam chair and members of this
bill proposes to stop state
taxation of social security
income.
Right now New Mexico is one of
thirteen states that does tax
social security.
And
of those states it is one of the
one once the most heavily taxes
SSI.
So for me this bill is really
all about fairness to
to workers to
you know work to and put money
into their social security funds
and they were taxed on on this
with to the payroll tax as as
they were working and so when
they are in New Mexico residing
in New Mexico in receiving their
of their budget now they're
getting another chance and we
know that there are a lot of
senior citizens who find this to
be fundamentally unfair and I I
would agree with them.
And
So any time we have a tax policy
that specially birdies
people who are in there you know
they're they're they're trying
to rest from their labors
they've worked hard their now
retired and the state drugs some
of of that income is it can be
very very difficult but
basically it's it's really all
about fairness.
I believe that the passage of
this bill and this bill has been
from before the legislature in
years past I believe is it does
pass this year that it would be
very good for the state in a
number of ways which we will
explain in just a little bit.
Receive madam chair quite a bit
of email and phone messages on
this bill and the there of
there's a lot of support for it
just recently received a letter
from the federal retirees
organization nursing it's called
and they gave us get the
actually gave me more
information about why this
taxation is unfair I'll try to
touch on that just a little bit
it's a it's a aspect of it that
I had not really considered
before.
Hi this point madam chair I'm
gonna see if Representative Dow
is with us and would like to say
a few words before I turn this
over to our expert witness.
Which route I noticed some
Representative Gail Armstrong is
here I don't know if you you're
going to make some comments as
well yes yes madam chair at both
of those ladies I hope we do so.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative brown for
allowing me to sign on to this
legislation we both had
constituents in our areas ask us
to carry this we did so last
year madam chair and we were we
ended up combining are built so
appreciate Representative brown
taking the lead on this
Of the the people that are
paying this tax are our
volunteers and our schools our
local libraries our local food
banks the gentleman who brought
me this is retired from our
county one of my counties that I
represent and has some Barnes
named after him at our county
fair he is he and his family
were instrumental in helping
getting a fair going in our area
want to mind one of my counties
and and he said you know misty
did you know this and I said he
whole what I didn't have any
idea so I'm not at that age to
be able to retire and I had no
idea this was happening
I just read a report this
morning a few research center
we're New Mexico is right are
one of the worst states to live
one of the most dangerous is put
dangerous places to live and if
we could just
one little smidgen of something
that would help attract people
to New Mexico I think this would
be a great start so how again
thank you representative brown
and Dow and everyone who's been
trying so hard to get this
passed and thank you for the
opportunity to speak thank you
madam chair.
Thank you I believe
Representative Dow is now
presently this and I'd like to
give her an opportunity to say a
few words.
Thank you at chairman and thank
you Representative about doubt
brown for allowing me to sign on
this is also something that
constituent constituents in my
district have asked for and I
see this economic opportunity we
talk about diversity our economy
especially around tourism not
only is America about to have
what they call the silver
tsunami our baby boomers and our
aging and for the first time in
the history of our our our
nation senior citizens will be
the largest population for the
first time in our history by the
year twenty thirty and we talk
about the need to diversify our
economy we need to attract
retirees that have disposable
income in the last committee
there's a lot of questions like
does this benefit the poor
because we are we don't charge
so secure tax associate income
for folks under thirty thousand
this is an economic initiative
economic development initiative
and it's it's intentionally
retaining our New Mexico react
retirees benefit from working in
our state they can retire our
state and this is an intentional
effort to to get a little bit
closer to parity with our
western states like Arizona who
attract retirees with retirement
income add on an RV at garages
to their vehicles to buy info in
a to go to the golf course and
the county and then eating the
clubhouse and tip the waitress
and I believe that
Representative Armstrong alluded
to the fact that these are
senior citizens who volunteer in
our communities and that is
definitely true of the
non profits into the
consequences do they rely on
senior volunteers to the senior
foster parent program through
the senior companion program
there are retirees who volunteer
and throughout our state and
contribute greatly lowering the
cost of the state doing business
on behalf of our vulnerable
populations but also lowering
the cost of our contractors who
serve on behalf of the state and
so I think it's a grand idea to
when we talk about our thirty
six year eight parks and who's
going to come in who's going to
visit.
That we intentionally think of
ways to help people buy
properties pay property taxes
contribute to our communities by
and shop in our communities and
stay year round are snowbirds
are testimony that they love New
Mexico but they typically go
back to their home state where
there is a friendlier tax
environment for retirees this is
a step in the right direction
and I'm very proud to be a co
sponsor.
thank you very much for that
Representative Delem
Representative Brown any other
comments before we go to the
audience.
Yes madam chair I do have an
expert witness I would like to
have promoted from the waiting
room to panelists status his
name is John Garcia.
And he is a former New Mexico
cabinet secretary for the
economic development department
and and tourism department and
so if he is available now.
By name I do see is named
representative around Mr Garcia
can you hear us.
Mr John Garcia.
If you're speaking you're still
muted.
Representative Brown I seem to
be able to charge him.
Into speaking.
We.
Representative Mr Garcia Dawn
Garcia here we are greater.
Hi Mr Garcia yes thank you madam
chair.
Thank you have a few COVID you
wish to share with the committee
yes I did madam chair members of
the committee my name is John
Garcia I'm executive vice
president of the home builders
association of central Mexico
I'm the former secretary cabinet
secretary of tourism but the
state New Mexico and former
secretary of the economic
development for the state of New
Mexico madam chair.
just been as was said before
there's only thirteen states
that currently taxed so security
income
it was actually in nineteen
ninety
we we the state pays that
thirteen million dollar deficit
and they had a balanced budget
amendment at the time and the
the night before the close of
the session and then amendment
was made to the budget to
include a tax on social security
income try to make up the budget
gap
It passed and ever since then
it's been difficult for the
state to try to amend or change
This tax on social security on
fixed incomes
A. A. R. P. will tell you that
of the you know there are fifty
five thousand New Mexicans that
are the primary care caregivers
for for grandchildren right now
back in the past the madam chair
there's been attempts through
the military and native American
affairs committees look at
exempting those this specific
demographics from paying the tax
because we try to get some
equity for those folks Mexico is
one of a few states that does
not do dynamic scoring.
And if if they did they would
not look at just the expense of
the cost of the of the tax but
the benefit of
of having a good tax policy
in here's a demographic with
about seventy seven million
excuse me seventy seven percent
of the population where wealth
is of in this demographic and
yeah we we try to push them away
Madam chair representative Brett
of now talked about the
opportunity we're one of the few
states in America that does not
actually recruit retirees and
there's been a handful of us
over the last years to try to
see we can can do to diversify
the economy in New Mexico
especially as we look at the end
of the oil and gas being so
dependent of our budget of that
income in that revenue.
This would be a great way to
attract this demographic to New
Mexico and by not taxing them
there with that would also be a
huge benefit for for that
met madam chair members the
committee I know there's
probably a lot of questions and
more to comment about this
we did look at the F. I. R. the
F. I. R.
Obviously it's a hit to the
budget of around eighty two
hundred million a year again
this is something we should and
I know Representative Harper has
looked over the years it
holistically looking at changing
our complete tax policy but in
the in the interim until we get
to that place where we can
really right side our tax system
this is a good bill and I hope
you supported madam chair all
stand for questions thanks thank
you very much I'd like to go to
the audience before we go back
to committee with questions and
comments so and ask people to
try to keep your comments please
brief I would first like to hear
for from folks who are in
support of this Madam so please
raise your hand if you are in
support of this measure.
Okay all right I'll start going
down the list and as I said to
try to keep your comments brief
within the two to three minutes
time frame Mr Dominic Silva.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Dominic Silva and with the
independent community bankers
association of New Mexico we
have thirty four community banks
around the state and we operate
in all thirty three counties
around the state.
Deposits are very important.
Not only to our banks but to our
communities when we get deposits
we have lending opportunities
not only for families that
mortgages about for small
businesses and it's key that
thank what we just went through
this last year but community
banks around the state were
responsible for lending out one
point four billion dollars to
small business one point four
billion dollars and we wouldn't
have that opportunity unless we
have the support of our members
around the committee making
those deposits so for that we
wholeheartedly support this bill
thank you.
Thank you Mr Bill Marcin.
I.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chairman members of the
committee committee.
My name is bill Morrison from
Santa Fe.
I am speaking on behalf of the
New Mexico Hey on our P. members
and voters in support of house
bill forty nine.
Number one on my list is social
security retirement benefits.
Or never intended.
To be used to enrich state
treasurers.
They are all intended for those
individuals who have earned the
privilege of receiving those
payments thank you earn that
privilege by paying into the
system.
While they're in the the
employment in their careers.
Second.
The current exemption for
persons over sixty five is
woefully out of date due to
inflation and the recent
doubling of federal standard
deductions.
Order New Mexico's or on fixed
incomes clearly feel the effect
of inflation more than most of
us.
Mexicans borough this support
for shipment blunt run to of
drug and medical inflation that
is significantly higher than the
overall inflation rate.
These are two of the concerns
that we have a.
Many others have been voiced by
a previous speakers.
So on behalf of New Mexico
membership.
We request your yes who.
Them favoring this important
legislation.
Thank you very much Mr Morrison
will Mexico to Mr Charles
Lehman.
Mr Lehman.
Thank you thank you madam chair
my name is Charles Lehman I am
an economic consultant in
Albuquerque in support of this
bill our service staff for the
legislative jobs council which
identified retiree retraction of
the way to a burst of fire our
economy the legislature but did
this project in the past we put
up a website we've done research
we're not so violent advertising
researcher New Mexico State
University shows that ninety
three percent of potential
retirees to the Mexico are
concerned about paying the
social security tax it's also a
factor and national rate and
senator your would your magazine
Galbraith New Mexico because of
our social security tax we're
we're the only thirteen states
to do it Representative
disadvantaged insurance Arizona
and Nevada we were those records
for further information about
the Mexico former campaign we
believe it to be much bigger yes
the director done away with.
Also want to say that you would
as Mr Garcia pointed out.
Which are not calculated in the
FIR each retiree health so six
seven thousand dollars state tax
liability.
By direct direct express your
your one hundred and forty one
thousand dollars a year.
There is work with the issue
something is not there I have a
double tax on the job is the
only one in New Mexico the.
Ward there's something that
we're sure you're practicing
your work older larger and
should benefit something like
this where they get over here's
your reward versified part of me
just very important.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr Lehman Mister Steven Anaya
please.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Steven and I am the CEO of the
New Mexico association of
realtors we've also the realtors
have been working with the John
Percy on the home builders New
Mexico state and others.
On the initiatives to attract
retirees to New Mexico impacts
since the pandemic we've we've
actually seen some activity of
people moving to New Mexico
Because of their wide open
spaces that that we do have been
we actually see this as an
economic development
initiative so we definitely set
support the stand in support of
house bill forty nine thank you
thank you very much Mister and I
Mr Leri Sonntag please.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members I'm Larry
Sonntag representing us New
Mexico business coalition which
represents hundreds of
businesses and thousands of New
Mexicans around our state many
of those New Mexicans are
retirees of worked many years to
reach retirement and collect the
social security earnings that
they have paid into usually for
decades many of these retirees
are on a small fixed income and
need every penny that they get
from the social security
earnings.
The co sponsors of this bill and
the expert witness covered great
points and we complete we we
agree completely it's it's a
matter of fairness and it's also
a matter of economic development
and so many other good reasons
that New Mexico business
coalition says it's time for us
to join the other thirty seven
states that already accept
social security earnings from
state income tax in BC strongly
supports HB forty nine and we
urge all committee members to
say yes on this bill thank you
thank you very much Mister
Santiago miss Serra fits Gerald
please.
Misfits Gerald thank you madam
chair members of the committee
I'm cert that sterile senior
vice president with the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
the chamber offer strong support
for this bill for all the
reasons you heard the Sanchez
discussed so thoroughly as
you've heard where we were up
one of homemade thirteen states
just a handful they do tax the
social security benefits the
seniors of course for tax on the
income they contributed to
social security and under the
current system they're also
taxed when they receive those
benefits now it doesn't make
sense it's something that makes
retirees think twice about
moving to New Mexico to enjoy
their golden years or about
staying here if there are any
residents and it's a practice
that we need to discontinue we
also want to emphasize the
benefits to having seniors in
our community that you heard
already from retirees
volunteerism to the ways they
support their grand children and
other family members both
financially and otherwise so the
chamber wants to see New Mexico
become one of the top places to
retire in this bill is a step
toward that goal we urge your
support for these reasons thank
you.
Thank you very much Mrs fitz
Gerald karla Kugler
Karla Kugler.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is.
I'm afraid we may have lost do
you miss Kugler.
This Googler.
I don't see her name up any
longer let's move on to Jason
Espinoza amazing maybe Mr Cutler
get back on Jason Espinoza madam
chair members of the committee
Jason Espinoza registered
lobbyists with the associated
general contractors New Mexico
we stand in support of house
bill forty nine which repeals
New Mexico's tax and social
security.
If it's as you've heard before
in New Mexico is one of only
thirteen states that currently
does in over the last decade
either of those states have
significantly reduced their
taxes in New Mexico now has one
of the heaviest taxes on social
security benefits in the nation
I we also look at this is taxing
social security income is really
a form of double taxation since
New Mexicans pay income tax on
the money that's deducted from
their paychecks for social
security and that were taxed
again on the benefits they
receive we've seen studies that
say every dollar of social
security income generates a
dollar seventy one and economic
activity so we believe repealing
the social security tax will
generate local economic
development that will create
jobs for New Mexico workers
especially in a retail real
estate and healthcare industry I
thank you madam chair thank you
Mr Espinoza and I have a name
name cocktail but there's no
last name so Kyle could you
please state your full name when
you speak please.
Your yup it Bennett.
Hi million ship a good morning
madam chair in a committee
members my name is Kyle Jim and
I am from Shiprock New Mexico
here in the napa nation and I
just want to address that I do
not agree with taxation on the
on the elders for all the money
that they work hard and for and
I the father a farmer in that
work in the nonprofit sector
representing an introspective.
Operated and I feel that as the
thirty two year old adult that I
was through.
Reach such an age that I would
not want to be taxed twice for
all my Harding than being a
productive member in society and
so I feel that just living here
in New Mexico and then in the
Navajo Nation yeah it it's very
difficult we survive in a low
income community but it is very
much up to the people to create
every opportunity and so at this
time in enrollment I do not
agree with the taxation thank
you.
Thank you very much I see no
other hands up in favor those in
opposition to this bill please
raise your hand.
Okay keep men's Karen Witt lock
if you will.
Thank you madam I'm madam chair
money can we lock with the
national association of social
work New Mexico chapter and
we what we think the Sanchez for
bringing this bill we feel at
this point in our state and our
state to stream we we are.
The in theory not opposed to
this at all but it this point in
our
in our state's history we trying
to transition away from oil and
gas we have to be very careful
about the
the sources of revenue this
would you know approximately
eighty two hundred million
dollars a year that this would
be a huge asset to our budget.
Once we stabilize our income a
little bit more and diversify it
I believe that we would be able
to support the spoke at this
point we can't we thank you very
much thank you miss with block
amber Whelan is next.
You
madam chair you able to hear it
looks like it okay yes we can
thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to
comment my name's amber well and
I'm representing New Mexico
voices for children and we stand
in opposition to this
legislation because it's very
expensive as noted I miss what
law can it's not targeted to
those in our community for those
seniors in the state that are
most in need the bill would cost
nearly a hundred million dollars
per year in the out years and
because it's not accompanied
with any revenue raising
measures that's a hundred
million dollars that we would
not be able to use to support
the education health care or
outdoor public safety services
that matter most to our families
and communities and those types
of things that unlike unproven
trickle down tax incentives are
actually proven to attract
people to our state.
Not only is this policy
expensive but it doesn't help
those in our community that are
really struggling right now
eighty six percent of the
benefits of this tax cut would
go to those making more than
fifty thousand per year sixty
four percent would go to those
making over seventy five
thousand per year and that's
primarily because just to be
very clear not only does New
Mexico not double taxed social
security income and does not tax
contributions that retirees have
paid into the program but New
Mexico already does not tax two
thirds of retiree benefits and
does not tax the first twenty
four thousand in income more
than most retirees get social
security.
If we want to help those seniors
who need it most readers a
committee to look again at
increase in the low income
comprehensive tax rebate and
updating it for inflation
instead of elector gives two
extra exemptions to seniors and
as much more targeted cost
effective and proven way to
address poverty amongst our
retiree residents and to help
low income grandparents raising
grandchildren and to get money
circulating in the economy by
people who will actually spend
it quickly and locally we know
this is a really challenging
vote but we urge you to table
the bill in favor of better more
targeted and more cost effective
approaches thank you.
Thank you very much Mrs Wallen
of Mister Jim Jackson.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Jim Jackson testifying today
just for myself and I would
noted I am the person who's on
social security benefits
as has been noted by speakers on
both sides of this the this bill
would be a blow a hole in the
state's budget eighty to a
hundred million dollars and that
money is needed for the
important services that hi and
lots of other people are always
encouraging the legislature to
spend additional funds on I want
to just quickly touch on three
three issues first to reinforce
the the the mistaken notion of
that low income people are
paying taxes as some folks have
made clear the tax that we do
have on social security income
doesn't kick in until people are
pretty high level of the annual
income at which point I think
they can afford to pay taxes I
want to point out that half of
the benefits that social
security recipients like myself
receive are based on payments
that their employer made when
they were employed so employees
never paid taxes on that so the
idea that all of these benefits
are being double taxed is simply
incorrect and finally I would
just note that need New Mexico
has in the past tried some
things to try to encourage the
upper income people to move to
New Mexico we did a big personal
income tax cut on high income
earners the and frankly it's
been quite on successful this
one also seems unlikely
would be some additional wealthy
retirees move here possibly but
I'm not persuaded that the this
would offset the loss of the
eighty to a hundred million
dollars in current income that
the state gets that so it so
desperately needs so
while I appreciate the
motivations of our spa.
Answers the today I have to
encourage the committee to table
this bill thank you thank you
very much Mister Jackson and
Ellen Pinnes and I apologize I
probably have mis pronounce your
last name so please correct me
Ellen.
Alan.
Hello Ellen are you there.
You need to you if you're
speaking Ellen.
Apparently not with that with
that last potential speaker we
don't have any other speakers in
opposition at this point so now
going back to the committee I
see Representative Harper's hand
up Representative Harper your
the floor is yours.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative brown and
Armstrong and you don't have to
leave us I thank you for
bringing this bill forward.
I appreciate this bill very much
on the gives us an option
understand our tax code.
and so at my ex ex I guess my
dire peril.
I'm going to expect a debunk
some of the myths around this
this
This tax I see that because I
know speaker Egolf my good
friend ran a hit piece on me
during the campaign saying that
I hate old people because I
spoke against this during the
last time I came forward.
That's true madam chair.
I sent a copy sitting right here
if you want to show up out of
the.
so.
That's the.
But let's just let's let's let's
just talk numbers I want to no
not not talking about policy
here whether we should or not
let's just talk about the
numbers.
Okay so the federal government
taxes social security benefits.
Thank you.
How do they do it.
The tax ID.
Fifty percent of the value is
taxed well why did they do that.
So
when you are working and you are
paying into the social security
fund how works is you pay a
certain amount your employer
also pays a certain.
Now the amount that you pay is
included as taxable income while
you're working so you pay taxes
on that money that goes into the
sorcery Fund on that path that
you pay so Tax.
Your employer pays it.
Representative it is not taxed.
So that's why the feds tax
social security income.
fifty percent of that income to
make up for that portion that
came from employer your employer
that was not taxed.
Okay so so first you have to say
whatever so security income is
have a half that's what's taxed
by the feds.
Now in New Mexico our personal
income tax he backs on the
fence.
If you remember when you file
your taxes you put in your it
says first line put in your AGI
from your federal for so as we
do we take you back whatever the
federal form just a gross income
is we put that.
As our starting place for New
Mexico.
So so if you just look at that
you would say because we don't
have a security tax exemption
will I guess that means we're
taxing so security income in New
Mexico that fifty percent.
but.
We don't exist in a vacuum right
now all income is taxed.
We know that the federal
government right now is the
personal income tax induction
remember the big change they
think doubled or more than
double the standard deduction so
for a family of two.
The federal deduction right now
is I'm cert is twenty four
thousand eight hundred dollars
so you whatever your income is
few take twenty five thousand
dollars of that off the top
is exempt is not taxed.
So I hope you'll follow me so
far.
so if you look at them social
security benefits.
The average budget
is about eighteen nineteen
thousand dollars a year.
So if you're doing the average
benefit.
You would cut that in half.
Which is roughly nine thousand
dollars and then you would have
the federal standard deduction
you subtract twenty five
thousand dollars from last year
your income to be taxed at zero
you're not paying any tax on it
anyway.
Hey.
So the average.
You're not paying tax on it at
all because you're get the
standard deduction.
And what about let's just go to
the opposite extreme let's say
that you have a maximum.
income you can get from social
security which right now is
about thirty eight thousand
dollars a year.
And let's see that you're
married and your spouse is also
getting the maximum benefit so
thirty eight thousand times to.
Really good tax half of that so
it's cut that half in Georgia
Tax.
Thirty eight thousand dollars.
Also tracks the twenty five
thousand dollar federal standard
deduction so right now your
taxable income was thirteen
thousand dollars if you're both
making the Max you can get.
Well New Mexico also has an
eight thousand dollar retirement
income exemption.
Her person.
So so you can deduct another
sixteen thousand of income.
So now you're now you're back to
not paying tax on anything at
all again.
So.
Where does double taxation
actually happen.
It happens actually.
have a chart here that does the
mass it happens when you have
roughly thirty thousand extra
dollars of revenue in addition
to maximum social security.
And.
If you look at the F. I. R..
On the FIR is brilliant but we
don and her team did a great job
on this if you look on the FIR
page I there's a great chart
there.
And in that chart it shows.
That.
Forty three percent of New
Mexicans.
that receive social benefits
have an income retirement income
greater of one hundred thousand
dollars so almost almost half of
New Mexicans receives a security
have an income of greater than a
hundred thousand dollars that's
the accounting or other other
income those are the people that
are paying.
A little bit extra tax on
there's no security benefits.
Okay so so I just want to again
not talking about the policy at
all just help us understand the
numbers.
We're talking about here if we
implement this.
It would not benefit those
people that are on the for end
of this spectrum you're not
paying any tax anyway it won't
even benefit those that are
making
you know almost seventy thousand
dollars a year on double maximum
so security benefits we're gonna
be helping those people that
have a lot of extra income on
top of the so security benefits.
Okay.
So it's not really double
taxation it's not really helping
the poor.
And then also if you look on the
offer Mr page for there was a
study done
By NMSU in two thousand
eighteen.
It's not halfway down the page.
They did an analysis looking at
what kind of maybe economic
development benefits could this
provides you Mexico's last was
this on the ten least tax
friendly states and yeah we get
a bad rep for tall Texan shows
three benefits even though the
reality is we really don't
except for folks are making a
lot in income during retirement
there now is this was
any economic development
budget would be minimal compared
to the cost of the general fund
so you really really would not
see much of a of bump in
economic development and I have
to I have to agree with that as
soon as really started the tax
code in the problems are Tax
Court
and looking at what brings
economic development New Mexico
much is it out retirement income
is not on the top of that list.
So.
Finally it's really not good tax
policy these last several years
we've been talking about how it
continuing narrowed our tax base
the Serbian other example of
narrowing the tax base making
the income stream more volatile
we're trying to move away from
of all child income streams we
really wanna be moving towards
broadening the base and lowering
the rate.
So I would be much more
I'm excited about this proposal
if we were putting it in part of
a larger package where we are
increasing our tax base which
means taxing more things.
and lowering the tax rate.
So that we're paying less tax on
all those things.
So so in my mind really the only
question here for us to
consider.
You know it's bad tax policy
it's doesn't help the report it
doesn't bring in economic
development the question is is
it good public policy is a good
public policy is it a good
message to send that were I'm
just going to exempt fees social
security taxes.
That's a that's a fair question
and I won't answer here because
I've taken much too much too
much time but just wanted to
take this into account explain
the the numbers and sense so
thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much
Representative for that Torio I
was trying to think about how I
could say some of those things
and you obviously did so much
better than I ever could so I
very much appreciate your input
thank you Representative my
Estes.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative brown all of all
the public commenters I I
purposely waited till.
Representative Harper raised his
hand just that would save us a
tremendous amount of time.
And I enjoy is analysis and I
actually chair of.
I have a similar analysis I am.
I think that every single income
regardless of word derives from
should be taxed in a in a
progressive structure and that
includes
capital gains that includes per
diem for Legislature worst.
That includes you know lemonade
stand or.
Or so security I want to thank
uninsured Representative Brown
Representative out for for
bringing this forward it's it's
a great it's very popular and
makes a lot of sense.
if you don't you know if you
haven't accepted the tax code in
and gone to the struggles the
past decade.
President of Harper and many
others that the eighty three
million dollars.
Back in two thousand fifteen or
two thousand sixteen or of just.
The game changer one where the
other one we're struggling with
the budget shortfalls.
and I do think that of.
The fact that there are those
other exemptions it doesn't
really target.
Who we want to target
I also agree madam chair of a
brown is that it's not.
You know we've been trying to do
tax policy work for economic
development since I've been up
here and that's really not the
way we should be doing economic
development it's it's my opinion
spending on infrastructure
increased our educational
outcomes and and public safety I
think seniors will be more apt
to move here if we increase
public safety and that takes.
Revenue revenue stream so anyway
it's it's it's
I I sure what is coming from and
I I agree with the intent
But in light of a.
You know what I consider every
single dollar income should be
taxed in a progressive way every
single business transaction
should be taxed the same G. R.
T. I mean that's really the way
we're gonna have a functional
government develop our
infrastructure and
And and build our economy and
our educational system so I
reluctantly stand opposed
to this and I.
You may get a madam chair of the
brown the.
By my friend from sent of all
it's mailers I have to say seven
of a hundred people every year
and and Intel well I oppose this
bill.
Thank you Mr.
This is not fun but it's
entertaining.
Thank you Representative my us
this Representative Strickler.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you.
Representative Brown
We
In New Mexico to support state
and the I understand are there
are a are average so security
benefit is twelve hundred
dollars so that may be a bit low
I think
Representative
Harper was.
Which going at eighteen thousand
dollars should be about fifteen
hundred dollars a month do you
know.
Roughly what the average social
security benefit is in our
state.
Then a little bit.
Mr stern Representative
Strickler are you posing that.
You say you are our panel if
they say no
the answer.
okay it appears not
representative okay.
Okay well I
you know it's a you know we're
in a competitive environment you
know I say this all the time.
Texas doesn't tax so security
benefits save no income tax so
the Arizona.
The retirement state they they
don't tax so security benefits I
guess the matter was madam also
and I'm not sure what the tax
policy is in in Colorado or Utah
do you know offhand if they tax
there so security benefits like
we did.
Currently not.
We don't know.
Is there a verbal answer to that
question Representative any
member on the panel.
Okay we education Harper knows
that.
I'm happy are Representative
Harper give a quick answer to
that question I do thank you
madam chair so so again the FIR
is wonderful in the appendix
attachment one on page ten they
left the thirteen state tax
social security and what they
do.
The Colorado and Utah.
are on that list
So as you talk taxes social
benefits benefits may qualify
for retirement income tax
credit.
Sounds like we have a income tax
credit like we do here in New
Mexico and Colorado says.
For beneficiaries younger than
sixty five up to twenty thousand
so security benefits we excluded
for those over twenty over sixty
five.
Retirement income over
twenty four thousand is.
Taxed.
And there's more detail after
interest.
Thank you thank you.
Madam chairman thank you
Representative Harper.
the
I guess so I guess what the
point of trying to make is we
We need to attract you know
business and industry when his
track I think we also need a
tract
you know retirees and in my
community is is is a.
We have a lot of retirees that
that work
they do volunteer their time I
know that was mentioned in in
some of the testimony I have a
good friend who works for a a RP
to do tax returns for the
elderly and he also this tax
return for my college kids so
that I mean I can benefit from
from his
volunteerism and and whatnot and
we have a lot going for sure
terms of a
you know a formal housing low
low property taxes so I think
that that that will attract to
retirees but I think a like your
bill.
I know there's some the policy
issues and and the the the head
to our budget but the AT the
hundred million dollars per year
from a seven million dollars
seven billion dollar revenue
string is not that great I think
we can afford it.
You know so one point one one
percent one and a half percent
of our revenue stream and.
I just think everything anything
we can do.
To help or retirees and I do
understand they actually point
that Representative Maestas
pointed out that you know we
need to have a progressive tax.
Mexico which we did many
obviously with the
and the but I I really
appreciate you bringing this
forward I know you'll you'll be
able to kind of bring and bring
home some more points why why
this this would be a good thing
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Brown.
Thank you Representative
Strickler Representative
Montoya.
Thank you madam chair.
We have done a lot of
discussions and this committee
throughout the years about good.
And then tax policy
And and double taxation.
For me is right up there with
the tax payer meeting.
I don't know that that that it
should matter.
When it comes double taxation
whether or not we're looking at
what income bracket there and
especially for deal with dealing
with the.
Folks who later on in life for
probably dealing with a higher
medical costs.
there are some expenses that
take place at the older you get
that that maybe a businesses
dealing with Tax permitting that
can pass that on to consumers.
this is something that cannot be
passed on.
That's the and that's the end
user that's that the final
person so
I if we were looking at this
As if they were somehow
Included in our budget to
attract new residents to New
Mexico
the problem we have is a problem
of perception.
And and we end up.
Are doing a static analysis
which is all we really can do
fairly there and be hard to
project what could come out of
it but we're we're looking at
eighty three million dollars.
In our budget sets that's a
rounding error we will spend.
We we spend much more than that
we give much more than that to
the film industry and that's a
straight out give away.
That's that that is a rebate.
So from the standpoint of.
Whether or not we are.
Actually providing some sort of
relief for folks I'm I would
almost.
I like to look at the way that
Utah does if we're going to keep
this in place to have it tear
down the older that someone gets
the more that their medical
costs are gonna go out.
Ashley that's one of the things
we're looking at one of the
industry's that's actually
growing in New Mexico is the
medical industry the folks who
are paying that I mean in
reality if we want to bring real
money into the state would bring
in more old people so they could
pay more doctors.
I mean that's I hate to be so
blunt but in reality that's a
major cost for folks as they get
older is it is medical costs.
But for me it's a matter of
fairness.
Should anyone be taxed on the
dollar the same dollar twice.
I don't know that that matters
whether it's progressive or not
it doesn't matter that way to
me.
obviously folks are in their
prime.
Earning years.
And and they have more means
than someone else
obviously I think that is more
fair the tax code for that to be
progressive but once you worked
your whole life once you've done
whatever you're going to do.
And that's what you have left.
Like I said it's not like tax
permitting you can just pass it
on to the next person down the
line until you get to the end of
the the road the these these
folks are at the end of the
road.
I I know we're gonna end up
having to table this because it
has a fiscal impact.
but.
When it's time to to look at
what actually could benefit New
Mexico perceptions killing us
our tax code.
Is confusing I think one thing
that we've seen is that our our
taxes at the end of the day.
Or maybe not we're kind of
middle of the road I think we
were what's thirty five.
Something like that thirty fifth
in nation thirty fourth some
like that want to actually
figure in all of the deductions
credits
But the problem is people who
again they just see where one of
the states that that.
Charges.
What social security there
there's no they don't get the.
They don't get the information
as to what's really excluded and
and they don't get that if it's
a problem of perception.
And we're suffering from a
problem of perception I I think
Representative my assessment
mention public safety yeah if
you live in a rural part of the
state.
It's not as bad as it is a
Metropark politic part of the
state but we all get the same
perception.
That New Mexico has a lot of
crime which we do percentage
what's.
But this perception.
Has cost us when we grow less
than two percent in ten years
during this last census is what
we're what we're figuring is
that that that's going to be
approximately the number is less
than two percent growth in ten
years.
we're suffering for perception.
And I think.
If we were to fix this policy.
if we were somehow be able to do
dynamic scoring instead of
static scoring.
I think we see that folks who
have disposable income would
move here.
And that's a group that has
earned their money and they have
money in their pockets.
And it could do something
greater for us so I mean for for
multiple reasons.
Double taxation is bad policy.
I think we all agree with that
no matter who it hits.
And.
I think from the standpoint of
of how we are perceived outside
of New Mexico this is one of the
best states from the standpoint
of Climent very few natural
disasters.
Right place to live things to
do.
But.
We have folks who are not coming
here it like they are to our
neighboring states.
And.
In reality it just has to be
with what how we're perceived
and I think that the fixing this
would go a long way
with that Representative Brown
Do you have a follow up to my
analysis.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Montoya so thank
you very much for giving me just
a little bit of time here so.
I think that you are correct
Representative Montoya social
scientists have a term messo
facts which is just a fancy word
for perception and that's what
you've talked a lot about New
Mexico is known to be a state
that is not friendly to retirees
because of our tax policy and a
lot of folks do look at that
look at many factors as you
mentioned climb it to the beauty
of our state things like that
but.
This is this is really a deal
breaker for a lot of people and
there are studies that say it
isn't studies that say that it's
not but I know from talking to
people who are trying to recruit
retirees to New Mexico that this
is one of the first topics that
does come up it is a hindrance
it is a demerit to the state of
New Mexico and the yes the the
estimate is that in the first
year of affect this would
give the state eighty three
million dollars less in revenue
however that that will certainly
and you know we don't have the
upside in our fiscal analyses
reports as you mentioned
Representative Montoya that's a
difficult thing to calculate.
So madam chair and
representative we know that
Retirees of all income levels if
we could get them to come to our
state they would put money in
circulation in our economy and
yes a lot of them have higher
health care costs as they get
older and so you know that
doesn't have
there's no protection depending
on your income level for that so
it can affect everybody and just
knowing that New Mexico is not
going to tax social security
would be a bomb I think to a lot
of people
I also want to mention madam
chair and Representative Montoya
that I mentioned earlier that
the national association of
retired federal employees sent a
letter endorsing house bill
forty nine and in this letter
they point out that the double
taxation is actually a little
more elevated than we may have
thought and that that is
regarding federal employees who
some of them before they were in
federal employment and perhaps
other jobs and I have a long
very large one paragraph you're
explaining this but the bottom
line is that there's something
called the windfall elimination
provision and there's also
something called government
pension offset and these two of
mechanisms actually do take more
retirement income away from
federal retirees so maybe this
you know I we can we can get
more information to the members
of the committee said work on
that.
Madam chair representative I I
think and I appreciate the the
analysis we had done by
musically Iglesias is far more
developed and they notices we
headed into previous year and I
very much appreciate
Representative Harper's
comments.
But none the less most to most
retirees have not sat under
professor Representative Harper
and heard the ins and outs of of
New Mexico taxation and how it
dovetails with federal taxation
that all they know is New Mexico
taxes social security income
that's all they know that's all
the here and I guess we could
put Representative purpose
comments upon you to be the
people could could access it
that way but the bottom line is
you don't go to accounting for
an explanation all they know is
New Mexico is going to tax that
income so I believe that Madam
chair representative and members
of the committee that New Mexico
will be more of a haven for
retirees and we do want them
here we really do they make some
of our best citizens is not only
just retaining the ones that
were here who are thanking.
Their financial situation will
improve if they go to another
state that doesn't tax SSI but
we also want to attract folks
here and we know that our
retirees are you know they're at
the volunteer for civic
organizations and they there are
crossing guards and as mentioned
earlier many of our grandparents
are actually raising
grandchildren fifty five
thousand or more children and so
if I can be a voice for children
through this bill I think that's
that's certainly in order so I
guess I I would just just
recommended the committee madam
chair that they take into
account not just the nuts and
bolts and we have a seven point
some billion dollar budget.
just clear twenty twenty two
that we're working on right now
and eighty three million is
really not that much in light of
all of that so I would suggest
we send a message to our senior
citizens in New Mexico that we
are going to help them out and
also madam chair I think it's
wrong for anybody to presume
that a retiree should only have
X. dollars tax free to live on
because we don't know people
circumstances we don't know do
they have a mortgage they're
still paying into retirement
everybody has to pay some rent
right if you're paying twelve
hundred a month for rent at
sixteen thousand dollars for
their just for a for wells
we don't understand their debt
situation consumer debt we don't
know do they need a replacement
bill which that's not for us to
decide the bottom line is they
earn this money that was the
benefit of their bargain for
working as they did and we just
I think really would benefit the
entire state by removing this
tax in making New Mexico a
friendlier place to to retire
in.
And madam chair I don't know if
any of the other Sanchez would
like to make a closing comment
or not
I don't believe we have asked
all of our legislators if they
have any comments on this bill I
do so would you like to listen
and madam madam chair I still I
still on the floor very good
okay thank you very much Mr
Montoya I wasn't sure since you
handed it over to Representative
for that long explanation so if
we could if there are other
panelists who would like to
speak I would appreciate it if
you can keep your comments
brief.
Thank you madam chair I think
this does go to the heart of
fairness I mean besides what we
do to maybe be more appealing
to.
to retirees who don't live in
New Mexico who might want to
come here to retire here this
idea of fairness for those who
live here already and are are
are in this situation we talk
about brought a broadening the
tax base.
Generally what we mean is to
broaden the tax base by taxing
more people once.
I don't think it's the goal of
of of our this tax this taxation
and revenue committee to look to
broaden the base by taxing the
same people more or by taxing
the same people twice I don't
think that's ever been our goal
and if that's the result I I
think that's a real problem.
I think nursing home costs as
well and.
Private care that that these
individuals have to receive.
Later on in life as well that's
why I.
You know if you do have a
mortgage you have right you have
something like that there's a
cost.
That's why every single cost
that goes up utilities.
Taxes on the G. R. T. for for
for perishable items and things
after purchase it's a real it's
it's a lot harder for somebody
who's on a fixed income they
just can't raise that the disk
they just can't go up from there
but but one last thing madam
chair.
If you do if you're on if you
look
If you receive an a a RP
magazine or if you're on a A. R.
P. website they're sending
things out like good and bad
places to live they're not going
to score it the way that that
was score here they're just
going to say.
Good and that.
They're just gonna say these are
the amendment and quite frankly
that it without information
they're gonna do without all the
information that's that's just
the reality of it.
But it's hard to overcome that
with putting an advertisement in
there that says become the New
Mexico we've got great weather.
it just doesn't work that way so
when we do sit down and and
trying to turn over our tax
package is going to be
here in a couple of weeks I hope
this gets a fair hearing
to bring folks here who have
money to spend and will spend it
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Montoya
are and are there any other I
see no other hands on I just
like to make a few comments if I
may
I think we as public officials
have a responsibility to rely on
factual information to make our
public policy decisions and I
think we have a responsibility
to de bunk information that is
not factual and unfortunately I
think there's been a lot of
misinformation that has been
presented on this and I'm not
directing these comments at
anyone in particular or any
group of people in particular
but mythology has been evolving
around the taxation of social
security which grossly
exaggerates what the state is
doing and grossly agency is
identifies all the other things
that we are doing in support of
the working poor the retired for
for example elector is something
that's very very important to
not just
average for people but seniors
and.
To continue that mythology I
think is doing all of us a
disservice and I would call upon
all of us to rely on factual
information when we accessing
this and with that said I'm
happy to entertain a motion.
Two of two temporary table
because it has a fiscal impact.
Is there a second I believe
Representative Harper is
seconding motion is to temporary
table house bill forty nine.
I'm telling when you call the
roll.
Madam chair.
Representative.
Yes the table.
Yes.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative and then this
yes.
Representative.
Representative Maestas yes.
Representative.
The table.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Stansbury.
Yes the table but I want to
explain my vote.
Representative Strickler.
Yeah well I just spoke explain
about as well.
Representative new hard.
Madam chair.
Yes yes it will.
Thank you for chairman Martinez
please.
I'm sorry yes yes please.
Yes eleven in the affirmative.
It.
The bill is temporarily tabled
and I believe representative
Stansbury wish to explain her
vote.
Yes thank you madam vice chair I
wanna explain my vote because I
actually was one of the co
sponsors of this bill last
session and I did vote in favor
of table to temporarily tabling
the motion because of procedural
issues and because there is not
a budgetary offset for the bill
at this time but I want to say
that I am not philosophically in
favor of taxing social security
benefits or any benefits that
people have worked for and and
and have helped to pay towards
throughout their life and this
is a I think an important bill
and I appreciate the Sanchez
bringing them forward and really
appreciate it thank you and
Representative Strickler I
believe you wish to explain your
vote yes thank you madam
chairman and
Ali said in a I think we need to
consider this and I understand
why we had a table and our best
deserve further consideration.
and I know.
There's a lot of.
A lot of the Madison you know
what have you and I just like to
I think perception means
everything in New Mexico needs
some good perceptions out there
thank you madam chair.
Thank you everyone in our chairs
back and he's gonna take over.
Thank you thank you members and
apologize for being so late that
we had a had a couple of bills
in committee and one of them
where and what pretty long so
anyway here I am I believe we
are on house bill eighty nine is
that correct.
Members yes yes.
Bill on the agenda.
Good let's let's jump right in
and we I know that there are a
couple of stand being scared
taking place shortly before for
a number of us so well House
ready nine percent Chatfield
Armstrong Senator small and
Stansbury who would like to take
the witness stand.
While gosh Mr chair I had
thought Mr Representative
Chatfield was going to be here.
I see him the pop up on my
screen excellent good morning
Representative Chatfield welcome
to our committee please proceed
with health related not thank
you Mr chair I I've been here I
just haven't that I just
couldn't talk continue conduct
here we go let me get my camera
on thank you for letting me in.
Thank you for coming.
I'm very happy this morning to
bring to you house bill eighty
nine house bill eighty nine is
an act relating to taxation
creating an optional designation
for personal income tax refund
contribution for the
administration of the healthy
soils program the healthy soils
program is administered by the
New Mexico department of
agriculture it is a program that
encourages good agricultural
practices these so practices
increase organic matter in the
soil they increase the organisms
in the soil healthy organisms in
the soil
in grazing practices they may
increase the density a root
crowns.
On the ground which increases
moisture infiltration they slow
it slows evaporation and stops
you rotation and the number of
other good at healthy
agricultural projects.
Currently you're able to check a
little box on your income tax
refund if you should be
fortunate enough to we just
talked about the taxation will
if you're fortunate enough to
pay all your taxes and you have
a refund coming on your on your
tax refund there's a place you
can check a box currently for
sixteen other programs among
them is animal care for the our
shelter from the New Mexico
housing trust fund share with
wildlife fund so sixteen various
programs and with that
Mr chairman I have a couple of
expert witnesses that can talk a
little more about the program
and that would be rob Hirsch and
from NMDA Julie maybe in the
future let them yet.
Yes
please that are experts in
Elaine apologies my phone rang
and someday somebody will teach
me how to disconnect my from
from my laptop so when it breaks
it doesn't ring on my.
In a day.
Representative capital can you
repeat those things for me
please.
Rob Hirsch.
He's been promoted and the other
person from in MDA Julie
Maitland from the New Mexico
department of agriculture.
Okay thank you.
Thank you thank you welcome Mr
sh.
Welcome go ahead.
Mr chair members of the
committee and Representative.
Mr chair and members of the
committee thank you very much
just very briefly
the healthy soil program is
really important for many
foundational reasons
for the future of New Mexico
because
by ranchers and farmers.
Dissing healthy soil management
principles
we do a number of things that
really help including infiltrate
water into the ground and
standing let standing the state
of letting it run all we support
our public health.
By having more nutrients in the
food that we grow and we we take
care of ecosystem services with
less pollution in the water for
example in we also become more
resilient as a people and as a
state and that helps to address
climate change in an office an
opportunity to also sequester
more carbon in the ground so for
those in many many reasons this
is such an important program
NMDA in their current budget has
up.
A line item for two hundred
seventeen thousand dollars for
the running that program
instead of.
Coming in asking for an
additional state.
Appropriation given the
sensitivity of the times were in
with COVID nineteen this is not
asking for an additional state
appropriation but rather
enabling the public to become
engaged with this program and
contribute if they so choose and
that's a great way that raise
funds for this program and again
with that I'll just.
I guess Representative Chatfield
would have Julie maybe when from
NMDA speak briefly.
Thank you Mr welcome Mrs
Maitland previous address the
committee privilege.
Good morning Mr chair good
morning Representative Chatfield
thank you rob for your comments
and to the rest of the committee
of the New Mexico department of
agriculture funded in the last
two years so the first year was
FY twenty we funded eighteen on
the ground pilot projects and
and in FY twenty one we had
funded in just now begun that
process of of entering into
agreements twenty six projects
we funded
eligible entities so through the
the bill works in such a way
that eligible entities are in
charge of accepting proposals
and solar water conservation
district specific yes land
grants and also the native
American Community are
considered eligible entities for
receiving this funding to put
the practices on the ground and
or do you technical outreach
such as education not region and
those sorts of things this
program has been Fund in
seventeen counties throughout
New Mexico so far and some of
the healthy soil practices that
have been implemented include
finding diverse crop cover crop
reducing or eliminating
Telligent introducing compost or
mulch and or mulch integrating
animals increasing biodiversity
and planting on the in in on
rangeland we had thirteen farms
including orchards in FY twenty
and FY twenty one eighteen farms
is not we've had farms and
ranches in both FY twenty and
twenty one with an increase of
the farming and ranching as a
combined
of operation of two six in FY
twenty one two ranches in FY
twenty one and to community
gardens and why.
And in FY twenty and then in FY
twenty one one community garden
I wanted to mention I didn't
Rob Hirsch mentions not only do
we have approximately two
hundred and seventeen eighteen
thousand in our line in
recurring funds but NRCS matches
are funding so this year we
matched a hundred and thirty
thousand to their hundred thirty
thousand under contribution
agreement so that gives us some
really good leveraging and this
current tax in sort of option
for a voluntary relinquishment
of taxes to this program could
increase the you know the
funding available to the program
without any impact to the state
budget at this time thank you.
Thank you David and thank you Mr
Hirsch Representative Chatfield
anything else.
Well I think this is a good
program I think one of the
things that it results from this
program is to ability to educate
the public about what good
agricultural practices are it
does not affect the the state
budget it just allow someone to
give their own personal money
which is their tax refund into a
program that they believe in as
well as well as these other
sixteen other programs that they
have the option to do that thank
you Mr stand for questions.
Thank you Representative
Chatfield and bringing this bill
forward and for your
presentation.
I'm gonna public comment and and
just by way of reminder for
anybody in the act and the list
who wishes to speak please raise
your virtual hand and we will
admit you into the room
accordingly.
Messy hands popping up now.
We're gonna go first I'm just
gonna going order is a pop up on
my screen so I'll go to.
Let's see chairman Berman.
Ms Berman you're on the line.
Hi sorry about that good morning
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Sharon
Berman and I am a civic
engagement and policy manager at
New Mexico first I'm also a
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico first we support house
bill eighty nine and thank
Representative Chatfield
Armstrong Chandler Smalling
Stansbury for bringing this bill
forward.
Among other activities New
Mexico first helps organizing
convene meetings of the food
hunger Water Act policy work
group in which nearly four
hundred individuals and entities
statewide participate.
We would like to acknowledge
representative Stansbury for
having lunch the food hunger
Water Act policy workgroup a
year and a half ago.
the cross partisan policy
workgroup consists of farmers
ranchers tribal members faith
leaders philanthropists
professors conservationists
others in the food sector and
many many more the consensus of
that group is just support house
bill eighty nine it's an
ingenious way to raise funds for
important program that as you
heard budget the land
agricultural producers consumers
of that produce and more.
Please join us in supporting
house bill eighty nine thank
you.
Thank you Mr man.
John Roberts.
Hello and and we're hearing
right thank you Mr chairman vice
chair and members of this
committee I also think you
Representative Chatfield Mr
Hirsch in his name and for your
explanation of this bill and
thank you to this entire
committee for important work.
My name's John Roberts and I'm
the director of operations for
the desert force foundation or
veteran empowerment nonprofit
based in Albuquerque.
My degrees in politics and
government I have a background
supporting economic research
specifically related to
ecosystem service valuations for
decision makers such as
yourselves.
I also have experience and value
added agriculture tourism and
hospitality.
Today I'm speaking in support of
house bill eighty nine for
continued funding and even gold
expansion of the healthy soils
program.
As of which flagship program the
war former project transactions
in a range of agricultural
practices while supporting for
profit agricultural operations
here in Albuquerque area and
also in Farmington the land
crawl to and with fledgling
related projects in Arizona and
California.
Initially I'd like to think this
committee for the funding
allocated past years is as four
was supported by this you that
soil and water conservation
district it's application for
funding this year for over seven
thousand dollars by the healthy
soils program.
Are not allowed for purchase of
cover crop seed perennial native
plants and trees for fabrication
Services toward innovated
composting system which will
divert food waste and create a
localized composting resource
thereby reducing our dependence
on off for resources.
In the last three years the were
former project is supported ten
local farms to agricultural
tourism operations all while
building our own three acre farm
on C. Albuquerque open space
with the rear running committee
for.
All of these operations not only
create opportunities for
veterans to engage in our
community these operations also
sustained locally grown jobs
recover they preserve land for
agricultural use and other real
making about we're looking
tourism and marketing efforts
like New Mexico true which used
to attract out of state
investment relocation of
businesses and they enhance the
quality of life we all know and
love all of these operations for
their continued success are also
inherently dependent on
sustained investment in our
soils this committee charged
with considering ways we can
generate revenue for the state
Grothendieck economic
development and I want to draw
attention towards streamlined
connection between our soil
health and long term resilience
of our state's economic
development we're an investment
in our soil is inherently an
investment which given the
support of opportunity will
appreciate in value perhaps as a
percentage even above and beyond
prevailing monetary investments.
The impact of soil on our
economy is in trying by the
longstanding statement by
president Franklin Roosevelt
where he says that a nation that
destroys its soil destroys
itself.
This is the money so they gave
us the USDA's national natural
resource conservation services
to address the dust bowl and the
Great Depression.
That money knowing the New
Mexico is a water scare State
and as stewards of this land we
must support measures that
increase the water holding
capacity or soil we're from
project was funded this year in
a way that has given us the
ability to attract and retain
veterans into our programming
and it wouldn't have been as
nearly successful without
support such as a healthy soil
program so I encourage support
of this bill house bill eighty
nine and I think you all for
your service.
Hi my needs thank you Mr Roberts
that's next go to Valerie age
and just please try to put your
last name in the in the box you
so that we can have that Valerie
go ahead.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my apologies my
name is Valerie Stewart to and
I'm a registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau we support the
New Mexico department of
agriculture's healthy soil
program which provides farmers
and ranchers resources to
continue to maintain and improve
soil health and productive and
beneficial use of the land we
believe that this is an
extremely innovative way to
collect funding for this effort
we support providing additional
funds and tools to New Mexico
producers who are the original
stewards of the land and again
we support this legislation.
Thank you miss what the.
Amelia Vogel.
Hello good morning and thank
you.
And I are new former new farmers
in bland New Mexico and we
support the healthy soil program
because we are up beneficiaries
of it we're one of the twenty
six recipients across New Mexico
for the twenty twenty one year
and one of three key influencia
County we've already begun are
funded projects to add in a
it Campos who are planting areas
and the my husband and I are
joining a after having started.
Seeds of the season green onions
and whole heartedly flexes I
support bill we both support
this bill because we want to see
healthy soil and regenerative
agriculture movement in New
Mexico flourish to encourage
other farmers in the way that we
have been encouraged by this
community support thank you.
Thank you miserable goal.
Next on the list is so we thank.
Ms fate you are muted.
Sorry about that Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is that we think and I'm a
registered lobbyist with the
nationally and farmers coalition
I'm also a farmer here in
Bernalillo and support counties
national farmers co coalition
and I agree chapters here in New
Mexico are fully supportive of
house bill eighty nine which is
proven tremendous success in
funding innovative projects
across the state on a wide range
of operations we're all
committed to improving the
health of our soils and waters
we hope that the that the
committee will will be
supportive of this
Legislation thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Next on the list is Pamela role
we.
Good afternoon good morning
almost afternoon miss Roy.
Mr Chairman thanks so much yes
good morning that good day right
my name is camera thank you Mr
chairman and committee members
for bringing this bill forward
and into the Sanchez
Representative Chatfield
Representative Gail Armstrong my
name is camera I I'm executive
director from two table and I'm
a registered lobbyist for farm
to table the New Mexico food and
agriculture policy council and
the rocky mountain farmers union
which all stand in absolute full
support of this bill
we're sorry we really believe
that the bill did not to build
the program The New Mexico
healthy soil program really is
innovative it has a strong
mission around helping to
sustain agriculture energy
enhance agriculture New Mexico
what we love about it in an
appreciated is it's very
flexible program as Ms Maitland
and Mr first spoke to the wide
variety of projects that are
eligible for this program it
shows the amplifies the
diversity of agriculture and
food systems initiatives in the
state there really are providing
to the health and well being of
our communities and economic
opportunities for farmers and
ranchers so with that we've
requested full support of the
committee and stand in full
support of this bill thank you
very much.
Thank you miss Roy next up in
Scottsdale.
Mr Kylian share my name is Kyle
Jim of thank you Sir chair Madam
chairman of house committee
are more Representative
introspective a nonprofit
organization here ensure proper
New Mexico in regards to the
house bill eighty nine I fully
support the healthy soil program
I believe that given the
pandemic we have seen a well of
all food shortage and I feel
that the farmers are the unsung
heroes that we need to restore
our food system and stimulate
the economy in a healthy manner
and that by supporting local
farmers that we can provide
nutrition education in such a
way that it will provide
longevity through the body
through the land improve the
funding and so this will spark
many entrepreneurs in many
realms and so I feel that this
is a healthy way to provide the
regeneration through the soil on
up thank you.
Thank you Kyle.
Thank Kyle and again somebody
will want to teach me how to
take the phone off my computer.
let's go to miss come.
Sorry I just have to wait a
minute.
He was talking
Stimulate three Mars.
Okay there we go I'm not joking
I'm gonna turn that off so
somebody tweet text me something
to turn this thing off to mac
computer.
Our next community Romero.
Good morning Mr chair committee
members community medal at the
New Mexico State Land Office the
State Land Office stands in
strong support of house bill
eighty nine by adding this
option to the income tax for
makes it easier for individuals
to fund health this oil program
this bill not just benefits
those working in farming and
ranching but as a wise
investment that benefits all New
Mexicans so that we hope you
support this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr meadow and the
Representative Harper Jason for
me that you can't hear the crazy
buzzing on my end when its
ranking so that's good I guess I
should just pretend it's not
happening that you'd never call.
Next I have a Mr Walter Bradley
in the only wall Randy and as
formal training governor so I
wonder if it's the same person
either way welcome to our
committee.
Thank you Mr chairman appreciate
the opportunity and join my time
with you guys and and continued
to.
Prosperous are we support our I
represent the very farmers of
America and we are in full
support of house bill eighty
nine.
Combined with house bill of
forty eight which would be that
is proposed now to expand the
weather stations that will
assistance and our our
scheduling of irrigation times
when you combine both of these
and be very helpful to keep in
our souls healthy and.
Using a the water judiciously if
you will so Mr chairman
wonderful support this bill and
thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Bradley next Mr Ben
Rasmussen.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Ben Rasmussen.
And I work with the national
center for frontier communities
in the southwest New Mexico food
hub here in Silver City we work
with dozens of growers across
the southwest part of the state
in many more students and
efficient matter we're full
support of this bill you think
it's a really you know so
there's a set of really
innovative and creative ways to
help support healthy soils in
our state.
we you know currently have
several programs on board to.
You know increase the help of
our so.
And supporting program like this
thank you.
Thank you Mr Rasmussen for the
record that remains is not me.
I promise.
anyone else's supports I don't
see any other hands anyone in
opposition to house bill eighty
nine.
I don't see anyone in opposition
so I'll go to the committee on
the list as Representative
Harper.
Thank you chairman and see if
Chatfield good to see you this
almost afternoon.
I appreciate the.
The information received on the
program I think we learned a lot
about healthy soil since the
dust bowl back in the early
nineteen thirties and.
I don't think there's any doubt
in his mind that it's it's a
great program.
so chairman and Representative I
heard that right now the funding
level is two hundred seventeen
thousand is and I hear that
correctly.
Mr Chairman I would.
Differ too much for witnessed
univalent.
Our test Representative Harper
that is accurate two hundred
seventeen thousand that is in
the in our line and
we have had the opportunity to
years in a row to match about a
hundred two hundred thirty
thousand dollars our with NRCS
provided funds and our
contribution agreement.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative.
And this of.
What do the financial folks
estimated this what could
possibly bring in to the the
program.
Representative and chairman.
Mr chairman I I I believe some
of these other programs they've
very widely some I think the the
most I see here is the surest
wildlife Fund that's twenty
thousand some of the smaller
ones are four thousand for the
veteran's enterprise Fund so
they they vary widely from fund
to fund but probably not more
than twenty thousand.
And one more thing Mr chair and
and Representative is some
programs have actually brought
in as much as two hundred
thousand in the very early years
and that's a function of the
promotion and the you know the
PR work that you do what the
averages about ten thousand a
year but ten thousand year would
support another project or two
for ranchers or farmers to do
this program so it's not
insignificant.
Yes thank you Mr chair and
representative
rob I appreciate your you were
always going to next was that.
You know the.
The fiscal analysis estimates
this program will bring in ten
thousand I think that's probably
a fair gas based off of the
other sixteen that we have maybe
it goes up to twenty and you
know maybe you have a good first
year.
my next question was you know if
we're only increasing the funds
to this effort by five or ten
percent you know does that now
what does that allow what does
that.
is that a meaningful increase.
Mr Chairman representative I can
tell you that any penny this put
here will be doubled by the
federal government and will take
those two cents will put him on
the ground and will make him
count will will do a good job of
it and I will I would also defer
to the jubilee and maybe Mr
Maitland and the letter add to
that answer.
I Representative Chatfield and.
I agree that while ten thousand
is not a lot of money relative
to what we do have it's not
insignificant about five percent
right and so if we match it we
can we can double that money's
so I think that and and as Mr
stated we get another couple
projects with ten thousand so it
I think it's
not insignificant especially as
we're trying to you know M.
incrementally make these
improvements.
Thank you
Mr Chairman representative and
Julie I appreciate that.
Well I think.
I guess the other question I
have
Maybe would help me support this
I was not aware of this I just
saw the FIR but to.
Representative chat for you
familiar with the.
Seven dash to dash thirty one
point one more statutes.
Mr chairman I I may be or may
not be if you can tell me what
the that
those numbers are allude to act
familiar with quite a lot of
statutes I don't know which one
that is.
Representative Harper president
Chatfield when I was in law
school the the the correct
answer is it depends
so.
That's awesome.
You know so I a.
Want to see their greater for
his great analysis in the fiscal
impact reports but he I didn't I
wasn't aware we had this but
there's the statute is
essentially a sunset point.
For all of these
different check boxes and what
it says is that if.
Three years in a row that
particular check box doesn't
bring in five thousand or more
dollars and it's automatically
appeal.
I'm.
When I first heard recovery
hearing this bill I thought well
you know also for if we put a
sunset in here because now we
don't have the number seventeen
checkbox and you know we've got
to see us putting more and more
and more free soon you just have
a whole page of fifty different
check boxes on.
Since we have a.
no matter if you are already you
know maybe we need to.
Inflation adjusted since we have
one in there already
I'm I'm leaning toward
supporting your your legislation
especially since you might
you'll get some federal matching
to make that ten thousand
dollars go a little bit further.
So thank you Representative and
and thank you chair.
Thank you Mr chairman thank
Representative.
Thank you Representative Harper
and thank you Representative
Chatfield I don't see any other
hands up so all go ahead and
just make a couple of quick
comments thank you for bringing
the bill forward I I think that
it's it's an important because
it's a it's a good use it's a
good
option for for taxpayers as
they.
Other taxes to to be able to
send some of their hard earned
money back in your market to
specific program I I'm you know
I'm I'm certain this is sort of
like the you know these track
these license plate built for me
like after awhile like you that
we you know there a lot of good
work the costs out there.
I I I do agree Representative
Harper you know I think that the
the trigger here if it's not
raising some amount of money for
it to go away it's probably a
good one in reviewing the list
you know most seem to do okay
you know there's a few there
that are offering around that
specific three thousand dollar
mark but I guess that's you know
for the advocates to to to
really promote and and sort of
elevates these options for
taxpayers as well as the father
taxes I I know that I do get
emails for
some of the ones that are listed
here and I'm assuming that the
better the promotion you know
pry the more money you can raise
but it certainly is a very poor
program and you know for both
rural and urban areas in my
district that got a lot of small
farming operations and and some
of them not so small actually
some of them are fairly large
and so I think that many of
those programs would be able to
benefit alternately
what is the the will the
committee.
And move it to pass again.
Yes potion from representative
Stansbury is there a second
second Representative Chandler.
Okay second by your Chandler
Let's the.
Just for the sake of clarity
with the committee reports I'm
just gonna ask it came to to do
a roll call vote just a little
harder I think on soon to know
who's here who is it.
Thank you school the role.
And.
And we're gonna do pass motion.
Representative.
Speaker Igor yes.
Mr chair I was a test and we
went quickly enough to maybe
there was a get us get by my
side but representative that I
yes thank you thank you and
speaker for the.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Thank you Representative and
then this yes.
I Representative huh.
Yes.
Representative Maestas.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Romero.
Yes yes yes.
Representative Scott yes.
Representative Stansbury yes.
Representative Strickler.
Yes.
Vice chair chamber yes.
Chairman Martinez.
Yes.
In the affirmative.
On the negative thank you Elaine
thank you led by a vote of
twelve role you have to pass
Representative Chatfield and
other sponsors thank.
Thank you members.
Members I'm that concludes our
business for today we will
reconvene on Wednesday at nine
o'clock will work on an agenda
today and that will we'll get it
out to you all so we know what's
coming up thank you all so much
and again apologies for missing
most of the fund today but we're
getting in that time in the
session when thanks for going a
little crazy
but I by the way that serve my
under for the rest of you as
well when you have bills coming
up or whatever just let us know
and we'll we'll work with you to
accommodate your needs as best
we can thank you we're joined.
Thank you chairman thanks
everyone.
Mr.
