And we have switching around
with the agenda but I'll get to
that as soon as we get the roll
call.
Representative R. echo.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chandler here.
Representative Duncan there.
Representative Gallegos is here.
Representative Harper your.
Representative Hernandez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative Ortez.
Representative Scott.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Townsend.
By.
Yeah.
We have had quite a quorum
welcome back vice chairwoman
from about which both of that is
the exact and and and let's see
more people back as the
representative of this house so
welcome back from a weeks long
Elizabeth Liz let everybody back
hopefully that'll be the last
decisions that people haven't
over of general so looking at
the agenda this morning we will
begin with Representative are
for on house bill three twenty
one and then of.
And then we will go to our house
bill three fifty three.
That.
We'll go then to house bill
three eighty five.
And then lastly we will of this
get off to a resolution five and
six in the fall that we had for
those earlier on in the session
and so in accordance with my
conversations with rates members
partners and other folks that we
will bring both in the backs of
without further ado let's look
at house bill three four do you
want to the harbor of the gear
and motor.
X. distribute.
For research thank you chairman
good morning the best committee
in the house
I do have a hearing to.
Want to start off.
The.
I think that is.
Mr chairman I do have a handout
that hopefully be passed bills
to that we got it perfect all
right so chairman committee
members this bill will look
familiar to many of you we've
been talking about this for
seventy nine years.
but this bill goes to things
change the distributions for
motor vehicle excise tax and
from the liquor excise tax so to
excise taxes today and just a
little bit of why maybe a little
bit of history if you look at
your hand out and let's let's
maybe start on page two the
first couple pages or the
history of how we tax vehicles.
Thank you see in nineteen thirty
five.
We started with the gross
receipts tax and the gross
receipts tax was at point five
percent.
That's how we taxed vehicles
it's how we.
you know that that's really
where the gross receipts tax
started you can see it's goes up
to one percent in nineteen forty
one goes up to two percent.
I'm sorry and then in nineteen
fifty five those were shifts
over to the motor vehicle excise
tax then we start the separate
motor vehicle excise taxes to
one percent to match the gross
receipts tax rate.
And it goes Representative to
the general fund.
gross receipts tax animal
reflexes Tax start growing to go
to page three.
You can see.
In nineteen seventy nine we
start seeing so much wrote I and
why it's because the general
fund was looking really healthy.
And then the next year and
eighty seventy five percent
those are all fine and again
because the general fund was
building surpluses is healthy
and in eighty one hundred
percents want to refine.
And then it goes back you
Representative wrote funding and
in ninety four because there was
no challenges of the general
fund so really the point here is
the motor vehicle excise tax and
structure ninety four
It goes back and forth even in
recent history and setting some
to the road fund to help with
the right well down in the
southeast and the remediation or
that that issue the general
general fund is doing well we
Senator roads and when it's
doing poorly spring back in the
general fund.
So.
Why.
Do I think it's a great time to
send this money to.
Throat Fund if you go to page
four you'll see this nice
colorful graph here.
It goes back to a two thousand
seven.
These are really the major
sources to the state road fund.
you've got the gasoline tax in
read the latest Tax in blue
special fuels tax and mustard I
guess and then the vehicle
registration fees and green.
And you can see.
That gasoline and vehicle
registration I've really been
flat for the last two decades.
Part of that is our cars have
become more fuel efficient and
lighter.
so even though there's more on
the road we're not using as much
gas.
And then.
Special fuels is.
Going up a bit and what is going
up a bit but not anywhere near
enough to make up for the cost
of inflate the rising costs of
raw materials inflation
in the transportation part
Committee we've talked a lot
about this and it is it is a
real problem that we are losing
our our transportation
department is losing ability to
maintain and build road miles
because of our revenue streams
are not keeping up with
inflation.
So.
I think I'll leave it up as you
go to the last page I love this
this is an LFC.
reason offs you document that
shows kind of on the left side
all of the different taxes and
fees on gasoline special fuels
vehicle registrations and where
those go and you'll you'll
notice those kind of orangish
bars those or to their state
road fund everything else is not
highlighted or just other
distributions like to the
aviation fund or the motor both
you'll find and and such but I
just this is a if you're ever
interested in how we fund roads
this is a great one pagers going
to summarize everything.
So what this bill does is it
says for the motor vehicle
excise tax we're gonna send
fifty percent of it now to the
road fund the state road fund
and fifty percent of it to a
transportation project fund and
that is a a newer funded funds
local road projects it's it's a
it's a bit easier to use and and
the locals like it more than our
prior local transportation fund.
And the the reason I chose that
split is if you drive around the
state like we all do you notice
our state roads are generally in
pretty good shape.
It's our local roads are unique
and county roads that are
usually
meeting a lot of help so that's
why I chose the fifty fifty
split here to give a lot to the
locals.
All right and then the last part
of this bill the liquor excise
tax.
What this bill proposes is that
we send.
All of it to
account for to help with the
rules that the industry.
In passing deuce on on New
Mexico and and really background
there is when the letter excise
tax was enacted back in the day
the liquor industry actually
came and supported it
which you know might be
surprising but they were
promised at the time that would
go towards those things be
deducted FY treatment prevention
those kinds of things
as we supported it but the
legislature
I don't know who is I thought it
was intentional but during bad
times they sent that money to
the general fund instead.
And and what I've learned this
eleven years ago when I first
showed up here I thought this is
not right.
We've been slowly over the years
and putting more of that money
towards the W. I. treatment
madam County programs.
so we've made progress but this
just says let's go the rest of
the way and this is okay from
now on sixty percent of what
directions goes to the county to
don't you I treatment
appropriation programs ten
percent goes to drug courts.
And that thirty percent goes to
Medicaid for Medicaid match.
and obviously that's to help
with no fifty percent Mexicans
on Medicaid so certainly
Medicaid helps to pay for some
of the the illnesses and
sickness is caused by that.
so that portion of those
actually revenue positive
because.
We get a three to four four to
one match for Medicaid
of course the other point is a
revenue native saw.
Up but I'm hoping this is the
year we finally do adjournment
without ever questions.
Right thank you Representative
The presentation this morning
let's go to the audience for all
those that are in favor and
online.
Of house bill three twenty one
all the favor we will start on
my left hand side and I this
year on the bill your stance
that was a big part of the bill
you are Mr chairman of the
committee out of the infants in
as that you're over the
transportation public works in
Google permits committee I think
this bill will be transformative
for the way that we provide all
our roads and department
transportation in New Mexico
this would be a huge huge
difference for generations to
come so I stand in strong
support thank you.
You yes Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee tries to question
executive director for New
Mexico counties we appreciate
funds are bringing this forward
but we certainly feel the value
of D. W. Y. programs at the
local level and appreciate the
intent to increase the funding
provided to them in addition
with some of the federal
opportunities we have to
leverage road from me makes
several we truly appreciate the
intent to transfer additional
funds to but the state and local
government row Fund thank you
thank you next yes.
D. Wonda Johnson a registered
lobbyist for posted that
registers I've been talking
Representative Harper about this
concept since I think since he's
been in office fully supports
the concept this your chairman
as a means to move money
leverage it created good part of
money traditionally four to five
times more than what we're
spending now on education
treatment prevention we support
the bill and ask you to as well
thank you thank you got yes
Representative Mr chair members
of the committee my name is
Allison Smith of the registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
restaurant association
restaurant association has
always supported taking for
money that's already collected
from the liquor excise tax and
putting it into programs we deal
with this bill accomplishes some
of that thank you so much thank
you anyone else on the Senator.
The group.
Is there anyone on the line of
support of house bill three
twenty one how we didn't spend
Kelly good morning.
Good morning chairman and
committee members my name is
Kelly Livingston I am the co
chair of the due to be affiliate
and beam New Mexico counties I'm
also the chair of the New Mexico
D. W. R. grant council we are in
support of this bill and bill is
business as an excuse me
beneficial to the counties and
the services they would be able
to increase and provide to their
communities I thank the sponsor
for bringing this bill and thank
you for your time thank you we
are.
Okay let's go to the all the in
opposition of health bill
between what both in the room an
online.
In the real seeing no one
online.
No one of mine as well okay
let's go back to the committee
that so discussion House Bill
three twenty one users
Representative just got thank
you Mr Chairman representative.
Specifically with respect to
the.
The issue here isn't.
Yes this this legislation.
All of.
Campos.
Areas entities is.
For this level.
Yeah chairman and registrada to
that's a great question yeah I
will honestly say if I cannot
give you with high confidence in
answer to that my understanding
is that these organizations do
not carry balances.
so that gives me
give me some confidence in
saying that yes they can absorb
this but I have not spoken to
them directly to to do that
answer directly.
So thank you Mr thank you anyone
else questions or comments.
Of the lady in the thank you Mr
Representative for this bill
how do we know.
What kind of insurance do we
have as we distribute more to
each is the for Medicaid program
that those programs we need.
help support treatment addition
Services as opposed to just the
general Medicaid program.
Yeah so so chairman and the
speaker thank you for that
question I will say last year at
this bill it is the secretary is
very excited he was saying that
he's gonna be able leverage
somewhere around ninety million
more dollars.
Federal dollars from from this
yeah and I believe we actually
do have language in the bill.
Yes on page two.
story line six it's as an amount
equal to three percent so is the
three percent on HSD of the net
receipts true advertised
actually made to HSD to match
federal funds for state Medicaid
program if for no other purpose.
So we believe that language is
sufficient
but to no.
Open to any to just talk yeah Mr
Chairman representative of I I
I think I don't want to be your
prescriptive with the department
I would hope and expect that the
additional ninety millions are
leveraging that it would be
used.
You know Medicaid is email.
Covers a lot of different things
from home visitation in early
childhood to health care to
treatment and I would hope that
the additional thirty percent.
Or rather the additional ninety
million dollars that they can
leverage from.
To be able to use this fund.
She would go to the services Act
I don't know that we need to
prescribe that in the bill but
certainly something to keep
track up idea
should this pass and.
And should governor sign it it's
something to to really keep
track and for for the LFC to be
able to account for it.
In the interim other than that I
think it's a great thank you Mr
thank you chairman the speaker
I don't question the comments
from committee.
Hi.
The two people age.
HB three twenty.
The second.
Representative get the others in
the motion saying that thank you
for that.
Thank you chairman.
Okay let's move that to house
bill three fifty three.
That this.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee I'm
gonna keep my mask on I hope
everybody's okay with that
trying to nine feet as best as
they can
this is hospital the three of us
authorizes the out the campus to
to issue bonds not to I'm not
going to read all that you guys
already have one of you
essentially Mr chairman this kid
is the way to revitalize parts
of Albuquerque
and that are associated with the
university of New Mexico on the
south gives an area of the
airport
in a way that we've never been
able to do before I'm gonna have
introduce you to a bevy of
experts just so you know how
much of support we have for this
bill countryman Assam fantastic
question
so you first at where her into
my left registered lobbyist Kim
Murphy also to my left eye is a
consultant retired you director
real estate Kelli ward.
Executive director level
development corporation actually
we each.
Actually is somewhere she's the
director of the New Mexico
finance Marquita Russel CEO New
Mexico finance authority have on
to where director department
municipal development City of
Albuquerque market marketing
dollars director economic
development Bernalillo county
this is a yes we do you guys
know all about his I'm sure you
have a million questions about
ours the last thing that I
believe would leave you with Mr.
Is of this this kid is a little
bit of a different one this is
for public entities and and this
kid is a way for us to
revitalize up working way that
we've never been able to do
before and we stand for
questions thank you Jennifer
like to add anything to the
discussion of.
Yeah Mr you Senator can you
repeat that.
Now you can Mr thank you Murphy
I'm the project lead on this on
this project well that might be
in the office I'm the project
lead on this project I'm sitting
in from two for Theresa constant
the need is who's the traitor of
the south campus did and it was
also the executive vice
president for finance
administration at the university
of New Mexico she's in
Washington DC unfortunately
today and can be can't be here
with us this project is a
partnership and collaboration
between the U. N. M. the City of
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county to address the vacant
infill area that some would say
is skipped over and lighted up
and underserved portion of
Albuquerque of low to moderate
income neighborhoods south
Broadway San Jose Clayton
heights curtain addition an area
in need of public infrastructure
to stimulate economic
development and job creation.
Groundwork has been laid for
that you're consideration today
of house bill three fifty three
it's all state board of finance
approval last December for
dedication of a portion of
future tax increment from the
district over a twenty five year
period.
As well as New Mexico finance
authority approval of the ticket
finance plan last month the
project has been well vetted and
both approvals were unanimous
this bill seeks your approval of
the districts bonding capacity
allows state tax increment to be
pledge towards the payment of
district bonds the state
dedication of fifty six percent
of future tax revenue matches
dollar for dollar the seventy
five percent dedication from the
City of Albuquerque and
Bernalillo county already
committed this unique
partnership a three point three
legged stool if you will
leverages local and state
resources that benefit a wide
range of New Mexicans with
improved transportation
community amenities and jobs in
an area of great need we
respectfully request your
approval and stand for questions
thank you thank you thank you
folks some of the audience for a
those in support of house bill
thirty fifty three and online
just begin and the audience yes
Sir.
Yes members the committee sorry
Mr chairman of the committee
David brought me on a registered
lobbyist for the City of
Albuquerque just this weekend
fifteen thousand people what to
the pit to unfortunately watch
the Lobo's losing the last
second with what we call the
west side of stop and shop it it
just went in it would coach
Gonzalez up revitalizes the UNM
football program which we
believe you will thirty thousand
Albuquerque ends Rio Rajan's Los
bush newness people will come to
this area for entertainment to
with their families with their
friends this is an area that is
ready for development it has
been for a check for a
generation as long as I've lived
in Albuquerque when I would go
out and sit in the outfield and
watch the Albuquerque dukes
I live about half a mile from
the area I don't know that we
have to call it blighted
everybody's been there it's
ready it's ready for development
in this is the financing vehicle
that this legislative body
approved over I think a decade
ago to help with this sort of
thing and the time is right the
folks have done the work both at
the county level the city level
at the UNM level and at the
private level to to get this
project finally passed the
finish line so that the
thousands and tens of thousands
of citizens who want to come to
this area for entertainment with
their families have the
entertainment that is that that
can be provided by this bill
thank.
Thank you next is that.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Ken
Sanchez rail and I am vice chair
of the university of New Mexico
board of regents I've been in
that role for four years now I
would ask for your support for
this bill we've been working on
this project for the four years
I've been on the region's and
it's the most exciting and
transformative project that we
have had as a board in my time
on the region's I think it is
the Trifacta for economic
activity for central New Mexico
within the Albuquerque area
public safety and the thing
that.
Really inspires me the most to
be honest with you about it is
what it does for this part of
the community and in particular
trails public infrastructure
access for people who may not
even have transportation maybe
on bikes with the students are
members of the community to be
able to buy groceries access
access services in a way that we
just don't have today it's an
ugly piece of dirt and I think
this can be transformational for
for our community and for
university so I ask for your
support thank you thank you it
would help and support house
bill thirty fifty three zero
anybody online.
It would opposition house bill
thirty fifty three in the room
or online.
Okay C. mobile money that.
Okay very good that's going to
the committee Representative
Harper.
Thank you chairman and madam
chair good issue this morning.
So it's a it's been a while
since we've seen acted bill in
the legislature I think the last
one was about nine years ago it
was the
House valley C. Bailey Tate.
and so
I think maybe maybe we could
just to talk for a minute about
what tents are in with you or
not
And then I'll share some
thoughts on this one.
So when I first started here
eleven years ago
in my district there was a rate
which is that public improvement
gonna district in Mariposa.
And it was not structured very
well and state funded out for
you know bills always beautiful
facilities
over over bonded and.
Well when that company went
bankrupt is left the homeowners
had to pick up the cost of that
and was going to multiply their
property taxes by ten times.
So it's gonna go from you know
your normal three four thousand
dollars to thirty to forty
thousand dollars it was it was a
complete disaster.
And so that was actually the
first bill I got passed and
signed into law work with
several folks here in the room
on that.
And we were formed the state
could law.
and we actually very closely
modeled the Albuquerque
ordinance which was really good
and we made it so that was not
possible.
For developers over bond they
have to look at the existing
property
but folks could coverage in the
current bond over that so we did
it we did a great job fixing the
the the rate ordinance are are
for the kids law in the state
and the too long we have right
now is false it's very good it's
a
again very very similar to
Albuquerque's it requires a
public body be set up requires
lots of calculations requires
being vetted by the New Mexico
finance authority and the very
final step after going through
all these approvals is to come
to the legislature to approve
the bonds and so that's where
we're at right now so I guess my
first question chairman and
madam chair and experts
I make sure I'm I'm remember the
process correctly and have you
been through all these approvals
received New Mexico finances
Authority approval for this Mr
Chairman representative Harper
there's one piece that that we
should have to go through even
before the final story which was
the state board of finance and
so we did the application was
has been approved by the City of
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
state board of finance you
unanimously and then also the
finance authority and if that
I'll point to the binder that he
is here on the desk is just the
questions we had answered for
the board of finance those are
simply the question the
application is yes as you
alluded to Mr Chairman
representative part of very
extensive and they really that
the calculations of the numbers
you have at the board of finance
and Mr Chairman representative
Harper the other thing that we
have to do with the board of
finance is we have to give up
your before them on an annual
basis to report on the progress
of this project if this is the
legislature approves responsive
there's extensive oversight Mr
Chairman representative Farber
and every we're unanimous it'll
unanimous approval also the
staff approval recommendations
at Alstom's.
So so chairman and madam chair
thank you for that so so that's
how the process of how it's set
up and that's good to hear right
this is the first time that
we're seeing I mean it is the
first time legislators in this
but there are several entities
of seeing this and and there's
been a lot of work to that this
okay so then what is attended
and why why do we have in the
toolbox how does it helps
development
So that tax
improvement development district
or tax increment in the COVID
district.
Is different from up hit rate or
are more like residential
tickets are are more like
you know commercial but but
still public property here in
this case.
And what it does it's it's kind
of a.
Geographically downed trees and
it says.
in this area.
what we're gonna do is we're
gonna see the taxes that are
collected right now and and like
gross receipts taxes.
we're gonna.
We're going to make sure that
that is
locked in that is that is
not changed.
The does you know it was just
for for argument's sake let's
say this particular areas bring
in five million dollars gross
receipts tax right now.
That will not change the state
is inactive that amount stays it
goes you know to the city to the
county to the state.
but
yes there is development.
And if there is an increase in
economic to economic activity.
The growth in those taxes will
not.
Go to where they typically would
all go head and this legislation
in front of us roughly fifty two
percent of it goes to the
developer to help pay for a bond
and then the rest the the
balance goes to the city and
county and state at a chairman
and madam chair my describing
that correctly.
Mr chair representative Harper
yes although it's state and
committed is fifty six percent
okay the only thing I would add
Mr chairman and representative
is the the money from that
incremental growth which is is
what we are it the internet
you're talking about must go for
public infrastructure so Mr
Chairman representative Harper
any public infrastructure that
is built can be repaid by those
bonds and then that public
infrastructure then becomes the
property of whatever government
entity is responsible for that
so so thank you chairman and
madam chair this translates you
for that fifty six percent
correction I appreciate that.
Not really the point I'm I'm
trying to make here is.
this actually does not have a
fiscal impact to the state.
And and just a backed up if you
look on page two that's right
all the FY are two.
TRD does not consider tends to
be a tax expenditure.
That's because.
You know we've all talked about
dynamic scoring rate in a static
condition.
There's gonna be no loss of
revenue because what they're
getting right now the continue
to get.
But if there's growth this is
the dynamic part right if
there's growth.
You know roughly half of that
will go to pay off bonds the
other half of that growth will
still get distributed act with
this so it's it's kind of a it's
an interesting tool is not used
everywhere.
it's kind of a public private
partnership if you want to call
it that
when I first so so now talking
about I hope we know understand
which is are we talking about
this one now and.
I was scratching my head just a
little bit because it was a
public entity right and and
normally you know it's like task
you value for you know developer
of Mariposa right usually it
developers I just it's kind of a
little strange to me and we did
a little bit of homework and
Our our our a good compact
analyst Kevin powers to having
done bonds for a living as well
you know Los crucis did one of
the city of Los crucis they
redid their downtown it was
actually a huge benefit.
And and then.
I'm I'm glad to see these on our
desk yes red in the Albuquerque
journal yesterday they actually
did a huge story
at I want to say it's good
timing I don't think that time
to figure out the story last
week right for for this bill but
to.
This is a great story about how.
Los crucis able to help.
Revitalize their downtown so we
do have examples of I guess
public entities doing this let
me just a little bit better
about this one
and then the I think the last
thing I'll say is actually spent
a lot of time in that UNM south
campus well when I did my PhD
south campus is worsened you're
has a facility that's where UNM
has there transportation solders
you know facilities I spent a
lot of time down there.
And
All say it's a it could use a
face left.
and I and I think you know being
a revitalize that area.
turned into a place we can do a
lot of tech transfer.
where there are some places
where people can go at before
and after game
I think it's a
great idea and if we can get
kind of the same outcome the Los
crucis got downtown.
And you know south campus is
greasing and really in the end
the state's not going to lose
anything right so I don't
consider this example if if if
things go south we're still
going to get the money that
we're getting right now.
so
I think those are all my
comments chairman and madam
chair thank you for the purpose
of this got.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative this current
sixty seven million dollars and
launch.
Would be used for what type of
construction.
Mr Chairman representative Scott
and all all ticketed to Kim for
specifics but it is all for
public infrastructure in the
area as it as it as it is
required to be through the the
ten legislation but all that
came to speak specifically about
what type of and infrastructure.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative is.
Representative Scott
is a variety of public
infrastructure first it starts
with basic infrastructure roads
water lines sewer lines because
that we we need those kinds of
improvements in order to
continue to develop the the rest
of the property
an important part of the
remaining money will go to what
we call amenity improvements
parks trails recreation fields
that are open to the public not
for athletic purposes at the
university or other another
entity up transportation
improvements are very
significant we're going to we're
going to help the city Fund
transit
we've dedicated some money
toward infrastructure
improvements on I. twenty five
at the inner changes
public safety is another
important element the City of
Albuquerque is collaborating
with the university on a police
station and so public money can
be used for to funding the those
type of improvements in addition
to Representative Harper
Harper's the previous comment
we're gonna be able to use to
get money to fund building
improvements that are science
and technology park that could
be used for economic development
in our collaborations with
national labs and so forth so
it's a variety of very important
public improvement projects
that will stimulate other
development in the area.
And Mr Chairman this chart
thanks for.
Is there a private money
to educated to this project at
this time or that there.
chairman and and representative
of Scott
There the the the university of
through its nonprofit
corporation global development
corporation will be funding some
of the initial of money for
these for these improvements
waiting for the tax revenue to
come to the district to later on
seek seek reimbursement in
addition to that and I would
like to maybe refer to a Kelly
ward to talk about the various
transactions that are currently
being contemplated with private
developers and private
businesses in the area Kelly.
Mr chair members Representative
Jim Scott we are currently
working on about thirty three
thirty four acres of development
with private sector so this be
the commercial development that
is the G. R. T. generator that
fuels the the remainder so I'm
primarily working on on that get
into it with the several land
transactions land leases and
causing about three hundred
fifty thousand square feet of
commercial real estate to to
come up out of the ground.
Senator.
I would just place anyone.
I want to.
This for example low income
housing as part of this process
all Mr Chairman excuse me
representative got no.
Okay Mr Chairman.
The.
FOR or.
Hundred fifty million dollars.
Just to the general fund but
that's.
That is because.
All we're looking at committing
the state to here yes.
Yes have.
Representative plus or minus.
The increase in G. R. T. is that
an accurate.
Mr Chairman representative of
Scott exactly and and there's
really with the two there's
actually no risk to the
governmental entities because if
the district does not make money
the private dollars have to put
the infrastructure in in the
reimbursed for so that district
does not make money in there
still no fiscal impact in any of
the governmental entities and Mr
chairman that was exactly my
last question the full faith and
credit of.
Yes I this two hundred sixty
seven million dollars long.
Mr Chairman representative Scott
you development Corp which is
the the nonprofit corporation
that has private dollars in it
that Mr ward talked about.
And then also Mr chairman
Representative Scott those
private commercial entities that
he's talking about investing
that money.
Mr Chairman representative Scott
let me just add that that those
entities level developing the
private developers would be
would be at risk for their
investment the the actual bonds
that are issued by the district
are the sole obligation of the
district itself and not the
obligation of the city the
county the university for the
state and so if there's not
sufficient money to service
those bonds in the holders of
the bonds are the ones that are
actually at risk.
Mr chairman thank you and G. U.
N. M. family agent developer.
I relying on state funds.
Mr chair Representative Scott no
we're not local development is
self funded through their
overriding of real estate
activities at the university and
is not reliant on the state
appropriation.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
all for your answers
Representative Scott the
Representative Chandler.
Thank you Mr chair.
Good to see you on this subject
So I'm a little I would like to
understand a little bit more
about local development Corp.
Tell me how.
Well funded they are what how
are you capitalized our use of
is Lobo development for Mr
chair.
does it have two hundred and
sixty seven million dollars at
its disposal Mr chair
representative.
Chairman Representative Chandler
top.
Chairman representative Jan or
nothing no it it doesn't but but
it has sufficient capital that
has been allocated to it by the
region's through a variety of of
a real estate transactions
ground leases and so forth that
we have entered into over over a
long period of time in order to
Michy eight development of the
infrastructure in order to is Mr
ward indicated attract
additional private funding.
local development corporation
is very will closely tied to our
board of regents and it's it is
so in terms of oversight but
it's also because the land the
local development will be
facilitating the development of
is actually owned by the
region's its bond in the name of
the region so Ruiloba
development and the regions have
agreed in principle about the
structure of the of this
development and
and again with adequate adequate
sufficient intense oversight by
the region's.
So we know the board of regents
as a public entity.
What I think I heard the state
Mr chair and representative is.
The regents are diverting other
bump bump that it is has access
to.
Support this project and I see
Mr hands shaking his head no so
help me understand
where the money from
the well well development Corp
is coming from I yes I heard an
explanation Mr chair that said
regions is very closely aligned
with this company and that
monies that would otherwise go
to the board of regents is being
assigned to this project so help
me understand where I'm wrong Mr
chair Representative Mr chair
representative in in.
And all that.
All that can answer the exact
part of money but none of the
money the board of regents has
oversight of it but it is not
the same public funds that go to
fund the educational mission of
the university is revenue
generated by property owned by
the university which is private
dollars.
Correct.
Yes that is.
Chairman and and Representative
Chandler that that that
statement is is correct the
university for all first of all
the research park act which
which was
I think I think one of my
favorite laws Mr but it's been
land it's been long standing it
was approved in like nineteen
eighty nine so it's been around
for about thirty years but a lot
of it allows the university to
direct this corporation and
frontier this corporation in a
way in ways that benefit that
benefit the university now to
your specific question
Representative Chandler
university entered into a number
of ground leases for student
housing both off campus which is
local village what we call off
campus of mobile village as well
as on campus with the with the
student housing project on
campus the private developer is
paying the university for the
use of that land to the tune of
about a million and a half
dollars a year for those
projects and those projects have
been ongoing for over ten years
and the regions have allocated
specifically funds from those
ground leases to go to local
development in order to provide
the seed money and capital
necessary for it to go to do
further projects such as such as
this so that's just one example
and probably the primary example
of how local development is
funded Mr chair and thank you
for that answer Sir so what will
it cost to service these bones.
We have a I'm sure Mr chair you
have had an estimate done so
that we know that it's
financially so what's it gonna
cost I meant it's gonna be
caught more than one point five
million.
Am I wrong.
The at the chairman
Representative channel first of
all the funds are going to be an
obligation of the district and
and bonds will not be issued by
the district until they until
they're sufficient revenue
coming into the district.
From gross receipts tax part and
property tax and so those bonds
will give a very intense
underwriting analysis in
addition those bonds cannot be
issued until the state board of
finance excuse me the New Mexico
finance authority authorizes
those bonds be issued so there's
intense oversight of the
issuance of the bonds themselves
which will not be an obligation
of local development nor the
university or any other
governmental entities.
Mr chair and expert I I still
didn't hear what what what is
the estimate for what it's going
to cost to service those bonds.
I understand there is an
estimate.
The.
Honestly chairman Chandler
Representative I don't have
those figures the financial
model at the top of my head
those initial model shows a
series of bonds issued over a
twenty five year period in each
of those bonds will have
different underwriting and cost
implications okay so we don't
know at least today for the
committee Mr chair what it would
cost to service these pods
all right so Mr chair.
Assuming this project we always
like to think of projects going
to be successful which would be
fabulous of course but I always
think about what happens when
projects aren't successful
because I think that's our job
we can all live with rose
colored glasses and then that's
great Mr chair but my concern is
what happens if all these great
ideas we have to go into another
recession you know we can
mention all kinds of bad things
that happened in fact sometimes
they do happen Mr chair so what
happens if the
estimates in the economic
assessments and so on and so
forth actually don't come to
fruition the project is unable
to service the bonds what
happens.
Thanks for close is there a lien
what happens Mr chair
representative.
Yeah Mr Chairman Representative
Chandler again the bonds are
issued only when they're
sufficient revenue.
Being generated to the district.
And so.
Yeah
If if for some reason that
revenue stream is impacted in
the future after the bonds have
been issued.
And then the holders of the
bonds the person purchasers of
bonds will be the ones that will
be impacted
I'm I need to add Representative
Chandler that the financial
plan.
For the district.
Was extensively reviewed by the
New Mexico staff the the staff
of the New Mexico finance
authority well as the state
board of finance.
And and they were there in favor
they're in favor of the
financial plan Mr chair and
expert I appreciate that but
there's probably a reason why
the legislature guess to look at
that so I you know I I'm happy
to accept the fact Mr chair that
they've been some financial
issues but I hope it's okay if
we also inquire about those.
Thank you
If I may just real quick Mr
chairman of the September we can
get we we're going to get you
that information just give us a
of of that but we're definitely
going to give you the costs as
soon as we are able to do that.
Mr chair and representative we
we you all referred to of leases
as one of the state funding
sources but are there also
things like and download funds
that you might be relying on to
help support this project or am
I wrong about that Mr chair
representative.
Mr chair representative Janet no
point you know other university
funds such as the endowment
funds are not being
contemplated to fund this
project okay and any sales of
real property that the
university might and engage in
those be used for this project
Representative Mr Chairman
representative Jennifer it's
possible that that a future land
sale proceeds subject to the
approval of the board of regents
could be used up for of funding
the infrastructure necessary to
get the projects are.
Mr chair and representative.
So let's assume a successful
project and local development
Corp is actually making money
through the development of of
the site Mr Chairman
representative where will those
revenues go.
Chairman and Representative
Chandler to the extent that
local development is in a
positive cash flow position
beyond its its needs for
additional of working capital to
do projects our agreement with
the screen name and will you
with that we're regions
provides that those surplus
funds would be returned back to
the university okay so Mr
Chairman representative what a
revenue streams have you does
your economic analysis show how
much you are you expecting to
earn from this project.
Chairman Representative Chandler
The university will be entered
as.
As a Mr ward indicated will be
entering into transactions with
private developers.
And that that money.
Would be used
subject to regents approval
to provide working capital for
the for the lower development or
return back to the universe Mr
chair so it's an either or to
local development has the option
Mr chair of holding on to that
money.
Chairman Representative Chandler
I I didn't imply that I didn't
intend to imply that in my in my
answer okay good subject its
subject.
The operations of global
development are subject to
annual review and budget
authority of the region's.
And it's up to the regions to
decide where any surplus money
would go either towards working
capital for the corporation or
back to the coffers of the
university Mr chair and
representative.
And so there wouldn't be
appropriated monies that the
university so there's probably a
lot more flexibility Mr chair
and representative one monies
are flowing in from a different
source do I have that correct.
But chairman Representative
channel that's correct.
And Mr chair and representative
revenues from Lobo Development
court when they're returned back
to the regions are they
typically apply to the education
of our state of U. M. students.
Chairman representative gender
that's really up to the board of
regents of how those monies
would be used.
Okay.
Another way Mr chair and
representative would have done
for the regent's yes just for
the purpose from the legislature
is that right.
Mr Chairman representative
general that that is correct
the challenge there and the
reason that we believe that the
ticket is beneficial and
favorable way to go is as yes
Representative Scott indicated.
We're talking about two hundred
sixty seven million dollars of
of infrastructure.
Over twenty five year period so
if we were to come to the
legislature every year for
twenty five years and ask for
money sufficient money we would
that would total two hundred and
sixty seven million dollars the
kid up through the dedication of
future revenue the district at
the rate of fifty six percent.
Only only amounts to a hundred
and fifty four million dollars
rather than to two hundred and
sixty seven million dollars that
would be necessary if this is a
state procreation and the reason
being is is that the nature of
the partnership the City of
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county are chipping in a
sizeable portion of money toward
that toward that two hundred
sixty seven as well Mr Chairman
representative and that's
because they on land that's also
within a ten minute correct
about that.
Representative Mr Chairman
representative Janet Popp the
city owns a small amount of land
the bulk of the vast majority is
owned by the university of
Bernalillo county does not own
any land in there
Both the city in the in the
county
have adopted policies to
encourage.
In a reasonable and appropriate
manner of tax increment the
development districts and they
have reviewed this project and
determine that it's worthy of of
their commitment of future
revenue.
So the Mr chair and
representative the kind of the
concept and the underpinnings of
it to add is that
but for this arrangement the
state would not be getting any
Representative revenues that's
what the theory behind all these
things are is that not right Mr
chair and representative.
Mr chair representative Jim of
the state would not be getting
any state city county would not
be getting any G. R. T. U. G. R.
T. so there the state and city
county are still getting the G.
R. T. in property tax it is
existing in the district today
exactly so Mister chair and
representative are there any
arrangements that have already
been made with large retailers
for example that have been lined
up or at least very close to
lined up do we have any sense
how much how far along are you
Mr Chairman representative in
that in that.
Mr Chairman representative
general of.
Mr ward
I said a minute ago but maybe
you would like to expand.
Mr members the committee
Representative Chandler yeah
we're we're.
Alright well did so we've got
three letters of intent that are
been signed we have one.
Our.
Our sale purchase agreement
that's been signed for about one
point three acres so small tract
during your addiction and alumni
records called.
And and we got a next one of the
three is for thirty two acres
it's a ground lease our large
retail anchored multi tenant
facility.
And that one's we're gonna close
to final agreement to be signed
which be a land lease agreement
yes and then we got a letter of
intent that's it signed for
another two point four acres so
that was what I indicated
earlier in terms of we're
working with master planning
about three point eight acres at
corner sensual and university
for multi family housing mixed
use development so that we will
see some progress I think about
six months or so I want to get
through that process.
You Mr chair and representative
so we know there's no state
participation in the ticket at
this point but we have just
heard Mr chair and
representative of sounds like
three very successful outreach.
In projects that are look like
likely to come to fruition so
Mister chair and representative
my question is when the G. R. T.
starts being generated from
those projects will that somehow
be considered an increase in G.
R. T. that the state is
therefore that they're not going
to not going to get and I'm I'm
sure that's fine saying it in a
very in an elegant way but we're
is that G. R. T. going to be
counted Mr chair that's what I'm
trying to say it because you
have to show its incremental.
We already know these things are
lined up.
And I would be very disappointed
if so that G. R. T. was then
considered G. R. T. that the
state does not get to recover.
Because the state has not been
participate in the could add to
that.
Do I need to clarify research
here Representative take a shot
at it the way it works is you
have to set your baseline start
date.
And so once that growth if it's
part of the growth that comes
after that start date and it's
part of the increments.
But and and all.
I'll defer to the others but.
Those negotiations and deals
this is all part of a package
about what it's going to go into
the area including
infrastructure.
And so those deals are not
necessarily independent of that
infrastructure going in which
would you choose to revenues
for.
Mr chair and representative but
my point is if there's a but for
test there's no but for yet from
the state.
We have an I understand the
board of financing so it's great
all that but the legislature has
not determined that so my
concern is that without the
state's participation the city
has are in the in the UK and
logo development have already
been able to do to make great
progress apparently Mr chair and
my concern is that the state
should not be than expected to
be precluded from recovering all
of G. R. T. related to those
projects Mr Chairman
representative.
Mr chair representative Jim.
But for is if we don't have a
permit to put in the
infrastructure than those deals
may not happen at all and so
then there's no increase.
Well I can Mr chair you know
that's okay I'll accept that as
your explanation thank you Mr
chair my concern is this this is
an unusual tiered in that
there's virtually no private
entity involved in it's a it's a
fallacy to think Mr chair that
global development as a private
and we all know that we just
heard about the quote close
relationship between the regions
and what about women so kids are
typically used for
Frankly public private
partnerships and this is really
a public public public public
partnership and I think it's
under at not a terribly
transparent way for the state to
be supporting redevelopment of
cities projects and it's not
transparent to the public which
is partly why I'm having this
rather detailed conversation Mr
chair because I think it's
important that people understand
that this is essentially a
diversion of state G. R. T.
arguably some of some of which
wouldn't have been generated but
I think that's always a point of
discussion
that the state would otherwise
collect in appropriation process
Mr chair very transparent there
are line items in budgets and we
have conversations that we have
performance reviews and only
through LFC and I just think
this is Mr chair as a work
around for something that should
be vetted through our
appropriation process so thank
you Mr chair representative go
to the health of.
Chair.
In fact you can see on the.
Representative a lot of.
Issues that by.
At some comments.
Your legislative.
How does this affect the.
Property owners adjacent to the.
Have what impact will place the.
Yes.
Chair.
Mr Chairman Representative
Townsend.
With the success of a detailed
and the redevelopment it would
probably be an increase in
property value would be
increased and services and
amenities available they won't
have to travel as far for things
like
food entertainment.
Groceries those types of things
they'll have parks and other
amenities so it's a positive
impact on the surrounding
communities as part of wipe out
kids are used to help these are
the particular Mr Chairman
representative of a brownfield
Gen meeting in in fill like this
to help improve the area that
has been underserved for
decades.
And madam chair.
I think they're issue is on
their values but that is their
property taxes one thousand that
users.
Can you speak to that a little.
Mr Chairman representative.
Residential property yes could
go up although it I think we as
we also we all seen is in with
the late speaker Lujan.
Yes legislation for the three
percent property tax cap on
residential property tax
generally is going on.
As a matter of course.
chairman.
Representative.
The.
The lack of.
Financial action Zacks.
I heard about the value of the
global.
Depending upon the sale of the
bonhomie their ability their
ability to stand for the for the
bonds yeah.
Concurrent with with the fact
that the ticket is authorized in
the monsters of.
Is that not works.
Mr Chairman representative.
Local development is not
involved at all and funding of
the revenue that comes to the
district.
General.
I thought I heard you state of
the settlement.
State and in the case of yes.
Developed
not being
successful stance for the bonds.
Mr Chairman representative.
The for the infrastructure to be
built the cash transaction house
will run through local
development they will put the
money into to build the
infrastructure.
And then the bonds are issued to
repay that if there is enough
gross receipts tax and property
tax growth to fund that
repayment and those bonds are
sold publicly so then the
bondholders hold the risk for
the box.
The
What you're asking legislation.
Authorize all of this of the
moms.
So that.
Public.
Transaction.
to support that and.
Chairman Representative Townsend
that's yes yes that's generally
generally correct we're asking
for the authority for the
district on behalf of the
district.
The authority of the district to
issue the maximum of two hundred
sixty seven billion dollars of
bonds over the life of the two.
So Mr chairman and
Representative how will this
affect capital outlay.
That is going on.
Mr Chairman representative if
you look on section three of the
legislation on page two.
That actually specifically deals
with capital outlay projects if
there aren't any capital outlay
projects authorize with the
exception of public school bill
insurance Ortiz higher education
building two facilities cultural
buildings or facilities
facilities up and struck for
public safety and for other
public purposes and so that's
that's more language that's an
every kid authorization so
there's limitations on what if
any capital outlay would be
authorized.
Mr chairman and.
Our.
Capital outlay authorized.
The.
Mr Chairman representative down
and yes the campy.
Mr Chairman representative towns
although the state does not
contemplate any capital outlay
dollars for any of the
infrastructure that we're
talking about building that is
not part of the request for the
planned for this development.
Chairman
Representative.
The.
That
number.
maybe about the developer is the
developer known.
Chairman Representative Townsend
local development is going to
act act is what's called the
master developer it's going to
be responsible for for planning
and installing portions of the
basic infrastructure the roads
in the water and the sewer lines
and so forth as Mr ward
indicated up we have other
developers that are going to
come in and specifically
developed parcels or groups of
parcels there will be
responsible for perhaps
additional infrastructure but
then also we responsible billing
for what we call but
improvements during the leases
with the with the businesses and
the retailers and other
establishments
so that so it's a it's a
combination but but Ruiloba
development is is again
functioning as the master
developer to coordinate all this
and also see the see the first
phases of basic infrastructure
in order to attract these other
developers to the development of
the general the latest for words
and then.
The authorized.
Global development has forty to
sell.
Arms.
Love of development that because
of the with a developer to build
infrastructure.
whatever.
Of the
And the infrastructure that they
have install in this area of
that is not currently available.
Would be them what might be
repaid.
The.
With the with the mechanism is
that correct.
Mr Chairman Representative
Townsend the piece about the
bonds is not correct the ticket
itself is a political
subdivisions governed by a board
Lobo development and the
developers build the
infrastructure.
If there is growth in the
district then the bonds are
issued by the board to repay for
that infrastructure so the
that's the piece the two
district itself as the chair of
the bonds.
Mr Chairman I'm not necessarily
opposed to this that.
I I the.
But we have the capacity to do
that this development without
the do it where is it just an
enhancement to that ability
chairman Representative Townsend
the university does not only
does not have the capacity to
fund this type of project but if
it did have a kind of capacity
it would not fund this project
is not there are many many other
needs that would be a higher
priority the ticket is actually
a new you use the word
enhancement and that's correct
it's an enhancement it is a tool
that allows
That that area to be developed
using future tax revenue.
To pay for public
infrastructure.
But I think that
I'm not at all Mr chairman I'm
not at all of.
Need to utilize.
Ask for this type of
us develop a of I do have a
little bit
concern about and people outside
to do it and it will be
affected.
And
And
that that can happen with or
without and do it in the in the.
Development area have a tail
live in.
Yeah.
The impact but
I would tell you that I've had a
number of people.
Yeah of the with that.
Thank you thank you right thank
you and go back thank you tell
them let's go back to speaker
Martinez thank you Mr chair I
move that to pass on house bill
three fifty three.
For that motion we do have the
other members of we need to
speak so we can hold our first
step let's go up I see
Representative but it's online
shooter and up.
Representative.
Yes can you hear me.
Yes we hear you.
Thank you.
so just wanted to ensure that
having servers and the
redevelopment official for city
for about ten years and work in
redevelopment any type of now
the plan in redevelopment areas
uses these funding capacities
for large projects and to
representative.
Concern about adjacent
properties of much of his area
is work related and I think.
Actually been some of those
areas I also wanted to mention
that I
And I don't think this is a
conflict Mr chair I think it's
just in the area transparency
while I was on the city council
serving as share our presidents
I voted on this.
To put forward to the state and
Typically these are a type of
project that we are looking for
us to
Somewhat I guess that's the guy
the sense
for lack of better words
This is
going to be
and improvement for this area
and.
Much of the infrastructure will
actually be probably stays in
that what you're saying because
there is that plan for this area
and the local group and I forget
their names
would be acting as a mask
develop which is not on and on
in these types of redevelopment
project.
So Mr chair I wanted for
transparency sake to to mention
that I did our on field on this
as fast as you can were and I
think it's important that you
guys know that we did you much
of the make up of this deal and.
One of the comments made with
regard to.
Public public partnership at
some point this actually does
become a public private
partnership as they attract new
business into the area so Mr
chair wanted in the board to let
you know that I am supportive of
this
I think it would be a great
improvement working area that
really needs
kind of boost are shot on our
state this area
and I want to redevelop for the
twenty five years so.
Seeing this come to fruition
would definitely be a step in
the right direction thank you.
Thank you Representative Borrego
up bad before we continue with
the discussion of the war on the
list I was reminded that house
rules do you have in place that
until the member is confirmed
positive of with COVID their
participation yes it is
allowable but that they will not
be able to cast a vote until of
course the the items are
positive so I just wanna make
sure that we're clear that
within this in this committee so
that's what Representative
docket.
Thank you Mr chairman is there
anything you may not know the
answer to this and you may is
there a difference between this
ticket and the ticket for Los
crucis.
Mr Chairman representative
Duncan
Actually they're very similar
because the the Los crucis tip
once the two board was the city
council and it was also the
money there was no developer
behind that so in that the thing
public entity they're very
similar although level
development does act as a
nonprofit that does have
revenues but very similar Los
crucis thank you Mr chairman so
global develop acting as the
city council of Los crucis.
Basically.
Mr Chairman representative
Duncan noted two board has the
chipboard has.
The folks local development also
DFA has various members in Los
crucis case the city council
itself was actually the to board
okay
and then the only other question
I have is
We had I think I heard that
there would be there might be a
new police station now there in
this area is is that correct
Chairman representative Duncan
that's it that's correct hello
for that reason right there
along the.
Thank you Representative.
All right I appreciate yeah yes
if that's what it is that.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Are any of these public
infrastructure projects planned
to generate revenue.
Mr chairman and Representative
Scott.
Yes.
Mr chairman Mr Gramm where.
With that revenue.
Direct to.
chairman we're Representative
Scott
You yes some of the projects of
like the building improvements
and the parking structure.
Would possibly generate of of
revenues through leases or fees
that money.
Is not substantial is not
projected to be substantial and
would be go that would go toward
maintenance and operation
expenses of those of those
improvements.
So.
Mr Chairman.
The.
This would be like for example
the.
Complex user generated.
Surely significant revenue and.
And to local development.
This and.
Mr Chairman representative of
Scott yes
let's let's talk about the
parking structures we we
We have a demands down there for
parking for the science and
technology parking for athletic
events our athletic department
charges a fee for the use of
surface parking the city does
likewise so it's anticipated
that the we have three parking
structures
that excuse me to down there on
south campus it's possible that
they would and likely that they
would charge a fee during
certain athletic or
entertainment events and that
money would go toward toward
operations
of those facilities as to the
building improvements at the
science and technology park
these are really are anti type
buildings there mainly going to
be housing the university
research and the collaborations
with the national labs.
Currently we have five hundred
thousand square feet of of
building improvements at the
science and technology part only
nine percent is occupied by
private tenants that rate that
pay rent out it's it's unlikely
that that percentage would go up
in fact we would probably like
to see that percentage go up to
get more private investment and
participation collaboration with
our with our your reserves and
so those right those rents would
come to local development or the
university depending on the
ownership of the building and
and go toward operation and
maintenance expenses.
Thank you Mr chairman you would
not.
Anticipated in operating profit
the developed
any of these infrastructure
projects.
Mr Chairman representative got.
The idea of the district itself
it's not necessarily just those
pieces of property owned by
development it's all of those
commercial tenants that now will
come in so you need the
infrastructure for those
commercial tenants which would
put include the gross about
grocery store entertainment
restaurants office buildings
research all of those are
designed to generate the
revenues that are projected in
the master plans that that forms
the basis of the projected gross
receipts tax growth so although
maybe one facility may not Mr
Chairman representative Scott
generate direct revenue to local
development the ideas that the
the tax revenue will increase
because now you have a
significant leap increased
commercial
businesses in the area
generating taxes.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for your interest thank you
Representative vice chairman for
the.
Thank you Mr chair.
At
questions that come into play
would be there what higher ed
institutions are public entities
and how the shape and are
reflected by the communities
that they call home
I also.
Free Google to see this article
in the Albuquerque journal as
you all know I Representative
cost estimation we have
thousands Mexico in the nasco
Authority of my constituents are
residents of Los crucis and then
I represent New Mexico State
University online with out here
doing thank you goes out so I
have some perspective imposition
Audi and.
What it means to.
Think about college towns and
communities that are both
services serving those towns
just a point of information for
me are there other I have two
kids completely on higher end
campus like this morning.
Yeah Mr Chairman representative
in yes there are cross the
country there are numerous ones
some of them are more focused on
research in science and
technology parks up like Purdue
of the university Kentucky I was
State University others are
oriented more towards commercial
development much like the what
we're projecting here
those kind of projects one of
the signature projects is that
you do University as of of
southern California cultural Jim
village which is a combination
of commercial activity and and
institutional uses so yes the
short answer is and I.
The largest example I almost
overlooked it is the of the
university of Oklahoma get their
medical facilities in downtown
Oklahoma City Oklahoma City has
in cooperation with the
university has created fourteen
tickets to redevelop areas of of
downtown Oklahoma City for their
medical campus the research
activities associated with the
medical campus thank you Mr
chair and.
But to confirm this would be the
first of its kind in New Mexico
and setting a new property.
Mr Chairman representative
that's correct.
Yes
I mean you know.
This often and consistently I
often have basic questions of
equity and when we looked at
institutions of higher at in our
state as much as we try to bring
in different kinds of students
or student populations of
students of color and indigenous
kids and other people of color.
We sell CD's hired institutions
to not actually reflect the
communities that New Mexico.
Home to as certainly even in in
a state like ours that has
primarily have publicly funded
hired institutions not the
private there is still
significant discrepancies in the
neighborhoods surrounding our
campuses and those who gets
would tend to hire it I remember
my dear friends Mr chair at
committee members now.
County commissioner agent but I
spoke in publicly about what it
meant to grow up in the shadow
of you to grow up on the south
campus.
Nope that found their way there
that eventually got those
college degrees I'm still Mr
chair committee we work towards
the lottery scholarship and then
all of a sudden cap is on you
and would differently you could
see that you know basically you
could see kids from the high
kids that grew up in the shadow
of that institution I'm so when
I think about when we have
conversations about kids
generally in the state and
around the country there has
often been recent question of
gentrification of what happens
when different investment
dollars whether it's a public
public partnership where a
private public partnership
come in and sometimes we go away
in the name of giving a facelift
to a neighborhood folks that
have been there for a long time
Mr chair Representative.
Because we're in New Mexico I
imagine that you all have had
conversations at the city level
or other level about how to
taking into considerations
concerns like that what kind of
backstops would there be on this
to border otherwise to have the
kind of equity conversations I
think folks that live in the
south time neighborhood
deserved.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and vice chair of content for
the question I think it's a
really good one
I think for the most part I
mean.
The emphasis is not on the
effort of getting the tip passed
but I think that this is
absolute criticism honestly and
I think that in terms of putting
together to board the should be
used question should be
incorporated as part of the
decisions are being made as to
the businesses that are being
let in maybe we need to look at
other types of campus housing
for those students maybe we need
to look at other
methods of ensuring equity
throughout that area so that
we're not just it's not just a
need to be gentrification we're
not just doing it for in and out
burger we're doing it for the
betterment of the community so
that these committee members
can continue to live in that
community feel like they're part
of that community and live
better lives as a result of this
infrastructure that is not there
yet so I think it's and and an
absolutely excellent criticism I
I would encourage the University
of New Mexico to take this into
consideration these questions
should be asked by the to work
continuously and maybe they're
going to be I didn't need to
speak out and perform experts
but I just felt it's an
excellent question and it's it's
something that as legislators we
do need to keep into
consideration that's why we're
here today so that these types
of questions could be asked Mr
chair representative and it's
also very similar issue raised
by speaker Martinez and
judiciary
with with you the University
about doing a better job of of
taking the those communities
into consideration in decision
making and message was very
clear we received we and we
miss Kim Sanchez rails member of
the board of regents is here in
New and we heard and we are the
speaker in judiciary as well I'm
very similar type of discussion
to make sure we take those those
communities and consideration
not just with the tip but with
the university as a whole.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative with one more
question comment I'm actually
not sure how it yes vote on this
bill should make it to the floor
because of some significant
issues including those basement
church.
Property again it's noteworthy
that this entire ticket would be
contained in U. N. M. Capas that
to me it says is that well this
is what that is FY activities
but that's that's a pretty to
get to a precedent for me and it
raises questions about what kind
of opportunities are potential
potential with that open the
other institutions budgeted
would also argue that would love
to have a little bit kind of tax
for tax policy so that they
could make needed investments in
their capital
I did hear that again comparing
to the existing council simple
Mr chair that that word was the
Los crucis the council meeting
when I think about
accountability to the people
that we represent our
constituents every day.
Well accountability when you
elected those people and then
they are entrusted to servitude
born on this way there is a open
I have there is a means of
accessing those elected
officials you can weigh in about
the kind of decisions that
making using using tax policy
that this opportunity would give
me some has that we think about
the ticket going on this project
it's actually a mix of as as you
all at the explained it actually
some DFA people some regions
will they do an outstanding job
it could be more impressed and
grateful for my regions and with
you they're not elected they're
not.
Public figures I'm in the same
way with the state kind of
accountability to folks that
that that act so that also is
something that's giving me pause
is this I have no to board that
that would come into existence
of family.
Thank you.
Thank you I don't get that back
up and no one else requests to
speak at this point in time so
let's go back to us because
we're doing this is motion to do
pass this motion made is there a
second.
Seconded by Representative on
this these call pope.
Representative for echo.
Well that.
Until I know if I have a comment
or not thank you.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chandler.
No.
Representative Duncan yes.
Representative guy and go yes.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative I'm sorry speaker
Martinez yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Scott.
Pasifika the quest for the it's
thank.
That's going out to health bills
three eighty nine.
This chair Lara good morning
thank you for your patience Mr
chair I think it's still about
an hour ago.
I think it would be on this bill
plus that thank you for your
patience the floor is yours
whenever you're ready thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee I do have an expert
with the surname is due to
launch she's on should be option
hello good morning
I have so what whenever and if
you wanted to chime in so that
is the thank you Mr chair House
Bill three eighty nine are you
just looking to remove that the
requirement for the issuance of
a state issued ID for homeless
individuals or on house people
this bill is intended to give
greater access to purchase two
persons experiencing
homelessness or are are to over
those war on house in order for
them to to receive services or
to I didn't identify themselves
when they need to and it also
will allow them to to be able to
get greater access to job
opportunities as well and with
that Mr chair I would like to
choose my my expertise data loan
data I don't know if you would
like to say anything.
Hello.
I'm here with you.
Hi.
One of the state coordinator for
the education of homeless
children and youth with the
public education department and
I have a state advisory
committee and every year we
decide Representative pursue
legislatively that was just a
students experiencing
homelessness to better academic
success.
And so the sleep this year we
ask everybody what we wanted to
work on and of the youth said
really really want to help us
please help us get free at home
because we needed for food we
needed for services we needed
for housing when you jobs and
they don't even vote if that
happens I the so
I just wanted to say that you
know publicly if if you don't
have fiber ten dollars you know
that's that's quite a bit you
know it doesn't sound like much
if you don't have it but if you
if you do have time to hire sort
five dollars if you don't have
that amount of money then it
could look like an impossibility
so this could really be a game
changer for a lot of folks out
there again it would help them
with employment and everything
that they need to get stable.
Thank you madam chair with that
we stand for questions.
You Representative a lot of
little first go the public is
there anyone here in our
committee room are offline that
would like to speak in support
of this bill please read your
towns.
They know
Constituents wanting to speak in
support to we have any
opposition I just wonder what we
do have some.
Yeah.
What the government.
I'm Bob Gardner go to you first.
Good morning money order
attorney with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty we are
in support of H. B. three eight
nine this bill making it easier
for people experiencing
homelessness to access state
IEPs having ideas critical to
getting a job finding housing
and receiving benefits.
Unfortunately the cost of
obtaining and ideas often cost
prohibitive for folks who are
surviving date today four
minutes a minute.
Locational Mr chair DO H.
statutory fee for birth
certificates for people
experiencing homelessness this
is one small step we can take to
improve the lives of individuals
experiencing homelessness and
mitigate the house almost this
crisis Garcia is experiencing
thank you and The New Mexico
Senator Robert Mondavi hoaxes
for this bill.
Thank you we have anyone that
would like opposition.
Okay if you look.
Presley wrote your tax support
on eighty three eighty nine.
Yes my name is Chris Moran
manager and German Committee I
am with the ark of New Mexico we
represent individuals with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities many of our clients
and our guardianship and respond
the.
Programs are.
Homeless and are in need of
having ID cards issued has to
come out of their social
security payment currently now
in order to pay for the ID the
and just having the ID card the
way it would be one less
expensive that would have to
undergo thank you very much.
Thank you do we have anyone else
online.
All.
Okay is there anyone with us
today that would like to speak
in opposition to HB three eighty
nine your home for on these
insurance now.
No hands in person or on screen
it looks like we're ready to go
to committee.
Yeah thank you very much yeah
In a.
Definitions of non GAAP Federal.
Hello.
That.
What is that and.
Mr chair representative of that
definition begins on page two
ladies seventeen.
And it continues on to.
The bottom of to and.
The agency.
All the way to.
Line ten.
Of the so Mr chair
representative the McKinney
vento homeless assistance act as
it is a federal act that we
utilize at the at the at the
school districts that that
Public Education Department to
identify persons and families
that that's a that's security
that we used to all I do is for
for the for the big event a
homeless education programs.
And then.
Chairman
I did.
That
that old definition.
More than one.
This.
Mr chair representative I'd like
to defer to miss off actually
she's it she's a the expert on
the.
I'm so sorry could you repeat
the question I could not hear
it.
Yes ma'am where.
The McKinley met fell Publicis.
Is that case law.
Federal definition where did
that originate.
Okay I heard enough to give you
an answer for that so the home
of making even the homeless
assistance act has been around
since nineteen eighty seven
it's your primary legislation
that provides cut funding and it
also has an educational
component so this this is really
been around for.
Over thirty years and have
the definitions are better on
the field aligned with the
definitions that had provides
for us.
So Mr Chairman representative I
I mean the definition it happen
though.
And Representative whether there
are they are you listed on that
and.
Mr chair representative yes
that's correct thank.
Thank thank you Representative
Townsend Representative Harper.
Thank you chairman
First of all it's good to see
you this morning
I I'm very much in support of
the legislation I just have a
couple quick questions
so
Representative Townsend for us
my my first one my son in
regards to this definition
reporting here in
Session.
That we do slash Tax Code
section do we have any other
place in our statutes that
define.
Almost.
That are we gonna be a conflict.
Like with any of those.
Mr chair representative I like
to defer to agency loan and was
one of you would please go for
the term please.
So this would not conflicted
with actually
bring it all together to be
quite honest with you.
The definition again in around
for a really long time all your
most providers know this
definition and we did something
similar a couple years ago for
freepers certificates for
homeless individuals for
individuals experiencing
homelessness making sure that
they're able to get that and
they have a self attestation
form that they feel out it does
not look like it's been abuse
this is been in place for two
years and so far and they've
only requests about one thousand
five hundred Ishq for
certificates for that so it's
not it's not something that's
been abused so far.
So thank you Chairman
Representative an expert so so I
I the answer to my question is
we do define almost this and
other places in the statute
them.
Mr chair representative up miss
more if you would answer for
that maybe please and if you
would please go to the chair.
This is just specific to to this
piece of legislation I believe
but again it is similar it's
identical to the one that we've
used for birth certificates.
Okay so so Chairman
representative thank you for
that I just.
You know I've been here long
enough I I see were sometimes
one of Michigan's change
somewhere and it does get change
somewhere else and it's nice to
point to a definition and have
one place where the definition
is maintained center Tyler
brought this up earlier was
somehow legislation referring to
the capital gains deduction
and so I would just
Recommend to you I mean I'm not
going to.
Vote against it to make a big
stink about it here but I would
very much recommend that between
now the floor in the Senate you
look at.
Updating where ever you want to
add definition to be so that is
the way you want it and then
point to it because I don't
think we need to have in our tax
statutes the definition of
homelessness
So that's just my recommendation
And then the only other question
I have is
Really does not specify a cheer
Health Department is to verify.
That an individual needs
One seven ways they could be
defined as a publicist Division.
And just looking out for the
department.
Try to help them do their job
chairman and Representative do
you have an idea for.
How how is some of the NMED
supposed to verify that they've
met the seven criteria.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative I think miss
Malone had mentioned something
earlier about the the the person
to because and they have to have
a an affidavit is blown out if
you have any
further details regarding that
and how is the immediacy will to
work with these with these
individuals experiencing the
situation at this was full of
you go to the chair.
So it doesn't look like it's
been an issue with the
department of health at this
point we don't have somebody
specifically verifying that most
people don't want to identify as
living in a homeless situation
it's rather embarrassing for
them so I I I don't see how this
would really be an issue in
don't really verify housing of
residency for people who are not
living in a homeless situation
so it almost be
Putting an undue burden on them
I.
So so Chairman representative
expert thank you I appreciate
that but what I'm.
What what I'm trying to guard
against this someone going to
and we do hearing that they can
save ten Bucks by singer
homeless and there's no way to
check
if if we have an affidavit
required for a bursary to fidget
it just really seems to be like
this bill should be changed to
say folks who are homeless.
Do not need to pay Miss.
Reference that section that
defines homeless reference that
section that says the
legislative affidavit.
so
that gentleman and
Representative I loved your
thoughts on that.
Representative just Mr chair
that you bring up similar very
valid points and in order for me
to have this bill successfully
get through the process I'd
really like to maybe have a chat
with you regarding that because
I think those are those
Those points really I I really
do believe that they need to be
addressed and I thank you for
that was what Mr chair
representative of what I would
like to see is is something
because
Together well that will able to
will be able to facilitate this
for these individuals thank you
thank you so so chairman I'd be
happy to work with him on the
floor amendment for Committee
amendment it's really up to you
but I'd be happy to work with
Representative okay let's let's
get department the last person
will come back to that
Representative bumped into
representatives go.
Thank you Mr chair.
Representative I might as a I
think of the rather simple
question I'm just curious you
have a four year terminate your
term here
Can you tell me too can you
choose between the four year and
eight year term.
On your ID cards Mr chair and
representative to my knowledge
yes but I would like to defer to
to my experts see she has that
information and data if you
would please go to the chair
please.
Hello this this is that seven
one day so I I would would put
us is that when you answer your
questions if you just say Mr
chairman that about this go to
the process if you would please.
Okay
Mr chairman I believe that.
It would be beneficial to have a
four or eight year term maybe to
choose depending on what your
situation is if you're a U. S.
you might not want to for your
one as you might turn eighteen
somewhere along the way one
adult one.
I I really don't have a lot of.
Information on that one but I
can see where the beneficial to
have that opportunity to issues.
Thank you Mr I'd I'd just
assumed if you're if you're
dealing with homelessness.
I I just thought maybe in a year
term would be better because
that we don't have to go back
again you have a three years and
that's it that's all I have
thank you Mr Mr Representative
don't forget that there's got.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative.
Establishing a community
requires perspective.
Or some sort of affidavit sure
cost of acquisition of these
documents.
Mr chair representative I think
I'm hi I think I heard that
this will all mentioned
something about the person
because in the affidavit is a
waived that the proper
certificates so Mister Mister
alone would you we do have an
answer for for the
representative will not.
What I know for sure but the
first certificate is when you go
into the office there you can
they have not printed out and
you can achieve after the office
or you can put them on the
website so if agencies were
assisting our for our
our folks with you know these
applications and stuff they
would be able to have help from
and print it out for them
possibly.
It's.
Mr Chairman representative I see
a bit of a check and move.
Problem here is in which came
first.
So does applicants have to have.
Any sort of social security or.
Anything that I would.
Here I that they are.
In fact the person.
Like in the application for the
first.
Mr chair representative this
Malone if you would mind
answering that you might answer
that please.
I can't remember off the top of
my head everything that you need
for
For it I would only need to
bring with you but I know for
sure that proof of residence is
one of them and so one of the
things you know that obviously
if you don't have a stable home
a lot of people use maybe the
address of an agency that
they're working with or
sometimes even use will address
that there in school or wherever
they're staying go use those
kinds of addresses so that it
would wouldn't be able to.
but again I'm not sure without
looking at the website exactly
there's another document we the
thing the.
Okay Mr Chairman representative
now confused.
That are proof of residency is
required sure identification
cards for a homeless person.
Yes be issued without.
Residents details on the
application.
Mr chair representative are out
I'm not thirty on the same page
of what you're asking if you
could repeat that please.
Okay Mr Chairman representative
in order.
To apply for virtual tours of
some form of documentation
a proof of residence.
Required.
Mr chair representative thank
thanks for for for clarifying
that so there are many
individuals who are staying at
shelters for user for staying at
the other.
Things of that type and those
facilities allow them to use
aperture at that address as a
residence okay.
Thank you for that
Representative.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative got your question
comes from the committee.
If not there's been a discussion
between Representative Harper
and the sponsor with regards to
an amendment to be made on this
bill in conversation with the
sponsor that he would be
amenable to to working on that
with Mr Harper and then we would
have him back first thing on
Wednesday four four
I final work on this bill so if
that's okay with the folks we
can roll it over until Wednesday
first thing and then you're okay
with that Sanchez yes okay and
then we can we can take that at
that point.
Okay that big that thank you for
your presentation thank you Mr
Mr thank you members of the
committee.
Representative Garcia.
Good morning Sir morning how are
you today.
Thank you okay so we have if you
recall early on in this in this
session we had house joint
resolution five and six that
represented in this committee by
Representative Alcon
in conversations with ranking
member Harper and myself we did
have some competition regards to
wanting to pull this back off
the table and get that out of
this committee so that hopefully
you can still make a run at the
and getting it through the
process so is there a motion to
make the most of what the with
respect thank thank the
opposition to that okay we've
already had a hearing on this
bill before nothing's changed
because of the bill and so I
don't think we have to go back
to the audience for for for
commentary this point of the
harbor.
Chairman if it's appropriate
this time I move that we take
house joint resolution I off the
table to make it the next order
of business okay that's a better
way to do it.
Okay then I'll second that and
seeing opposition
there is not so it's it's off
the table twice at this point so
this if there's any discussion
on this matter at this point.
Modou past will take what a time
would you pass on how strict
resolution number five.
Is there a second thank you
Representative Hernandez is
there any opposition.
To do pass on house resolution
I.
Seeing not yeah what do passing
hospitalization for I
Representative now let's look at
how straight resolution number
six.
Motion made by Representative
Castellano.
I have to resolution number six
second second by Representative
Ortez looking at the committee
is there any questions or
comments is the opposition to
that single opposition you have
a few passed on how straight
resolution number six thank you
representative Garcia for all
your work today.
Yeah I do.
Of kind of worried about.
I thank you again for taking the
rascal enough.
Thank you okay thank you and at
this point that concludes our
work for the day up folks we we
call that we handed out those
forms last week on Friday for
that we can all work hopefully
you've been given.
