Good morning everybody.
Representative Kevin.
Speaker Igor.
Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez.
Here.
Representative Lente.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Maestas.
Concern.
Good morning this is
Representative and I'm here as
well.
What is here thank you.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Romero.
Here.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
Here.
Chairman chairman.
Your.
We're.
Great.
To see you Representative by a
goes you have an expert with you
good morning our test Madam
chairwoman are Scott back
Beckner and
In Abbey.
Okay.
Kimberly if we could elevate
those two gentlemen to
panelists that be great.
I'll be can you repeat Scott
last name for me please.
It's near.
You may be a good morning madam
chair members the committee this
is going to be it may be under
Philip ropeless also or got
pregnant one of those two names.
I think they were just promoted
to panelists thank you.
Right thank you again we are on
house bill thirty nine and the
floor is yours Representative
Gallegos thank you good morning
madam chairman and members of
the committee house bill thirty
nine is a pretty simple bill
that has a huge impact on done
in a county and southern New
Mexico economy house bill thirty
nine extends the current gross
receipt tax exemptions sunset
date for NMSU non athletic
events to July first two
thousand twenty seven this
exemption is specific to non
athletic special events such as
concerts rodeos and wrestling
competitions this exemption was
established in two thousand
seven in order to minimize or
diminish the unfair financial
advantage you to has added
tracking special events because
they're located in a state that
does not stop it does not charge
taxes being able to track the
special events provides positive
economic impacts to the students
labor force.
Local hotels and restaurants
goods and services gas stations
and other miscellaneous
attractions in and around during
the pandemic as southern New
Mexico
madam chair and members of the
committee I would like at this
time for my expert witnesses to
be able to be able to answer any
questions that to maybe add a
few and statements at this time
is that examples acceptable to
you Madam chair.
Course Representative so which
of you wish to speak.
Chairman Chandler this is Scott
director of the expert witness
for New Mexico state welcome
Mister Brickner.
Thank you I would just like to
add that the bill house bill
thirty nine as its articulated
is done very well the impact on
my background is that I've been
special event director New
Mexico retirement of June
thirtieth twenty twenty one so
I've been under this exemption
since I was employed by New
Mexico State University since
two thousand seven the specific
concern of course is always been
that you tap.
As an exemption policy that does
not force promoters to pay a tax
when on gross receipts that puts
State University and pan
American center how do you need
disadvantaged simply because if
you are promoter.
Putting together a Taurus
Sanchez Luke combs Garth Brooks
Carrie Underwood.
You will not play a venue that
charges a five percent tax on
gross receipts if you can simply
go forty miles south.
I evaluated similar in size and
similar in gross capacity in pay
between thirty and fifty
thousand dollars in additional
tax we see that it's been the.
Pretty much the goal of the
state to support the fact that
we need to have that extension
to provide those major events in
the pan American center and in
Dona ana county in the city of
Los crucis in direct competition
to the don Haskins center
specifically at the university
of Texas el Paso.
We now as articulated and
spelled out in the proposed
information on H. B. thirty
nine.
That the impact to payroll
payroll taxes.
Taxes and money spent by
visitors to the hotel restaurant
association activities.
In this area yes Representative
Stangel.
Case in point the Garth Brooks
concert in twenty seventeen
which was five shows sixty five
thousand people the closest
hotel spaces in el Paso
Alamogordo.
And as a singular line item
example the payroll for police
and security for that event a
long was a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars.
So it's a great opportunity we
employee.
Thousands of dollars worth of
payroll to support of students
police fire stations you and
other sundry groups and
organizations and it's critical
that that exemption be extended
as we move forward in addition.
It seems to be there would be
but much better for us if those
shows do not go to el Paso to
have Texans visiting the state
of New Mexico and paying taxes
and buying tickets to our events
rather than having New Mexicans
go to Texas and events we know
through the analytics of our
ticket master system that
depending on the show between
ten and forty five percent of
our market does come out of the
city of el Paso Texas in el Paso
county so it's very clear that
if the concerts would continue
to go back down to don Haskins
again that we lose that revenue
and we lose that attendee and we
know that our attendance New
Mexicans will be going to all
classes to attend shows the
final item that I'd like to
mention is the state in
association with the federal
government just spent millions
of dollars on an expanded and
well designed act access
interchange to the campus off of
I. twenty five and we think
that's going to be a tremendous
asset to get a second growers
and concert attendees to visit
the campus it's a beautiful
activity that's been supported
by the state it was completed in
October and it's going to prove
to be a real asset to those in
individuals around Los crucis
dining area and surrounding
counties.
I would say for questions thank
you madam chair.
Thank you are there other
witnesses Representative you'd
like to speak on this point.
Actually of.
Madam chair at this point I
think will stand for questions
because I think there there
might be some questions out
there that we might need to
clarify.
Sure so before we do that why
don't we go to the audience and
And find out who's in favor we
are going to use the timer today
because we have a number of
bills and I want to be able to
keep in meeting moving so we
will use a timer individuals
will get one minute each I see
two hands raised are the those
in favor please raise your hand.
Okay Larry heard ran.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Larry R. and
registered lobbyist for the city
of Los crucis we appreciate
Representative bring this
legislation the the events that
are held at NMSU are definite
economic driver for the city we
have folks come in you know not
only the going to the venue but
they're eating our restaurants
staying or hotels and they bring
needed revenue and activities
the city Los crucis so we stand
in support of legislation thank
you madam chair.
Thank you very much Mister grand
Charley markets.
You madam chair thank you very
much for the opportunity to
speak
you madam chair members of the
committee Charlie mortgage for
restaurant lobbyist for the
county of Dhoni and.
for the same reasons as Mr rants
stated we have seen an actual
positive in in the taxing of
during these events and so the
county stands and and support of
this effort thank you.
Thank you Mr Marcus Ricardo
rail.
Thank you madam chair on a car
loaded with New Mexico State
University and we do stand in
support of the legislation for
all the reasons stated before
and again there is a a regional
impact with the for example a
Garth Brooks concert when people
have to stay in tier C.
Alamogordo and actually and
Silvercity as well but it does
have a impact to the entire area
when we do have these athletic
events as well and it actually
help support the funding for
supporting our students are to
be hired and working up on in a
lot of these events as well
thank you.
Thank you Matthew Madrid.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee nothing to dread
student body president for New
Mexico State University.
On behalf of students we stand
in strong support of this
legislation for all the reasons
stated also to highlight the
immense impact that these events
bring for our students and
campus life in general things
like this are very important for
retention and obviously it
affects the wider Las Cruces and
dynamic community so we would
like to see as much of this
revenue stand areas possible
thank you thank you demi Moore.
The work thank you madam chair
Debbie Moore president CEO of
the greater Las Cruces chamber
of commerce and we echo all of
the comments prior for the
reasons we are fated full
support of this bill it is a
very important economic driver
and ability to draw more people
to non Los crucis but southern
New Mexico thank you madam chair
thank you Clinton when a silent
I got that right.
Clinton.
I just us to I'm here and he
should be coming out shortly
okay thank you madam chair can
you hear me now.
Yes.
Okay I fully support the bill
I'm a grandparent of students at
the university and the thing I
support for all the reasons
mentioned above thank you.
Thank you I see Abbas yield in
the audience with his handout so
if used Mr chair are you
involved in this do you want to
speak to this bill I don't see
on the paint on the list here on
my list madam chair actually as
good as the or H. B. sixty seven
but as a former Aggie are and.
To add my support to this bill
what do it does please go ahead
and give it.
Well showing true let it
provided demeanor you'll you'll
support it no matter what it
does.
I'm just teasing you across I'm
glad to see you in the audience
thank you
are there any attendees in of
the audience who oppose the bill
please raise your hand.
Okay I do not see any so let's
go back to our sponsor date spot
Representative Gallegos you once
anything else before we go to
the committee.
You know I just want to just
stress the point that this bill
is
important to NMAA you because of
the close location to you tap
and what if we don't have this
it would be just so easy to lose
all that potential business
because you to really just
thirty miles away and just
I think we just put us at the
put NMSU at the unfair advantage
and so with that I I will stand
for questions.
thank you so much for
Representative let me look at
the panelists and see who may
have questions or comments.
I see my good friend
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair
and it's great to see you this
morning representative Gallegos
we've we've heard this bill
before.
and we want to talk a little bit
about that because I think this
is a good example of why we have
sun sets
and an example of
what I think the right processes
for extending a sunset
so some insurers of the I guess
you're you're aware that
many moons ago when
Representative family and I were
together in this committee we
made up a policy that we're
gonna make sure every tax credit
had an exemption had a reporting
requirement and a sunset on it.
And and I'm glad to say that
we've every single tax credit we
let out since then has has done
just that if if if if it met the
criteria.
and the reason we have a sunset
the reason this legislation has
a sunset is so that we will
review.
occasionally you know you know
five seven ten years.
The merits of of that credit and
and whether it's doing what we
what it was intended to do or
whether that business is now you
know able to stand on its own
feet and we can we can let it
that.
Credit expired.
and and I think.
We've seen this bill two maybe
three times over the the time
that we've been here together
sing Representative Gallegos who
are in our classes you know ten
years yeah that's crazy you
Madam this ten years.
And so I guess my my first
question is and I and I believe
you and the experts have to talk
about this the folks in the
audience to but
See this is the cost to the
state worse
It that we're seeing in that
area.
And and I'm looking at the the
FY are here and just wanna make
sure we all understand it looks
like there are three or four
funds that are affected by not
having this.
Mistrust receipts tax in place
there's a.
Which is interesting because
usually we're just talking about
the general fund but here it
looks like Chris kinds of events
these these things are earmarked
for particular funds and I see a
New Mexico use conservation
corps of state park and rec area
capitol office of cultural
affairs and a public project
revolving fund so those for
funds.
And if you add up the total
cost
we're looking at it's roughly
two hundred fifty thousand
dollars if I'm reading the FIR
right
you know twenty six thousand to
the use for thirty six thousand
of state parks three thousand
offs cultural affairs and then a
hundred and ninety two thousand
to the public project revolving
fund in my.
Am I reading that part of the
FIR right madam chair and
representative Gallegos.
Madam chair and and
Representative you are but I'd
like to have one of my witnesses
addressed the FY are because
what we did receive the fire
there was that we did scratch
our heads a little bit and so I
think we'd like to have I'd like
to have my my at one of my
witnesses response to that if if
I could.
Madam chair members the
committee apologized Donadoni
myself
actually I think we initially
had concerns with the the first
draft of the FIR and has been
updated to.
No longer do it and I'm an
impact on the general fund
into your question specifically
representative Harper I think
it's called me we are mad I I
will defer to you is you're much
more of an experiment at.
Much more of an expert than I am
on this issue but.
As you may be able to see in the
F. I. R. I'm not sure if it's in
the I haven't got all the way
through the updated FIR but we
have a budget in in terms of
student rules about a hundred
and eighty nine thousand in and
of course these are on the.
this is averaged nine student it
will about forty two thousand
contracted labor of three
hundred and eighty one thousand
and security a labor of about
three hundred and ninety five
thousand and I think all I can
really stresses that that is
labour that is paid out at
that's but that's salaries and
benefits and things of that
nature that are paid out as a
result of holding these concerts
and events where is I think that
that just evaporates absent the
events it's not
And so I I guess that just I
would argue for to offset the
cost to those various forms and
I hope that addresses your
question.
Madam chair and representative
Gallegos and and and Mr Abbey
thank you for that and and it
does a.
I I look back at the tax
expenditure report in the last
couple years less credit
obviously
hasn't cost these groups very
much because of COVID you know
there have been very many events
but it looks like
when when the world is normal
and hopefully it goes back to
normal here soon this is roughly
a two hundred fifty thousand
dollar total cost to these
different for different funds.
And and it appears that it seems
that we get a big bang for for
that box that we could do get a
lot of labor and
and I'm I'm assuming also hotel
and restaurant in those kinds of
things and and I also understand
the argument that.
because of your proximity to the
border
you know it would be harder to
attract
some of the.
Folks to this venue that you
would you would like when they
can just usually go go a little
bit further down the road so.
you know I I think we've at
least ten years I've been here
we've extended this at least
twice
because when you come and
presents we we talk about.
We talk this over we say Hey
this is a.
This sounds like it's a good
bang for the Buck
and and I think it's why is that
we have the sunset so we can
have this conversation.
I think that the last thing I'll
just add is
Again just since we're we're
kind of freshen the committee
this this session and just
remind people who might be new
or or
I just jog memories in our
committee we what we make it a
point to table built was a
fiscal impact.
But I put a cap on that the
fiscal impact that is new.
Right if if it's a a new credit
a new exemption new deduction
right we we get I mean there
some years we get hundreds of
millions of these brought to our
committee you know twenty thirty
different bills and we need to
decide which ones we think have
the most America forward as we
move them all forward they would
have to go next to
appropriations I could figure
out what to cut and what to keep
and then we just turned into a.
A subcommittee of appropriations
you know the committee loses its
it's Authority and so we like to
hold them in and decide how what
we think has merit let those
out.
But I don't think that makes
sense when you've got a bill
that has I sunset you're coming
into extend.
because this is already in place
right it's it's not like it's a
new thing a new hit I understand
the appropriators when they when
they determine the new money we
have to take that sunset into
account right so yeah I I get
technically that it's not
included in the budget but that
just doesn't make sense to me we
want to make it so that people
are encouraged to put on sunsets
so that they come here and we
can talk about it and if we have
merit that we we we passed them
on and it's not it's not like my
does gonna die because as a
sunset no matter what.
And so I just want to make sure
that we understand I think
that's the the right fair thing
to do that if if we agree a bill
has merit to pass on even
and they're coming back to renew
a sense that that that we go
ahead and do that.
so I want to thank you for for
coming for for the great
description of of of.
What's happening down in that
area so we can consider the
merit list and that was that
madam chair I am finished thank
you.
Thank you Representative Harper.
I'm trying to see my screen to
right now I have an a in a funny
positions so my apologies you
think I've been doing this long
enough I could figure out how to
look at to spent and raise it so
let me.
I do not okay I am
Representative Martinez.
Thank you madam chair I've been
doing this long enough to and I
can't figure out.
Apologies for that I I'd like to
move to pass these.
Well.
That's fine if I could ask some
questions before we take that
motion up.
Yes it's actually a debatable
motion you can take that motion
and we can talk for three more
hours if you'd like.
A great.
It just chairwoman at the
Representative Harper is well
interior to speak for three
hours on this topic.
Well I could speak for three
hours with questions.
We we want to do that.
so the reading this and of
course I wasn't around when this
was first put in place.
The flag that I I came up with
is it seems to benefit only one
entity am I missing something
Representative Gaydos.
madam chair
that is correct.
And I guess.
In terms of policy right now
some flags went up for me in
terms of.
How we do that in concern yeah
I'm sorry please feel free and
fair
so it it's a regional you know
when I when we talk one entity
you know it it's regional and
it's not just
Johnny and I mean we're talking
Alamogordo we're tacky in Silver
City it's it's a regional area
but I would also defer to my my
an expert witness right now B.
to respond.
Madam chair thank you
Representative I would just like
to
Mentioned that I think is the
bills right and it could apply
to other institutions such as
eastern New Mexico university
which I think is well within
fifty miles of the Texas border
New Mexico junior college could
in theory.
have uses for this I think the
one caveat is a right but I
believe the language in the bill
indicates that it would need to
be entering a greater than ten
thousand in attendance and so I
that would probably be more
future thank you if they ever
grew to to benefit from that
and I would just also mention
that.
Propose to introduce in the
cities with that we within which
they lie don't necessarily have
a city proximity that they would
be competing with to this extent
in terms of attracting large
scale not athletic events and so
I think that I guess is sort of
the the web here is there we're
we're sort of the one
institution in city with this
unique
competition in such close
proximity so I hope that sort of
and the question them and I'm
happy to answer if you need
other explanation.
Thank you for that answer I I
guess one of the concerns I had
was
you know I I understand the
point but.
Border is this gonna be
something we hear from all of
the.
Cities that are in close
proximity to a in other larger
city that was what was flag with
me and that was referenced
little bit in the FIR so keep it
might help me understand that I
I appreciate it.
Mr Abbey or representative
Gallegos.
well madam chair I think that
the as as stated before I mean
it could be used with other
with that you know you could be
used in other parts of the state
it's it's not necessarily just
within an issue as long as it's
within fifty five miles of you
know of the border so it could
in theory be used somewhere else
and so given that it's not
specific just for this you know
it's just it's it can be used
for out of the box thinking for
some of these other small
universities and you know when
we look at western highlands me
Clovis you know there are other
communities that really could
benefit from the.
Okay thank you for thank you for
that answer are there any other
individuals in the committee and
wish to speak this issue
Representative Cadena.
Thank you madam chair I
appreciate a couple of moments
to just chime in as someone that
has the honor of representing at
New Mexico State University
along with that okay goes and I
really appreciate your question
madam chair about like the
applicability and certainly I
have similar concerns for
example.
In this legislative session when
we are talking about incredible
crime in one city and we others
are attempting to legislate
reforms that potentially impact
folks from all over the state I
get incredibly concerned because
there will be New Mexicans whose
lives are altered by that policy
what I see here is actually the
the inverse is that there's not
other institutions that will be
at a harm or disadvantage by
creating this equity and
economic development opportunity
for our institutions that
operate in the borderlands and
it's certain I continue to raise
this during COVID and other
moments New Mexico is such a
gigantic state such a diverse
state but certainly to live in
the proximity that we do to
Texas shapes our lives it's our
big city it's where we go for
health care and transportation
and because it's such I see that
we're creating economic
development holding equity for
the borderlands in this policy
but we're also not creating any
negative consequences for
institutions across the rest of
the state so I just wanted to
offer that Madam someone who
represents an issue and and
would ask the support of the
committee on this bill thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative Representative
Romero.
Thank you madam chair I just
echo the concerns of of you and
Representative cut and I'm not
entirely sure though that.
You know how this would work in
particularly if other
institutions have been hit hard
by COVID and gathering spaces
that secretary I wouldn't
benefit as well from such a tax
deduction and we are seeing a
fiscal impact of two hundred
thousand dollars which is
significant when we've been
putting together junior bills
and other things with by fifty
thousand dollar increments so it
does add up for different
programs for the for the things
that you're talking about and I
absolutely here that and and
this is more a question of
procedure madam chair when we've
typically dealt with anything
with the fiscal impact we have
typically table that in the past
I'm just curious
How we why we would have a due
pass works verses the tabling
just on a procedural motion
chair.
Well
procedurally it means the bill
will move to the floor and other
bills that have shown of fiscal
impact will be part of our you
know evaluation will be held in
advance well we understand the
fiscal impact of a two and to
be.
More balanced in that response I
would point to Representative
Harper is explanation about why
this because this is an existing
Tax.
Induction I think is what it is
we it's already baked into the
budget so it's not something
that will head out have an
ongoing you know it's it's
already considered where is
these other bills that we
temporary table our new impacts
and we need to assess them in
terms of what kind of capacity
we have for the upcoming year I
I think I got that right and if
Representative Harper wants to
correct me I'm happy to be
corrected.
Thank you you got that right
Madam.
Right thank you thank you
Representative Harper for the
clarification that that helps me
understand this and just as a
COVID I know that so many
industries like these have been
hit super hard by COVID and how
we recovered moving forward is
going to be I think top of mind
for this committee so I would
just look to not just one region
but perhaps how we might be able
to solve this statewide and and
think about some of these
opportunities beyond one
regional area and and think
about moving for thank you madam
chair thank you representative
Representative Maestas.
Thank you madam chair
representative Gallegos just
briefly
I think up to San answering the
last couple questions this
doesn't include sports sporting
events correct madam chair
representative bagels
Madam chair representative is it
it does not thank you and I just
want to elaborate on that point
I mean it this there this is
fair it's not.
This deduction does the term and
how many men and womens ID games
play in the Pan Am every year or
or volleyball games or whatever
it it's not it's not meant to
just give someone a break but
rather to incentivize economic
activity in terms of concerts
in rodeos and what not just up
just refresh our memories I mean
Albuquerque I'd love to have the
pen and summer center not
occurred.
Our arena a theme the Coliseum
was built in nineteen fifty
seven.
The pit is the hallowed ground.
but there's two two things with
regard to the pit the floor is
not movable so you can't play
hockey you can't the NC double a
has a standard floor that they
use for its NCW tournaments so
the it is no longer eligible to
host NCW tournaments for the
time being which is sad because
the most famous came this to
this it will time out was play
in the pit back in nineteen
eighty three and then also the
roof is so vast that it doesn't
have steel being strong enough
to hold your speakers and all
the all the various
infrastructure for the modern
concert you know.
Presentations and entertainment
stuff like that so.
So I I think it's up and it
doesn't change the game is not a
new tax we're just extending it
but I think at some point in the
near future we need to talk
about a world class.
Modern.
Public private partnership
daring crucis I don't there's a
spot downtown or not and then
obviously second world class
arena in the City of Albuquerque
I think that would that would
make sure that there was no
there would be no flyover
concerts ever again that every
great show that goes from Dallas
to Phoenix stops in New Mexico
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative vice chair
Herndon.
Thank you madam chair I would
just like to just the.
Madam chair the experts a
question regarding this
deduction as I read this this
call report and it and that just
looking at what it says here is
that under the deduction right
now
under the exemption that's
existing right now it may soon
does not pay in the gross
receipts tax but it passes on
this this deduction to the
beneficiaries into the people
who important at in M. S. two is
that correct madam chair Mr
Expert.
Representative I'm not sure who
would answer that question.
Madam madam chair Representative
Gallegos if you in mind I I
think Philip and cut can most to
simply speak to this question.
Thank.
Madam chair representative thank
you for the question and yes
that that is that is true with
the exception
Would cross through what are
pretty much faster to the artist
because the artist and the
promoter will benefit from the
area in which the concert takes
place.
those tax rules that apply to
them.
Okay so resistant Alice's
further that if this exemption
was allowed to expire because
pan American University is a
nonprofit organization it would
issue it's in two D. C.
certificate so it would be paid
in taxes anyway so help me to
understand what we do.
Madam chair if if my expert
witness right now we could
answer.
Madam so I sort of to echo what
Philip and Scott just mentioned
that.
The effectively by has passing
on that savings in taxes to the
to the performers that is the
lower and bringing them here
because at.
In with respect to el Paso they
will not be paying that tax in
that venue that you to.
Your.
I apologize to you hear what I
said I'm sorry Madam chair
representative of Herndon.
To your question what what we do
by providing this it go by use
of this exemption as we pass on
that tax savings to the
performer and that's the
attraction and coming to us
because they know that they will
have that exemption if they go
to you to up in Texas so it's
really just a parity issue
because in Texas they're not
paying that tax and we're saying
we'll we'll we'll simple pass on
that savings to you also if that
makes sense so I hope I've
answered your question madam a
present.
Madam chair Mr Abbey thank you
very much for your response and
so what we are actually talking
about is not if they miss you
itself of being.
The beneficiary of necessarily a
tax deduction but I just making
sure that I understand that we
look at everybody else comes to
reach to perform their madam
chair Mr at B. is that correct.
I'm sorry can you repeat.
So as we look at this deduction
and we look a little closer I'm
just trying to make sure I'm
understanding that what we are
absolutely doing is looking at
providing the
the performers are performing at
NMSU the deduction and not in
invests you in any way be the
beneficiary of the of the
exemption is that right madam
chair Mister.
At the madam chair and
Representative kind and it's
it's it's okay of Philip and cut
actually want to clarify on this
one.
Yes Madam chairwoman the.
Tax basically you are correct
the tax is going to be a
deduction for the artists who
comes through would be exempted
from paying that it does not go
back to the university so you
are correct in that assessment
the rental contracts or any
performance contracts that are
written specify that if the
exemption is no longer correct
here if they would be forced to
pay as part of their agreement
that tax which puts us at a
disadvantage with okay.
Okay good thank you madam chair
Mr rove was that for explaining
that.
This.
Let me see sorry Representative
Montoya.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Gallegos I think
this.
Across the border
as I understand it the the
reason this tax is not something
that is.
Incurred to those artists who
play across the border in Texas
is because of our gross receipts
tax versus a sales tax is that
correct.
Madam chair representative
that's correct.
So that's that's the difference
for those who have not been on
tax for for awhile let's just
the one of the problems we have
it brought aware of where I come
from in Farmington where border
town as well forty five miles
away so we had trouble with
Competing with people provide
services like CPA's and others
so a lot of folks a whole New
Mexico licenses but they locate
across the border and it's just
one of the issues we have with
the capital gains structure that
we have in for for those who
understand why we have capital
gains it's because of our the
numerous federal institutions
that we have here and the
inability to be able to tax the
federal government so so we have
a capital gain structure so we
don't lose out on taxes relating
to the
The labs or the military
facilities so and one hand it
helps us to to make sure we
don't lose out on all of these
federal dollars and the tax that
should come from from that since
we can't tax the federal
government we have that in place
it really hurts border towns in
particular so I I do see how
this is unique particularly to
New Mexico State University it
is a it is a situation that that
does not affect UNM.
so.
At the proper time madam chair
I'd like to the commotion I'm
Representative there is a motion
L. made by Representative
Martinez so he beat you to it.
Let me see I see no further
members with their hands raised
so I think we're ready to call
the roll.
Really.
Representative Devin.
Yes.
Speaker ego.
Yes.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lente.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative Maestas yes.
Representative image yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Thirteen there about you have a
do pass representative Gallegos
thanks for attending and thank
you participants appreciate your
participation thank you so much
thank you madam chair.
What I would propose that we go
on to house bill seventy six
military retirement income
exemption.
And who is presenting on that
bill I see and Representative
Anderson's and Garcia's names
here.
Representative Anderson be
present.
Good to see you representative
Garcia Representative Anderson
are you amongst us.
Yes I just asked me.
Representative Anderson are you
have you logged in the here.
I see that they are locked and
I. just requested to and meal
I'm not sure if you can hear me.
There we go.
Representative Anderson.
Madam chair Representative
usually gonna respond your call
and Mr your.
Excuse me.
Mr leader of Anderson are you
there.
There are muted so I think he
may be having.
Issues with audio.
Okay why don't I propose that
well
A representative there see how
would you like to handle this
you want to move to the next
bill while we try to get
Representative Anderson
Fix your manager that will work
in a few doesn't of mono right
in my district.
Thank okay that's fine how about
we do next house bill sixty
seven in my Ali Representative
Harper is going to take the lead
on this presentation.
All right thank you madam chair
it's I appreciate you having me
the reins I have hope to not
embarrass you.
So also sixty seven members is
something that we should all be
familiar west we actually at ask
unanimously on the house last
year and it past you I think
there's only one dissenting vote
in the Senate and the governor
actually started to loss
services this is actually an
existing.
credit in our statutes and when
we called to technology
readiness gross receipts tax
trigger is kind of a the acronym
that folks like to use.
What this does if you recall is
it helps businesses in New
Mexico.
Achieve that technology
maturation
allowing them to cross that
value of tests that you for.
With technologies that were
developed at last New Mexico
national laboratory.
So it really is designed to help
spur our economic growth in the
state and if you if your call
you know we we talk about lots
of different ways to help us
economic development and and I
very much
I mean I mean I I like to call
myself an equal opportunity tax
credit hater.
Because I really don't think
throwing away a bunch of money
is a great way to attract new
businesses to New Mexico.
But there's something called
value added right and and I
think that you had agriculture
right we have a large dairy
industry.
Right so could we perhaps do
some economic development around
that industry and and it just so
happens that in southern New
Mexico we have the largest
cheese factory in the world
right so I mean that those kind
of things make sense to me
leveraging what we already have
instead of giving away the farm
to try to bring something here.
And in New Mexico is blessed in
many ways but one is that we
have these incredible.
State of the art research labs
in our state we have Los Alamos
yes and yet we also have your
first research lab.
And what we decided to do was
support this initiative last
year and what it does is it
gives a small gross receipts tax
credit to stand here and a
smaller to Los Alamos and they
can then use this credit to pay
for their current scientists
time to help small businesses
were spun out some technology
from Sandia response and
technology from Los Alamos and
that and usually it's the actual
scientists who helped develop
that technology that are going
to help and and it's just kind
of takes that technology to the
next point where
no passed the proof of concept
across that we have to ask you
something that's manufacturer
will and as a commercial product
that's robust reliable that can
be sold.
so that said
the way this was set up was a
three year pilot project.
They can give
Two thousand dollars of help
to each groups that.
It applies and is determined to
We selected by this this group
to receive this funding and I
like how this was structured and
that is not just in our you know
it's not an opaque process it's
very transparent the group.
that decides you know on these
applications is composed of
folks from the economic
development department from the
labs and and other places and
there's a third party company
that collects all the data and
presents it to us so that we can
determine whether this was
really worth the investment.
So that is the background that's
what this credit does.
and and we we also this is a
great idea the governor to to
she decided to law okay so this
bill does two things.
To modify this credit I'm the
first is the way we funded this
was kind of a new idea and and
it was at at I have a clever
idea and it was different to how
you Mr all the other taxes and
I'm happy to talk about that if
you want to but I don't want
your eyes to glaze over suffice
it to say it took a long time to
get this new thing set up it was
almost a year and was
complicated our tax report and
had a hard time and and so we're
essentially a year behind
already on the street or pilot
and so
after talking with the tax
department in the labs what this
bill does is it strikes out that
interesting new funding
mechanism and it just goes back
to the way we provide every
single tax credit so it's normal
like everything else so I just
kind of cleans it up makes it
easier to administer
And again support from everyone
and including TRD on making this
change.
The second thing it does is I
mentioned we we're we're already
a year behind on this three year
pilot
they're just started with the
first batch of of companies that
the are working with here.
And there is such a huge
pipeline of folks that are
interested in this.
That we really feel like ending
this in two years is not gonna
be enough to really show to
collect that data to show
whether this is a viable credit
or not and so what this does is
it pushes that out eight years.
so those two things that change
the funding mechanism so it's
simpler and then it pushes this
out here so we can really get a
good collection of data and help
all these folks that are in the
pipeline to show that this
works.
and then madam chair I do have a
couple experts at if I could
invite them in.
Yes and at one point sponsor
Carper we do have an amendment
as well I don't know when you
want to talk about that yes
thank you.
That yeah we yeah we can do that
and and in just a moment but let
me make sure the our our experts
are in here in case you want to
add any saying so one is David
yes in.
And the other is Marianna
Johnson.
Thank you brought in.
All right and then the amendment
is very simple but was talking
as recommended by both LFC and
TRD I spoke with the the
stakeholders Nick reed was a
great solution right now this I
move for discussion purposes the
amendment.
I'm learning guys.
Good job manager thank you I
appreciate that.
yes so all this amendment does
is that existing frontier right
now that was set up that kind of
weird Fund I talked about has
about two million dollars in it.
And this language they're adding
in the amendment reversed that
funding to the general fund.
So I just sent it back to the
general fund that makes sense
since the general fund is what's
used to provide tax credits
like this so
with that.
Madam chair any questions on on
the amendment.
The C..
I don't see any questions on the
amendment I would propose that
we
to adopt them and more take a
vote on the adoption of the
amendment will move forward with
some discussion from your
experts and then we'll go to the
audience if that's okay with
everyone so is there any
opposition to the amendment
second.
The amendment is dot adopt it
with is no opposition.
All right so we have an amended
bill and to hear from our
experts Representative Harper.
That's right if they ever ran
would like to add anything.
Hi I'm David kessen thank you
madam chair and vice chair and
members of the committee I'm
David Justin I manage the
technology and economic
development program Sandia labs
and hi I'm very grateful to be
here today in support of this
important legislation to labs
have a long track record of
successful collaboration with
New Mexico businesses and we're
really looking forward to
expanding these efforts with
this program
in the first year year and a
half of this pilot we've seen an
enormous appetite for this kind
of assistance and so right now
we are creating a pipeline
companies in the state that are
maturing what technologies and
extending the program would help
ensure that companies are
starting to explore the
resources in the opportunities
at the labs have access to these
programs and these resources in
a report and with that I have in
this over to Merion Johnson from
Los Alamos and thank you madam
chair Madam by sharing and
members of the committee thank
you Mr Kesten Mr Johnson maybe
doctor Johnson.
Maybe Dawn that thank you madam
chair and madam vice chair and
members of the committee for
this opportunity to speak on
behalf of the technology reading
a special the tax credit.
We've seen as David that and
increase the interest by
companies with this in fact by
the state to help them mature
technologies that can turn into
products and services to be held
and exported out eight New
Mexico we've also seen where we
had other company and all on
company I'm start to come to the
state of New Mexico to partner
with up with national average
with Indian national laboratory
to invest in the community and
help them grow technology center
and platforms within the state
of New Mexico so I hope you
support this investment that
really does in the late start at
and create an alternative job
opportunities and businesses and
capital
and interacted with the capital
to the region thank you.
Thank you.
Will now go to intend these I
see there to look like.
Speak the there's more than two
I am assuming all these.
Those of you who are in favor
your hand up if you're not empty
favor please take your hand down
now.
Okay thank you very much
Mr John Chavis.
Mr Chavis.
I just asked you Mr Chavez's
begin please accept that
request.
Good morning committee John
Chavis managing director of an
accelerated called the New
Mexico startup factory we work
with Los Alamos national labs
with their destructive programs
and have one of our portfolio
companies to neural foreman as
part of their first cohort for
their lab embedded coaching here
programs we support H. B. sixty
seven as a good tool to
commercialize technologies from
Sandia national.
Samus national labs and we ask
for your support thank you.
Thank you Mr Chavis Sherman
McCorkle.
Mr McCorkle.
One second.
There Representative greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
and we to support the technology
readiness tax credit and let me
make two points real quick.
Technology jobs by definition
are economic based jobs which
means that the existence of the
technology based jobs create
other jobs in the economy.
The highest level of economic
based jobs is centered around
technology based jobs the
technology coming out of the
laboratories is the most
advanced technology.
In the well on the planet
including the Soviet Union and
in China.
New Mexico has done so little
over the past seventy years to
take advantage of the two laps
being here this is a small step
these technology based jobs will
after two to five years will
average a hundred thousand
dollars so we are step stand
strongly in support of this
thank you very much thank you Mr
McCorkle Mr McDaniel.
Hello good morning hopefully can
hear me now yeah Lujan nice to
see nice to hear you anyway
okay.
Okay yeah happy to be here I'm
I'm I just wanted to say a few
things in support of this
of this program
so we're just gonna from us
almost national laboratory we've
raised about eight million
dollars that's a capital brought
in more than ten million dollars
of capital to the state I worked
at the lab previously and so
we're very deep tech you know
technology you are in the focus
kind of business we've grown to
at the end of this last year
twenty five full time employees
in the state and so we're having
an impact on the economy here
this program is is has been very
helpful to us which we have a
program that's just wrapping up
to the trigger right now create
a with the lab essentially and
what what's beneficial but it is
more money to get more buy in
from the folks at the lab than
the MSBA last more complex
partnerships including I. P.
generation and I think a little
more flexible in terms of the
timing and length of the program
some and strong support of and I
hope that you guys are too thank
you.
Thank you Lujan Tony Pino.
Yes my name is Tony Pino and I'm
the president sandy of biotech
in the I can support for House
bill sixty seven we what
technology Polis Los Alamos
national labs and University of
New Mexico we are now currently
applying for trigger Act grant
and.
We are excited because.
Women on the technology that we
look Anil combining it with the
technology we we are.
You were to New Mexico right
help to us it'll office for
further commercialise a product
that we've already
commercialized but we need to
have improvements in order to
gain for commercial use of the
product so thank you for hearing
me and I appreciate your
support.
Thank you Mr Pino Abbas yield.
Barreras chair I'm ready now I
was trying to of your by the
same madam chair thank you so
much for allowing me to speak
let me make my point the briefly
one second Senator I stand in
full support of HB sixty seven
and what the tank Representative
Chandler hopper and her vehicle
presented this bill again HB
sixty seven changes HB what H.
B. two fifty five day and twenty
twenty I had the honor of
sponsoring fifty five along with
the representative with you and
Representative hopper and as
Representative hopper just state
HB two fifty I was passed
unanimously in the house and
almost unanimously in the state
I don't know why there was one
dissenting board and I'd lose
sleep over that even today.
You heard the technical details
of sixty seven thirty and sum up
what HB two fifty I did I want
to reemphasize some of the ones
that Representative Harper made
and point nine seconds Mister
keel.
This bill will allow the
companies to pass through the
value of debt and it's
critically important for job
development and economic
development in a statement thank
you so much for the time.
You Jason Espinoza.
Jason.
Madam chair can you hear me yes
okay chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico technology council as
well as New Mexico idea which is
the statewide economic
development professional
association both organizations
stand in strong support of the
legislation we do believe that
fosters the successful
transition of lab technologies
to New Mexico companies to
produce high value goods and
services to grow the technology
based economy here in New Mexico
thank you madam chair.
thank you Mr Espinoza there's a
someone named B. W. R. host if
we could have your true name we
appreciate it.
Hello this is Matthew Annis I'm
a co founder of filled with
robots so and it automatically
comes up there with the zoom so
I apologize for that thank you
for let me speak today on the
tech knowledge you reading this
gross receipts tax credit bill
with robots is a technology
company based in Albuquerque New
Mexico we have raised over six
million dollars in support of
our efforts which is keeping
schools and businesses open
including the some port in a
number schools near you we're
using technology based at a
Sandia national labs and have
licensed and we would not of
license that without the the
availability of this program in
the past because this actually
allows us to get it to the state
that we need to build to it so
that quote Valley if that so
thank you very much and
hopefully in the next couple
years will will hire the next
fifty.
Thank you I'm here Hastings.
Peter Hastings yes can you hear
me now.
Yes thank you madam chair
members the committee thanks for
the opportunity to comment today
I'm Peter Hastings vice
president vice president excuse
me of regulatory affairs for
kairos power our mission is to
enable the world's transition to
clean energy with the ultimate
goal of dramatically improving
people's quality of life
property tax the environment our
development testing and
manufacturing efforts in
Albuquerque or essential
components in the development
and deployment of our clean
energy technology and the
trigger initiative has proven
invaluable to our efforts as an
example we're working with sandy
on stimulating fuel
determination using gamma
spectrometers harms power
southwest campus consists of
assets and activities for
component manufacturing testing
fuel development and
manufacturing and our flagship
engineering test you there are
many important ample
opportunities for continued
cooperation and collaboration
with the nearby national lab
teams and this initiative
provides a very useful means not
only for accessing those
resources but also for securing
New Mexico's place as a leader
in clean energy research and all
thank you thank you Jennifer
whether.
Yes good morning chair Chandler
and committee members my name is
Jennifer Weber and I am here
representing the New Mexico
chamber of commerce in support
of house bill sixty seven which
extends be technology readiness
gross receipts tax credit.
Believes that the development
and expansion of New Mexicos
economy requires a multifaceted
approach to provide support and
appropriate incentives for new
existing and expanding
businesses large and small rural
and urban established and
emerging businesses and
industries the chamber supported
the legislation that created
this credit and while the
technology readiness gross
receipts tax credit has had some
success and allowed New Mexico's
national labs to assist and
support small businesses in New
Mexico extending it and making
changes will allow it to be more
effective and will continue This
needed assistance and support we
ask for your support for H. B.
sixty seven thank you thank you
any final.
Thank.
Sorry about that good morning
chairman Chandler and committee
my name is Kenny brought all I
am the CEO for management
sciences we are current
recipient of the G. R. G. R. we
are working with Sandia through
a license that we had already
purchased to.
In a technology off the shelf
from the transfer office and
this trigger is helping us to
mature technology but also work
with the scientists at Sandia
who developed this technology
and then the scientist as well
as San Diego will benefit as we
mature our technology our
technology is for the detection
of deterioration and solar
arrays that can lead to fire
over thirty to forty years so we
definitely support this bill and
I would like to see and benefit
other companies after us thank
you for your time.
Thank you for your comments that
concludes the those in favor are
there attendees who oppose this
bill.
I see none so let's go back up
to the committee and
Representative Harper do you
have anything you wish to add
your presentation so there's one
thing
madam chair and thank you for
the extra moment I just because
there's a lot of new people on
this committee I was to spend a
one minute explaining how this
credit works.
this is not
a credit that goes to a small
business and gives them a tax
benefit.
What this is.
Is a small business that's why
sensing technology those devoted
the labs can you know partner
with university or whatever but
they they can apply for this.
It.
And what this budget is is it's
researchers time.
and and access to government
equipment for these researchers
to use at Sandia or Los Alamos.
And the reason we need this crap
the reason that these labs can
just you don't do this right now
is is because under the contract
we have with the federal
government we we are your the
home to do that work for the
government and and we can't just
give away this I mean I wish we
could but that that's how this
is structured and so what this
gross receipts tax does is it
gives a credit to the labs to
make up for the time of those
researchers hoping the small
business I just want to make
sure folks understand that's
that's how the credit work it's
not it's not a it's not a budget
dollar wise to a small business
it's just allowing the labs to
have their researchers timing
equipment help the small
business with that I I stand
for.
Russian from committee great
thank you so much Mr sponsor
Harper I really appreciate it
their questions from the
committee yes Representative
Romero.
Madam chair representative thank
you this is more just a
opportunity to support this is
one of those tax credits that
reinvests the tax into the
entity that provides the
services and so this is
excellent for for economic
development and it truly has
that growth mechanism to it that
provides more income to our
state and the ability to tech
support on the services and and
the technologies that are being
invented and and then of course
at Houston in society and of
course in the in the tech
industry but Landel could usurp
some of the other national so I
just I'm strong support of the
entrepreneurs who stuck with us
to to give COVID and those who
support them thank you I think
this is an excellent reinvested
in our people and our state and
just highly support and hope it
continues in perpetuity and
grows continually thank you
madam chair.
Thank you very much R. Lee us
speaker egolf.
Thank you madam chair and I hate
I hate to be the dense one on
the committee this morning but I
really don't understand how this
works and it Representative
harbors explanation kind of
confused me actually a little
bit more so can we kind of start
like what is so this step Abyan
see how this works
like wiser gross receipts
credit.
Needed.
When someone is using equipment
at the lab.
So madam chairman and speaker
egolf apologies for for
confusing further with my
explanation will well we'll see
if we can clear this up a little
bit.
So so if one wants to have a
scientist help them.
or or have access to government
equipment.
As a labs we by contract
We cannot at all because the
time that spans the maintenance
on the equipment
use of that equipment are
essentially all tied to funding
that we receive from the feds
and we have to account for that
funding for everything we do.
so
for example if you want to come
in and do some bio or have me
help you with some by research
and and the lab even if I wanted
to on my own time I I cannot
contractually I have to have
something that I charge my time
against.
Does that make sense.
Just.
Yeah.
And so.
So madam chair and Mr speaker
what this does is it allows labs
to have something to charge my
time against.
And and how it works is right
now each lap pays out roughly a
hundred million dollars in gross
receipts taxes to the state of
New Mexico.
And so this would allow each lab
to have just one million dollars
worth of time that is completely
unburdened so that's another
benefit right I I simply at
twice the bang for my Buck is
that we don't have overhead
built into this
but it gives them a million
dollars that I can charge my
time against.
to help small businesses they're
trying out why you know take
this license technology from the
lab and get to a point where
that is can be a sold.
Okay.
Thanks yeah thank you.
Thank you speaker for the
question and then it was a very
good question if you're not
immersed in the Centene world of
laboratory DOE NNSA constructs
it it it makes a lot of sense
the funding mechanisms to the
labs are tightly controlled and
it would be hard for the
laboratory able to do this
without some sort of you might
call outside non federal money
so that's that's really what's
driving this Representative
Herndon vice chair current.
Thank you madam chair and the
Representative Harper I just
like to just a little bit
further explanation of what you
provided to the speaker Egolf so
in terms of not being able to
charge your time if I'm a
sciences and working at the labs
are you saying that when these
contracts are entered with the
labs they do not allow the
workers to work outside of the
contract at all and but it it
madam chair Mr Harper would you
please explain is that what I'm
hearing.
Yes so madam chair and and vice
chair heard and I I think it's a
great question let me just make
sure I understand it properly so
so you're asking.
Is it possible that a researcher
perhaps outside of their
relation to the laptops on their
own time or something could help
it is that your question so well
I'm I'm I'm actually asking for
clarification of what you state
that so it's a combination of
the two so madam chair
Representative Harper if I'm
working for the labs and I'm
under one of these contracts I'm
just clarifying what you are
saying is that the contract does
not allow me to work outside of
the the contract at all and so
that the only way that this
credit is occurring is because
now there is some other
provision that you are now
entering with the state to allow
them to work outside of the
purview of the contract to allow
for the credit is that correct
Madam chair of Mr Harper
Representative Barbara I'm.
Yeah yeah madam chair and and
and vice chair I understand your
question now thank you and and
that is that is almost exactly
right I would just put a little
new ones on there that the labs
are entering a contract for city
with the state for this work
the so what is happening is this
one million dollars that the
labs would have paid in taxes.
They can now keep and re purpose
as a fund to pay for sciences
time and and and whatever
associated costs of equipment
that that's what's really going
on here instead of paying that
money in taxes they can now take
it and re purpose it.
for this.
Your activity.
Does that make sense well.
Madam chair representative
corporate thank you I I'm
familiar with how the process
works because I have seen an
member businesses the
beneficiary what I didn't
understand before is now the
extra part that is allowing for
credit to be allocated against
the funding that was received
the money that would normally be
paid on that both the seats that
so that is an interesting
concept so thank you Madam chair
representative of corporate for
explaining that thank you madam
chair and and vice chair heard
and and I'm not just I'll ask
you I don't know if
David R..
And if you have anything you'd
like to add maybe maybe coming
from it at a different angle
might help folks understand if
you would like to
Partner Adam chair madam at vice
chair yeah so every every hour
have to be accounted for by a
scientist or engineer from
funding we can receive outside
funding it through Pacific
agreement called either a
strategic sponsor project or a
cooperative research and
development agreement from
businesses universities and
other the problem with that and
at that money coming in is it
pak very high by the department
of energy and and that day so if
the companies that are
participating in trigger wanted
to participate with it just on
their own they would be spending
twice as much up to three
hundred to four hundred thousand
dollars to work with the
national lab where is this I'm
out of money at a hundred fifty
thousand dollars give them the
same amount of work from the
national lab to help improve
their technology and grow their
business so it's really
investment by the state of New
Mexico to help New Mexico
company access have access to.
This to the capabilities at the
national laboratory.
Thank you madam chair thank you
miss Johnson.
Thank you madam vice chair I do
not see any other questions or
comments from.
From our many members.
We have a motion.
Thank you madam chair of.
I a motion from speaker egolf we
have a second second.
As amended yes as amended.
All right really when you call
the roll please.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative mess.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative.
Representative Anderson we want
to do when you yourself please.
Madam chair can you hear me this
morning yes but could you
yourself for in the middle of
the vote.
Thank.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
Vice chair and then.
Yes.
Chairman chairman yes.
Let's not forget Representative
Montoya.
What else.
Representative Montoya.
I guess so.
Okay we have a thirteen year
about we have a due pass thank
you very much I let's now go to.
And thank you for your
assistance Representative.
Anything now.
We could go to Representative
Garcia and Representative felt
Thank you madam chairman the
madam chairman.
this morning to percent house
bill seventy six.
Seventy six is an act relating
to taxation of course providing
income tax exemption in about
equal to thirty thousand dollars
of military retirement pay I
don't believe this is the first
time this committee has seen
Of various exemptions to
military retirement pay but I'm.
Representative Garcia myself
Representative joined Garrett
Representative Powdrell Culbert
and representative Ryan lane are
all optimistic that this will be
our year to achieve that after
all of New Mexico is one of only
seven states with no exemptions
according to a two thousand and
fifteen articles of or
That was dealing with the the
state various states in their
efforts to recruit.
Military retirees to their state
in these exceptions are
important considerations for
retired military as they make
their next step in their lives
and careers to.
go forward so this is really a
bill about attracting of future
workers to New Mexico as much as
anything else and the a number
of states provide this so
exemption madam chair it's it's
rather black and white and
before we we appreciate I'd like
to ask Representative Garcia if
you would like to take a crack
at any opening comments.
Madam chair.
Welcome Representative Garcia
the C. thank you thank you madam
chair members of the committee
thanks for the opportunity to
prove bill and thank you day.
At the role of New Mexico right
now stands at about ninety
percent unemployment rate the
state part of it okay well
there's over forty thousand
retirees living in Mexico right
now there's both seven the over
seven thousand spouses that are
evidenced in New Mexico.
And the work of this bill madam
chair and committee members is
what it reached for state the
people that are retired are we
to this state or less forty five
fifty rules sure and these
people can bring skills to the
state of New Mexico such as
doctors nurses teachers to all.
Contractors engineers central
for the list goes on and on
madam chair of what the these
people can drive bring to our
state I know there is a almost
twenty million dollar all it
again so taxes in the state of
New Mexico.
But we need to take into
consideration what these people
are gonna supply for stated the
end of the day because these
people are going to open up a
new businesses in our state of
the could provide much needed
assistance on what we are facing
nurse to Mexico right now is of
people not be able to get the
lawyers to work if you go around
the city in the state in New
Mexico you can see where are the
ones that were and I took in the
state part of it and there is a
ninety percent vacancy rate in
the state.
Madam chair and
Members of the committee
at the end of the day it's not
the number.
Another big benefit madam chair
is it the retirees have will
medical.
And dental and vision insurance
is coming with them so that
would not be a burden on our
state well I just apply any kind
of medical well sisters from
these people and it is all if we
can pick this impasse it is on
the traction to other bit of
military people retired our
state we have four bases are
right now and if we can get
people to stay here madam chair
it will be a big benefit to our
seats that's all I have madam
chair.
Thank you representative Garcia
anyone else on your team who
wishes to speak this this bill.
Madam chair I'm watching another
committee and Representative
Garrett is presenting there so I
know she's got her hands full so
I think that's all this morning
but I did want to add simply
that I believe the fiscal impact
statement shows a twenty million
dollar impact should the big
house bill seventy six be
enacted and that concludes our
presentation this morning.
Thank you Representative so
let's go the attendees and yes
those in favor of this bill
would raise their hand.
Please.
Okay I see a Martin Gaydos.
Martin.
My and if you can please accept
the on your request.
When we move to Jim Williams and
we can come back tomorrow Jim
Williams.
Thank you madam chair
distinguished members of the
committee my name is Jim
Williams I'm a retired army
officer I'm here this morning
representing the veterans and
military families caucus which
supports this bill.
Post tax exemption for portion
of military retired pay will be
of particular benefit to junior
enlisted retirees and members of
the National Guard.
Is you realize I'm sure retired
pay for members of the guard is
based on days rather than years
of service and therefore is
typically lower than the report
are a of active duty personnel.
Each year more states pass
legislation lifting this tax
burden from their veterans.
For example Arizona recently
exempted all retired military
pay from state income tax.
Noting in its fiscal report that
I quote the exemption would be
revenue neutral in five years
unquote as additional military
retiree settle in the state.
And pay taxes on.
there.
A new career incomes and other
taxes that are levied by the
state of Arizona.
We believe that each of the
typical retiree after twenty
years is between thirty eight
and forty two which means they
will be embarking on a second
career in New Mexico.
Many veterans possess skills
such as engineering information
technology communications
education and health care which
are skills badly needed in New
Mexico.
Is working citizens military
retirees will be paying tax on
tax on their second comes as
well as other taxes that all of
us pay thank you madam chair for
allowing me to speak in favor of
this bill.
Thank you Mr Williams Martin guy
a ghosts.
Martin can you hear me madam
chair yes I can thank you thank
you madam chairman of.
Thank you to of the the
committee for allowing me to
testify on behalf of and in
support of house bill seventy
six I am the legislative chair
for the military veterans
leadership council.
and I'd like to begin is this
legislation is an economic
development bill to retain and
attract military retirees who
provide many benefits to the
state of New Mexico work skills.
Under employer spouse's
homeownership economic activity
and community leadership.
In two thousand nine New Mexico
was home to two thousand three
hundred eighty five military
retired in twenty twenty that
number had decreased two
thousand twenty thousand seven
hundred eighty one a decrease of
two point eight percent.
Well the neighborhood states of
Arizona Colorado Kansas Nebraska
Texas Utah and Oklahoma us
increased by thirteen point five
percent hi New Mexico grown at
an average of neighboring states
we would have three thousand
four hundred eighty four
additional military retirees for
a total of twenty four thousand.
Two hundred sixty five for every
military retiree we retain or
tried to New Mexico would gain
an estimate median household
income of over sixty one
thousand eight hundred and
twenty six that tax net taxable
portion of the tax exemption an
estimated fifty percent of that
income would be used to purchase
subject to grow receipts tax
property tax average for major
major New Mexico metro areas is
one thousand three hundred
fourteen one of the benefits
that's not included and was not
part of the FIR was what's known
as the blended retirement system
and thrift savings plan which
will also bring economic
stimulation to the state because
it's an additional retirement
afforded to the military and yes
it is subject to taxes.
The bottom line is the annual
tax loss Praetorius less than
seven hundred retire seven
hundred dollars retiree wall an
annual gain of taxes alone is
more than four thousand retiree
plus over the five thousand
retiree household income in in
income activity if the.
The committee has any questions
of myself or breaking four any
additional information in
regards to what the economic
increase would be by these
military retirees please feel
free to contact me at any time
thank you for allowing me to
testify.
Thank you Clinton when I sent.
Yes.
Thank you madam chairman I'm
sorry your force officer here in
New Mexico are you charging
eighty five you work for
another.
Twenty plus years Hey.
Income tax to the state I still
graduated income tax to the
state.
All the other benefits as
mentioned by the previous
speakers hold true for the
general fund more because this
is one of the few places.
I will not agreed that we wanted
to retire.
Don't regret that decision.
I do strongly support this bill
I think the influx of military
retirement from state would be.
All will benefit well worth what
is not really a cost but again
financially for the state.
Thank you.
Thank you I'm Gary Williams.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you to yourself as well as
the co chair Madam co chair and
members of this committee I'm
Gary Williams I represent a a RP
New Mexico and I want to express
our State Bank extreme support
for this legislation A. R. P.
really supports quality
initiatives that encourages
recognition of services provided
by our service members of our
military staff as well as
importantly their family members
of this legislation would go a
long way in encouraging
individuals to come to and stay
in New Mexico and A. R. P. New
Mexico strongly supports this
this bill thank you very much
madam chair thank you Mr Sherman
McCorkle please.
Thank you up.
Madam chairman I'm what the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce I'm also.
Twenty by the governor to the
New Mexico military base
Planning Commission and I'm a
founding member of the current
partnership committee she.
To create perspective you know
for the last hundred years we in
the Mexico have asked the US
Congress to establish Department
of Defense facilities in New
Mexico we've always asked to our
congressional delegation to
fight for additional department
of defense facilities and so we
have three or four spaces in
white sands missile range in the
army research center located
here.
And then as soon as you're no
longer active.
Your veterans we seem to say
well why don't you go away and
so we're we're not veterans
friendly but we're we're active
duty currently.
And it is strictly if you look
at it the at the economics of it
we're building training whites
down down Coolidge because as
has been explained.
Mr Kirk called could you wrap it
up these yes the loss of
veterans is greater than the net
gain that the tax provide to the
chamber stands in support of
this bill thank you thank you Mr
McCorkle there's an individual
named Alan.
Alan.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Alan
Martinez and over the years
we've seen a drastic loss of
military retirees in the state
of New Mexico would benefit from
a
A tax incentive like this
drawing members of the military
who especially now or.
Are retiring from the military
we need goals.
Our young men and women here in
New Mexico to build the
technical
Jobs that we want to fill they
have a high level of training.
And those that they bring their
spouses who will also get a
career and pay taxes on those
and I think this would be a
great benefit to the state of
New Mexico.
Thank you Mr Martinez I think
that is all for those in favor
member members of the audience
who are in opposition this bill
please raise your hand.
I see no one in opposition at
this point so let's go back to
the committee.
Representative Lujan well let's
let's go back to the Sanchez
first Sanchez did you have
anything you wish to add.
Madam chairman of I am somewhat
overwhelmed this morning with
the great support testimony
we've heard from so many I think
the point of drastic losses
military retirees in New Mexico
speaks to the retirees that are
here now and yet there is a
great number of retirees coming
as we deal with our workforce
deficiency in nursing education
technology
In a long list of on field
positions that yes group of
individuals would be highly
qualified and welcome to join us
here in New Mexico so I hope New
Mexico can move forward with
that we stand for questions.
Thank you I just got a text
message from somebody in the
audience whose hand I could not
see Bill Jordan in opposition
and then we'll go to the
committee.
Thank thank you madam chair and
members of the committee of Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children we really want to
appreciate the sponsors of the
legislation and we do understand
and appreciate what this bill
and others like it are
attempting to do but we must
respectfully oppose this
legislation we believe it's just
not good tax policy to exempt
income based on the source of
that income we've seen bills to
exempt social security now
military retirees we also have
built for police officers and
federal retirees so others will
last one I teachers nurses
doctors we need them all why not
pair of retirees you will be
never ending it's simply not
good tax policy to be providing
income tax breaks based on the
source of the income that's how
we ended up with the capital
gains tax break we can't keep
eroding the one progressive
source of our state revenue
thank you.
Thank you Mr Jordan Martin guy
in those your name has a hand up
but I believe you spoke in favor
so I'm I'll move on to Charles
good marker it.
Thank you
The committee Charles Walker
also with voices just want to
underline
what bill said with great
respect for the
Sanchez who include my own
Representative Powdrell
Representative Powdrell Culbert
you know that the FIR does
find a focus on the issues
around equity and diversity.
In this bill
You know it says very clearly
this bill may be countered LFC
is tax policy principle of
adequacy efficiency and equity
due to the increasing cost of
tax expenditures revenues may be
insufficient to cover growing
recurring appropriations so in
this case if this bill is
actually enacted and it succeeds
with its goal drawing more
military retirees to New Mexico
the inequities and a lack of
adequacy issues becoming our
appear to a court the FIR to the
extent the legislation causes
more military retirees to Mexico
military retiree population
growth is positive versus flat
or negative the fiscal impact
will be even larger so madam
chair members the committee
military retirees very welcome
by all New Mexicans this bill.
May not be the best idea so we
urge you to.
Thank you Mr good marker now
let's go back the committee
Representative a tear Lujan.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you very much to the sponsors of
this bill and and for that the
the reason why they're bringing
it forward it is.
Is really commendable for our
military veterans.
And I understand it but I'd like
to ask a few questions madam
chair and I think someone just
mentioned to you something on
the FY are.
Maybe this is insufficient to
cover growing recurring
appropriation so it's a concern
here that that's already been
highlighted and so I'd like to
ask for clarity to Sanchez what.
What is the age group that you
are focused on for keeping.
keeping here in New Mexico.
Thank you let me take a I don't
think this is age group.
A
representative madam chair but I
do think that of
Miller that yes we see military
retirees.
From this point forward they
tend to be younger and they tend
to be seeking second career for
their state of retirement so I
think that that I would say mid
age of men and women on the
future retirees to the course
the men and women who have
already decided to retire here
would be at various ages I hope
that was the answer.
Thank you thank you measures our
safeties to say that we're
they're still in the that you
the working age group.
Looking at our second career
madam chair that's correct with
the thirty thousand dollar
exemption that's correct thank
you.
It.
Madam chair I'm sorry.
Yes Representative Garcia.
I just want to touch on the
previous question madam chair
you know of people join the
military around the age of
eighteen we're still but
can they retire their and their
forty five forty that general
area so most of the military and
will be page of this fifty years
old and willing willing and able
to certainly career thank you
madam chair general manager.
Thank you Representative
Representative Lujan you still
have the floor thank you thank
you madam chair.
Yeah excuse me so.
We have working families tax
credit in place right now and I
would assume that at that age
group madam chair that they that
these are but a lot of families
in our military as well would be
able to take advantage of that
twenty percent as believe is a
twenty percent
Tax credit which then increases
and twenty twenty five and
please correct me if I'm I'm not
taking that correctly but so.
They would out so they would
they would also be are included
in that this this tax credit as
well so.
I'm just looking at we're you
know how Representative Harper
is always telling talking just
about helping it of measures of
our tax code and information
that we have at hand and making
these decisions and really
looking at that
My other question madam chair
goes to also the this workforce
what guarantees do we if any of
these
That are retirees would go into
those critical workforce
workforce is that we re really
essentially need right now like
I mentioned our our nursing
workforce etcetera.
Thank you Representative and
before Representative Garcia
weighs in on this.
I would I think simply say that
Or one I believe that.
You cannot get to exemptions in
other words taxpayers elect for
the most attractive of the two
and so that's where I tend to
not go to the tax of exemption
you may be referring to I'm more
focused on this one and I think
that is military retiree search
for their their future
retirement states of New Mexico
is on a very yes advantages list
of states that provide no
exemption whatsoever although as
you point out they may qualify
for a different extension should
they come to New Mexico but I
think it's my understanding that
is lost the second point I
simply want to say is will it
work there are no guarantees in
life but a few years back I will
point out that New Mexico
provided a film production tax
credit and to get that you don't
even have to have tax liability.
This would require tax liability
to offset for that thirty
thousand that film production
tax credit costs eight to ten
times more per year than house
bill seventy six so I think
arguably we get a a sizeable
return for a main much much
smaller investment
Representative Garcia I would
ask you if you have any
additional comments.
Thank you.
Representative that should be
pretty well covered at all
Seoul.
Well Representative Akter funnel
that answers your questions.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for the thank you for that
the answers
So it sort of does it it it is
still big and there are no
guarantees as you said and and I
appreciate you bringing up the
film tax credit as well and make
a comparative there but on on
this bill
We need to work.
What I'd like to DO addresses
are workforce here what we're
we're looking for one of the
things we have learned in at
it's been repeated throughout
the interim
and throughout all of our
communities and our budget we're
talking to our agencies is that
you know we need to compare a
competitive salaries competitive
pay structures and.
We need and that's kind of the
the the base of the of our
workforce problems as well and
so I how would you know does
this bill covered all any kind
of recruitment type of.
Oh wait of the keeping the
retirees here madam chair.
Representative I think that the
Mexico's history with tax
exemptions no matter who they
may fall in favor of I believe
have have always resulted in
some positive impact offsetting
the cost to the state general
fund I hope maybe I got an
answer.
I'm I'm asking more specifically
is there a recruitment process
or mechanism to what you're
trying to do with this this bill
I'm here to help.
Thank you and I think this time
I did catch it madam chair and
Representative no there is no
recruitment mechanism of per se
but in talking to a retired
military if you're in New Mexico
they seem to research their next
hold of it for their retirement
in a way that that perhaps they
do self recruitment.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair that's the
better answer and that's all I
really have no idea appreciate
the effort and what you're
trying to do here and you know
we were always trying to find
ways to to bring the respect and
you to help our military
retirees or
Anybody in our military service
thank you for what you're trying
to do here I just have some.
There's some questions based on
how our tax structure
is in place and happened to that
the reform that we need to route
it thank you madam chair I
appreciate the time you
representative of Representative
Strickler.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you are a Representative
Anderson and Representative
Garcia.
A similar bill
Such as this.
was passion I believe twenty
fifteen.
I passed the Senate passed the
house when it ran out of time on
the house floor which was which
is too bad because this is
definitely a.
A benefit to our state and and
we always talk about
competitiveness and how can we
compete with our neighboring
states and you just mentioned in
your testimony madam chair and
gentleman.
That Arizona recently
did some adjustments to military
retirees in their state and of
course Texas doesn't tax
military retired retiree
benefits and I believe Colorado
with the Air Force Academy and
other military installation I
believe they have a
very good
exemption in Colorado source
Randy States.
That we were that we could pay
with all the time this would
really help
and what I what I like about
this bill it's a it's not a
complete repeal
I think that's a to partial
repeal of up to thirty thousand
and that's a regional approach
it's a twenty million dollar.
You know impact to our budget.
wait we need a tract these
highly educated highly trained
of retirees to our state as you
mentioned madam chair the
gentleman that we have a labor
shortage of technical people.
and and and and New Mexico we
need to track these these folks
they bring their families with
them their school teachers
nurses
the list goes on it's
interesting to note madam chair
and gentleman that in Arizona
life in
they're fiscal analysis.
estimates set the
the fiscal impact will be of
in five years so it'll pay for
itself with all the additional
taxes paid from these family so
really appreciate you bringing
this for.
I hope we have the capacity to
pass this thank you madam chair
and thank you gentleman.
thank you representative
Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Anderson
what how long do you have to
serve in the military before you
can retire.
If I could Representative I'd
ask Representative mon Toyo he's
much more familiar with that if
I could get Representative
Montoya.
Representative.
Our state of.
I am so sorry Representative
Garcia thank you.
Thank you madam Representative
the the the.
The retirement process about
twenty years you can retire from
the military of twenty years.
You started eighteen you'd be
about thirty eight you could be
thirty eight years older
retirement most people local
twenty five years the
representative madam chair but I
hope that answers the question.
Thank you for that
the representative Garcia.
I think that is really kind of
the point as that that when they
retire ripping the retiring
young and we we have a other.
tax credits or exemptions.
that the purpose is to help
folks to.
Actually need to help we're
looking for it
on their it especially if they
have young children.
Such as working families tax
credit in others that are out
there
The problem is what we what we
look at is what we have in the
budget we talk about this being
a twenty million dollar hit
because we only because we
really can't do dynamic scoring.
but madam chair.
I think that the twenty million
dollar hits not massive I would
love to see this one get
through.
in this form but what if it does
not
I would suggest that the
presenters
Maybe bring nor immemorial us as
part of economic development to
look into
the.
Impact if they can give us
something more than just a
static score the argument
whenever we talk about of the
working families tax credit.
is that if the people have that
extra money that they'll turn
around and spend that money and
that money without within be
taxed G. R. T. and if if folks
come here they have a second.
Career obviously somebody thirty
eight.
To say forty five years of age
the state that that that's still
a lot of very few people retire
completely at that age so if we
have folks to.
Are not coming here.
I I like the idea of of what
Representative Lujan was
suggesting is some sort of
outreach or some sort of
messaging to those.
Veterans that.
That what we would be offering
so they would you know.
It's just like the A. R. P. A.
R. P. puts out.
The states that the most
friendly to their retirees to
the to the same degree of we
can.
You know that that folks talk
whenever they go to retire
Where we're most favorable for
them we have so many other
things going for us such as
clients and they the lack of
natural disasters and and just
UT we have here I would love to
see if if this once again and I
I would hate to see this go
nowhere but once again if this
gets stalled you have plenty of
time our representatives to to
get a memorial and they're asked
the
Maybe even a department of aging
and long term development the
department of of of that.
Well there there there could
item I'm looking think about
this pry two or three different
apartments that might be able to
put their resources together and
ask the secretary to do
something and give us something
more than just a static score
because we all know very well
that if it if we do attract
these folks here
and combine it with some other
things like allowing some
licensure is our to to transfer
to New Mexico I've you know I I
think a lot of that could bring
those.
Thirty eight to forty five year
old here in New Mexico and be an
overall benefit to us and
instead of just looking at as
was stated maybe by by one.
of the attendees that that it
would be a greater harm to us if
those folks come here and enter
the second careers in and pay
all those gross receipts tax and
the property tax and other
things that retirees bring I I
think this would prove to be an
overall benefit yes but I just
takes in every year come up
against a wall just because we
can't.
Justify.
Your static scoring we can't
justify giving outbreak which
once again is is in virtual in
in most of the other states so
with that madam chair
I if we had a table this I would
hope this would get serious
consideration tax package thank
you madam chair.
Madam chair can you hear me.
Wave your hand you're talking
you're you're muted madam chair
so sorry Representative Maestas.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative understanding
Garcia.
Appreciate all you do for
veterans in the state just a
couple questions
First a comment and a question
just have the similar concerns
with regards to
taxing the source of the income
rather than the amount of one's
total income.
I just did just that when you
because you can think of the
many reasons to to lower the
taxes on the source.
Of.
Could you tell economic activity
or you simply just love the
people that.
That get income from that source
and we all of our veterans and
want to do everything we can I
think the the crux of this bill
is to as for not just not
necessarily for veterans in and
of itself up for economic
activity by having more veterans
moved to the state somebody
mentioned that that would happen
and and with would offset the
loss to the state of the
revenue.
Because right now there's
approximately twenty one
thousand retirees that currently
live in New Mexico there's
approximately three thousand
survivor benefit a person's that
receive survivor benefits the.
Formers you know with a spouse
or former spouses of military
veterans that that would receive
this break without creating any
EC economic activity in the
where they live here now.
so in a sense that would be a
global we when I say give away I
mean it it has no economic
benefit although it has a
wonderful benefit to our
veterans and their families no
question about it but anyway my
question madam chair
representative of Anderson
Representative Garcia.
Maybe the someone who mentioned
it.
What is the study or what is the
document or what is the analysis
that suggests.
We will have so many veterans
moving here as a result of this
bill that will offset the cost.
The cost of the bill.
Thank you representative madam
chair and if I could be endorsed
take a swing at just comment
quickly on source the map in my
mind we we handle sure she's
very straightforward and that's
military retirement the amount
is capped at thirty thousand so
I think to go beyond that on the
amount question would be a
supreme the state because I'm
afraid of this is difficult
enough to do with just a two
page presentation and then on to
your question about source of
source yes
of.
Is.
Yes article from stars and
stripes
magazine which is debate which
is talking about states
competing for military retirees
New Mexico after a very stagnant
last decade in population
growth and today the most
popular sign in the state is is
help wanted I think we're in
desperate need of building
workforce and I don't believe
there is a better potential
workforce ahead for New Mexico
that our military retirees and I
would ask you Representative
Garcia would like to add
anything.
Thank you madam chair of
Representative and some.
The work was part of
Representative Maestas.
Being offered from the military
retirees this is the this
subject to anything you know we
really get doctors of lawyers
contract workers all.
Equipment operators the teachers
nurses all the people are there
now and you know we are we have
been hearing about you know and
if we don't fill out
use the correct more people
would just.
My eyes you know and Madam chair
of live gentleman might just so
you know why am all.
Rico veteran.
And I support anything I can do
better is because you know our
veterans and kind of been left
out.
When I came up the enormous
thank you sixty madam chair you
know we were the scum of the
earth.
And and that's not right and we
need to make right what we've
done wrong to all our military
to all our history matter of
fact you know and we need to
remember a madam chair members
of this committee if it wasn't
for veterans will be here that's
bottom line we just wouldn't be
here thank you madam chair of
that have the entry your
cell requesting that roadway is
yes absolutely madam chair
representative Garcia
Representative or understand
that.
So it seems like it's two prong
it's helping our veterans and
trying to spur economic growth
Keep in mind
New Mexicans enroll in the
military.
More so by percentage than than
most states.
so those folks already have a
love and affection for our state
we also have numerous military
bases the other other states
don't have so yeah military
folks who have the opportunity
to live here whether it be out
in Clovis.
White sands Curlin or wherever
that that get to know our state
and then decide whether to
whether to remain when they
retire or come back after they
retire.
so I think we have a pretty good
leg up pretty good leg up on
attracting better it's just in
and of itself.
we just that's that's just some
of the hesitancy of.
The committee members that take
the position that it's bad bad
public policy to.
To give a tax break based on the
source like for example Madam
chair representative
If a better and makes to a
thousand dollars.
From other sources they would
still receive a tax break.
From there military retirement.
Correct on this bill.
Madam chair representative is.
Madam chair representative I
believe the way you stated the
question the answer is yes but
again we're not
if you're from out means to the
total I think to myself New
Mexico's done that before is
public policy.
And
It's really not the total that
we're aiming at or the total
amount it is really that brought
thirty thousand dollars the
first thirty thousand dollars of
military retirement that would
become attractive to individuals
to perhaps consider New Mexico.
As a place of retirement in the
case of military retirees that
is often more often than not a
place of starting their next
career
in life so I think the Arizona
FIR approach is one that I want
to pursue because I think that's
the that they got it right and
I'm anxious to talk to our taxes
Representative department about
why the difference in
calculations where in New Mexico
it's just a one way street
without any return benefit long
answer I hope I answered your
question Representative
absolutely thank you madam chair
representative said that I just
I would like to have a more
Just a more exact estimate on
the amount of retirees that
would affect move here and then
make a making economic policy
decision based on that on that
estimate but right now the
estimates are kind of all over
the board.
I think once up you know once
the pandemic lips are businesses
start opening up.
Our our our minimum wage which
is now set by the market manager
not by law or minimum wage cut
evens out and everybody kind of
knows where they stand on
medically.
Then we know where we stand as a
state once all this federal
money spent whether it spurs
economic growth or not I believe
it will tremendously.
Then I think we can take a.
You know chunks out of the
general fund for for for our
most beloved members of our
community that it but until the
economy evens out until we get
an exact estimate on on on the
cost benefit analysis
And I'm I'm hesitant at this
time
You know to.
To do this but I but I anyway I
just want to show stocks that
way were in on committee on the
floor where ever you can now.
S. these concerns which I I
believe I don't speak just for
myself but anyway thank you
madam chair thank you
representative Garcia for all
you do thank you Representative
Anderson.
So I I have a few comments and
observations as well and then.
Wait I see a hand up
Representative Herndon do you
wish to speak.
Representative madam chair
Representative Garcia I did but
I just just sort of being a a
bigger and different perspective
to what I I think you're trying
to do so as we look at as we
look at the doctor of the tax
the floor of the tax in New
Mexico in terms of the amount
that a person might bake but
they would not pay one single
penny of tax and all of Mr madam
chair members Representative
Garcia that amount is around
twenty five thousand dollars if
I'm correct is is that right
Madam.
Madam chair Mr Garcia yes I
believe that's correct so that
what we're looking at really is
a net of five thousand dollars
because what you're talking
about here is there's thirty
thousand dollars that would be
this credit is act was actually
equal to about a thirty thousand
dollar exemption so we're only
talking about a five thousand
dollar amount that would
actually be taxed that would be
exempted because the first
twenty five is going to be
exempted anyway if we just look
at the basic application of
taxes in New Mexico.
A little bit Representative more
prestige Representative.
Madam chair can I add to that.
Well if we.
ahead Representative Harper if
Representative affirmed and
doesn't mind.
Madam chair up I will yield
Representative Harper.
Madam chair and and as vice
chair heard and that's a great
question I'm glad we're talking
numbers like that here that
that's exactly the kind of
conversation when I have the tax
committee.
I just want to clarify you are
exactly right madam chair and
vice chair if there is no other
income that's being considered.
But let's consider the case
where someone has social
security income and military
retirement income.
in that case.
Thirty thousand dollars of
return of military retirement
would be subtracted immediately
because it's not considered here
in if this bill passes in New
Mexico and then you would still
have.
That deduction for that other
social security income at twenty
five thousand dollars dollars
could be applied towards the
social security income so it's a
little more complicated if you
have multiple revenue streams
coming in and I believe the way
this drafted revenue from wrong.
Representatives.
That's thirty thousand military
charges comes off the top so if
you're anything else adding in
that twenty five thousand dollar
deductible apply to that.
So Representative I mean Madam
chair representative are but
thank you for that additional
analysis and as we continue as
we continue to look at what what
happened it in terms of bringing
of allowing this exemption so if
we're talking about bringing
more and more people into the
state let's look at a broader
picture what this also could do
for us I mean if we look at the
census for example if we
increase our numbers that we get
more at we get a bigger stronger
voice in Washington and maybe
that would be a greater
attention paid to us in in
certain areas because we now
have greater representatives in
the in the in our Congress so I
just I point that out to you and
then I just looked at this
Representative as madam chair
Chandler and representative
Garcia it sounds like you're
looking at a step process this
is just one process in the
bigger picture and then what
you're looking at the next thing
is you start with this exemption
and then you're looking at in
terms of New Mexico be in short
still labor own doctors in rural
areas and then you figure out
how to move this forward in
expanded it to make it bigger so
I don't think it can be looked
at in a vacuum that then that
sounds like Representative I'm
sorry Madam chair representative
Garcia that that's what you're
looking at this bigger picture
of the operational aspect of of
how this would play board is
that correct Representative
Garcia.
Madam chair on the.
Representative that is correct.
The bigger picture at the end of
the day is going to be what
these people can find for state.
You know we are going to exempt
them a little bit on on their.
Tyerman but when they can what
they can what.
There uses skills and knowledge
into what we can do in this
state.
I'd with a bunch of these people
to work again and at the end of
the day we deduct from their
income in on their retirement.
The benefits are going to be
greater of what they put into
the state that we're gentleman
okay actually question
representative madam chair and
then madam chair.
Garcia I go back to one of the
quick thing that that
Representative Harper was
pointing to but what if it if
it's an additional if a person
had to do so income like social
security well I just want to add
that most military people are
not paying social security
because of the way the structure
of the payment the military is
going so we would be looking at
that so we might really just be
looking at that thirty thousand
dollar exemption and looking at
that floor with the twenty five
thousand dollars applicable to
that but that's a that's a
different conversation that I'll
have would Representative Harper
at another time so I just I just
want thank you for bringing this
forward because if you look at
the broader aspect economic
Madam chair representative
Garcia of what this could do for
our state in terms of elevating
the the types of worker and what
we're looking for to grow this
state in another area I think
it's absolutely brilliant so
thank you madam chair
representative Garcia for
bringing this bill forward.
Thank you Representative Herndon
if I may I have a few us to
share on this.
I am in the school of Tax theory
that agrees with those that we
should not be looking at the
source of the income but that we
need to be just looking at
overall income and general I
think that is the sounder
methodology for thinking about
tax policy it it is a way for us
to treat everyone fairly and
equally.
When we start taking particular
groups of people who
whose income we've we've quote
value more I really grow
concerned and.
There are a number of
initiatives in the legislature
this year that appear to be
taking that tact and I can't in
good conscience except that is
an appropriate way to be
thinking about how we implement
tax policy in the state.
There's a lot of talk about
who's gonna come in who's going
to be productive and who's going
to do this and who's going to do
that we have no idea I have yet
to see any data that suggests
we're going to get more.
age working are eight you know
working eligible
of military retirees down we are
now a number of my colleagues
brought up the point that we
have a lot of military retirees
here and they're wonderful
productive people and they're
here because they're at New
Mexico native and we I'm proud
that our New Mexico natives have
a strong interest in serving in
the military and when they're
when they're done serving their
country they come back to New
Mexico and and that's great and
they're super productive people
in terms of recruiting people
here I've seen little
information that suggests that
will really work.
we're talking about things that
happen in other states their tax
codes are totally different from
ours so we're comparing apples
and oranges when we try to rely
on what's going on in one state
or another state because it's a
stacks tax structure not any one
thing that has impact on a
person
Young Montoya youngest military
retirees those in their thirties
and forties and I know that many
military members are eligible
for retirement at that point in
their lives have children.
Those children use our schools.
they use all of the
infrastructure and programs that
we pull provide to children in
the state and those programs
cost money and to think that
those people receiving those
services and help support those
services is also I think
questionable.
Older military retirees who come
to the state
receive all sorts of benefits in
terms of our senior programs are
recreational programs are art
programs are medium the whole
litany of things that we all
share and I believe it's
appropriate for those
veterans to to sharing the
expense of those services so
I appreciate the sentiment that
the sponsors are bringing and
and my comments on this are not
intended at all to to diminish
my respect for those individuals
who served in the military my
husband is a military veteran is
he came here without any tax
incentives.
He did actually benefit from the
GI bill which was something that
was a marvelous benefit that we
provide to our veterans and as a
result he was qualified to work
at Los Alamos national lab in in
a very full and fruitful career
there
He you know he doesn't he would
not.
Feel the need for such a budget
to stay in the state I think
most veterans want wouldn't once
they moved here
my brother's a veteran.
At current trends and I respect
my colleague representative
Garcia hi not Sir in the Vietnam
War and I I thank you for your
service but.
I think this is just wrong wrong
headed approach to tax policy
I'd also now mentioned to
everyone I think everyone on the
panel recognize this as well as
the Sanchez this has a seventeen
to twenty million dollars fiscal
impact this bill is
open to a temporary table motion
which I'm willing to address the
pain now.
So madam chair.
We have a motion to temporary
table.
House Bill what's the number
seventy six.
Madam chair before the vote
could I make a quick comment.
Well yes Mr fellows
Representative selves but he's
keep your if we had a we've had
a robust discussion of this
bill.
Thank you madam chairman I
failed to mention their
companion bill in the Senate by
Senator pope of that Senate bill
eighty five moving through the
Senate I hope.
I think when we talk about who
will come to New Mexico I agree
there is no definite answer for
that.
Individuals would be as a group
a welcome addition of third that
there is no tax credit for
military retirement
of income and we are one of nine
states to do so and
I the representative thank you
thanks we've that said we got
the message we did.
Thank you so is there a second
on the temporary table motion.
Of Representative bye
Representative Harper I think we
will call the roll on this one
could you please call the roll
Kimberly.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Egolf.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lente.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative mess.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes very table.
Representative Montoya.
Reluctantly yes.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
Chair.
Yes to the temporary table.
Chairman chairman yes.
We have a twelve there are.
Very good thank you moving on to
house bill forty seven.
I would ask by chair Herndon to
share this portion of the
meeting I am the sponsor on the
bill and I do have.
An expert witness whose name is
Makin love the now.
Thank you madam.
Madam chair.
Would you please bring the with
the Representative so.
I'm sorry the chairs expert
witness for.
Panelist thank you very much
chairwoman Janet would you
please proceed with presenting
this bill thank you very much
madam vice chair.
House Bill forty seven.
Addresses an issue that arose as
a result of our moved to
destination sourcing.
And it applies in a what I would
say is a somewhat unique
situation.
We are asking that home care
facilities B.
exempted from the destination
sourcing requirements and the
reason is
And it wasn't anticipated I'm
sure at the time we passed the
bill is.
Many of these providers are
relatively small.
The healthcare providers who you
know the actual visitors home
visitors to provide these is
very important services to
families and individuals.
Those in the those providers
travel often in a day between
multiple counties so the example
I would give to you is let's say
you have a care provider who's
you know where the business
location is in Espanola all
right Espanola straddles two
counties so it's possible that
the care provider could be in
Santa Fe County Rio Arriba
County we all know it's less
almost is very close to the
Espanola also there may be some
visitor who goes into Los Alamos
that's three counties in a day
that that one provider has to
account for.
I would note also that the the
recipients of the services are
often Medicaid eligible
individuals there off and on low
incomes and
it's difficult for the actual
business to track the time the
administrative burden and and
it's I think it could be a real
disincentive for the
continuation of a number of
these businesses in our state
and with that if I may madam
vice chair I'd like to turn the
the for over to my experts yes
let me know being no we welcome
this let me know.
And madam chairman and vice
chair members of the committee
my name is Meggin Lorino within
our.
Which is fine but just just to
be clear from the New Mexico
Association for Home and hospice
care and we really appreciate
and madam chair sponsorship of
this bill I she has very clearly
laid out we feel that this a
destination based sourcing of
gross receipts taxes adds an
administrative burden on a
health care provider based on
where they provide health care
and we know especially in the
pandemic has really emphasized
for all of us that care in the
home is not the only patient
preferred but it's also Lexus
less expensive and a very safe
care setting for people to be
rather than in a hospital or
nursing facility and we think
that the state should be working
to encourage care in the home
rather than creating punitive
tax disincentives for this
health care delivery model.
The agencies that we represent
they serve their clients and
patients anywhere they call home
that can that can mean that a
member can move from a long term
care facility to their own
personal home and then maybe to
a lot of one time over the
course of their care and we
believe that care should be able
to be offered seamlessly without
administrative burdens on the
provider forgiving patient
centered care we have been in
common conversation with our
members and we need to know that
they all had to add
administrative costs in order to
stay in compliance with this
destination sourcing
and so it's not hugely
significant for them but it is
it is a barrier is a burden on
them and we think that anytime
that there is an administrative
burden being put on our
providers that does not benefit
patient care and the delivery of
services in our state that that
is just a lose lose proposition
the H. B. forty seven I the way
I the way I the most recent
version I've seen of it solves
this issue by shifting home
healthcare providers hospice
providers and personal care
service providers to an origin
based sourcing similar to that
of other professional services
and we would argue that this is
a professional service and those
are my comments but I can try to
answer any questions the
committee might have thank you.
Before we go to questions from
the committee of I'm sorry madam
chair did we have a a poll that
we were taking I'm I do not is
also but we do need to hear from
the audience in favor or opposed
madam vice chair.
And madam chair I can't see the
audience are you can't you can't
see the hands right so the thing
called attendees and perhaps if
you can't see those attendees we
could ask Kimberly are many
assistant just to call out who
has raised their hands with that
work for you madam vice chair
yes that would work would be
madam chair thank you very much.
Yes so the first.
Question from the public we have
is chasing us to stack.
This Espinoza you have one
minute.
Thank you madam chair member
chair madam chair members the
committee Jason Espinoza
register lobbyist at the
national federation of
independent business we stand in
strong support of the
legislation and if I'd be
represents only small and
independent businesses and many
of those businesses here in the
state are home health care
providers and as the expert
witness and the sponsor noted a
lot of those are Medicaid
providers I'm so really the
state has a decision here with
the state rather those Medicaid
dollars be spent on
administrative costs we're on
health care delivery because the
providers that we had talked to
have and to add additional staff
at least one person to comply
with the complexity of the
destination based sourcing us a
really passing this legislation
and we're back to origin based
sourcing for these providers
sure that those dollars are
reaching health care delivery
providing care for the patients
thank you madam chair we stand
in support of house bill forty
seven.
Thank you Mr Espinoza and since
we started with support is there
anyone else that is in support
if so keep your hand up I can
now see the attendees.
So next step we have the data
and those are.
Mr major you have one minute are
you in support of the state of.
Legislation yes I am madam chair
can you hear me yes we can hear
you yes I I represent amber Care
and I had a statement delivered
to the committee yesterday I
believe I want to just add two
points to the points made by the
sponsor and the other speakers
in our experience in New Mexico
it's very common for families to
share responsibility for the
care of their loved ones and in
that regard to love ones are
moved periodically often month
to month and we've experienced
since this came into place that
several times we have to keep
adjusting gross receipts tax
payments for the same individual
as they move from one
jurisdiction to another I also
want to add that I don't know of
any other situation with health
care professionals put in the
same position positions can see
a patient in our office go down
to UNM hospital and see him and
see him in a clinic without
having to change the G. R. T. we
urge you to support this bill
thank you very much.
Thank you Mr those are.
Mr here are you speaking in
support.
Yes ma'am thank you good morning
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Missy
Currier and I represent the
cities of Carlsbad and Hobbs on
behalf of these municipalities
we support HB forty seven and
appreciate the chairwoman
bringing this legislation
forward however we would also
like to note that the home
healthcare and hospice industry
are not the only industries and
entities affected by the tax
change created by the twenty
nineteen house bill six on
municipalities depend on the G.
R. T. generated through local
businesses to ensure quality
essential services for all of
their residents businesses and
visitors we help HB forty seven
could be extended to include
other industries thank you for
the opportunity to testify.
Thank you Mr here Mr block.
You are because thank you.
Good good morning madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is Pat block on the
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico retail association let me
start by saying that the.
Main driver for switching from
Tuesday excuse me to destination
destination based sourcing had
to do with providing equity in
the market place between online
out of state sellers and
businesses physically located in
New Mexico the.
Issues that we're hearing about
with the home health care
industry and also oil and gas
service as miss career just
spoke to you or I believe in
unintended consequence of this
change the passage of house bill
six a couple years ago did make
that change and it has helped in
state businesses but it's
causing some negative impacts to
some of the industry's like home
health care that we're talking
about today and so as long as we
are limiting the discussion to
services and not tangible goods
we strong stand stand strongly
in support thank you.
Thank you Mr block is there
anyone in else in the audience
who wishes to speak for or
against this bill.
Seeing no hands madam chair we
will go back to you two of
Representative of your
conversation before we go to
the.
The members of the committee
thank thank you very much madam
vice chair I did want to make a
couple of additional points
mainly about the FIR and the
suppose in fiscal impact I pull
the thread on that and and I
want to explain to the members
why I think it's kind of
misplaced and frankly
speculative so.
What the analysis is in the FIR
that reports to identify half a
million dollars and then a two
million dollar impact is it's
based on
the belief that there will be
gross receipts tax that have
been attributed to counties in
these last five months that will
with this change which is
occurring very promptly after
the effective date of the Act of
the of the destination sourcing
that some of those but now it's
not necessarily all of those and
we don't know how much really
we'll go back to the city so
then the city will get
from the state they're one point
two two five percent that
normally that the state would
not have to give to a county so
the analysis is based on the
idea with very little data
having accumulated in five
months that.
There that is a negative fiscal
impact on the state and I would
suggest to you that it's not
adequate to hold this bill in
committee and I would request
that it would that we move it
out of committee today so we can
start supporting our health care
providers who are so essential
to us in this very trying time
thank you madam chair.
Thank you of Representative
Chandler will now go to the
committee members for their
comments Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair and Act.
Chair Chandler thank you for
that I'm sure to talk about this
bill and I know you and I have
talked several times about
behind the scenes I just want to
maybe share of a little bit.
Background a little history
because I I heard from the folks
in the attendee list of this was
an unintended consequence and
and you know destination
sourcing was done you know just
for internet sales in those kind
of things and and that's really
not the case so I just want to.
Share I mean.
So.
Really this is been the I'd
object of discussion for several
years.
I think it's always three or
four years that we are working
on legislation and how to
implement a change from our
origin based you know where the
business is located to a
destination based for the good
or service is delivered.
And and yes the the impetus
behind that was the internet
sales and and why white because
if I'm buying something from
someone in Texas or the internet
New Mexico doesn't have the
authority to taxed Texas.
so if if our taxes are based off
of where the business is located
we can't tax.
So to tax it we change the
location where the tax
transaction happens to where it
is delivered.
We do that because the Supreme
Court took up a case what South
Dakota Bristol Wayfair.
Some of the states have been
pushing for a long time and I
have so my colleagues in in Utah
and South Dakota works once
you're headed this and we're so
glad I did because it does give
parity to our more local mortar
more shops here west with the
rest of the US anyone here
disagrees thank you.
I'm doing that how do you do
that is really challenging.
And and we Russell was that and
we had you know years of
language and and actually the
the language that was finally
passed came from my bills are
about ninety five percent if one
of my one of my bills and that
actually includes when was that
in the to be America's.
Later on with other things so we
had to come back and do some
cleanup.
But we we understood the pros
and cons of each one one day one
that are kind of talking about
indirectly but as part of this.
Is that your big business
centers like Albuquerque or or
other places where there's a lot
of.
Business is set up and they do
work outside of Bernalillo
county roster number Turkey.
That there would be a decrease
in revenue there because we're
now going to tax it what happens
and so this would actually help.
Other smaller counties Mr Valdez
like this this helps Rio Rancho
right and we continually talk
about how the that was the
erosion of the tax base and not
taxing food and medicine that
especially our rural areas are
being hit hard.
And so we knew that this would
happen and and and frankly we
saw this as an opportunity to
help our rural communities out a
little bit more.
The other the other point about
the complexity I think this is
where I have sympathy right this
is where I understand and and
you have the C. R. for for the
folks who have come forward here
we knew that this would be more
challenging because they were
just gonna put down one place
their tax now you have to keep
track of several different
places that have different tax
rates that money
TRD what I collected flow to
those places and we wrestle with
that for a really long time I
mean think about your your folks
to what are you know someone at
sea or something like that and
we figured out was
for a lot of these bigger
businesses they have the
capacity to handle this and they
can take care of it right so
some thousand receipt as you
take care of it Amazon has to
keep track of nine thousand
something different taxing
jurisdictions make it figured
out.
So what do we do to help our
local businesses.
And what happened is in that
bill that passed house bill six
that move the the destination we
include a provision in the
Senate tax revenue department
has to develop
us system usually to access that
allows anyone in the state to
plop in an address and find out
what the taxes.
We're trying to make this easy
on on folks that might be in the
exact position that we're
discussing today and they've
built that system it works well.
it is not
But when I think about okay the
only example we have someone
Espanola that's gone to three
different places
now they have to go back and
plug it in the system and then
brought a taxable transistorized
I mean I get that that takes
more time that that you hired
next person.
what I have heard so is that
your amendment is right now
working with the department on
making it more user friendly
version of that system.
And the hope is essentially just
like normal they put all their
all their information as a
normally bill and whatever
system quick and or or whatever
right quick books whatever and
then you to essentially just
input this module and and click
a button and it would just
automatically look at the
addresses and phone the tax
rates so we're trying to make
this simpler.
One folks but I do understand
the complexity and the
challenges in the system is
available yet right the it's
it's in the works.
So.
So I guess run come from I'm I'm
kind of torn right I I I I very
much love to
do everything we can to help the
tax payer.
especially when they're trying
to be compliant right I mean
unintended consequence of this
is maybe people are just like
yeah whatever I was gonna do it
the way I did before us on
audits based on audits we want
to make it easy for them to be
compliant so I'm I'm wrestling
with that versus we've just
barely changed the code and the
dust hasn't even settled yet and
when you to see how things shake
out.
This could potentially help more
rural.
areas of the state.
and
You know I.
Those are the two things I'm I'm
I'm I'm just kind of wrestling
works.
so madam chair and and and sure
Chandler if you have any
thoughts on on that I'd love to
hear.
Very briefly madam chair because
I think we need to move forward
on the but
I appreciate everything that
Representative Harper said in
the context of goods.
And he and I have chatted about
this too we have a very unique
we all know this is a very
unique code where we it's not
really a sales tax on goods it
includes services and if there
and all of the decisions that
amount emit from that and our
thinking was focused on good
certainly I was focused on goods
and that thought process is that
things are a little different
for services and so it's not a
one for one for comparison in my
mind and there will be times
when these kinds of appropriate
exceptions are made.
Madam chair chair I yeah I
completely agree with you
that that service is a is a big
deal and and
so I understand where you're
coming from I I also just
concern we have we talked I
think Saturday about a Hodge
podge of our medical taxation
and this is just add another
piece to that that Hodge podge
that now will also have
in person Services treated
differently for medical but I.
I get it I get it I think.
In the end I'm I'm not going to.
Support legislation this is a
really hard decision for me
because I can really see the
pros and cons of both sides and
I understand chair while you're
why you're bringing this this
bill Ford and I just want to say
I'm very hopeful that we can we
will continue on this path of
making it easier for the
taxpayer to comply I'm very
interested in what this at UNM
project is gonna help what and
I'm hoping that this doesn't
open up the box Pandora's as a
as a one of my.
Okay Mister politician used to
say and that will be able to
make this easy for everyone to
comply and we will have to do
this for anyone else so I thank
you Madam chair.
Thank you Representative Harper
let's still to Representative
stopped.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair.
I can certainly appreciate the
issues raised by the home
health.
Right.
And.
Yes.
Yes the nation sourcing change
the.
Many.
Your
consequences.
Particularly.
With respect to the rural
communities in southeast New
Mexico.
Because.
The sales now accruing to those
communities.
Have not come close.
The revenue lost.
Because service each.
From businesses based in those
communities is now.
Basically.
To the communities of the fact.
I think you have to.
Continue to provide police fire
Roach schools to the businesses
located there so I would just
urge.
We're considering this.
Legislation that we also
consider.
Consequences.
Cruz this legislation and I
really didn't have any questions
that was a COVID thank you madam
chair and chair.
Thank you representative of
Scott.
I do not Representative let's
see I do not see any other hands
is there anyone else who wishes
to speak on this legislation.
If that will go to Madam chair
representative Chandler to to
provide the wrap up.
Thank you madam chair I really
think we I'd ask for in the past
we had a very good debate and I
think you can all see that if
damages to this a proposal thank
you very much madam chair.
The proposed to do for by shared
right like to propose a due past
due and and is it as amended I
don't know if there was an
amendment.
It was amended previously so it
is house bill forty three as
amended recommended you pass as
amended thank you madam chair
madam chair.
Thank you is there a second.
I will second.
We'll take the boat would you
please take the will call.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Speaker.
Representative Harper.
No.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente.
Representative Lujan yes Sir.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Montoya.
No.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Lujan was on the
line did you want to make a.
It is.
Representative Hernandez about
yes.
Or call noted Representative
Chandler both chair Tenneco I
did not it's a yes.
And what is our total please.
We have a nine two two.
Representative a chair Chandler
you have paid a do pass on the
amendment.
And the bills.
Thank you so much madam vice
chair for taking the home there
for a moment
I I've been told that we're
starting the floor session so
we'll roll house bill eighty two
and there are few other bills
that will be considering on
Wednesday thank you all it was a
really good discussion very good
meeting I appreciate all of you
thank you so much.
Mr chair and thank you.
