Here.
Representative Lujan.
Here.
Representative Maestas there.
Representative Montoya.
Here.
Representative Romero.
Your.
Representative Scott.
Representative Stansbury.
Good morning everyone.
Learning Representative
Strickler your.
Thank
you.
Chairman Martinez I am here.
We have a quorum all right
thanks Elaine of members we have
a.
We're pretty packed agenda today
but I I think we will be able to
get through it we're gonna start
with house bill two forty one
Representative ada house bill
one seventy four which has been
rolled over a few times
Representative Anderson so
Well all shoot an email and if
any of you any of you have a
cell should text please.
then we're gonna go down to.
House Bill to sixty I'm sorry
house bill two seventy one.
And that's harboring Rubio.
And then house bill two sixty
two Syriana we're gonna roll
over house bill two ninety one
we didn't get the FIR till
pretty late last night I want to
give everybody a chance to.
To look at it so we're gonna
roll that over until Monday
we do plan on meeting briefly
tomorrow at eleven to at it in
in collaboration with the
ranking member Harper were were.
Trying to figure out a tax
package to get out you know some
of the bills that Abington free
table because of fiscal cost
we're we're working on a list of
a few of those to be able to get
out so
will we'll convene tomorrow
briefly at eleven and get that
done
So yeah that's the plan
Representative at it are you
ready on your house bill two
forty one I am ready Mr chair
all right taken away.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee it's good to be back
with you again this bill H. B.
two forty one basically calls
for setting aside ten percent of
the water trust fund money for
small mutual domestic water
systems.
I'm wondering in the north and I
guess in all of New Mexico is
really a sacred trust and we
carefully guard our watersheds
intersect yes most importantly
we guard clean drinking water
that is that is probably the
most important commodity that we
have and
I live in rural New Mexico and
have it as septic in a second I
am a well and take careful care
of all of those things but I
really didn't know much about
mutual domestic water systems
and I I actually first learned
about them in the parking lot of
Walmart when I was at
circulating petitions in my
first campaign and somebody said
do you know anything about
mutual domestic water systems
and I said well not really and
she said who is now my good
friend Gloria Gonzales will you
better learn.
It's important and I said okay
and after I got elected I called
for a meeting and that thirty
people showed up all of them
over sixty five and most of the
most of them ran these mutual
domestic water systems on a on a
volunteer basis since then there
have been several follow up
meetings and I've done my best
to learn and see how we the
legislature could help us help
the volunteer people run the
systems so this is basically how
it works the water trust fund
was created in two thousand one
and they charge The New Mexico
finance authority with the
administration of this fund the
water project fund receives nine
percent of the senior US
severance tax on annually this
year it'll be fifty three point
three million dollars and they
get another four million from an
endowment and so this year there
are a total of fifty seven point
eight million there two other
funds water funds for
infrastructure that are financed
by the senior severance tax bond
the Los colonias infrastructure
act was created in two thousand
ten and as of two thousand
nineteen has awarded ninety
eight million two hundred ninety
eight thousand nine hundred
fifty five dollars to two
hundred and twelve projects
within a hundred and fifty miles
of the board.
It gets four point five percent
of the senior center severance
tax bonds and this you'll get
twenty six point six million or
or water infrastructure projects
a hundred and fifty miles from
our southern border.
Tribal infrastructure was
created in two thousand sixteen
and as of two thousand nineteen
it was awarded forty million two
hundred sixty two thousand
dollars eight hundred and sixty
eight to seventy design
instruction are planning
projects each year another four
point five percent of the senior
severance tax one is allocated
to this fund and they too will
get twenty six point six million
dollars in on twenty twenty two.
There are one thousand forty
seven water systems in our state
three hundred of those one
thousand art the smaller future
domestic water systems only
eight of them have more than
five hundred that's of these
three hundred small mutual
domestic water systems a hundred
and seventy eight over half of
them have less than two hundred
hit that hook ups.
This legislation is really aimed
at serving our smallest water
systems they really can't afford
loans the can't pay for three
years of financial audits they
they really can't tackle the
NMFA's water project fund
application please don't get me
wrong the NMFA does premiere
were and their exemplary work
with the last colonias
infrastructure fund prompted me
to have the NMFA act as the lead
agency permit the Mitchell
domestic set aside it is the
best example of quality
transparent their work on the
part of our state government
employees serving our citizens
but the requirements demanded by
these funds make it nearly
impossible for small mutual
domestic water systems to
compete on an even playing field
so essentially this bill is a
set aside ten percent of
available funds approximately
four point seven million from
the water project funds for me
to a domestic water systems
these requests will not require
a matching contribution nor they
will be part nor will they need
to be part of an accepted
regional water planning area.
They will have to comply with
all state and federal permits
but they can use the grant award
to pay for these projects so
this bill is essentially about
access and equity
to clean drinking water in the
rural unincorporated part of our
state if you're a hundred fifty
miles from the border no problem
and you've got to act fund
working for you if you're on
tribal land you've got to act
fund working for you but if you
rely on one of this three
hundred small mutual domestic
systems you may have trouble
building the needed if
infrastructure needs you need
this bill will address a
critical need in our state and
with that Mr chairman members of
this committee I would like to
introduce my expert witnesses we
have with us today Marquita
Russel who's the CEO of the NMFA
and bill Connor is the executive
director of the New Mexico rural
water association.
Thank you Representative and
that and are are any of you to
other co sponsors with you today
Representative Garrett and
senator how do you.
You know Senator I mean
Representative Garrett is that
there Senator live how to me and
he just showed up I think
excellent there he just well.
Welcome center how to meal to
house taxed rate of thank you Mr
chairman thank you so much
Representative but I did a
wonderful job of introducing
your bill would you like to add
anything to that sure if you
don't mind Mr chairman members
of the committee rural New
Mexicans are in desperate need
of safe drinking water now if
you look at the number of issues
we have in addition to people
drilling wells is the threat of
groundwater contamination with
septic tanks this bill would
ensure adequate access and
equity for everyone clean safe
drinking water for small rural
communities and this is
something we definitely need in
northern New Mexico now when
Representative and I
Representative Chandler and I go
out to northern New Mexico
specifically Rio Arriba County
the number one issue people talk
about is water and the threat of
ground water contamination this
bill would alleviate that stress
and would help us in ensuring
mutual Water domestics can
provide clean drinking water to
north Tenniel's and everybody
deserves clean drinking water Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you senator and thank you
for being with us and
Representative Garrett I don't
see her but I'm and I do a quick
look here I don't think she
could make it this morning
that's chair.
Very very well
ms Russell.
Welcome anything to add.
Thank you Mr chairman no I'm I'm
here primarily to answer any
technical questions as to how
the finance authority
administers the water project
funder how the water trust fund
our water transport makes its
recommendations happy to stand
for questions excellent thank
you for being here Mister Connor
anything to add.
And don't have very much that of
Mr chair
I I just would like to point out
I think maybe expand a little
bit on what Representative
Ferrary.
said in her remarks.
of the of.
Total water systems and and New
Mexico there's about I don't
know that thousand fifty to a
thousand ninety somewhere in
that area a total water systems
about five hundred and seventy
two of those are community water
systems.
And community water systems are
those that provide.
Waterjet homes to families to
schools.
Thank.
Out of those about sixty eight
percent of those have
populations of five hundred or
less.
About
What is about ninety percent of
those have populations under
thirty three hundred so they're
all from relatively small to
very small.
Of the ones that serves.
Nine hundred or less almost all
are managed by a volunteer
volunteer boards.
Many of them have have day jobs
so they do an exemplary job of
providing safe clean drinking
water they do an awful lot of
really good work with the very
limited funding but funding is
something that they all need to
keep maintain their
infrastructure and keep it up.
Keep it strong and and in good
condition so that they don't
have water outages and don't
have.
Problems for their communities.
the water trust fund does a very
good job of both of.
Funding a lot of infrastructure
in rural New Mexico however the
truth says is that the the
larger communities and larger
water systems have staffs that
that actually can can prepare
for next like go out and chase
and really work on on this type
of funding smaller water systems
don't have yes the staff is
often times don't have the
expertise to really go after
this type of funding so.
So the funding of.
being requested here today will
help fill that void and and put
the smaller water systems
unable equal footing with the
what larger water systems and
with the colonias and tribal
system so we fully support this
that and the I appreciate your
time would be happy to answer
any questions thank you for
being here let's go to members
of the audience.
Anyone in the audience in
support of house bill two forty
one.
Give you a second to raise your
virtual hand.
In support of house bill two
forty one we have the first on
the list join E. sports and.
Good morning joy welcome.
Joy we can't hear you.
Join good morning Elaine I'm not
a panelists so you might have to
let folks in I don't have the
powers today.
Unless you want to give me the
power.
Our of those.
All right miss parson welcome
house bill two forty one in
support thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Joyce sparks and I am
the deputy executive director
for New Mexico counties this is
a really important piece of
legislation as Representative
has mentioned these are smaller
entities that do not have a
large enough rate base to really
take on a traditional loan and
even make a minimal match with
that being said we certainly
support this effort we think
there's a viable need were rural
state and these communities
outside of urban areas continue
to grow and we think this help
support that infrastructure
moving forward thank you.
Thank you for joining us.
Steffi wise bird.
Good morning good morning Mr
chairman and committee as a
representative three fifty New
Mexico climate change advocacy
group and the girl at this to
see said Canadian we stand in
strong support of this bill
thank you very much thank you
for being with us and good
morning to you anyone else is
support of house bill two forty
one.
Okay anyone in opposition to
house bill two forty one.
Okay let's go to the members of
the committee and first on the
list I have by your Chandler.
thank you very much Mr chair and
I really just wanted to speak in
strong favor of this bill that
is being presented by my two
colleagues from the north
Representative had a and my new
dear friend senator hot amigo
they've been a pleasure to work
with Mr chair over the last
since I've gotten the now I know
non the ref of course for long
time that the senator is been a
pleasure to work with them and
on these last few months that
I've gotten to know him and
I just want to know kind of
reinforced the message Mr chair
that Representative Herrera on
presented when I first was
elected I was from Los Alamos we
have a well developed water
system with the bunch of
employees that run it and it's
it's great
what what I really had to learn
about was mutual domestic water
systems when I was first elected
and truthfully I was stunned I
had no idea that these small
groups of individual volunteers
most of the time are responsible
for operating a clean water
system for their community and
many of those communities Mr
chair and representatives are up
for
often very small of the folks
have to work on the problems in
their spare time they have jobs
during the day they might have
one operator and operators are
required to be certified by the
state and they might have a part
time office person who helps
with the billing and you know
all of those sort of
administrative tasks and that's
it for such an important
functions your chair and I
thought Representative have as
idea and Senator how to meals
idea about trying to get a
little bit more money into
supporting the system's was
extremely important most of us
when we get our capital outlay
the first thing we look at our
how can we help the mutual
domestics because we know how
strapped they are for cash in.
And in lean years when we don't
have capital outlay or it's very
low those communities offer and
so this is a great way Mr chair
to create a sustained and level
of funding and increased level
of funding for those entities
and I want to thank the sponsors
for bringing for this bill I
think it's a fantastic idea
thank you very much Mr chair.
Thank you vice chair channeler.
Next on the list we have
Representative Stansbury.
You Mr chairman and thank you to
our sponsors and I just so
appreciate your focus and
passion for addressing these
issues I wanted to ask you just
a couple of questions about that
finance mechanism in the bill
partly because there's been a
lot of issues raised the last
year about the availability of
funds in these water project
funds
and so I was what I'm looking at
the bill here and I'm just
trying to understand it doesn't
look like it's creating a new
pot of money but rather just
satisfied with in the water
project fund is that is that
correct is that what what it's
doing.
Mr chair and representative
that's exactly what it's doing
to ten percent set aside within
the available funds.
I'm so could you Mr chair and
and Representative headed just
share with us a little bit about
why why is that so those funds
presumably are already available
for mutual domestics what does
what is the benefit of having a
set aside and I I think you know
I about part of why I'm asking
these questions is that it's
slightly different than you know
the colonias project or the
cleanliness Fund and the tribal
infrastructure fund potentially
get it their own they are their
own separate funds they get
severance tax set asides where
is this is actually a satisfied
within an existing frontier
for which these projects are
already eligible so I'm curious
why a set aside within the fund
itself.
Mr chair and representative
frankly I did what I could you
know if I had tried to set aside
a new fund within the severance
a senior severance tax on I
didn't think it was going to go
anywhere and so I look for an
available fund and and yes does
what it has been they do so
funds small mutual domestics to
I know why you think they don't
do that
but I can tell you
I just know from my district
when I see those projects that
have been funded by the a water
test board in in my district
it's usually I I it's a small
district I know people so I know
that when L. Rico gets funded
they had the former head of the
engineering department in their
community and I I can probably
name the people on that
committee even though I don't
know that for sure I kind of
know who is on that committee as
so you so you have these
community brain trust sometimes
that can navigate these these
these projects but but a small
mutual domestic with less than a
hundred people on of that are
just making it they're just
making it they can compete with
some cities like Santa Fe and
Albuquerque that's why and and
and actually it was very clear
when I talked to.
The New Mexico finance authority
and I'm gonna refer to market
about this you too understood
the problem if the if this is
known in the water trust board
circles that they they really
have a hard time serving at the
end of the poorest of the poor
at market would you like to
comment on that for me.
I'm certainly Mr Chairman
representative thank you for the
question so the finance
authority again administers the
water transport of the way in
which the water trust board
makes its recommendations is
based on criteria that they've
established in their policies
and there's a seven agency
review team that looks at all of
the applications that come in
and great these applications
based on the criteria so all of
water conservation projects are
looked at and ranked against all
other water conservation
projects and mutual domestic
which typically fall under with
the call water conveyance
delivery projects all compete
against you know all the other
so you do have small mutual
domestics competing against
larger utilities and cities and
things like that.
Mutual domestics particularly in
the last couple years have done
much better because the water
transport has taken into
consideration some of the issues
that have prevented their access
to the fund there have been
barriers to access relative to
the state match that had to
occur I think it's both
Representative at a and
Representative Chandler
mentioned much of much of the
funding that goes to these
mutual domestics is in the form
of the severance tax bond
capital outlay projects and the
water trust point policies don't
recognize severance tax bond or
other capital outlay as a local
match because what the water
transports looking to do is
actually get your local dollars
or federal dollars into the
project and not have it be a
hundred percent state funded so
in prior years prior to about
two thousand sixteen that had
served as a significant barrier
to the entry to the water
transport projects the water
transport change their policies
back in two thousand and sixteen
and said first off they put a
sliding scale and so they looked
at the size of the project the
kind of project that was being
requested and the relative
median household income of the
applicant and put a sliding
scale and so there are actually
if the projects less than half a
million dollars or if they're
asking for less than half a
million dollars from the water
trust board and they have a low
median household income they
wouldn't have a match at all
there's a zero percent match in
those instances but you know to
at eight just because I am I
think what I'm trying to get at
is concern that by setting aside
funds within the existing
pundits gonna compete with water
projects that are already under
funded and so just I am I don't
mean to interrupt but I know we
have a lot of bills on that sure
I apologize.
I should mention is that in the
last five years as a result of
those changes you know the water
transport has funded projects of
at least twelve percent of the
money has gone to the small
mutual domestics and up to as
much as twenty two percent so
what wouldn't change really
anything until those years in
which there is a shortage of
money to fund projects so when
those years in which there's
less money available for water
projects that's the point at
which this bill becomes really
important.
When there's more money in the
fund there's less competition
and as a result more these
projects get funded so the two
changes that are being presented
here which require no match and
not being required not being
part of a and acceptable
regional water plan that's the
difference between many water
small mutual domestics getting
funded or not getting funded so
right now it wouldn't have a
significant change we anticipate
about fifteen to twenty percent
of the money available this year
going to mutual domestics would
make a change at all no
difference whatsoever but in the
years in which there's less
money that's when Mitchell
domestics lose out so that is
that's why it's important that
there be some mechanism in those
years of shortages for there to
be a leveling of the playing
field.
Thank you Mr chair
representative I can follow up
and and clarify my question so
what I'm trying to understand I
understand the benefit for the
mutual domestics that's clear in
your presentation and the bill
what I'm really trying to
understand is that we have
regularly have the state
engineer come before this body
and say that these funds are
being depleted by other uses and
we've authorized several
different carve outs and so what
I wanted to just I'm I'm not
trying to be difficult I just
wanna make sure we understand
the fiscal implications of doing
another car about inside the
fund and so so that we don't
solve one problem and creating
another problem in the process
so Mr chairman and and
Representative had it at
it would to to follow up
questions about the kind of
financial aspects of it and I
think it sounds like met him
miss Russell already answered
part of this is one is ten
percent does that tie up funds
that could otherwise be used for
other projects seniors when I'd
like is is is there enough
capacity and demand to use the
household full full amount and
then the second question is by
setting this project is setting
this ten percent aside are we
going to end up making it not
possible to fund other projects
that have been ranked as being
high merit and high priority by
the water trust board.
Mr chair and and Representative.
I agree with you I think I think
this body needs to put more
money in the water trust fund
and we have carved out monies
over the years lots of money
from the water can spend I
totally agree with you but we
also have a backlog of these of
of funding and in small for
small mutual domestic it wasn't
until three years or I think it
was three years ago market at
seven the rules changed in the
two thousand sixteen thousand
sixteen thank you so but there's
still a large backlog of the
smaller mutual domestics that
probably need more help to
getting and you know and that's
really they don't have anybody
else to turn to if you really
want to know the truth to I
think that this body needs to
fund water projects and the
water project transform and
greater capacity absolutely but
this is this is stopping a
promise just I happen to have
forty three mutual domestic
water systems in our state I
think we could spend the whole
money the all the money there
but they they are spread out all
over rural unincorporated parts
the state and these people are
charged with keeping clean water
drinking water of for their
communities and they do it on a
volunteer basis that's why I
think we need to set aside.
Right but I guess I'm really
trying to get at the other part
of my question which is by doing
that satisfied are we not going
to be able to fund statewide
projects that have been highly
ranked as high priorities by the
water trust board because those
dollars are tied that
and and then account basically
holding them in advance for
mutual domestics.
Well I mean I I think everyone
in the state districts clean
drinking water and I don't think
I don't think a larger problem
and I think that's why they have
a list of priorities set up it
certainly you're taken your kid
taking ten percent set aside and
and investing in.
In.
In you know old systems that
need to do some and structure
that's really what you're doing
yes thank.
Course it's going to take away
from other funds.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Representative and it just so
I'm looking at at our analysis
and I actually don't see much
analysis from and it looks like
it was sent to NMED and and
Office of the state engineer but
I don't I don't have the agency
analysis in front of us I'm can
you share with us a little bit
about what their feedback was on
the bill.
The NMFA is that what you're
talking it's Mr chair the
environment department and the
state engineer which also have
projects.
Fund.
I have had sick significant
conversations with the
environment department and
they're the ones that
recommended that we in this
We L. we each did the substitute
bill under their recommendations
and up and then to understand
the significance the
significance of that I work with
Rebecca Roose and I worked with
Judy Kelle who oversees the that
drinking water bureau and they
the
The they know this is in a this
is needed in rural communities.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative had at at I
I'm gonna sit and listen to the
rest of the discussion having
worked a lot on water funding
over the last year with our
agencies I am very concerned
about creating a set aside
without providing additional
funds because Lee are agencies
are really struggling just to
fund existing projects but I am
completely sympathetic to the
need to have a set aside for
mutual domestic so I want to
listen to the rest of the
discussion thank you.
Thank you thank you
Representative next on the list
we have Representative Harper.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Good morning street to.
So you representative senator
and Mrs Russell again thanks
for.
a giving us a good start to a
Friday morning.
So
The representative Stansbury
asked a lot of great questions
and I'm not to repeat her her
questions but I'm maybe just
assume out just a little bit.
I'm.
We just talking about where
these funds come from and how
they are
set aside right now.
so we have a severance taxes and
in New Mexico and severance
taxes refer to suffering natural
resources from the ground we do
that from public lands.
Those are owned by all of us
right the the people in New
Mexico on those lands when we
sever those natural resources we
get severance tax.
we have so much severance tax
year.
And the what's this R.
legislature's done for the last
several decades is we have
bonded every year against those
revenues.
And so we pledge those revenues
against bonds and that
essentially allows us to spend
more money than what is coming
in a given year because you can
borrow rights you're borrowing
you're taking more okay.
and.
The severance tax permanent fund
when we started.
the split was fifty percent of
the tax revenue from severance
taxes would go to bonding for
projects like this and the other
fifty percent would go into the
severance tax permanent fund.
I'm.
And and then as you go through
the years
we started cutting away more of
the money that was going to the
permanent fund and put more into
the bonding side.
Intel you got to the Richardson
era it was like ninety five
percent responded against and
five percent which is a fund.
And and and they would they
would just rip up that five
percent through something called
sponge bonding.
And.
I don't know why it's called
frontier bonding but essentially
all that means is you you bonded
instead and then you immediately
pay it back so it's we're
getting cash so you.
Like a it's an immediate bonding
and then paying it off actually
so the other way to get that
money and spend it.
and so that's how the history
right we've made a couple steps
in the right direction I know I
think it's fourteen percent goes
to the permanent fund to try to
keep it alive survivors relying
on Wall Street
to give a life.
but we can still spend most of
that source so some years or get
no money going to permit I.
So that that's the big picture
we zoom in a little bit more
where is all this bonding money
go.
So this is called seniors well.
I will go to that I will go that
far exceeds so where is all this
morning we go about forty five
percent of it is used for
schools our capital school
public.
Now what was the acronym
the public school capital outlay
story I covered the accident but
to the SUNY lawsuit the state is
now involved in deciding where
schools are built in when they
are built and that money comes
from the severance tax bonding.
That's about forty five percent.
And then the next biggest one is
water if we're talking about now
you have a nine percent.
goes to the state engineer for
water projects.
And then I think it's four five
percent goes to well yes
projects and other earmarked for
five percent goes to tribal
infrastructure projects.
And then what's left over goes
to the governor and legislators
for capital outlay.
So today we were filling out our
Capwell issues internet and it's
essentially the leftovers of
that.
Eighty seven eighty six percent
with these earmarks
Representative Harper point of
order or point of information
sheets are due by three PM do
not be late.
Thank you Mr.
Every minute you're late it's a
hundred thousand dollars
the chairman of the next couple
outlay allocation thank.
That's awesome thank you.
Chairman for that
So.
Now what's in the water nine
percent.
We have some your marks right
now.
and and I'm I'm trying to
remember I think there's a ten
percent right now that is used
for Education.
If I remember right.
and and chairman miss Russell
can you help me with are there
other ones right it's not just
that my percentage at your will.
I'm Mr Chairman representative
right now ten percent of the
money that comes into the water
project fund regardless of
severance tax bonds or water
trust fund gets sent over to the
office of the state engineer so
the water transport doesn't
administer that part so there's
a net eight point one percent of
the severance tax bond capacity
that the water trust board that
oversees for water projects with
in that every time they do
funding they have sort of a goal
set aside so up to ten percent
of the money would be used for
watershed management for
instance and at least fifty
percent for water storage so
there's some guidelines within
their bonding capacity.
Thank you chairman and Mrs
Russell and under those.
Those guidelines are those
statutory or those
are determined by the water
transport staff with input from
the governor.
Mr chairman Representative
Harper those are policy
guidelines that the water trust
board administers so there is no
input from anyone other than the
water trust board and the seven
agency review team that makes
the technical recommendations.
Chair representative senator I
miss Russell thank you for
helping me understand that I I
appreciate that.
okay so.
and maybe just the last thing
I'll mention just so people
understand
so all of us you know it's
capital outlay projects you know
we we fund projects every year
and they're supposed to be
shovel ready work work often
told by people ready to go but
they often take a couple years
two or three years and are
sometimes stragglers and takes
them for five years to get a
project on so there is no you
look at any of our have a would
distributions are backlogged
projects I think that total
number right now he added
everything is about a billion
dollars of backlog.
but the chair and senator of
Representative mistrustful I
believe the water trust board is
a pretty good job at keeping
their backlog to a minimum we
can providers
I want to say.
You know it's it's.
What but maybe last year do you
know what exactly the current
outstanding project backlog is
on on water projects.
Mr Chairman representative not
off the top of my head but I can
look that up and get back to you
in just a minute.
Thank you I appreciate that I
want to say last time I looked
it was like less than two
hundred million which is really
good that's you know roughly
three years worth of money but
yeah I.
When you have that I'd love
that.
Okay so so now to the bill
itself Representative Stansbury
ask amazing questions really
kind of got to the heart of of
what we're doing here I don't
think anyone.
disagrees with the motive and
the need the question is.
Do we do another
your mark another set aside
within a fund that we know there
are way more needs than there
are dollars.
And and that's a fair question
to ask.
and when I I guess the.
The question I would ask
chair Senator Representative.
We don't have the
engineer
in the room do we would have a
state engineer representative
from the engineer's office here.
What.
What is there in your
conversations with them of
course they understand the need
but is this is this something
whether kind of reluctantly
supporting or or are they.
Saying no thank you are they
saying this is a great idea.
You know I they were kind of
running up the flag pole I think
the engineers a little busy
right now with everything that's
going on in every single
committee so they were trying to
get it I don't think they got it
in time and I just you know the
bill gets heard new pushing to
get heard and you know you don't
pull it back for that when you
think it's got more time on its
own so I just affording straight
ahead Representative.
Yeah and and chairman and
representative I I completely
understand
The I just I would think you
know if.
My capital outlay allocation
this year you know I was simply
asked to dedicate ten percent of
that to something else I would
be now I know it's important
but.
No I really like to still have
the state over all of that
that comes in my direction so.
Well that I very much appreciate
the discussion option to just
talk a little bit about funding
sources in these your marks.
all of I was into that the rest
of the discussion thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative.
Thanks we'll go to
Representative Lujan.
For the next the committee
member I have a little one in my
tension right now yeah
absolutely I will come back to
you Representative Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative off.
The the first moments your
presentation were a profound
in terms of the size of the
various water.
Water systems you know what we
forget sometimes that you know
we think of a small town as you
know.
That's one of our Vegas are
grants with twelve a.
Six thousand people but it's
really folks living in clusters
of two hundred home three
hundred homes hundred home.
which is why with the most rural
state in the country.
Even the where the bears for
states that are larger than us
you know with those four states
people don't live all over
Alaska people going there like
on in ten percent of Alaska but
it was a very a very eye opening
the but I I have some similar
concerns and really appreciate
the gentleman from Santa
reminding us of
The card else we've done with
severance tax bonding and they
just seem like such fantastic
ideas I remember.
When we pass the percentages to
work alone as elective colon as
live in these older
neighborhoods they need so much
infrastructure.
But it's not and it's important
it has to happen but it's not
the most bang for the Buck you
know now it comes to water
that's not part of my
calculation million it's you
know do we rebuild the system
for ten thousand this is for two
hundred with of those sort of
people are entitled to water.
that's that's a must so anyway I
just want to remind the folks
there is a in statute this is
totally allowable
look on page two.
Money I know its or where is.
That their sub account that in
the statute there's sub accounts
are yelling I the water project
fund they consist of sub sub
accounts as the authority deems
necessary to carry out the
purposes of the funds and then
of course ten percent of all
water project funds should be
dedicated the state engineer two
percent of that or twenty
percent of that ten percent or
two percent of the funds.
Goes to the courts and so my
question is when folks do these
water litigations do they pay
court costs because if they do
that's two percent you know we
could fight back from the courts
and and then a fully from the
courts through through a
hospital to general fund
allocation.
But here's my question when you
allocate the ten percent
The walk you through our Mr
chairman of Representative just
the water trust fund and then
the water project fund.
Mr chair representative I'm
given deferred market on that
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative so the water
trust fund is a constitutionally
created fund that's managed by
the state investment council it
received forty million dollars
and then back in like two
thousand seven an additional
fifteen million dollars and the
state the statute requires that
a portion of that be distributed
annually to the water project
fund and that's the fund from
which the water trust board
recommends projects in the
finance authority funds projects
so of four million dollars comes
over again ten percent goes off
to the office of the state
engineer and then further to the
administrative offices of the
Courts so the water transports
working with recommendations for
three point six million dollars
annually unfortunately the
amount of its earnings is not
enough to
make up for that so there is
we've been eating into the
corporate so that fund for
several years so it's it's a
depleting Fund based on the way
in which the statutory
distributions work but that is
that's what the water trust fund
so the water project fund
receives for purposes of the
water projects eight point one
percent of the severance tax
bond capacity and three point
six million dollars from the
water trust fund and those are
those of the dollars that the
water transport is working with
annually in terms of its awards.
Thank you madam chair gently and
then the and and it talks about
approved water projects.
who makes the decision who
decides where this money goes.
Mr chairman I'm happy to take a
stab at that the water trust
board recommends to the
legislature annually a list of
projects from which the water
transport will ultimately then
of make recommendations to the
water transport so it's having
to the finance authority so it
starts with the water transport
a recommendation is made to the
legislature that Senate bill one
thirty seven of this year and
that then that bill once it's
approved if it's approved the
water trust board may make
recommendations from that list
of authorized projects over to
the finance authority the
finance authority ultimately
makes the grants and loans I see
thank you Mr chairman of
mistrust on then the
What intrepidity would use these
projects if if any do you know.
Mr Chairman representative The
New Mexico finance Authority
oversight committee received a
report from the water trust
board at its last meeting in the
interim so that I think happened
on November thirtieth this year
they received a list and they
endorsed that bill so it's
reviewed by the oversight The
New Mexico financed Authority
oversight committee and so the
bill that goes forward this year
Senate bill one thirty seven
isn't endorsed Bill by us that
oversight committee thank you
just a quick point in a the one
last comment or question the
I think the approach the
legislature as appropriate or
should that early.
Take over this process you know
we have four five agencies
legislative finance councils one
of our agencies but there's
nothing that prohibits us from
expanding of agencies
you know Senate bill one thirty
seven IST typed up we love it we
fall for it but we don't really
decide what goes in it
And then that this concept of
the governor getting thirty
three percent and a house and
the Senate the legislature's to
get a hundred percent of that in
my opinion
and determine what our larger
projects what are smaller
projects obviously incomes
consultation with the chief
executive of not just the chief
executive of.
Working all this is my
philosophy but my concern is
that the ten percent we want the
ten percent to be a floor at you
know at least ten percent
nothing would prohibit in this
bill more than ten percent but
would it be.
Would it be a ceiling my my fear
of of one of my concerns not
necessarily fair Mr Chairman
representative you think that
that there may be a pretty clear
court twenty percent of this
money's going to go to the small
projects but they say well only
ten percent of those small
projects.
you know you think it'll be a
ceiling or or do you think it'll
be like out of more you know
what I'm getting.
Mr chair representative
Yeah I can I can see what you're
getting at I I mean it's a it's
a I considered it a ceiling but
I know that that that they also
that the NMFA in the water
transport also gives money to
other small mutual domestic so
so you're right a kit you know I
I.
I trust this I trust the process
that they have in place if you
want to know the truth I think
they've been very very very
transparent the you know they
come to the MFA they present
these bills we take it to the
legislature so so it's in people
have gone through this process
if they can get through it you
know the they love it but I'll
tell you every mutual domestic
that I've had said we don't even
bother we we just can't do it we
just can't get they don't have
the time they don't have the
capacity a lot of them don't
have internet so you know I it's
it's it's a problem on very many
levels for them I got you not
all that I think that's the
problem we're trying to solve
and this may solve it by forcing
everyone's hand.
but it's really
There should be someone
You know we we all all hundreds
always need to kind of divide up
the the executive branch and and
weigh in on it this this is a
big.
Good section of of our
government that needs to be
waiting on a.
The board to reject this causes
and others of the bill we did
yesterday and things that nature
but I'm very interested in stop
what you're right we need to be
able to harness.
The political power of the
smaller communities
structure we or.
Or funding wise so that so that
they do are they are at the
table that these projects to get
done so I'm not sure if this is
the way to do it but I
appreciate your time determines
thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative Maestas
Next we'll go to Representative
Scott.
And I'll go over the next
Representative Lujan.
It is not going.
Thank you Mr chairman I was
trying to get my.
Technology up and running here.
Representative Herrera and miss
Russell and I guess these
questions would be.
For miss Russell with the awards
okay.
The size of various projects how
would presume because we're
bonding to generate this money
that these are all capital
projects that is were.
Roofing improving rather
infrastructure or to
infrastructure or something of
that nature that will have some
longevity.
Mr chairman of Representative
Scott that's correct these are
capital projects they are
infrastructure building or
capital equipment additions.
Mr Chairman representative miss
Russell are these projects would
be.
I don't know if you've heard the
term for sure right as to their
viability and I heard someone
earlier mentioned bang for the
Buck does that occur as a matter
retain.
Mr Chairman representative Scott
there is because of the ranking
process there is prioritization
one of the reasons the money
gets spent down very quickly is
because there's required
planning by the water trust
board so you can't really apply
for the funding without a plan
as to how that money is going to
be used we one of the
evaluation criteria is in fact.
Readiness how quickly the money
can go went and what the impact
of those dollars will be so
there is from the from the side
of the evaluators of.
A relative ranking as to impact
of donor reading this so that
the the buying power of the
dollar doesn't diminish that's
all considered as part of the
recommendations from the
evaluators over to the water
transport.
Okay yes Representative is
Russell.
Is our water trust board do they
provide.
A technical expertise and
assistance with the paperwork to
these small mutual domestics.
For help filling out the
applications.
Mr Chairman representative
no what what the water transport
has done is to change the way in
which the application process
works and rely very heavily on
the technical document that
planning document that's
required so while they don't
provide assistance in filling
out the application there is
there are annual
There are annual trainings for
you know how this have the cycle
works what you need to do but we
don't sit down one on one with
applicants we do some training
but not one on one technical
assistance and again the
application itself relies very
heavily on the technical
document because of the fact
most folks applying for the
application are separate from
the people that no no how
dollars are going to be spent
in.
What exactly is going to be
asked for.
Mr Chairman representative which
certainly saying.
Appropriate.
Given what's been.
Representative Representative as
Cherry limited resources.
For these folks sh two.
To get some assistance.
This application processes
beyond to their range to to
prosecute would you.
Agree with.
Mr Chairman representative
certainly do two years ago I put
two hundred thousand aside in my
capital outlay and for the
environment department to do to
go out and help small Mitchell's
figure out how to get through
the application process and and
you should know that bill Connor
New Mexico a rural water
association that's really what
they're set up to do they have
conferences every year where
people come together in the they
train them on that really on how
to manage waste water systems
and clean drinking water systems
I and they also help them should
teach them how to navigate
through this process if they
can't so yes that
you know I'm planning to do this
again we're ready to do this all
last last year then COVID hit us
and we couldn't do anything that
we I will I think you things are
going to open up this summer so
when it we've already arranged
with northern New Mexico college
to do that operators training so
that we can get our certified
operators us up to date and add
in the field and and also to do
training on of these grant
applications and have them go
through this I mean I can tell
you I will not capital outlay my
way out of small mutual domestic
water systems in in my area.
And and they are all good people
and they're willing that yes
they need help so that's what I
plan to do with Senator Hotmail
and and really the the a
delegation from the north in
helping our our our small pool
domestic systems learn how to
navigate these applications.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for that long.
I'm sure.
Some of the previous comments
with respect to concern about
creating another your mark with
senator mark.
but I do think these folks
operating the smaller systems to
serve some support from the
state of.
Really with respect to fill out
the paperwork and making sure
that the that the application is
appropriately presented will
cause thank you the fact is that
it will be in competition with.
Some folks are perhaps.
Better funded and and we're and
with more technical expertise
okay Mister chair
representative thank you for
your answers miss Russell thank
you that's all I have thank you
Representative let's let's go
back to Representative on one.
Thank you Mr chair and and thank
you for the Sanchez for well.
This is legislation
and this discussion and is just
really really
What a light of that information
and also some really good
problem solving I think
but I want to say that you I
appreciate I appreciate this
legislation because and your
doctor than usual Mexicans
Asians and and how they provide
the critical safety water to
rural communities
and water trust board and then
you just connected to pry but
they have to compete with larger
entities such as you know the
bigger cities and towns and
something we're talking about so
this this whole approach and
what you're doing with this
legislation and looking for some
some answers and how we get this
accomplished I I want to say
thank you for doing that this is
an this is really important to
the community and we know that
you know what to the mutual
domestics are more reliant on
state funding because they do
not have an attacking Authority
they they do not have a
recurring revenue source sure
one day.
I look forward to continuing
this conversation and how we
accomplish getting getting these
measures in place for the.
For these communities because
that that they're run by
volunteers and the need they
need the funding and we help
them answer thank you thank you
for bringing four I I really
support your ideas of how your
in your approach in trying to
solve this problem thank you
very much and.
That's all I have to say thank
you thank you Representative
that's good Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
gentle lady and I know each of
our districts are so different
in San Juan County we've got
forty six million dollars for
the capital outlay requests and
we team up this for legislators
and two senators and we're gonna
fund
eight million six hundred
thousand and in state law the
New in one particular project in
my district is irrigation ditch
that needs some help and it's
you know it it it's a water
project and I guess so that we
all have water projects but in
your area you've just you've got
a a ton of fun Mitchell domestic
so that's that's probably where
you spend most of your capital
outlay and in wisely so
I'm I'm too concerned Mr
chairman and gentle lady of the
year March of we very familiar
was severance tax permanent fund
and it's heavily heavily
Utilized and not much revenue
growth a are not not much inflow
into the into the fund so I
understand what you're trying to
do and
they would just never have
enough capital outlay to handle
all the needs in our in our
respective districts and this
year scandalized that you know
there's only forty six million
dollars request so the you know
with we we I think we need to
consider general fund dollars
for these special needs
and the thank you thank you Mr
chairman thank you gentle lady.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative.
Representative role metal.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative and Senator for
bringing this bill forward I
just wanted to clarify a few
things because I had a very
similar bill in my first term Mr
chair representative regarding a
second so this for me is very
parallel to something we've done
in particular with when we're
talking about a rural
communities that are deeply
affected by the powers that be
and how the funds get
distributed when it's such an
important critical access point
and the funds are limited as to
why the water transport allowing
mutual domestics to apply having
to compete with the larger
entities cities and towns
becomes quite dicey without that
protection which is what I
believe you're seeking which is
something that we did and the
governor signs just two years
ago for a secular as
so Mister chair representative I
did just want to clarify about
how the set aside would give
greater flexibility to having an
appropriate process it to to be
able to provide those resources
and then they wouldn't have to
compete Mr chair
representative and senator and.
It we're so reliant on state
funding without that taxing
authority they don't have
recurring revenue Mr chair
representative and senator and
members of the committee and so
therefore these racial domestics
are run by volunteers and so if
that funding process isn't
accessible and it isn't clear
cut as far as how the law
precedes you know everyone still
grasping for the same part of
funds without that set aside and
so hearing the debate and
knowing that we've we've we do
do this and it is important and
in particularly for communities
that don't have that those
access points I feel like we
just need to
You know be clear about why this
is is critical now and of course
for the protection of water and
for everything stated I support
your effort and the bill and
again it's not unlike things
that we've done in the past I
don't know what the conversation
is so controversial at this
point madam chair our Mr chair
representative in senators so I
just I feel like it's important
to stand up for the for our
mutual domestics in the process
because it is very very
challenging and this helps helps
that so thank you Mr chair for
the time and thank you
Representative and senator for
bringing this forward.
Thank you Representative I still
see a lot of hands up I'm not
sure if you all want to speak a
second time or if you forgot to
take your hand down but if you
want to speak again just wave at
me.
Okay nobody's jumping out of
their seat so great well thank
you thank you for fantastic
conversation committee
Representative I'm gonna I'm
gonna share a brief little story
so I live in the north valley
Albuquerque you know we're
connected to the what we call
city water right the.
The water authority
I I live on close to an acre of
land and my house sits on the
corner of the two streets where
I live and then there's sort of
this field
I decided for a few years ago to
to pull off plant the budget
trees of the field and when I'm
an old man I can go out there
and hang out with the orchard.
the problem is water is is
limited right and so I either
have to water using my city
water which can get expensive.
although there is a lateral that
comes in from the from from the
ditch from the a second line is
the the the the peers lateral
and my neighbors here organized
a couple years ago and they kind
of revived it and so now we all
get water rights right so every
summer I get to water my field
for like forty five minutes
every other week so clearly not
enough water to to maintain a
healthy orchard and so I have to
tap into a sea water and you
know rate city water bills up
but I I I tell that story
because you know living here in
Albuquerque downtown Albuquerque
you know often times and it's
been said you know in debate on
the floor in the campaign trail
that sometimes folks in the city
or not really connected to
what's happening out in rural
communities and you know I think
twenty extent that that could be
true and it's true both ways you
know there's a lot of issues we
have here in the city that you
all may not necessarily be privy
to.
Regardless I do have to say that
working with you for the last
two years on this issue has been
eye opening and I remember when
you came up to me you know
whenever that was and said Hey
we've got an issue with mutual
domestics you know it's hard to
access the money and I said well
there's a set aside from the
STBs what you mean it's hard to
access the money that you broke
down how cumbersome and
complicated the system can be
and then you have these
associations or organizations
being run by a group of
volunteer neighbors not unlike
my neighbors here right nobody
here is a water expert nobody
hears a engineer you know we're
just neighbors and we've got
different professions and we're
just trying to keep the culture
in the tradition of this old
historic neighborhood alive we
don't know or don't have the
time but we're trying our best
and and I suspect you know your
communities have a lot of that
tradition of a lot of that
knowledge in place for
generations but when it comes to
dealing with the government when
it comes to dealing with these
processes that are in statute it
could be a little bit
overbearing you could be a
little bit complicated for them
so
I remember your original bill.
Was to create another year mark.
Within those three earmarks and
I looked at the bill and I said
all my goodness you're gonna
have some problems why because
as Representative Harper of very
eloquently stated earlier right
we have this fund that is you
know it's it's it's not as
healthy as it should be because
we've tapped into it in many
different ways.
so the idea of of of bringing in
another year mark I told you at
the time was probably not gonna
happen
for many reasons including the
fact that here we are plugging
you know making another hopeful
in our whole
within within that funding
source so.
Representative that if you
remember what I did at the time
and I said you know we really
should probably take this to the
intro.
And you probably need talk to
stakeholders.
And you really need to talk to
the folks who administer these
funds because they're the money
people write these are the
people tell us you know that
they're the people who put
together the FIR is and
oftentimes those FY are
sometimes will scare us from
moving into action right and so
I said you gotta get in with
these folks to make sure that
what you want to do can be
accomplished in a way that
you know it in in a way that
preserves the health of the
fund.
You did just that you went and
met with folks LESC over the
course of the summer and you
came up with this concept
together with the LFC.
and I'm not gonna claim any
credit because I was in there
when you guys have that idea but
I was on the text messages and
you know so click okay Milou
credit if I may.
Representative
but this is really also idea.
And the idea is.
Take a little set aside what's
already been earmarked.
Right take a small little piece
and ensure that he gets down.
To those local communities that
really needed in that have a
hard time accessing it.
The other piece I I we ask you
bring together was was the the
NMFA ms Russell right to make
sure that these folks are on
board to because they're the
ones that are going to be in the
middle of this should happen and
you did.
I think that when it comes to.
Capital outlay
and and I agree with with the
Representative Maestas a hundred
percent I mean the way this
whole process works this is so
weird and convoluted in the
third a third a third and
whatever else is just you know
it's out of the nineteen
thirties we've got to change
that mentality and and and I
think that that's probably
something that will happen
sooner rather than later but you
know giving the world given the
world as it is here we are the
fact is those communities in
your neck of the woods in the
neck of the woods of many of you
have a hard time accessing these
critical funds and I believe
that through this bill you very
responsibly and very
thoughtfully create a way for
these communities to access the
funding now you know I've I've
heard I've heard a lot of great
debate from the members you know
I understand that you know is
this bill moves forward there
might be tweaks that you need to
make and I would encourage you
to work with those members to
make sure that those tweaks are
made so that is many people are
at a are at ease as possible
right because this is you know
if if if you if this is your
funding source and now ten
percent has to go to something
different it's gonna scare you a
little bit although not that
different I mean we're still
dealing with water issues here
act but I could see where that
could potentially scare some
people so I would encourage you
to keep working with those folks
to make sure that those changes
happen over the course of the
next few weeks.
but I have to say I mean this is
really it's been a joy seeing
this go from.
Idea number one.
To idea number seven hundred
forty two.
and you just diligently staying
on it I mean talk about
representing your district you
you've done a wonderful job in
in many areas but specifically
on this area so I thank you for
bringing this bill forward and I
appreciate your thoughtfulness
and you diligence and your
discipline to stay with that
so with that
I don't see any more hands up so
what is the wheel with the will
of the committee.
Mr Chandler
Mr chair I move a do pass on.
Committee substitute.
for House Bill to forty one.
So.
Okay I have a due pass motion by
by your sandaler traveler and a
second by Representative Lujan I
think it was.
Yes all right Elaine please call
the roll.
Representative Cadena.
Speaker egolf.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lujan.
Yes.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative dot.
Representative Stansbury.
Yes.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative Cadena.
Send speaker Egolf.
By church member.
Yes.
Chairman Martinez yes sorry that
was my kid is screaming
Representative said yes yes.
In the affirmative to it in a
negative.
Okay by a vote of nine to two
percent but I do have a due pass
graduation this Mr chair I'd
like to thank you that's
basically for all your help in
in help me walk through this
kind of difficult.
Abert labyrinth and I especially
would like to thank the
committee thank you all thank
you thank you Representative.
Members let's move on to
Representative Anderson there
you are good to see like I don't
see you but good Representative
Anderson thank you Mr chairman
it's always good to be here.
Sir we are doing your house bill
one seventy four are you ready
to take it on.
Yes Mr chairman I am of okay
good.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman of house bill one
seventy four is a three page
bill that I presented to this
committee two years ago as house
bill one forty one.
It is identical
and of two years ago when we of
the New Mexico legislature
passed a massive tax reform that
included a number of different.
tax increases tax decreases tax
changes for some reason of this
particular exemption was.
Not included overlooked whatever
it was and I bring it back
because it is.
A very simple and
straightforward doubling of New
Mexicos low income tax exemption
for individuals sixty five years
of age or older or who are blind
and of course that is the the
last time thirty four years ago
that this exemption was our.
Sittard but by the legislature
so it's been thirty four years
set at the nineteen eighty seven
the income thresholds so
doubling of the.
Tax exemption is straightforward
you'll see that in the three
page bill of the schedules
showing of the double.
And the I think somewhere in
here I saw fiscal impact suggest
a very modest
the impact to the general fund.
A modest by my standards I'm on
the Appropriations Committee
where we just passed a seven
point three nine billion dollar.
General appropriations act of so
revenue forecaster showing the
state with sufficient revenues
rolling into next year courses
would be here right right
recurring tax expenditure.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
This tax exemption helps New
Mexicans who need the help the
most these are New Mexicans who
live on low and fixed incomes
and as we as we address the the
economic disarray in the New
Mexico economy that comes from
this pandemic.
Of their there.
There are daily pressures of of
putting food and shelter
first and foremost.
And other necessities in life
they live on low incomes and we
have we have excluded them we
have not include them forget
excluded we have not included
them in in addressing of
modernizing the New Mexico Taxco
so of New Mexico eight forty
seven ten per capita income in
the I I I throw that statistic
simply to say there are New
Mexicans who will benefit from
this tax exemption and yes it
has minor impact in totality but
for those who get this tax
exemption it means a great deal
in their annual disposable
income.
So Mister chairman of.
I think you're it is
straightforward enough of yet
yet
want to I I recognize sure that
that you and other server are
busy on their their quest to
complete two capital outlay
forms do it three o'clock so I
would be very pleased to get my
do pass and go back to working
on my capital out.
Mr Chairman I believe that
concludes my presentation and I
stand for questions
Representative Anderson I don't
know if you can see us but we
were just cracking up laughing.
When you said that we need to go
at all angle finisher capital
outlay forms which is a true
story and it is a very smart way
to get your bill to pass just
get it out of the way you all
can go back to work and capital
outlay.
Representative Anderson do you
have anybody any experts in the
audience you want me to let in.
Mr Chairman I do not have any
experts because I believe this
bill is very straightforward
thank you.
Very good representative I'm
gonna go to the audience.
Is there a member of the
audience in support of a house
bill one seventy four raise your
hand.
For
anyone in opposition to this
bill.
J. C. one hand up and I'm not
sure if it's for or against so
all call on you and then you
tell us where you stand on the
bill Carl Kaiser.
Welcome car.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Members of the committee I'm a
senior that lives in Albuquerque
New I am put in opposed to
increasing the over sixty five
exemptions state income tax
I understand that the bill
provides relief Vinings
exemption but a better approach
is a it is targeted refundable
tax credits similar to the
lowincome conference a tax
credit that offers up extra
extensions for the same age
group and out such a credit
would offset the payment of of
local and state taxes are
generally it's it's some less
good tax policy to exempt income
based on either status or source
and exemptions reduce the
taxation generally shift the tax
burden to other revenue sources
such as G. R. T. or oil and gas
such sources are volatile and
aggressive.
proponents of exemption
legislation to include social
security and military retirement
from PID quite additionally
claim that the tax savings would
be step by individuals and boost
the local economy frankly
similar to other Task tax cuts
the promises are large and the
results are small I would urge
the committee to vote no on H.
B. one seventy four and use
elector as a better approach to
help those in greatest need
thank you.
Thank you for being here.
I don't see any more public
comment so I will go to the
committee members of the
committee.
Representative Harper.
Thank you chairman I'll be very
brief
Representative Anderson it's
great to hear voice thanks for
in front of the tax committee we
are.
R. enjoy your you're a great
presentation and and your
dedication on this I do recall
we brought this to us two years
ago
And the.
Yes things.
Looking at the last two years
they have improved much.
You know as this is a the action
remains the special remain
static.
less and less people are able to
take advantage of it celebrities
costs last.
Thank you know that I'm a equal
opportunity.
No credit deduction exemption
hater.
but there are there are many
that are based defining which
are important.
And then there are some I just
ordered for.
Social benefits if that is our
in our also point to consider
and I think the good question
that we need to.
consider is as this production
in its current form continues to
lose efficacy.
Is this something that we should
remove from the code or is this
something that we need to change
to approve its efficacy again.
So as usual Representative
Anderson you know we're going to
reject we kindly table this
because as a fiscal impact.
but it will be something that we
we all talk about it strongly
consider when we put our our tax
package together
missing mortgage but I guess one
of a a question I'd love to hear
any comments you might have.
Thank you Representative up.
I think my response is this that
this is.
Tax exemption that has perhaps
declining utilization therefore
impact on the on the state
general fund what let us not
forget that there are
individuals to take advantage of
this very exemption they live on
the slowed fixed incomes they
are not they don't have
an adjusted gross income quite
frankly under the current code
you you think will nobody is
living on of an amount that
small know Google was living on
a map that small in yet when
you're in a state that's forty
seven ten per capita income and
quite frankly if the work for
one county in the state I
believe we would be fifty.
And and that is a very small
County.
so I believe that we we we just
are yes Sir.
Our state.
Want to address more often than
every thirty four years an
exemption that provides tax
relief for individuals senior
older Americans and those who
are blind I two years ago asked
will why you're why the blind
did not others the answer is I'm
not trying to change the scope
of this wall I'm simply pointing
out that we are thirty four
years past taking a look at this
and during this pandemic the
probe the the economic pressure
is the greatest it's been in a
long time on New Mexico families
and
I think it's time and I I think
the impact to slow and I think
the good ideas to do away are
simply a delay in reality and so
let's pass this bill and then
let's look at the good ideas
relative to the F. F. F. I get
help me out with that one.
Efficacy of this particular tax
exemption but I believe while we
do that we should we should look
at doubling this exemption thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you chairman.
Thank you Representative Harper
anyone else committee.
Very well Representative
Anderson thanks to bring the
bill forward and thanks for your
diligence as well on this I know
you've been working hard on this
issue as well.
It in your view
Would you know as as you know
that there are deals out there
that would increase Lichter the
lowincome comprehensive tax
rebate which should
You know include the same folks
are you trying to support to
your bill have you given thought
to that in and how that might
achieve the goals that you're
trying to achieve.
Mr chairman of you and this
committee have a much broader of
the view of New Mexicos tax
policy going forward
I have I know I have not to be
specific in answering your
question Sir about elector but.
I think this I think that we
don't know what is going to pass
and fail and yet we do know that
there are a group of New
Mexicans and there has to be
quite a few of them because the
exemptions not that great.
That are taking advantage of
this and I believe while we look
at other forms of tax relief
to low income New Mexicans in
this case sixty five and older
implied I believe that we should
not hesitate to simply say
what's deliver some tax relief
to those who use this exemption
I believe that would be my
response.
Thank you Representative
Anderson you know I think I
don't think we disagree on the
policy I I think that we.
we do need to ensure that we
provide.
Tax fairness in that we provide
tax relief particularly for to
those who you know and in this
case you know folks who have
worked all their lives and folks
who are living on a fixed income
you know folks who you know
you're right often times these
populations are are forgotten in
these broader discussions about
tax reform so I certainly
appreciate the sentiment and I
don't think you'll find any.
Any this agreement from for many
of our committee members on the
need to figure out away to
support comment on their
different ideas out there when I
mention Lichter you know there's
there's also been an idea
floated around for a couple
years to exempt
social security benefits you
know there's there's there's a
few different ways you know to
to do this.
you know we we do want to be
targeted we do want to do it in
a way that enhances our tax code
and doesn't just sort of.
But with the problem that we've
had for such a long time
but I certainly appreciate the
sentiment and I appreciate your
work on this
as was mentioned earlier due to
the fiscal impact we will do a
temperate table today
we are working over the next
really few hours to to figure
out you know what we have
capacity for and and what makes
sense and so we'll we'll keep
you posted in in the coming
hours in the coming days
and will we'll leave it at that
by your Chandler.
Mr chair thank you in and thank
you Representative Anderson for
this bill I move a gentle
temporary table Mr chair.
We have a tabling motion I'm
gonna have to revisit Roberts
rules of order to provide the
the temporary table section of a
parliamentary procedure.
But maybe will adopt our own at
least for these types of things
is there any opposition to the
motion.
Okay seeing none Elaine please
show all work committee members
present as boarding.
In the affirmative
Representative Anderson thank
you for being with us this
morning it's great to hear your
voice and I look forward to
hopefully see you soon and
shaking your hand.
Thank you Mr chairman and I I.
Wish you the very best in your
deliberations going forward and
I am confident that you're going
to be able to incorporate
of.
Help where it is needed the most
and I hope is we we just ideas
float around the committee will
not lose sight of the idea of
maybe while we're sorting it out
in the time ahead of future
sessions that we should address
this.
On a timely basis and not make
this thirty six years Mr
Chairman thank you very much and
good luck with your capital
outlay.
Good luck to us all
representatives thank you.
Let's go to house bill two
seventy one Representative
Harper and I don't know if you
co sponsors here I'll look for
her in the attendee list.
Thank you chairman and if I get
us that the jury will those from
an NGO team brought in.
Jerry well this coming right up.
Seven or eight or.
C. chair Rubio here what.
She shows up we'll keep our eyes
open
it take it away Representative
thank you chairman and there's a
committee are this is a
technical fix bill that really
does not change current
practice.
well what.
Maybe two minutes of background
Z..
So if you will of transportation
across
the that's the the greater forty
eight states and those
businesses that are involved in
transportation you can imagine
that what what's a different
states have different tax rules
and and keeping track when you
have a semi going through ten
states it was challenging and so
what happened was.
In two thousand.
I federal legislation
was passed and signed into law.
In the unified carrier
registration.
And it
replaced the single state
registration act maybe I a
simple unified way to collect
fees just made it simple or for
those businesses in New Mexico
joined forty other states we
came you know forty one states
altogether.
adopting
what was needed to be a part of
this.
Yes I carrier registration act
we see our that happened in two
thousand six it was house bill
four nineteen.
but what was neglected at that
time was to specify where the
revenue goals.
our.
Passed it had gone to the motor
transportation to provide and
that's where currently does now.
all we're doing is making it
clear in statute that that's
where it's supposed to go so
this doesn't change current
practice it's the way it's been
it really is a technical sex
just to
How to fly the current practice
that these funds which are
roughly about three million
dollars a year.
I go to the more transportation
fee I and with that all the.
Mr chair if it's appropriate I
turned over to Mr Valdez for any
comments you may have.
Mr about this welcome please go
ahead Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you and I want
to especially thank
Representative Harper and
chairwoman Rubio and helping
other department transportation
fixes technical issue that we
have with these funds and so as
a Representative Harper talked
about this is just a technical
fix to this natural language to
ensure that these please
continue to go to the right
place that we don't have any
statutory little dilemma in
regards to the distribution of
these keys to the highway.
Hi we are programs that they are
currently being allocated for so
thank you and I'm I'm here to
answer any technical questions
that may come up from the
committee thank you Mr chair
right thank you for being here.
There's about three hundred and
seventy two people in the
audience waiting to speak on
this bill so we're.
Anyone in the audience is a
support or in opposition of two
seventy one raise your hand.
How do you get I don't think any
of you are here for this one.
No it's it's no disrespect to
the Sanchez it's an exciting
bill
just did did they get a public
safety I think.
Members of the committee.
All right what is will the
committee buster Taylor.
I would think that motion by
you're muted the whole time vice
chair.
Eight thank you Mr chair on
muted now I would like to move
it do passive house bill two
seventy one.
All right we've got a new as
motion is our second ticket
Representative Strickler is got
a second their opposition to the
motion.
Seeing none Elaine please show
everyone present as voting in
the affirmative.
Thank you.
Residents are being here.
So much chair.
All right members will now move
on to House Bill.
to ninety one rolling over so
we're gonna go to House Bill.
And that is representative
Sarinana.
Good morning Representative
Sarinana how are you good
morning Mr chairman and doing
well how bout.
All right thanks for being here
I take taken away and you have
any experts to allow in I do
Abbas Akhil.
Welcome Mr accueil.
Thank you Mr it's an honor to be
here.
Take it away I thank you Mr
chairman representative Debbie
seventy on I'm present House
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee sub for
House Bill to sixty two energy
storage system income tax.
This bill aims to put energy
storage behind the meter on the
customer side the definition of
energy storage system means our
determination is back a battery
used to store energy star
electrical energy for use or to
displace energy at a later time.
the bill itself allows for forty
percent of the total cost to
purchase and install an energy
storage system with up to a
maximum credit of five thousand
dollars whichever is lower the
bill ask for a million dollars
in storage energy storage system
income tax credits for fiscal
year over two year period.
By the end of two years
hopefully there will be two
hundred homes that have energy
storage.
Our system.
From the building.
Credit.
Installed are used with a new or
existing PED system or installed
as a free standing system.
As a maximum of two hours of
storage capacity the system must
be certified by EMNRD.
The total amount of credit
available each year is capped at
one million dollars a month
number of your specified would
be two years prior to January
first twenty twenty four.
The issue tax credit maybe
carried forward for up to five
consecutive years the taxpayer
may claim a tax credit in the
year that the system was
installed for the following
year.
taxpayers fired filing
separately or are have about
half of the tax credit one tax
credit address.
EMNRD must adopt rules for the
certification requirements and
application process in EMNRD
will create a publicly available
website that taxpayers can use
report specific data and there's
five different fields for the
data that requested
the taxpayer will pay a fee of a
hundred dollars to EMNRD.
And EMNRD will give the taxpayer
identification number to be used
on the taxation and revenue
department application and
tracking of the tax credits and
reports will be by TRD yes.
Really looks at value of the
energy storage system how
important is it during peak
energy usage times how important
is it is an energy storage
system during rolling blackouts
or brownouts and how important
is energy storage system during
an arctic freeze with this bill
we're trying to make to get more
New Mexicans to see the value
and importance of energy storage
and with that Mr chairman I'd
like to defer to my expert
witness Abbas Akhil additional
comments yes thank you
Representative Sarinana welcome
Mr kill.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members I want to
thank first of all
Representative Cadena and
Senator B. B. Stewart for
sponsoring this bill and ready
the representative has done such
a good job describing this bill
I'm you know this much I could
at this point out that in twenty
nineteen of course
Representative Stansbury passed
H. B. two three three which was
the great modernization bill so
that we have a roadmap achieved
a hundred percent covered
vehicles of the Energy
transitioned Act
this bill really introduces one
of the technologies that I think
we need to modernize the grid
as a sign and I just expand
seeks to provide a tax
incentive.
A to a local listing strong back
to stories in the poll I would
only add I mean without going
into a lot of technical detail
which I did in the previous
committee I would point out that
the sixty years of electric
grade in Texas one side of the
need for this type of technology
as the representative just
stated we have real experiences
documented from oracle and as a
Texas way able to cope with the
disaster because the act energy
stories like this in their homes
so let's keep that in mind when
we think about orders
communities and remote
communities who will leave this
type of storage option if things
go south and they lose their
electricity you have a natural
disaster or freeze just being
like we did in Texas so that Mr
chair and committee members I
stand for questions.
Thank you for being here Sir
good to see you again.
Next we're going to go to the
audience if you are in support
of house bill.
Two sixty two please raise your
hand.
Okay we have a few a few hands
in support of house bill two
sixty two I'm gonna go first to
jam.
I'm sorry I mispronounce a name
Jim does Jordan's.
They are on you did a great job
thank you very much Mr chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Jim day try to and I'm
executive director of the re
renewable energy industry
association of New Mexico we're
known as ria and we're a group
of
mainly local solar companies
we've been around since two
thousand and four.
There's lots of reasons to
support this bill but really I
think it all comes down to that
the ability to store energy and
use it at a later date is really
a significant and it's a kind of
compare to being able to store
data on my hard drive on a
computer so that you can use
that at a later date but I'm
just going to dial into one of
the reasons why this is very
important there's about thirty
thousand rooftop solar systems
connected to the grid in New
Mexico almost all of them do not
have energy storage to them so
that means during the middle of
the day.
Right about now on a sunny day
which it is
they're basically producing more
energy than day that is being
used at that location and so
that energy goes back to the
grid we call that back feeding
and you know that's great but
more more we want to be able to
keep the energy at the location
where it's being produced but
the other thing about that is is
because of the back feeding when
the grid goes down those solar
systems are required by code to
shut down and so what that means
is in a grid outage they do are
now producing energy and so we
do have behind the meter storage
on a system like that we'll be
able to have energy produced
when the grid is down and I
think what happened last week in
Texas clearly illustrates why
something like that is needed so
basically by having this tax
of credit would incentivize
this type of of usage and would
help to grow the storage
industry New Mexico all help to
provide more jobs and
And that would I think the very
important so thank you very much
for all your time and we hope
that the committee will support
this great bills.
Thank you for being here we
appreciate it before we go on I
I do need to remind you all to
try to stick to the minute
thirty second public comment
rule the timers not really
working so just kind of keep
tabs of yourself otherwise we'll
have to interrupt you next on
the list is all there is a time
or okay so you can see the timer
now when you.
When you make your comments.
I see no I'm sorry FEMA thematic
crease Christodoulou can you
correct me please.
Sure you got it absolutely
correct hi to I'm two for two
today all right absolutely share
committee members my name that
the increased to do Lujan and I
am in full support of HB to
sixty two on the political chair
for the Adelante progressive
caucus and we see this as a way
to encourage people to
address climate change and it
incentivizes stability for the
grid because we all know we've
been told over and over again
that wind and solar needs
storage and this is a way for
the people to find it and this
is a way to make sure everybody
understands also that
electricity is clean we need
electric I everything.
Please support this bill it is a
carrot rather than a stick and
let's not wait for that arctic.
Solar that arctic cold to hit us
again.
So do support H. B. two sixty
two thank you very much thank
you.
Appreciated next we have my in
Beirut in.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Mina burden and I am
representing vote solar today
organization dedicated to
increasing access to the clean
energy transfer session I am
also tribal number of Santa
Domingo peublo in just twenty
six years I can really see
substantial changes in our New
Mexican climb it on going
drought extreme weather event.
And risk making very for myself
and our youth about what is yet
to come climate change continues
to rebuild the pressing need for
grid resiliency and behind the
meter energy storage will ensure
greater grid reliability in
survivor survivability moreover
New Mexico needs to commit to
the energy transition on all
fronts not just thinking we are
checking the box with the ETA
they're often misled that we can
rely and utility scale
transformation for the clean
energy transition but that is
not the case we also need
distributed energy resources
Texas is a clear indication of
the susceptibility of the great
to risk and we need solutions on
both the transmission and
distribution level it is better
to be prescriptive than reactive
especially if risks are to be to
the detriment of New Mexicans
and compounds pre existing
circumstances for all these
reasons I stand in support of HB
to sixty to committee substitute
for customer and grid benefits
thank you for your time today
thank you for being with us the
time.
Next we have Carlos lu settle.
Good morning.
Good morning chairman Martinez
members of the committee Carlos
to settle with the.
public service public service
company New Mexico and we're
support of House Bill to sixty
six to sixty two on
because it does you know it does
give customers an option
especially are on rooftop solar
customers to you know store this
energy within these
energy storage
This all these plus they can
also you know in case they can
use as backup during on during
the out any outage conditions
even though PNM does try to
mitigate as many outages as
possible or preventing as many
hours as possible but this is an
option for them also the part of
the bill we also do like is that
it can be used as a shared
resource reviews on energy
storage systems can be shared
with with the utilities that you
know save there's
You know energy that needs to be
made endorsements and start out
there that we can utilize you
know we can partner with our
customers on these on some kind
of energy storage program so for
these reasons we can support the
bill thank you.
Thank you for being with us
today.
Next is going to this land
Connolly good morning bill in.
Hi my name's don Connolly and I
work for affordable solar member
of a ria.
And we stand in support of HB
two sixty two.
We feel that this is a another
carrot similar to the solar tax
credit and it's going to expand.
In this case energy storage
which will be a job creator
while also providing resiliency
to New Mexicans we feel that
solar it has matured and is
continuing to mature but energy
storage is just getting started
other states that have.
There are providing benefits tax
credits to their constituents
are really moving with storage
and New Mexico is just getting
started this would jumpstart the
industry for us so we urge you
to support this bill.
Thank you for being with us.
Next Lewis Carroll welcome
Louise.
Thank you very much.
Good morning chair and members
of the committee my name is
please get out of the
provided a political organizer
with this year the program that
chapter representing more than
thirty five thousand meant
members across the whole state
of New Mexico and we strongly
support HB to succeed with thank
the sponsor for bringing this
forward there are over twenty
five thousand distributed energy
resource solar systems installed
in New Mexico and almost all of
these are installed without
energy storage as a result when
a solar system generates more
energy is being consumed the
excess energy sent back to the
great I'm adding storage would
enable the the capture of that
energy so that it can be used at
a future.
This ability is just you know
it's it's great to do.
We have seen what unfortunately
happened to our neighbors next
door in Texas New Mexico can be
a leader in solar energy and
storage some urging you to vote
yes on this bill today thank you
very much for your time.
Thank you for your time Sir we
appreciate you.
Next we go to John and John
please give us your last name
when you speak thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
John.
Executive vice.
John we lost.
Mr Chairman there is back yes
Sir my apologies thank you my
name is John Garcia executive
vice president home builders
association of central New
Mexico representing
approximately seven hundred
members in the central part of
New Mexico and we stand in
support of the bill thank you.
Thank you for being with us
John.
Steffi wise bird good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members I'm here
representing three fifty New
Mexico today and we stand in
strong support of this bill
everyone has mentioned Texas but
also last summer in California
when they had rolling black outs
there was a community that had
integrated storage and solar and
if they have been allowed to
supplement the electricity grid
at that point they could have
really helped a lot so there's
lots of examples where storage
can helps move the curve and
also contribute to our energy
independence through electricity
so thank you very much.
Thank you for being with us it
G. anyone answers hold anyone
else's report of house bill.
Two seventy.
Six to sixty two the two.
All right anyone opposition to
house bill two six two.
Very well that was quite a list
of of support for your bill
representatives hang on a very
diverse crowd it's always nice
to see that.
Let's go to members of the
committee.
Representative Harper.
Chairman
Representative and
Representative she'll it's great
to see you I was wondering if
you would be sure I'm I'm glad
you came thank you
now we we are we have a good
discussion around this a similar
topic
while you're here and it was fun
to talk to North I've done some
of the actual chemical work in
my day and no battery science
pretty well not as well as a you
making a career out of a this
kind of work
but they were they were really
fun discussions the last.
So.
I have a couple technical
questions I just like to ask you
your thoughts on just looking at
the bill I want to first.
Menu boasts chairman and
representatives are that you
have a reporting requirement.
and a sunset
those are our best practices we
try to make sure these bills and
in the committee so I'm really
pleased to see those.
So.
The what kind of technical
questions I have.
it looks like.
The Tesla power wall is kind of
the the number one Energy
commercial storage system right
now and it costs but looks like
about twelve thousand dollars in
total to have one of these
installed.
Mr chair and representative is
that is that correct.
Mr chair representative kind of
proper.
I think you're right but it
actually has to come down the
tribe's well it's more in the
range of products and I would be
ten thousand depending on
options part.
Okay
chairman and and representative
thank you
yeah the the data we have.
says that the store system is
seventy five thousand.
Need another thousand dollars
for the controller and another
three hundred.
I'm sorry thirty five hundred
for installation coming to about
twelve thousand is that not
correct.
Mr Chairman are you I think in
process is that the states
Representative yeah Los.
In fact the FIR blade of the
bill that house reviewing last
night but drive over the pin
number on it Senator house bill.
And that is going around that
these systems cost growth and on
the streets not quite the case.
Right so.
All right
yeah chairman and representative
thank you for for that and I I
haven't priced one my myself
although I've I've thought about
would be nice to have you know
some storage for temporary power
outages.
So so Jennifer allowing for
forty percent.
Credit.
Of the cost of the equipment and
installation.
one mass is roughly.
Two hundred maybe three hundred
people would be able to take
advantage of this
that was the one million dollar
credit cap which I'm also that
you have a credit cap.
What did you give I guess my
question is did you order to why
not thirty percent or twenty
percent so that more people
could take advantage of this or
are we just expecting that.
As this starts the next couple
years there's really only gonna
be demand for two hundred three
hundred homes.
Mr chair that actually that's a
very good question in fact the
FIR does note that the black
black be lesser than you
expected as an update and which
is why they got that by a C.
suite seven hundred fifty
thousand in the first year
that's the lighting because we
have really not trying to give a
credit to the rich who this you
want to that sense your
But what PED trying to do just
introduce a technology choice
benefits and as user new
technology is already there is
evidence you and those people
can afford it there's a
hesitancy to apply
Representative not sure in a
confident about its performance
more games and this is really
what you're trying to
incentivize just short of that
you as a representative in a
state is not so much to give an
incentive to the rich to buy but
to show the value of what energy
storage in the whole I do just
as you said if you had a outage
this week at your local more
than two hours in fact are one
to tell you more than two hours.
Thank you.
Thank you chairman and
representatives
Yeah that that that's helpful
under help me understand how you
came to to this number and and
such
I I understand that you're
you're not trying to give a tax
credit to the rich
But the reality is it'll it'll
probably just those who have
this kind of revenue and have
this kind of.
The tax liability that will
benefit
so I understand not your
attention but that's probably
what will be at least this first
couple years
but that said maybe just one
more.
A nerdy COVID
so
of course I've been very
interested in energy storage to
and and really the battery you
know sense Volta you know
invented it
has seen lots of improvements in
materials and inefficiencies and
and yes was an incredible job
just squeezing every drop of
efficiency out of batteries and
making them that much better.
But batteries are still just a
really bad way to store energy
and we really need a Eureka
moment in energy storage a new a
new way to do it as a right now
still the best way
that I've seen to store energy
from solar or wind.
Is to take a pump and take a.
A bunch of water and while the
wind is blowing Law Center
shining humps that water up hill
into a reservoir up till.
And then when the sun goes down
when it stops flowing water
flows downhill through a.
Turbine and generates power and
and that's it's it's kind of
ghetto but you know often get a
works and that's that's still
the best way to the store solar
and wind really do need a.
Or something.
No some some remote some some
brilliant way to store energy
to.
so.
Sauces you have Representative
your chairman of well you've
been retired and able to into a
your thinking cap on.
J. J. Lente and representative
yes I have had many talks on
this spent about thirty years
thinking about it I do agree
Bactris I'm really not the
optimal solutions for energy.
but it is what we have right
now.
and it would probably be what we
have for the next ten years and
so that you're just not going to
go away it has opened the door
for the especially in light
weight energy dense energy
storage option that we have and
I I do agree thank actually.
Using it and it distributed fall
behind to meet at in a whole is
a much better application for
leave to then it distributed
then lunch eighty megawatt
facilities I mean just to give
you an idea you know the thirty
megawatt to our facility might
have eight hundred thousand says
in it.
next really not the optimal use
for this type of technology I
fully agree with you the best
ways to pump water up a hill
into it as a lawyer using our
excess wind energy at night
absolutely so yes stage suits us
state because of the large
microwave you produce at night
and PNM actually had a storage
option like that be back when I
was working with them to build
up seven hundred megawatt
facility instead with
permission.
But the problem is and this is
the main crux of the problem.
The impact environmentally
specially in the water shocks of
state like ours is huge thank
yeah we have thank you open land
there may says we could utilize
it on but one option we are
looking at is to try and see if
we can use of produced water
from a southeast part of the
state which currently is being
stored in ponds and well being
injected back into the ground to
use eight and smaller Martina
pumped hydro which may not need
to six seven hundred four K. but
committee about two hundred and
it could be a great nexus
between the renewable technology
and our ability to use the
produced water and so of
constructive and I'm really
hoping that the such would be
off and your dream of pumping
water instead of using it and
trees does come true and that's
my dream as well thank you Mr
thank you up to speed.
Thank you chairman thank you
Representative are.
I I completely agree with you
and
it would be great to be able to
you know maybe even a closed
system we're not right out of
operation and that kind of thing
use.
use water of that we awesome but
to you're right better is what
we have right now and I do agree
with you that.
A wall in a whole is a better
use than in our house for
batteries.
But I I'm I think you and I
could probably do out here for a
long time but I I don't want to
Rob was the the committee's time
here I'll just finish fired by
saying I think.
You know I I I I very much agree
with you your attendance here
I.
My my concern is that
those who have the means I mean
this is this is your last model
right she started was electric
car that only the rich good bye
and then used that revenue to
buy or to design a card that the
upper middle class.
The could by and then his use
that money to design a car now
that we're looking at middle
class people could buy.
But I think right now the cost
of the systems to something that
your your upper middle class and
wealthy you can buy.
And
I'm.
I'm I'm not sure.
I agree that this proposal is
really needed at this time the
only those would benefit
It is where I'm coming from I
mean obviously will will gently
table it and it doesn't are very
big fiscal impact so it might
end up part of the tax package
that comes out this year
but I'm just letting you know
personally I think
What's what's eight so we'll see
in the upper middle class by
these.
and when they come to the
something that the middle class
could purchase and we still want
to incentivize it maybe that's
when we when we pull the trigger
on this room that just might my
personal thoughts but to
gracious you representative
Akhil this year just and honest
thank you chairman for the time.
Thank you Representative Harper
anyone else will offer some
comments or ask questions.
Okay.
Reserves are gonna CENIC you
thank you both I have a a couple
of questions.
and I'm gonna refer us back to
the to the FIR.
And I'm trying to understand a
little bit
a little bit more what the
fiscal impact of these will be
is it do you agree with the FIR
it's up to a million dollars.
A year for four years.
Two years.
Mr check out part of my expert
witness Mr chairman okay.
Mr chair representative yes of
the I find indicates a two year
impact I think the first year is
seven hundred fifty thousand the
second years eight hundred fifty
thousand they expect that the
full one million may not get
used up however it does so apply
at the end of the queue would
have to relive it tax credit
laid it here which is why you
see a code here that as I recall
I see if you're giving a five
year window for those two if
they cannot claim that tax
credit they can build it up to
several years so I think the
fiscal impact is really like
then it will I know we are
dealing with some big issues
here but it's not as drastic.
This at some of the fiscal
impacts.
In the Representative David and
Mister keel is the impact not as
high simply because they're not
expecting a whole lot of people
to be purchasing the systems
Mr chair representative I
believe that's correct as
Representative Harper made the
point that not that many rich
people in New Mexico.
So we may not be able to table
the one billion dollars sector
setting aside and and
Representative and and and Mr
kill
that's an interesting comment
because if
if it's if it's rich people
purchasing this what what is the
need for for for a tax
incentive.
Mr Chairman I don't know that
it's it's rich people because
they're a lot of people who this
is their thing get bringing
being clean energy and storage
to
to their homes to New Mexico
they are environmentalists who
believe this is important so I I
I don't know if it's always the
rich it's sometimes it's the the
people who just have a focus on
environment and know that clean
energy is good and energy
storage is important and and see
the value of the systems.
I appreciate that Representative
Sarinana I I think I I that's a
good clarification I mean I
think I I have neighbors who you
know by no means are wealthy or
even upper middle class but
you know the what what little
money they have they they
invested into.
you know into these types of of
You know we value centered
investments that they make and
we know whether it's to purchase
an electric car which is always
gonna be a little bit more
expensive
whether to test lower or or GM
or whatever it might be of those
cars are usually.
More you know a little bit
pricier so.
I I I I appreciate that response
You know I I'm I'm comfortable
with the sort of hyper.
Targeted.
What you're taking.
it's a it's a percentage of the
value of the system that you can
claim it's only for a few years
I think Miss sunsets in twenty
three so two years yes Mr credit
can be rolled over.
A total of five years is that
correct.
So this is this really is an
experiment and I think I read
somewhere in the FIR that this I
think they use the word
experiment and that's what it
kind of seems like we might be
back in twenty twenty.
To looking at the first report
in maybe two people claim this
thing.
or maybe maybe a handful of
people maybe more substantive
number of people claimed it.
you know the last thing I'll say
well to two more things that'll
say given the fiscal impact we
have a process and so will will
be tabling this today
and then we'll be working with
our analysts and as we figure
out the capacity that we have
you know we will make decisions
at that point.
but I do want to go back to to
you know the the COVID I may I
meet at the end of of public
comment and that was how diverse
your.
your list of of public
supporters was.
I mean it was just a really
interesting mix of of
industry of individuals of of
public advocates and and I think
that that really speaks highly.
Just to the work done to bring
those folks together behind this
but also sort of the the
excitement that this experiment
can bring you know.
Again we could be back here in
two years and maybe didn't
really work out and then we'll
move on to the next experiment
but maybe this is really
something that takes off you
know and as more people
investing these systems as the
technology develops further
you know up to to my to my
colleagues point earlier right
the Tesla business model was.
Wealthy people and then they use
those monies to invest and
develop less expensive products
that now you know many of us may
be able to afford and you know
if if that's the model that's
the model but if we can CD.
The seeds of of interest in this
type of of of industry and who
knows maybe in ten fifteen years
we all have storage units
attached to our solar panels
that would be a pretty cool
thing in my opinion so
thank you for your time thank
you for the presentation it's
always good to see both of you
and I'll go to my by here by
your Chandler.
All thank you Mr chair I'd like
to propose a temporary table on
Committee substitute for House
Bill to sixty two second.
Hey that was a temperate tabling
motion by by your Chandler and
it was seconded by
Representative Strickler.
is there any.
Opposition to that motion.
Okay seeing none
you all have a table bill we'll
keep working on it and and you
know we'll we'll try our very
best I can tell you I I I like
where this is going on so
hopefully we can get something
done.
Members that concludes our
meeting today thank you for a
good deal of productive work we
will convene tomorrow at eleven
to tackle some of the stable
bills be on the lookout for your
resume link
and
for the Republican members
please be in touch with
Representative Harper he's my
He's my line of communication
rather than calling.
Eighteen people we can just
college other and kind of get
everybody up to speed so please
be in touch with him and then
democratic members be in touch
with myself for the or the vice
chair should anything change but
at this point we're scheduled to
meet tomorrow at eleven on zoom.
Thank you very much have a great
rest the day we'll see you all
on for poor thank you Mr.
See you again thank you.
