And then this.
Here.
Thank you Representative lu Han.
Thank you Representative Maestas
I'm here.
Thanks.
Representative Romero.
Your.
Good morning Representative
Scott.
Right.
Thank you Representative
Stansbury good morning I'm here
thank you Representative
Strickler here.
Thank you and I see
Representative carpenter.
Your thank you.
Remember tennis.
I am here we have a warrant
thank you Elaine good morning
everybody and welcome to house
taxation revenue committee
welcome to all of our viewers at
home both through zoom webcast
the the zoom cast and the
webcast on the regular listen
website just by by way of
background if you all go to the
image that website click on the
webcast link and you should be
able to see any committee that
is happening right now including
this one or if you go into the
committee schedule are you can
pick up the zoom link
at which point you can raise
your hand and you will be
recognized to speak and
supporter against
Neutral on any piece of
legislation that we have here
today members on the agenda
we've got three bills we've got
house bill ninety Representative
Harper ranking member Harper and
vice chair Chandler we also have
house bill one fifteen tax
return preparer definition
sponsored by myself and with
that house bill one of four to
expand the rural health tax
credit.
by Representative Allison and
I'm gonna make this very easy on
us today I'm gonna skip down to
house bill one fifteen because
this is a bill that that that
we're gonna bring a table in the
ranking member Harper promised
the gentle table for me so that
I don't feel so badly
but just by way of background
this is a bill that I worked on
over the last couple months with
hello folks region are blocking
but what we're trying to do is
to really bring into the fold
paid tax preparers
the you know that don't work for
a company that sort of on their
own we're trying to bring a
little better regulation to that
world simply because there's
quite a bit of abuse that
happens often times in in those
settings we're trying to be
really careful to to watch that
line between rate tax prep
agents in folks who are
volunteering their community in
their church you know doing a
service for somebody else and so
I think we had a we we have a
good bill but I I think that it
still needs a little bit more
cooking and I think in the
little bit more input so we're
gonna put it off and take it to
rest up in the interim and and
get insight and advice from from
all of our members specifically
those folks in rural communities
who you know it's it's sometimes
if it's the only game in town
right we want to make sure that
we you know don't.
you know over do it and somehow
end up harming people that we're
trying to help so we're gonna
we're gonna table today and then
you know we'll we'll see another
version of it some of the point
in time but
Representative Harper if you do
the honors.
Thank you chairman
I would move that we.
Table at this time house bill
one fifteen so that we can give
it the attention it's do during
it.
Is it and seconded by
Representative Strickler thank
you
Ice I saw little joy there.
That
there any opposition to tabling
house bill one fifteen.
All right see none thank you for
tabling my bill will we'll get
rid of it it'll be off our books
and we move on with our agenda
I'm gonna go next to house bill
ninety.
and I'm gonna pass the virtual
microphone toward to sponsors
for them to explain the bill.
Meister Chandler ranking member
Carper please take it away.
Mr chair before we start could
we have secretary Chardon Clark
and more chicken in included in
this meeting.
There.
Very good thank you so much Mr
chair I have a few brief
comments and I imagine
Representative Harper will have
a lot of very enlightening
comments about our kids I know
he's work on this during the on
this bill and the during the
interim so thank you very much
I'm here to present with my co
sponsor Representative Jason
Harper House Bill ninety.
I would generally characterized
the bill as a cleanup bill that
was endorsed by the revenue
stabilization and Tax Policy
Committee during the interim.
The high points on the bill are
as follows the bill amends the
tax credit process to improve
the application process
clarifying that the deadline to
review and approve or deny an
application begins to run when
the application is complete the
bill reduces the T. R. the
review time from a hundred and
eighty days two hundred and
twenty days.
The bill also incorporates new
fraud technologies into the
state's criminal tax fraud
statute it provides that tax
fraud includes the intent to
evade or defeat defeat through
the use of electronic sales
suppression devices.
And lastly the bill adds two new
sections to clarify that
protests of property valued by
county assessors are heard
through the county protest board
while protests evaluations done
by TRD go through T. T. R. D.'s
administrative process with
appeals to the District Court
that's pretty much it there's a
lot of detail in the bill that
I'm sure the secretary and her
staff can help us with or my
dear colleague Representative
Jason Harper.
Thank you Mr chair and the vice
chair Chandler for that
transaction and a great
explanation of the bill I think
that's a beautiful high level
description of the content.
maybe just dive into to two
parts of the bill that I to give
a little background why are
making these changes and then of
course we'll.
has to make over to.
Secretary shorten Clark she
wants to add anything but.
To me there's really two big
things that this bill is doing.
Yes it's helping with the
zappers and and you know fraud
materials but.
One big problem that we have is
many of our tax credits
you if you want to claim them
you have to.
Following application with the
department.
And once you filed application
under current law.
It has a hundred and eighty days
to review and either deny or
accept the application and allow
you to take the credit.
Well that you generally works
okay but what happens is the
department will often get
applications that are
incomplete.
And of course it takes some time
for the department to review it
right they don't just you know
the data shows up you know how
much people waiting to review it
you know it might take some time
for the party review it.
And then it goes back to the
taxpayer to correct it and this
is my go back and forced and by
the time it's actually complete
the department you know might
have run out of those hundred
eighty days for there might only
be a few days left.
And so that's been a frustration
to the apartment into the tax.
So what we've decided to do here
and I think it's a good
compromise.
Is there they're now saying that
the start of that clock.
Is when that apartment has a
completed application.
So it doesn't go back and forth
back and forth back and forth
while the clock is running.
Now that really helps Department
so I thought oh well how can we
make this more from the taxpayer
because this is part of the
taxpayer to they've shortened at
a hundred eighty one oh two
hundred twenty days that they
have to review it once it's
complete.
So I think that's a.
A great changing a good
compromise.
And then the other one I just
mention briefly a lot of the
last half of the bill as.
Vice chair Chandler mention has
to do with a property tax.
And there's just it's not really
clear in the statute where you
go
if you want to appeal to like
the administrative office of the
courts or or to your County you
know it's just it's not clear
where you go when you need to
feel something so this this is
really I think makes sense
looking at where the county is
assessed or where the property
is assessed for the county
assessor that goes to the county
if it's a it's a state assessed
it goes to you know the state.
So
I think that that is also a good
changes to make it more clear so
Mr chairman and committee
all of us
Arches anything to add but that
that really is the the meat of
this this legislation thank you
representative Secretary Mr
Clark welcome to taxed read
any anything to add.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members I I think our to Sanchez
covered all the details of the
bill just perfectly and I and
the tax policy director more
chicken are here to stand for
questions.
Excellent and welcome Mr Chaykin
we appreciate you being with us
this morning.
Let's go to the audience
we have.
We have one hand up
Brian van dens in.
please go read it.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Can you hear me now.
Good morning we can hear you go
ahead very good thank you I'm
the chief hearing officer the
administrative hearings office
and I'm here just to provide any
objective answers or information
as it relates to the changes to
the property tax hearing process
as Representative Harper just
reflected the bill does a lot of
clarification to sign when a
property tax valuation protest
will go to the county valuation
board versus going to the
administrative hearings office
and then once that.
First where the fuel goes this
did come up in the tax
practitioner advisory committee
that so secretary shorten Clark
as the chair of and she she did
get input and developments and I
was part of the process so I'm
here to answer any questions you
have and support those changes
as it relates to the property
tax code changes thank you.
Thank you for being here we
appreciate you any anyone else
With anything to add on house
bill ninety.
Okay it doesn't look like it
will we'll go to committee and
before I go to committee members
are
Our our analyst or or amazing
staff caught a bit of a drafting
issue where it's it's not it's
not nothing complicated it's not
being substantive but it is sort
of a lawyer in the drafting
issue and you know
appropriations because of the
previous stop it is bill but it
wasn't so
I I did communicate with
Representative Harper last night
about this
it's
In all have Pam right kind of
explain what the draft in areas
but.
Just to sort of lay the
groundwork Care for how we're
going to proceed with this bill
the amendment I just got it this
morning
so you know I it's it's
certainly not within that time
frame that we would need to give
it a full analysis so I'm gonna
suggest that we continue hearing
I'm gonna suggest that we adopt
the amendment and then we take
the vote on this bill first
thing on Monday morning.
it doesn't change anything from
a timing perspective because we
don't go back to the floor until
Tuesday anyway so we're not
losing any time on this but I
did want to bring this to the
committee's attention and and
I'm grateful for Biltmore and
Pam ran our team who who are
very.
The smart lawyers and tax
experts and and they caught that
so.
M.
well before we do that is
everybody have a copy the
amendment.
Should be in your Citrix some
assuming.
I'm seeing some test systems
knows.
Anyone cannot access our Citrix
I'd be happy to email it to you
right now.
What what why don't we give it a
minute and and we could do that.
Maybe sent everybody in this
room.
Okay I'll do that right now yes
chair looks like the secretary
would like a copy.
I think that's appropriate.
I think we can make that happen.
Mr chair I did find it in the in
Citrix under it says Harper
Chandler.
HB ninety committee file for
those that may re want to
refresh and try.
Thank you representative.
We'll have it we'll go through
it will have Pam and and bill
explain it and then we'll we'll
consider it.
Just give me a thumbs up or
something once you.
Once you have it and then we'll
go through it together.
Representative Harper is at hand
up to discuss the amendment or
is that hand up telling me that
you saw the man.
That was my fat finger
But thank you email it to me I I
seem to walk out of the Citrix.
How can you be locked out of the
Citrix you can get into all the
secret vault at Sandia labs but
you get locked out of Citrix and
that.
That's a great question chair.
Mr chair if I may are we looking
at six four one.
Representative says that is
correct.
Mr chair will.
Secretary go ahead thank you we
received an attachment from
staff and it notes the section
that is to be amended but it's
not the amendment itself it's
the staff analysis that we
received by attachment.
All.
Thank you.
The link can you resend the the
amendment to center court a
trading card please yes it just
right now.
Thank you.
Mr chair what we're doing this
could somebody explain how to
two documents on the same
screen.
Mr chair.
I have a bit of a hack for that
Mr chair representative I ask
this if you I what I've done is
create a bookmark like in my
little bookmarks bar.
Of the tax and Representative
committee the problem is that
you get least get to the top
level of the files the stuff to
drill down but you can open
multiple tabs that way by just
having a starting point that is
it at least of the tax committee
folder level.
So you can note if you just keep
basically creating like that
folder is your home page is you
know what I mean like you open
it up on a new tab on the new
tab on a new tab and then you
can have all of your tax files
in one place that's my very
cumbersome half thank you Mr
chair.
The more you know thank you
Representative Romero.
We haven't you all should have
by now hopefully you can get
your email yes we're good okay
so the amendment number is two
one nine six four one point one
can.
their motion to two of the
amendment for discussion.
So moved.
This is been moved
And bill can you explain what
what the.
With the amendment does please.
Mr chairman this is bill more
When I discussed it and we're
we're looking at is is on.
I start with the premise so if
you look at them.
Four of the bill.
I'm sorry.
For the bill one eight.
Ninety one says a person is
guilty of tax fraud the person.
It goes through does various
types of fans and there's one.
Two three four entities are down
there.
I on page five one fifteen.
This is the.
Section dealing with the.
Issue of
Suppression software so we want
to make six compatible and
consistent.
Representative section our.
So what's the purpose of the
amendment is to make the network
of water calls the men's raha.
For section six which is on
page.
Subsection six.
For research section for our
that's why the that's the
purpose of the amendment it's
just basically a drafting or.
Is what it amounts to when we
want to make that clear.
To criminal defense lawyers and
prosecutors are through the
recommends rant is the same
under both subsections.
Thank you bill and so members
that side as well as I would
school discussing this amendment
with the team this morning I was
you know I wasn't too sure about
it I'm I don't I don't I never
practiced criminal law but it's
it's a drill down on it with
build and Pam it became pretty
obvious to me that you know this
is this is something that later
on could be misinterpreted by a
crafty lawyer down the road and
we're back right back you're
trying to fix it so it's
probably a good idea to put this
on now you know I I know as a
committee we don't work Smith
you know with that's that's
another committee but in this
case where the last stop for the
floor so I think we probably do
need to to make the change is
there any any discussion on the
amendment Representative Harper.
Thank you chairman
And and I just want to a.
I voice my support and and maybe
raised in a different way why I
think this is important.
so if you look on page five.
In that section you started and
paragraph for their on line
seven it starts with this
verbiage right with intent to
evade or defeat the payment or
collection of a tax or knowing
that the probable consequences
of persons act will be to evade
or defeat the payment shift tax.
And it goes into.
You know what legal.
And you go into paragraph five
it has that exact same language
and starts off with with intent
to evade a feat or knowing the
problem consequences welfare to
feed.
And it goes on.
And then in paragraph six we
don't start with that language
we.
We see what's wrong and it's
very and we say what's the
purpose to the fear of a.
And.
And I I think I agree was with
bill and Pam that no just to.
To be consistent again I'm not a
not a lawyer but you know maybe.
Someone a lawyer Josh looking at
this would be like well maybe
there's a reason why they wrote
her grant six differently.
And and then that could lead to
a change in.
the outcome of that case.
And so all we're doing here with
this amendment is adding that
language to be to match
program for and I and so I I
think that's that's a good
change and that's from your.
Non lawyer research engineer
respective.
Thank you.
Very good.
It's going to reserve my it says
on the amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
of Representative the I agree
that to program should be the
same.
You know because you don't want
to you want to give a window
Mister McPherson to make that
argument so I'm just trying to
read
let them back in and let them
board the
But I think you could look at
either way but the fact that
they're the same is is is the
best the but my question is in
your opinion this chair
Representative so you're not
changing the law you're merely
clarifying existing offer these
for these up for these acts
correct that's correct
Representative okay thank you
Mr.
Representative Representative
Jordan Clark no secretary
charted clerk I did I just do
what you I'm sorry.
Mr chairman thank you we are
we're checking this I I totally
agree with the the drafting
improvement I think it's great
to have the intent and knowing
intent and knowing language
follow through these three
paragraphs our only question is
as re written should the word
knowingly.
Then be deleted from line
twenty.
Bill of Pam.
Yeah I'm trying to get a copy of
the.
It would be helpful I can read
the paragraph the way it would
be in the amendment and I think
you'll see that we have knowing
and then knowingly and that's
what I think we should.
As Amanda.
with intent to evade or defeat
the payment of collection of any
tax or knowing that the probable
consequences of the person's Act
will be to abate or defeat the
payment or collection of any tax
knowingly sells licenses are
purchases I think we should
strike that were knowingly.
Yeah I think I think you're
right.
okay we can send it back up and.
And get it fixed.
Okay let's so.
This is running a take action
and is until Monday let's so
let's get the amendment
redrafted I think you're all
pretty clear at this point what
the amendment does.
so what we'll do is when we come
back on on on Monday will adopt
the amendment and then and then
what what on the bill for now
let's go back on the bill other
questions on the bill from
committee members.
Okay I don't see any hands up
some assuming there are no
questions what we'll do is we'll
we're we're gonna roll this over
till Monday
There hopefully there won't be
any more discussion so we could
just adopt the amendment and and
move the bill long
first thing Monday morning so
we'll leave it at that thank you
Representative bye Sir Chandler
and sent Harper and and thanks
to bill and Pam for for flagging
this for us like I said we
generally don't do the the the
worst missing in this committee
for the new members don't worry
we're not gonna be doing this
too often
more often than not by the time
we get it those those issues
have been worked out and we're
simply dealing with the tax
policy and so this was an
exception thank you all for your
time appreciate it.
Thank you as you to shorten
Clark up feel free to stick
around we've got another bill
coming up that we may need your
help on.
It looks like a president who
has a question.
All thank you Representative
Han.
Thank you chairman I would raise
my hand there or with the thank
you for me I do have one one
question on the bill
and it is to.
On page one.
Line twenty three I'm just
wondering why there were
statutory was was taken out.
On it because it's a complete.
Application for a statutory tax
credit is being to have received
for why do why we wanted to take
are you wanting to take the word
statutory out.
Thank you.
Mr chair I think of the
secretary has their hand up.
Senator Strickler but Mr chair
and representative lu Han I'm
happy to explain that there's
there's only way I there's only
one place a tax credit can be
created and that's in statute so
it's really just drafting clean
up to take out that word because
it's redundant.
Okay I just want to make sure
that yeah I appreciate that
answer I just wanted to make
sure your I understood that
clearly thank you.
Thank you Representative and
thank you secretary charted
Clark with that let me just make
sure I'm not missing any hands
thanks for the heads up.
Representative Harper.
I don't see more hands up so
we'll we'll get a roll this one
over to Monday morning and now
we can move on to.
House Bill
We'll go for Representative
Allison good morning welcome to
taxed Representative.
Yeah.
When LCS and good morning.
Yes I'm very glad to be
president before you this
morning Representative I would
like to introduce of house bill
one oh four and that is
expanding the rural health care
practitioner tax credit to apply
to all registered nurses
licensed midwives are also
essential.
Care workers who provided
assistance during the Corona
virus disease twenty nineteen
pandemic that was the original
title since the last meeting we
have a.
Made some amendments but the
intent of this bill is to give
credit where we feel that credit
is finally do.
And that is to
Their registered nurses and
registered midwives and all the
people that were involved with
the health care during the
Corona virus pandemic you know
we we say that we appreciate all
the health care workers
especially in this pandemic we
say that we appreciate them but
that's as far as we go we just
talk about it we don't do
anything about it I'm hoping
that this bill will get approval
and we will do something about
it.
all their wishes we want to have
them granted but a
since I ran with this bill in
the.
Of twenty twenty session.
We just ran out of time and the
I have been receiving calls from
all over the state of people
really appreciate of what we're
trying to do for them and I
believe that this is a very very
strong bipartisan bill because
it affects everybody and it
finally gives credit where
credit is due and along with me
today would be my
Expert witness Lenaya Montoya
she was going to help us with
the technical stuff.
But the bill is pretty much self
explanatory and I think it's
just something that is like I
said very long overdue.
With that Mr chair.
Thank you Representative Allison
miss Montoya welcome to taxed
Representative.
Good morning Mr chair.
And members I have to give my
LCS bill real quick.
But my name is Linda M. NY I
work for Legislative Council
Service.
I am here for the sole purpose
of providing technical.
This is the spent on the matter
before this committee and I do
not appear in support or in
opposition to the matter before
you.
Very well thank you and thank
you for your
Your statement.
We we appreciate you making that
clear for all of us.
Actually the the new members of
the committee.
The public comment
I don't see any hands up but
I'll give you a minute to to
raise your hands
Very well we have in support
Yeah you have to so we we do
have a ten be Candace.
Kandace L. olds gold futures
please go ahead.
Hi good morning can you hear me.
We can hear you.
Perfect good morning chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Kandace Littlefoot and
I'm a policy associate with both
futures formerly known as young
women United we have for many
years worked with the licensed
midwifery community.
We support this bill and
inclusion of licensed midwives
in a rural health care
practitioner tax credit.
Currently the tax the rule tax
credit already includes nurse
midwives so not including
licensed midwives creates a
disparity with and then it by
three community we would like to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this legislation forward that
would support family structure
throughout Mexico thank you.
Thank you for joining us Candace
we appreciated in support let's
go to Karen Witt lock.
Chair members of the committee
thank you very thank you so much
for bringing this bill we want
to thank Allison representative
Allison for bringing this bill
we are in strong support we
similar to bold futures we would
like to have social workers
included in this in this bill we
are having huge issues as a
result of the pandemic and
others shortages social workers
that already exists throughout
the state is only being
exacerbated by this.
once again we think the sponsor
for bringing this bill.
Thank you for being here ms Witt
lock.
Anybody else in support.
Very well how about anyone in
opposition.
Okay I don't see any hands going
up members of the committee.
Representative.
Representative yes.
I'm I'm I think I'm on phone on
the they're not sure how this
works Mr chair good morning
Representative Allison good
morning
I'm currently home revert back
to the real New Mexico without
internet access so I apologize
for not having made a video with
you all today I just think I
shared I believe sometime it was
week last week when we heard
Representative Gracias bell I
just wanted to name my
overwhelming support for the
real health tax provider credit
but also offer as they have
previously over the question and
over years that I think we must
be much more strategic about how
we level that credit and have a
better sense of who might
actually make professional
decisions to show up that there
are real communities with the
credit like that of the common
been made previously let's make
sure that when we're spending
lots of money we're spending it
in the right ways I think that
could have a much more
transformational impact and I'm
pulling providers or or
retaining providers or are
raising our own provider in
rural and frontier communities
but I think we need to be much
more thoughtful and doing Phelps
I also just wanted to honor I in
my pregnancy had the care by
midwives had both my grow bored
at home with incredibly skilled
and ready providers that made
sure they help me with the
individual individualized care I
needed I also want to shout out
to representative Allison I love
and respect and honor and bring
you might cause midwives into
the Cup of the bill in the way
they design and set up their
practice they function really
wrapped up in rural New Mexico
because they don't need high
birth numbers that the thing
practices I can care for a
smaller number of families in
really profoundly in our home
and community birth that I.
Thank you Mr chair of the
considering that Representative
Allison thank you for reading
the conversation to include the
kind of that with free in our
Act policy thank you.
Thank you Representative.
And apologies members I I saw
restrict there's hand up go
first and then I heard a
president that has voiced so
apologies for switching back and
forth here we're we're all
trying our best redistrict their
good thank you Mr chairman thank
you Representative Allison yeah
I think you still this is a good
idea and I.
You know as a practical matter
you probably want to katamari
some of your ideas with a
Representative Garcia's bill and
just just a distant.
constructive no idea there and
but we we do this all the time
and yeah and I.
Still think it's a good idea to
have a sense that Anna the
reporting requirement
I realize just didn't have that
there in the beginning but to
would represent McAnally on our
committee for so many years we
can add that to our program
really is helped see how hard
hitting these tax credits are
are paying off or or not but I
think this will definitely pay
off so that's all I have I know
this is a yeah I has fiscal
impact so you know we'll have to
temporarily table thank thank
you Mr chairman and thank you
Representative Alice.
Thank you Representative
Strickler.
Thank you president Strickler
anyone else.
Comments questions
Representative Harper.
Thank you so I I just want to
make one one short comments and
I want to thank Representative
Allison for bringing this bill
forward.
I have a really good friend who
is a janitor at our local
elementary school at ridge
public schools and and they have
had to work super hard.
So I'm I'm I'm very appreciative
of of the spirit of this bill on
what you'd like to do.
That's I just want to.
Just one minute just.
Maybe talking about tax policy
here in New Mexico where we have
to be careful.
so many folks have heard me say
that our tax code looks like a
block of Swiss cheese.
And that's because our base tax
code developed back in the
thirties was actually really
forward thinking in that it is
socially taxes everything.
And I did it at a really low
rate started like one percent.
But over the years we've
decrease the number of things
that were taxing we haven't cut
government spending so what does
that mean it's just a simple
algebraic expression right if
you're.
Recent messenger taxed.
But your dollars are the same
are getting bigger that means
the taxes on everything else
have to go up to generate the
same amount of money.
So as we keep narrowing the tax
base.
the tax rate has to keep going
up on other things.
Eight when we stop taxing
doctors and janitors and
everyone that we love the only
people that will be taxing our
lawyers and yachts.
Right so
we.
The good tax policy principle is
you tax everything everything
and then you can tax at a lower
rate.
And we make.
Little exceptions like a
proposed here and we might
decide we want to do that
we just have to understand that
that is continuing to narrow the
base and got us into this kind
of meshed around right now work.
Our taxes are too high and
permitting or killing are small
this so.
I just wanted to share that with
the committee and thank you
Representative Allison for
bringing this this forward truly
a wonderful saying what's use
health care workers and support
staff on this last year.
Thank you Representative Harper.
Thank you representatives
Representative Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative allicin
Representative Lara Cadena of
the issue we appreciate just a
quick question on
On the wording of.
Mr chair representative of
Allison on page two one page two
lines
sixteen seventeen eighteen.
You know you.
Change the.
You know you are definitions of.
You know you can make better
definitions you know you take
away certified nurse midwives
and you just say midwives
licensed by the department
things like that but I lined six
sixteen it says the magic words
who provided assistance to other
health care professionals during
the coronavirus ninety two
thousand nineteen pandemic
So the way I read this is that
the entire act with a state or
that provision would essentially
sunset.
When the pandemic sunsets.
So do we want to do that we want
to.
I don't want to keep the current
statutes intact for future
years.
And then.
How do you how do we that Mr
Mister chairman Representative
Allison.
Or I was
thank you for that
Representative.
I will refer the question to my
adviser agency Montoya.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair Representative Biasa
breeding that a line I only hope
that up real quick.
the intent yes was to provided.
This past credit to do essential
health care workers until the
end of the corona virus disease
twenty nineteen pandemic
it wasn't to sunset the midwives
or.
The.
Registered nurses it was only to
sunset that provision on the
essential health care workers.
Okay no thank you of thank you
Mr chairman thank you is an
awesome thank you as well but
the
Given to us you might give it a
second look we made we made a
paragraph C. subparagraph C.
that that essentially no sunsets
so the program the doesn't
sunset as well.
and I.
You know I may be wrong but just
give it a second look I'm trying
I'm looking at the bill and I'm
trying to I don't know how the
amendments fit in but just
consider that as we
You know if this is temporarily
cable before we bring it back
thank you Mr.
Thank you so much to us any
questions or comments to the
committee.
reserve Allison thank you for
for bring in the bill forward
Representative I'm glad.
Thank you Mr chair and I want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this piece of legislation for
for a lot of the reasons that
Representative Cadena had
mentioned thank you have had a
wonderful experience meeting a
midwives in New if you health
care systems in our rural
communities that we don't have
enough provisions are
opportunities for women to act
that
that type of health care in
those.
You need thank you for bringing
this forward and and also
including
are registered nurses so this is
this is something similar to and
we're talking about it too
Representative Garcia's bill so
I'd like to see I'd like to see
how you and Representative
Garcia many be able to
collaborate work on this and and
see what
she would that mean for us and
we were able to maybe revisit
this Mr chair if that.
If you if you want to maybe
elaborate on that and how that
somehow possible how that
me evening work to our committee
I really appreciate that thank
you
Mr chair thank you
representative Allison for
bringing this for.
Thank you.
Yeah thank you for
Representative Allison and
Representative on.
You know the the culture of this
committee as as was explained by
ranking member Harper a couple
of meetings to go is to ensure
that we have
a you know capacity to to
provide for I'm sorry my kid is
right behind me Hey buddy was
not.
It's got a brand new let's see
we're.
The the culture of the committee
is to ensure that we have
capacity and to not just let
royal roll out all these tax
credits deductions and
exemptions and look I think said
Allison
as you know I'm I'm a big fan of
your work you're always very
targeted
in your proposals you know for
these types of incentives and
and many of you are as well but
every time one of us brings
something to this committee it's
it's a pretty important thing
for us right as the sponsors of
this thing and our job is a
committees to ensure that we're
looking at the entire code and
making sure that you know
whatever it is that we approve
really fits.
Within
you know within the policy goals
of the committee which has been
stated time and time again you
know is is to lower the rate and
broadened debates and every time
we carve out a little bit more
that means that ultimately
you've got a.
Are you gonna make up for it
somehow and so we've got to be
really careful I've I've you
know I've been in this committee
offered seven legislative
sessions and that that's always
been the culture since I've been
here under both Republican and
democratic.
Leadership so
what happens now is as with
recent Garcia's bill this one
will be tabled to pre tabled we
call it at some point in the
next few weeks Democrats and
Republicans on this committee
will we'll get together you know
I.
Work with Representative Harper
pretty closely and will come up
with our recommendations to the
committee
and you know in working in
conjunction with the
appropriations committees
finance committee on the other
side and with leadership will
put together a targeted package
it's not guarantee that we will
I mean it really depends on what
happens with the appropriations
process as well make sure that
there's capacity.
But I can tell you that.
You know all of us living
through this pandemic in seeing
how hard many of these people
are working.
I really appreciate your
comments percent Allison that
it's not enough to just
appreciate people with words but
let's put money in their pocket
if we can and really put money
where our money where our mouth
is if you will and so we will
make sure that you know your
your idea your concept is
certainly
certainly speaking for myself.
Sorry it certainly is at the top
of my list
if you will so with that
Representative a Allison thanks
again for for bringing the bill
forward we will certainly
revisited as we move.
Over the next few weeks
and with that I'll entertain a
motion.
Mr chair.
Yes.
I would like to thank you for
your comments and
I want to use the analogy of
building I have a simple
hamburger.
We start with the December two
pieces of bread and lettuce
maybe a tomato.
I don't want to get where we
start adding onions and
Pickles or olives or whatever.
Where we make it so big that it
doesn't taste like a hamburger
anymore I just don't want to do
that I want to keep it as simple
as possible and still addresses
the main intent of the bill with
that I thank you the I thank you
Mr chairman I thank you for that
committee's consideration for.
Thank you Representative
Allison.
Last year Chandler.
Yes Sir I move that we temporary
table House Bill one ten that
the right number.
You know for what.
We've been a motion to every
table
from Baxter Chandler second from
Representative Harper is our
opposition to that motion.
Right C. nine thousand thanks
again for being a bill forward
will will work with you and
we'll work with our our ranking
member on the other side to.
hopefully working out we're
gonna try hard it's now I I
think it's important concept and
it's something that deserves a
second and a third look as we
move forward.
with that members I think we're
we're done so first order of
business on Monday we'll take up
house bill ninety with the
amended amendment.
And that the plan will be to to
what that out and then the rest
of the agenda will we'll we'll
get out at some point today with
whatever else is on our docket
thank you all for your hard work
this morning thank you staff for
for working on over the last few
hours and thank you Pam and bill
for catching that drafting there
in the previous bill really
appreciate all the.
with that members we are
adjourned have a fantastic
Friday in a fantastic we can
stay safe mask up see you on
Monday.
And everyone.
Excuse chair.
it's gone.
Playing.
Yeah I like it when he noticed
background showing so we could
see the kids it's Q. now very.
