Representative Montoya.
Here.
Representative Romero.
You're in snowy Santa Fe.
Representative Scott hope.
Representative Strickler.
Here.
Chairwoman Chandler.
Here.
We were.
Okay great everyone first on our
agenda it is.
Calling the meeting to order and
first on the agenda is house
bill fifteen
chair woman in a blue is the
presenter and I believe she has
an expert witness named and.
Rogers.
Has she been invented yet
reeling yes I just promoted her
to panelists.
Give it just one she is.
Miss Roger's she's being
promoted as well.
Yes I see here they're very good
Representative Lujan I see your
I think that's your hand am I
right about that.
No no I don't make them check I
should have my hand.
All right.
Okay so I'm good to see you
chairwoman Lewis
Is present I understand you may
have an amendment you might want
to talk about.
Yes thank you madam chairwoman
and hello Committee members
today we have house bill fifteen
and we do have an amendment so
if I could just talk about the
bill first the bill was really
right and for those tribes
nations and pueblos that have
agreements with the state on
taxation and there's some
language in there that dictates.
How much the chart the the
tribes can charge taxes so you
know at this point it was lower
than and we had some tribes that
wanted to check tax higher than
local governments and so we made
that change in state government
however there were concerns even
from the committee members on
government to that the tribe
should be allowed to tax at
whatever rate they like so
basically what the amendment
what we've done is we're
striking that language that
dictates how much of the tribes
can tax so that then it's up to
the tax whether or not they want
to charge lower higher at the
same rate of the local
government in addition to that
there's a definition of tribe in
the House Bill fifteen that did
not include Navajo Nation or
Fort Sill Apache tribe so we've
also added those within the
amendment so that's currently
what we have before the
committee today madam chair.
Thank you a chairwoman Lewis and
I I think I should move the
amendment for discussion
purposes.
Thank.
Representative
Okay any discussion of the
amendment.
Any opposition to the amendment.
I see no opposition and your
bill is amended.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee members.
You madam chair yes
Representative Fajardo.
I I just want to
confirm that is the doctor three
version of the amendments that
were were adopting the dot you
had an error what.
We're talking a dot three
version.
Is that Representative Lewis is
that correct is that correct.
Thank you Representative Harper
yes thank you Representative
Harper for that clarification.
So we have adopted to to to.
Four two one six dot.
Three correct.
Correct all right is there
Are there any clarifying
questions from the members and
then I'll go to the public.
Right.
We let the attendees N. if we
haven't I guess we have any
comments.
From.
The public input I see one hand
raised it says room three
seventeen and
we on mute that person and
please identify yourself.
Room three for seventeen.
Seventeen has been a need.
Madam chair we have one member
of the public here to make
comments.
I'm okay very good could we
please have that person identify
themselves yes I'm Christine
could you Clovis I represent
what registered lobbyists what's
going back to try.
In your comment please my
comment is that we sent Lee are.
Support the amendments to
include the tribe.
As many times we tried was not
included as part of the tribal
when times when Mexico so this
specimen that and we are very
happy and pleased to see that
thank you very much to.
Representative Lewis and the
members of the committee.
thank you for that comment
Robert up in Dhaka if we could
on mute Robert.
I'm gonna need it good morning
madam chair members of the
committee yes well I'm a
lobbyist for the public will
walk in and we did have a couple
of concerns with the with the
bill was originally drafted we
think that this ammendment.
I should hopefully take care of
those concerns but if we could
just get a copy of that
amendment just verify that would
be great.
I'm sure Representative
chairwoman blue would be happy
to get you one thank thank you
madam chair.
When there's a person named Y.
LA.
You can please on mute yourself
on your and.
Hello good morning.
Okay that we have your full name
please yes good morning madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Dennis one here I am
the tax and revenue director
with the level of us not and
also part of the Pueblo tax
administrators coalition P. tech
as we call it I I just like to
thank the chair chairwoman
Georgene Louis and our legal
representative and Rogers and
the committee for their support
and hopefully getting this past
we've been working on this for
quite some time and I hope it
just opens up a little bit of
the relationship that we
currently have with NM TRD we
have been working with that
group Mr Mumford and his team
and and the internal auditors
and everybody in relation to the
joint powers agreement so again
on behalf of alkaline appreciate
your assistance and thank you
very much thank you for your
dissipation I the.
Do not see any other hands
raised so let's go back to the
committee.
Committee questions comments.
All right Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair and the
chair blue it's great to see you
here this morning and I just
want to ask a couple where I
question just what everyone
knows.
what we're a we're about to vote
on I I think this is a good
legislation with the changes and
I want to thank you for for
working with me and others on on
this ammendment.
So current law
Madam chairman and chairman
Lewis.
Is that for
I tried to participate in a try
to post participate in this
arrangement where tax revenue
department helps with the
collection and distribution of
taxes.
There that that cash rate within
the the the jurisdiction of the
tribe or pueblo had to be equal
to or lower than the prevailing
rate of the surrounding areas
that the tax for the surrounding
areas is that correct.
Madam chair and Representative
Harper that's correct.
Yeah so thank you madam chair
and and Carol Lewis and and so
really the the main impetus to
this bill is that there may be
some tribes or pueblos that want
to have a tax rate that is
higher
than the prevailing area and and
that right now would exclude
them from than working with tax
revenue department on that
collection and distributions.
and so.
Madam chair and interim worst I
really like the the solution we
came to here which is that.
I'm not really sure why we had
the limitation in the first
place.
I think if.
They want to partner with the
tax department and have whatever
tax rebate they want to have
that that's their prerogative
I'm I'm get to know madam chair
Caroline let's why in current
law is set that way you know.
Madam chair and representative
Harper I'll let my expert answer
that I don't know that we have
an official answer but a letter
you might have a little more
history than myself.
Got it.
Morning everyone this change in
the law originally came about
because of a dispute involving
taxation involving a Pueblo that
has the misfortune of having at
least two counties and one
municipality in which is lands
were located.
And I'm the result of those
negotiations led to this
requirement.
It has been a bone of contention
for other tribes ever since and
has led to some tribes just
saying it it wasn't worth it to
enter into a cooperative
agreement with the state.
So I would say that lessons
learned over a decade have
suggested that we change the
approach.
Thank you for that history and
background share and enjoy
listen and expert I'm I'm very
grateful for that
and and I thank you this is a
great segue into to the the
other question I had
Which is we are adding
in this amendment as well to.
Two tribes to the list of those
who can qualify for this
cooperative agreement.
And.
And Madam chair blue.
there there is often good reason
why a tribe or pueblo might
choose not to participate in
this proper treatment
this language in the amendment
does not require them to
participate are.
Madam chair representative
Harper it does not so you're
correct.
Yeah Madam chairman list thank
you for that and I I I really
think that's a great
However latest I like when we
have options and things are not
required
that way if they decide in the
future they would like to return
to the club of agreement I mean
I know there there are sometimes
issues with double taxation and
the Navajo Nation because
you know you you don't quite
have that
TRD kind of watching both and
just the the transaction so
maybe in the future they might
want to consider that but I
appreciate that this was not
require them so
thank you for that I'm I'm
instructor part of your your
legislation and I appreciate the
the time the answer to my
question thank you.
Thank you Representative Harper
Representative Sheryl Luton.
Thank you madam chair I think
Representative Harper.
Extended in.
The questions that I wanted to
ask and I just feel like it's
just more of a COVID now and and
I think that you know a
sovereign government have the
right to adjust their their tax
rates accordingly I want to
thank you for bringing this
forward I don't know that this
is an issue in our tax code to
thank you so much.
Representative Strickler.
Thank you madam chair
just it just a couple of
questions.
In the original in the original
law of madam chair and and
Representative Lewis.
That was entered into in the
early nineteen nineties the
Navajo Nation was not a
participant.
And and now they now they are
are they they have the option.
Madam chair and representative
sure clear so right when it was
originally ran it's my
understanding that Navajo Nation
didn't want to be part of the
cooperative agreements but now
there interested in taking a
look at it so that's why we've
added them so that if they then
decide to enter into an
agreement with the Department
and they're able to do that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative
what is what is the Navajo
Nation doing currently currently
with their G. R. T. system are
they
You know we were next door
neighbors Farmington Kirtland
next door neighbors to the
Navajo Nation and I'm just
curious how they operate now.
Chair woman Representative I
believe there are administering
their own tax but I'll let I'll
defer to and Rodgers.
Chair woman and Representative
yes you are correct.
Louis they are operate their own
tax administration system but I
do know that they have expressed
interest in a cooperative
agreement with the state of New
Mexico.
So currently thank you madam
chair and thank you.
Export.
So currently there they're doing
their own thing there are many
string around G. R. T..
What's the split between the
Navajo Nation and state
government.
Women and Representative so
because there is no cooperative
agreement there is no school at
when there is a cooperative
agreement then there is a
is it twenty eighty split.
It's seventy five twenty five
seventy five twenty five okay
seventy five twenty split and
and I believe there's also an
additional cost for the
administration of the tax so a
lot of tribes right now are just
too small to be able to handle
that administrative tasks so
it's been a win win for those
tribes and the department and
coming to an agreement entering
that agreement and having that
partnership.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Lewis.
So.
So currently I'm just trying to
stand at the Navajo Nation
because
we're such we're such close
neighbors and I'm just for my
education purposes so the Navajo
Nation currently are they
charging
whatever rate they want to our
state eight point three seven
five which is the same rate in
the city of Farmington out
maybe our expert knows that
answer.
I'm not certain but I do know
that they are charging their own
right and I don't know whether
it's higher or lower than
farming the right.
In that neighborhood thank you
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Lewis an
expert well I'll have to look
that up but they're pretty
competitive I don't think they
want to be charging a higher
rate
and I know this bill allows you
to charge higher rates but they
take a risk there and I'm sure
there's gonna be some
competitive pressure not to
write raise their their rates
higher than city of pharmacy for
example which I believe is eight
point three seven five percent I
may be off of an eight to
percent thank you madam chair
thank you Representative that
answers you that takes care may
thanks thank you representative
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair just three
quick questions hopefully one
that was just brought up by the
AG's office just as to you know
the sort of blanket approach
knowing that this is sort of
focused on acting up of low how
you know why the project to be a
statewide verses you know doing
that agreements one to one with
with each Pueblo are tried.
Madam chair representative so
the grievance themselves are one
on one with each tribe so we're
only changing of the the law
that states how much the tribe
can tax in comparison to the
local government but every
single tribe that wants to enter
into an agreement has its own
agreement with the department.
Okay that's helpful to the
questions one this doesn't
of fact the excise tax structure
whatsoever it's just here to see
if that's if I just wanted
clarification on that I'm madam
chairwoman Representative that's
correct.
Finally I'm just curious about
how destination sourcing as
going to work with this law just
because it's been a hard one I
think for a lot of folks across
the state and first wrap their
heads around it and and you know
figure out how it might be an
opportunity for economic
development and you know public
tribal areas do you know or
anticipate what that structure
will need for this
a great lease agreements or non
agreements.
Chairman and Representative so
the department has actually been
working with the tribal
association in in terms of
handling things that are coming
up and for that I believe many
tribes that have cooperative
agreements with the state
extended agreements to include
those is that correct and.
The chairman and Representative
yes that's correct they were
amendments to the cooperative
agreement that many of the our
tribes enter into hi in this
summer that were negotiated with
the NM TRD to address that
particular issue.
That's very helpful thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative I'm really
grateful for the opportunity to
look at how we might be able to
engage and greater economic
development using taxation as a
tool so you know our district
hosts for sovereign Pablo's and
in which case this might be a
great option but will be looking
at it closely as it moves
through the process with any
concerns and all reach out to
you if there are any at this
point it seems like we're we're
good said good to go thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative Representative
Lara Cadena.
Thank you madam chair if
appropriate like to move house
bill fifteen I'd like to make a
depressed motion on house bill
fifteen as amended.
Okay so I'm gonna look for
guidance here is it appropriate
at this point or should I just
wait until we have all comments
and then will take the motion
that might only take the motion
after we hear from our
Representative Lente that's
okay.
Representative Lente thank you
madam chair no question comment
which is second Representative
this.
Okay
would you like to make your
motion of Representative Lara
Cadena yes I'd actually seen his
hand go up madam chair side
texted I said I was going to
make the motion are you well
we're coordinating here but
madam chair I do pass on house
bill fifteen as amended thank
you okay we have a due pass from
Representative Lara Cadena and
seconded by Representative Lente
Kimberly will you call the roll
please.
Yes I'm Representative Kevin.
Yes.
Speaker
I'm not too sure he ended up
training I don't see him on the
list.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
It's.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Yes.
Representative Maestas.
Yes
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
We can come back to M. Kimberly
sure that Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler.
Yes.
Vice chair heard.
Yes.
Chairwoman.
I want to go back to
Representative Montoya C..
Representative Montoya I see
that you're on the line
Common us concern you see.
I'm not getting a response from
the time.
All right.
Representative.
Yes.
Well yes vote and nine one zero.
Okay when you have a due pass
chairwoman as amended thank you
thank you madam chairwoman and
committee members and thank you
Representative Harper to for
working with me on the amendment
I appreciate it.
Next on the agenda is house bill
thirty four
Representative Ferrary
chairwoman Ferrari has both
house bill thirty four and
thirty five could we admit her
and she may have some experts
that we want to admit as well.
I just admitted her as a
panelist.
Representative Ferrary.
There you are right.
You have any experts who need to
be admitted as well.
Madam chair okay great all.
The floor is yours thank you
madam chair house bill thirty
four amends the existing a new
solar market development and tax
credit to do three things and it
makes the tax credit refundable
it will raise the annual cap
from eight million to sixteen
million and it extends the
sunset date from twenty twenty
eight to twenty thirteen to to
a line with the expected
expiration date for the federal
tax incentives and New Mexico
reinstated the solar market
development tax credit in twenty
twenty.
And unfortunately this of.
Well.
It offering a personal income
tax credit of ten percent of the
cost to purchase and to install
a solar system and the credit
cannot exceed six thousand
dollars for taxpayers will a
year and can only be applied
against a tax liability and
unfortunately this is limited
the accessibility to
disincentive to only those
individuals who have sufficient
income to create a tax liability
to offset the credit so my bill
seeks to address this inequity.
By making the tax credit
refundable and therefore S.
sensible to those New Mexicans
who don't have sufficient income
to create a tax liability.
And this is a matter of equity
by making the new solar market
development tax credit
refundable this incentive will
open the door to significantly
for New Mexicans to install
solar panels on their property.
And we will be providing equal
access to this valuable
incentive furthering New
Mexico's energy transition to
clean energy.
This tax credit will no longer
be limited to those privileged
enough to have high incomes.
And making this solar tax credit
assessable to so many more New
Mexicans needs that the annual
cap needs to be raised to
sixteen million from the eight
million and finally this bill
amends the sunset date two
twenty thirty two in order to
harmonize with the expected
expiration date of the federal
income tax first solar
installations with that madam
chair I pressed for questions.
Thank you Representative are
there any clarifying questions
and then we'll go to the
audience.
I see none all those in favor of
the bill please raise your
hands.
Okay.
All right.
Let me let's start there.
I see a person named Jennifer
Weber.
Good morning at your camera
Committee members my name is
Jennifer Weber and I am here on
behalf of the New Mexico chamber
of commerce the chamber supports
thirty four which makes changes
new solar market development
income tax credit including
extending and doubling that
tapped and making a refundable
the credit has been successful
and growing solar in New Mexico
and we believe HB thirty four
well expanded accelerate that
growth we urge your support
thank you.
Thank you.
Angelo.
Many.
In a very.
I had and what we hear you okay
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee on
mental to maybe from Albuquerque
speaking for myself my family in
favor of HB thirty four we're
facing a climate emergency and
New Mexico's already seeing the
serious adverse consequences of
climate change urgent action is
required the transition to
renewable energy including solar
is essential.
Tension between growth in our
sunny state residential.
Public comment you can grow and
create jobs as well as lower
energy bills for New Mexicans
because the bill makes a tax
credit refundable it's more
meaningful for lower income New
Mexicans will further increase
the use of rooftop solar to
address our climate emergency
thank you for your time I urge
you to support house bill thirty
four.
Thank you we see what we're all
yes.
Yes good morning madam chair and
members of the committee as was
gonna with the Sierra Club Rio
Grande it's after representing
over thirty five thousand
members in New Mexico we
strongly support HB thirty four
New Mexico as you know as the
second setting a state and and
the country and with more than
three hundred and days of
sunshine we can produce more
than a thousand times our
current energy demand of the
solar programs such as the
residential tax credits help
grow energy SO sorry solar
energy in New Mexico creating
jobs and lower your bills one of
the best things about this bill
is that it is a tax credit
refundable which means that this
will really help people that
traditionally could not afford
to put solar in the on the roof
solar is is are really costly
myself as a homeowner
the other it it with it's
difficult for my wife and I to
four support this could actually
give us the possibility to do it
a tax rebate will help families
like ours get solar other.
The legislation is key as well
to protecting our climate and we
strongly urge your support thank
you very much for your time.
Thank you so much that we see
let's see rocking back us.
Rocky Mr chair can you hear me
now yes.
Thank you very much madam chair
and committee members of as a
solar install since since the
market development tax credit
was passed in twenty twenty
we've seen a fifty three percent
increase in employment so it's
been a successful program and
we're creating careers for
average technician is paid
between fifty five and seventy
five thousand dollars a year
depending on their training
level and so this is something
that will benefit and pay itself
back in terms of jobs and and
long term careers because there
will always be a need for local
service and while the warranty
on solar is very low less than
one percent when you talk about
millions of panels that still
going to create a lot of careers
so because of the advantage to
the state we urge passage of
this and thank you for your time
madam chair committee members.
Thank you and walk ins.
In.
Okay can use.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on can use
representing the coalition of
sustainable communities which is
comprised of Los Alamos Santa Fe
Albuquerque and Los crucis.
The refundable portion of this
bill really resonates with me so
many people with fixed income
can't take advantage of the the
credits because no or low tax
liabilities this is a big help
for them I also urge in a
separate guest out of
appropriations committee more
funding for energy conservation
division to help of as the.
Taxes available through this is
down there I have a lot more
work so so you can get the staff
thank you.
Thank you R. Peterson.
Our own.
Here we go.
Thank you madam chairman and
members we my name is Carl
Peterson of individual
Albuquerque we support this bill
and these changes this is
another step towards reducing
climate change in New Mexico
thank you very much.
Thank you Margaret L..
Yes good morning thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Margaret bell I live
in Albuquerque and I'm speaking
in favor of HB thirty four
between two thousand eight in
two thousand sixteen the solar
tax credit was successful in
helping New Mexico homeowners
retailers and farmers install
nearly forty eight megawatts of
solar energy and just in twenty
twenty and twenty twenty one
residents use the credit to at
thirty point three megawatts
this is broad economic benefits
of a hundred nineteen solar
companies with eighteen hundred
and eighty solar jobs and total
solar investment of two point
four billion in New Mexico I am
asking the committee to pass HB
thirty four due to the public
health environmental and
economic benefits of wider use
of solar energy from the
successful tax credit thank you.
Thank you Stephanie you
Weisberg.
Where madam chair and members of
the committee my names Stephanie
Y. spirit live in terrorists New
Mexico and I'm a member of the
democratic rural caucus and also
three fifty New Mexico real
advocacy I have solar and I've
been fortunate to be able to
afford it without a tax credit
and I'm very glad about this
bill that will allow other
people in lower income brackets
to afford it I love solar
because it's quiet it's clean
and it's amazing that out of
basically stand you can get
electricity New Mexico actually
is the number one state the best
state for producing electricity
from the sun because we're
cooler than Phoenix and Arizona
so we're much more efficient at
producing electricity so I urge
you to please pass M. H. bills
thirty four thank you so much
thank you ascena
this to do I know we've met
before Christodoulou and if it
is pronounced your name
correctly for me in a.
Thank you Representative
Chandler my name's Athena crease
to do the chair committee
members thank you for putting
this bill up I'm a member of the
Atlanta progressive caucus and
environmental justice caucus
this bill represents
environmental justice it means
my friend who is a hundred
percent disabled veteran and has
no tax liability can now afford
to put solar in and that will
reduce her energy payments thank
you for putting this for forward
and please pass H. B. thirty
four.
Thank you in this chart in.
M..
which number Mr Arjun.
The stern is a stand up.
Okay I think I'm good enough
thank you very much so Madam
chairman members the committee
Jim day showdown I'm with the
renewable energy industry
association of New Mexico we've
been involved in these type of
policy since two thousand and
four with forty five diverse
members the solar market
development tax credit which was
first adopted in two thousand
and six has been instrumental in
the installation of
approximately thirty five solar
thirty five thousand solar
systems in the state of New
Mexico and as such we created an
industry that now employs about
two thousand people however one
thing about the tax credit how
it is currently in place is that
because it is a tax credit it is
not available to a lot of low
and middle income families that
don't have a lot of tax
liability so by making the tax
credit refundable would allow
many more families to take
advantage of this great
incentive read the environmental
cost saving benefits of having
solar we are to do pass thank
you very much and thank you so
much Jim and lastly Louise
Martinez.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee.
My name is Louise Martinez and
I'm the director of the energy
conservation and management
division within the energy
minerals and natural resources
department hi Division is the
one that would be responsible
for processing and administering
this tax credit.
In bringing back the solar
market development tax credit
was a priority for the governor
and the state legislature.
This was to incentivize clean
energy and to help me our
state's kind of goals that tax
credit has really spurred job
creation in the last two years
and solar investment in all
parts of the state and this has
really moved rooftop solar to be
very successful in our state
however I do need to bring to
your attention that the tax
credit has proved to be more
popular than ever and
applications have exceeded what
we had anticipated receiving.
As we noted in our FY are we
anticipate that the changes to
the tax credit will likely
increase the number of
applications that will need to
be processed so to effectively
support the timely processing
and issuance of tax credit
certificates to New Mexico tech
speakers we ask support for
increasing staff resources to
effectively administer this
program thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you.
Are there any members of the
public in opposition.
I see I see someone named and
what I can see where you an
opposition or maybe you were in
favor only missed you and.
Madam chair members of the
committee my apologies I am in
favor of the issue technical
difficulties on this and may I
proceed with a brief statement
of support just briefly we do
want to talk about the bill.
Great thank you
Martin Luther king junior's of
federal holiday is the day
before the legislature starts he
has commented in many ways very
articulately that we are now
faced with the fact that
tomorrow is today and there's no
time for just a at the fear
complacency this is the time for
vigorous and positive action
climate justice is the urgency
of today in this bill doesn't
address the totality of the
problem but it certainly begins
to address some of the issues
the signal to new markets that
New Mexico is open for entries
solar penetration and local jobs
bill that invest wisely in the
future of New Mexicans tail New
Mexicans I urge you to support
for house bill thirty four thank
you very much thank you let's go
back to the committee
Any committee questions
Representative Strickler.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
Ferrary we heard this bill and
energy and and
had a good discussion of this
bill and the the current current
law we have an eight million
dollar cap.
it does run out twenty twenty
eight which is six years from
now and
the expenditure the public took
advantage of about three point
three six million dollars I
believe in twenty twenty
and so it was why under the
eight million dollars that was
allocated for this regional tax
credit so with the refundable
portion Madam chair
representative of the theory
behind that is it would it would
be more accessible to low end
and middle income folks is is
that your strategy here.
Madam chairman Representative
Strickler yes and
I my understanding is that the
twenty twenty over nine months
period twenty three hundred
sixty four solar installations
were certified for an aggregate
tax credit of six million six
hundred eighty two thousand
eight hundred thirty one and so
we and for twenty twenty one as
of January of this year they've
already certified
sixteen hundred eighty people
are tax credits for over five
million so yes this could grow
and.
So we want to have that cap to
accommodate all of those
refundable tax credits.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative my numbers are a
little off then so there's a
little more participation
close to five million dollars
and utilization and twenty
twenty one excuse me twenty
twenty twenty twenty one still
below the eight million so of
the refundable portion might
might get you to that point to
the eight million now.
My neighbor I have a little
experience with the rooftop
solar my neighbor
in Farmington.
Put a four kilowatt system in.
cash about.
you know time flies ten years
ago and he was able to do it now
he's like Trish and so he did
all the work yourself the bottom
panels himself that from
wholesaler in Phoenix and
brought them and and and put in
a four kilowatt system
and I know you're the expert
today how much is a four
kilowatt system which is a
pretty good size system
A cost today.
I don't think they've gone up
right
Let me see if my experts can
give me an idea I'm sorry
solar panel here geothermal
person.
Yes and solar okay good.
so I don't have an answer for
that but solar panels have
become less expensive over the
years especially the past five
to ten years and you know.
My home is of about two thousand
square feet and I had eighteen
panels so you know.
Better and more efficient now
yeah and and that's what I've
been hearing madam chair and and
Representative.
And I'm just going by inspection
he's got two rows of my neighbor
has two rows of us solar panels
facing the staff that we've got
beautiful sunshine and and and
Farmington.
and.
I'm not sure how many panels
that you know he has he's got a
pretty big house that thirty
five hundred square feet and
and I think you saved about a
hundred dollars a month.
In late Trish the bills if I'm
not mistaken so we have to do
the economic shin I just know a
lot of low income middle income.
Folks in my community.
Inflation is really ravage their
their disposable income and
is gonna be very difficult for
them to
expand let's say twenty thousand
dollars for a four kilowatt
system on that I think that's
probably reasonable.
they're gonna have a hard time
even with the refundable portion
to take that plunge
let me some but some will.
some well but I know the cost of
vehicles used vehicles have just
skyrocketed in our community I'm
sure throughout the state.
And that seems a bit of a a big
ticket item for them so this is
kind of a luxury item I still
think.
This budget the the operand come
folks
To double the the annual
expenditure seems to be a little
bit hi I think with the
refundable portion of your bill
and with six years left on the
current tax credit
it'll be it'll be interesting to
see if you you actually reach
that eight million dollars
currently and and maybe well
but to double that boy I tell
you
I know things are kind of tight
so thank you very much madam
chair and and Representative
Ferrary the those are my
those are my questions thank
you.
Representative thank you
Representative Strickler
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair and chair
for our it's great to see you
this morning.
yeah was an ice that evening
yesterday.
It was yeah and and the surprise
snow this morning that was that
was fun to.
so I I have a couple technical
questions and then and then just
some comments
So
chair and and Schardin Ferrari.
So are you familiar with the
I'm in terms of the exact
raised that to some of our solar
companies use when they are
market to residential homes but
it's like a purchase power
purchase agreement are you
familiar with these were the
essentially lease the the the
panels to folks but they don't
actually own them.
I'm.
Madam chair and representative
of Harper I.
I am not familiar with that now
okay so so I'll be I'll be brief
the manager and ensure Ferrary
this is really how the industry
has been able to help those on
lower income or middle income
take advantage of getting solar
panels and.
I've had several people knock on
my door offering service for
companies offering this but what
they do is instead of.
All right purchasing the home or
outright purchasing the the
solar panels the company.
leases them essentially to the
home owner and they do what's
called a power purchase
agreement where they say okay
every every year you're gonna be
paying this much a months for
the solar panels and it's gonna
be less than your energy bill an
opinion how they structured it
might go up over time or my stay
flat or whatever but you to
Homer essentially signs up for a
twenty year and sometimes thirty
year agreement with the solar
company and and they and the
install them they maintain them
so what people do this I think
it's not good financial
practice trying not good I mean
we need to use more financial
literacy in high school to help
our our folks.
But what happens is the solar
company gets the benefit of the
federal and the state tax
credit.
and but folks to perhaps come
out right by one can get solar
panels on their on the roof.
so so.
Chair of chair and and ensure
Ferrary I I think.
I'm I'm unsure how much actual
increase.
I'm in sales will see by making
this a credit refundable I
understand the reasoning why you
wanna make a refundable so that
folks will run that lower and
who don't have perhaps New
Mexico tax burden or that they
will build a refund I'm just I'm
not sure we'll see a big
increase because the the
industry or eat making inroads
with most people using this this
other financial mechanism.
but.
Chair for a do you know about
how much right now this credit
is
Costing the general fund.
Madam chair and Representative
Harper
Just to address that you're
talking about for your vinyl
people are vulnerable to scams
but that's not the subject of
this bill but to answer your
question about
That's what I was just
mentioning to Representative
Strickler that the tax credit
was six point six million in
twenty twenty and so far we've
already seen five point one
in tax credit certificates
for twenty twenty one in twenty
twenty two so it could go a lot
higher by the time people you
know get their applications for
the tax credit in.
Yes so madam chair and chair
furry I'm.
I'm I I ask that because I'm not
sure that numbers right
and and maybe I'm mistaken but
I'm looking at the tax
expenditure report that's part
of puts out every year.
And under the solar market.
You know the solar energy
systems you're cheated auction
I'm sure.
In twenty twenty one it was a
three million dollar impact to
the general fund and a.
one point six million dollar
impact to local governments.
And and I I know that's G. R. T.
I'm trying to find the the.
The ticket do you do you know
where we could find those
numbers I don't I don't even see
that in the in the FIR.
Madam chair representative
Harper I do not.
Okay all right so I'll I'll do
some digging all the.
What what we'll figure that out
So I guess the relevance to that
the question I mean the first
question was just you know it is
making this refundable really
gonna help the markets already
kind of taking advantage of ways
to help reach out to to those
that might not of.
You know so okay I'm not sure
that this question is do we
really need to raise the cap
from its existing eight million
to sixteen million
I do is you'll probably see more
activity but looking at these
numbers are we really gonna see
a four five six fold increase in
activity I would say maybe at
the most two fold your thoughts
on that sure Madam chair
representative Harper that's the
whole idea of with the bill is
that we're trying to accomplish
more getting more people to take
advantage of having solar
because not having
you know and electric bills is
it a really amazing and I once
had a fifteen cent of built in
so getting it so that it's more
equitable more people can take
advantage of this and
You know it's really important
that we make this available.
For more more people and having
that a cap raised now so that we
don't have to keep raising it in
the future as it grows out to
twenty thirty two you know we
could be more easily.
so madam chair and chair for I I
appreciate your your
Your your comments in your your
thoughts on that I and and and
I.
I'm just I'm just trying to look
at the the numbers and being
being practical here I I I don't
think we'll see that huge
increase in in gross I think we
will see some increase in gross.
Like I said maybe twice as much
but I I I appreciate your your
your optimism there and and
understand where you're coming
from that's okay so this does
that maybe a couple comments on
where I'm out on solar and then.
I'm on the merits of of this
particular credit because I.
I think is important right so I
I really believe that there will
be a day when we just how our
roofs in and solar panels.
it's it's a great form of energy
and our roofs are basically
wasted space you know and you
know yes was already doing this
right they've got some some
solar panels that are
structurally similar to roofing
material.
so I really believe will get
their.
The problem right now the big
problem is energy storage.
Right you can get a lot of great
solar during the day but there's
not at night and there really
has not been a great innovation
energy storage since the
batteries and wasn't filled
invented by by full time you
know back in the day.
and so we really need some break
ground energy storage and then
we'll see this just really take
off.
I'm.
And I really think that
Naturally as as we become
smarter and innovation continues
we are going to move into a
condo means that are are not so
dependent on.
coal or oil or natural gas these
kinds of things that we extract
nurse were eventually going to
move into fusion power there's
been some incredible
advancements here recently I I'm
really excited I think we'll
eventually have little many
signs that we are getting our
power from that is completely
clean.
and and the bridge between now
and then it is.
I'm just just is not solar it's
not wind
it's it's it's got to be
nuclear.
I'm.
But all that said I I'm a I'm a
big fan of electric cars US
solar power.
So setting all that aside let's
just talk about the merits of a
tax credit.
And I love your thoughts on this
So there are several different
types of tax credits in our code
I will go over all the time but
the main one is like citizen
benefit.
Right we have we have things
like we don't tax prescription
drugs we don't tax food and this
fall under citizen benefit.
This one
the the the solar market one.
Is kind of a mix of a citizen
benefit and industry benefit if
I'm if I'm just trying to be
fair and honest right so the
reason why we're doing this I
was done and for several years
federal and state level is
because solar panels were
expensive.
And we wanted to bring down the
price so that more people to buy
them and then they would
increase the throughput
production and drive costs down.
We've seen that and so I'll
actually use this credit as an
example when I when I'm talking
about different tax credits all
state this it it's sometimes
hard to tell whether tax credit
did anything if if it was just a
giveaway or what happened
otherwise but I see this is an
example of where I think it
actually did.
Where
the federal estate tax credits
helped bring down the cost of
solar.
And and now the question is.
Is the industry able to stand on
its own feet yet.
And and over the last few years
I mean you you probably heard me
say this already.
Madam chair and ensure Ferrari I
I think we're at the point where
the industry is ready for a soft
landing and Stannis on two feet.
And I work with Senator Stewart
Senator three four years ago to
give a soft landing for ten.
Percent of a couple years and
nine percent a percent to get my
soft landing I voted for that
legislation because it over over
seven eight years and went down
to zero because like one of the
members who was in the audience
spoke she could afford to buy it
now for self.
And so we just ask ourselves at
what point do we decide to stop
subsidizing the industry.
And I think we've reached that
point and I don't wanna just
give my heart cliff that's not
that's not right just say
goodbye to the tax credit but I
do believe.
A tapering off of the credit
over time soft landing is is
what's appropriate now because
the credit Senate's job.
and that's where I'm coming from
the madam chair and chair for
I'd love to hear thoughts.
Madam chair representative
Harper
I don't want to get into a
debate on tax policy with you
But the tax credit already
exists we're just trying to make
it refundable so that more
people can of participate in you
know having the advantages of
saving on their electric bills
and also if they go to having
electric vehicle being able to
as you said before the storage
is a great idea it's something
that needs to happen to
but at the climate crisis is not
a soft landing we we need to
keep this going forward.
Madam chair and ensure Ferrary I
I was with you all the way to
set the climate crisis is not a
soft landing or will.
If even if what was just if you
want to talk climate climate
crisis I think there's other
things that we could do with
this money that would be more
effective at addressing that
Santa Ana the agency credit but
all that said.
Tax policy wise I think folks
here know that I'm a I'm an
equal opportunity tax credit
here FTEs.
I think that it's a government
ends up picking winners and
losers and in the end taxes are
there your necessary evil that
funds essential services we
should tax everything and taxed
at a lower rate.
And so when we we do things like
this to the tax code try to use
it to help a particular industry
I I get it.
But when when is the point that
we finally stop or do we just
pick our favorite industries and
always subsidized I think that's
terrible tax policy so here I'm
trying I'm trying to extend an
olive branch and say look.
Okay I I get it we've got this
year
and and it has helped the
industries.
But eventually.
We would.
We we just got a not be funding
or subsidising everything into
this industry offline because
it's done its job it's really
reduce costs and the costs are
now in in a good place and and
the continue to innovate the
scientists will and I'll install
counsel continue better more
efficient and cheaper and last
longer.
so I I I believe in the the the
innovations innovative spirit
here especially in in in in
America.
So I just I think.
I think it's about time for for
a soft landing but I appreciate
your your perspective on your
thoughts on that and I have
At any further comment four
yield the floor.
Madam chair and and
Representative Parker.
We anticipate to make all our
energy on this many rooftops as
we can to help
Provide cleaner energy and and
also the savings more more
people.
Thank you madam chair thank you
J. Ferrary I appreciate the the
time of the discussion and
I am I'm not thank you.
All right Representative Lujan.
Thank you madam chair thank you
to sponsor
I and and really really about
this for actually have signed on
to this bill with you and I just
want to you make accommodate
that yes we we see the climate
change
And how climate change continues
to affect.
our economy and and everything
every aspect of our lives right
now and we are doing the
responsible thing.
I hate putting more effort and
more
Into renewable resources like
solar energy and that's what
this that's what this program
has done the service tax returns
that and I think that this is
something
it is doable I can understand
some of the the questions that
were asked today but I think
that as as stated earlier that
our our state.
The second son you state in the
in the country then we need to
take more opportunity and we
need to provide more options for
our public to take advantage of
of this type of rebate and I
think that that's what this does
and we heard today also from
our agency from EMNRD and and
saying how much our public is
taking advantage of this to the
point where you know they're
asking persistent asking for
perhaps another or two FTE ease
in their department to help with
this and that's where my concern
is I think we can what will
address that and look at that in
other ways in our and our budget
for the state but I just want to
say this is something that is
needed and moving forward as we
are looking to renewable energy
standards and creating those
opportunities as a response to
what is going on with the crime
Prices that you're facing right
now so thank you madam chair
PC I appreciate the opportunity
and we support this legislation
thank you.
Thank you Representative
representative Lente.
Thank you madam chairman good
morning Representative Ferrary
just a few questions I can
appreciate you bringing this
this legislation I'm all for any
piece of legislation that
provides equity especially in
regards to renewable energy in
the access to that are we
renewable energy for members of
our of our of our state that
perhaps might not have been able
to access that.
In the past and so my question
to you madam chair and
representative is when you speak
of of lower income New Mexicans
what what what is that the
finest.
Madam chair and representative
Who.
People who
Can afford to invest in the
savings for their electric
energy and.
I don't have a certain
Income level that you know we
think can afford it we're just
if we make it refundable it'll
make it so it's easier for
people to be able to take
advantage and get that savings
without having to rely on having
a tax credit.
Thank you thank you thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative follow that to
that is because I represent a
majority of the minority in in
in my district and that is
impact the state when I can I
take a ride to house district
sixty five that begins in
setting up a little bit of Leo
the pueblo is the Natalie
chapters and all up to the a
past meetings.
I don't see solar panels and and
anyone who and I'm wondering do
we have a map at this point in
time I I assume that we probably
would have a map of the homes
that are appreciating the tax
incentives that we extend to to
citizens of the state so far.
Madam chair and representative
I don't think there is any
analysis of done of but we you
know would like to see you know
reports given on how many people
which I think EMNRD already
probably does
But as far as the map is
a physical map I don't think
there's anything like that done.
Absolutely right madam chair and
representative we need to have
solar on as many
at homes as possible and so
having this refundable tax
credit.
It might be able to apply it
more easily to whatever
arrangements they make to have
the solar energy solar panels
installed.
Thank you Representative Madam
chair representative and I guess
this goes to my next point and
and because we don't have a map
of and perhaps figures aren't
readily available but but we
have numbers representing how
much how much in dollar figures
tax credits have been offered to
people in the state we don't
have a map or or or or a
guideline regards to I guess I'm
going with this is is is when I
when I look at a bill that I get
a ton of email saying support
this or don't support this and I
see that the number of people
that support this I see them all
coming from the large
metropolitan areas of our of our
state the Albuquerque's the
Santa fe's and and that's
fantastic and not less than and
and and they're very fortunate
to be able to for these types of
of products for their homes but
you know to do to be in all
fairness I mean how and when and
where and do you think this is
the way to get solar services
renewable energy into those
underserved
communities where you know
demographically that they're
just not their socio economics
are not there to help them
sustain and even think of making
these kind of investments he
called an investment into
renewable energy but I think at
the end of the day you know when
you look at things like this.
In my mind many of my
constituents are looking just to
try to buy groceries for for for
for their children and and not
necessarily trying to see state
of the art is not is not tough
on top of their list and so you
know what my question is it is
it is simple I mean is is this
the bills that that will ensure
that members in in the town of
Bernalillo or the Navajo Nation
chapters or in any of the
Pueblo.
We'll begin to.
Realized solar energy as an
alternative as opposed to having
to pay behemoths cooperative
trick or PNM or whatever they
they had their services to.
Madam chair and representative
it's that's a really good point
and and concerns that we want to
this bill will make solar more
affordable for those communities
and more solar companies will be
able to expand and make the
opportunity available and it's
not so much you know.
Making investment for climate
change reduction but for their
reduction in Seoul and electric
and energy costs.
Okay and last question madam
chair and representative it is
this credit for home residences
only or order would be extended
to any type of larger rate of.
Of solar panels like on
administration building a
governmental building or
anything else like that.
It is
tailored for residential but you
know businesses can also.
Apply what they're however the
the bill is now the tax
certificate we're not changing
that we're just making it
refundable okay Madam chair
representative thank thank you
for asking answer my questions
you know this is not about me
being negative toward renewable
energy and I'm I'm a I'm a big
fan but I just can't wait until
it's accessible to all can all
of our constituents and not just
those that are in middle to
upper class that can afford this
type of services so chair and
representative thank you very
much.
Thank you Representative.
Representative Scott.
Thank you madam chair just a
couple of real quick questions
most of mine have been answered.
This credit will pay.
Will offer a refundable credit
for up to ten percent of the
system cost.
In a research in the US.
Well if the discussion was
ongoing it looks like to system
from from.
A fifteen to twenty.
Five thousand dollars which
would maybe on on on the
installation of one of the
system for the credit would pay
basically for the down payment.
On the system is.
Pretty.
Reasonably accurate maps.
Madam chair and Representative
Strickler yes it you know it
it's a good way to get it
started and then
Be able to afford.
So Madam chair representative.
It would still leave the folks
want to purchase one of the
systems out of pocket
between twelve and twenty three
thousand dollars.
So.
So I suppose I could make the
case that it was would not.
Enable purchases assisted by
many low and middle income
families because that's
particularly this time.
Hey your pretty good out of
pocket expense okay one more
question madam chair
representative so that the
federal budget expires in twenty
twenty four I believe I heard
Representative this was going to
extend the sunset up to twenty
thirty two to match the federal
budget is flying from motion
with respect to the sunset
Senator Steinborn incorrect.
Representative Madam chair
representative Strickler back to
your other point you know it
depends on the circumstance you
know of the cost of the solar
system and things like that but
This is geared for
you know lower middle lower and
middle income you know of
families who do care about us
there cost savings for their
electric energy so but to your
point about the extension of the
Our state tax credit ends in
twenty twenty eight we're
extending it to meet with the
expected federal.
Credit to go to twenty eight
thirty two.
Madam chair and representative.
Federal credit has not.
In extended his point was was
not a.
Asian in the build back better.
Legislation that.
At least for now looks to have
been derailed.
Yes that that was part of the
build back better but it though
if they take it and do different
portions of it
in separate bills were we are
confident and hopeful that it
will happen.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative that's all the
questions.
Thank you Representative Scott I
up.
I'm sorry.
I I'm sorry I called
Representative Scott Strickler
and.
We often get them confuse
Representative.
So I
I have a couple at are there any
other question there are other
questions so Representative
Herndon.
Thank you very much madam chair
and madam chair representative
Ferrari my question to you is as
we have been supporting and the.
The land and middle income
individuals utilizing solar
credit solar panels rather so
that they can get a refund on
the taxes can you tell me what
it was their survey done to so
that this was a top priority for
low and middle income
individuals.
Madam chair and
Representative at her did.
I don't believe there's been a
survey but I know we have a lot
of support from of the different
environmental and conservation
groups from around the state and
also from those who work at
nonprofits that work with
The difference
Groups throughout the state that
try to bring equity into all of
our different
issues in the state and this is
you know inequity is been
brought up in all kinds of
issues and so we think this is
one of them also even if people
can only four to have a couple
solar panels on their homes
today will be able to benefit.
So thank you Representative
Ferrary madam chair and then
just one other question with
respect to that you know after
we pass the number of these
bills one of the things that
often is lacking is the
education surrounding what is
the benefit of what with what it
is that we pass so my question
to you and the individual
organizations that you've been
engaging with is there an
educational component of what
you plan to do to talk about the
benefits of solar panels and
also about the application of a
refundable tax credit what once
this bill is passed.
Madam chair and representative
for did no there this bill is
just simply to
extend the years of the cap and
to have the refundable part of
it I think the solar energy
industry itself will do the the
marketing and at the education
for people as they reach out to
provide this for more more of
low income and middle income.
New Mexicans.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you.
Representative our leader
Martinez.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you of centrality and and
sponsors of this bill you know
this is critically important it
is we continue to work as the
legislature for Legislature
toward these transition that we
know we have to make toward
renewables ensuring that more
people can get.
Rooftop solar is incredibly
important I was tax chair when
we re enacted the solar tax
credit a few seconds ago at the
reserve Harper mentioned that
earlier.
and one of what gave me a lot of
hard at the time was that the
credit was not.
refundable and and you know to
to be able to target lower and
middle class households.
Can be pretty tough I'm I'm glad
to see that we have this in
front of us today and thank you
for Jeffrey for your work to
moving it to this point.
As with
Four percent harbor said I I to
take.
Credits deductions exemptions I
look at it very closely because
I know how
terribly complicated Tax Court
has become and and very
regressive is the result because
of all these car about I also
think that there are some that
are important and there are some
that are critical to.
Future development in our state
whether to kind of development
whether it's climate justice.
You name it so thank you for
bringing this forward I'm I'm so
glad that we're having this
discussion it's no longer just
about rooftop solar it's about
equitable group so and and I'm
all on board to make it happen
with your rooftop solar and
with.
Any other
strategy to get us to to a place
where we can finally transition
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
Thank you appreciate it
thank you later I I just would
like to referred to the F. I. R.
Representative on page six
There is there is a discussion
on in the the first full
paragraph or maybe it's the
second full we're here do make
some suggestions and points out
that there could be a technical
problem with the fact that we
have presently eight X. credit
system that does not have a
refundable piece and we're
implementing a new system that
does have a refundable piece and
that there needs to be an
adjustment in the legislation
what count for that and
I I I don't leave the bill at as
presently presented to us has
done that in my my not correct.
Madam chair I think that's why
we're calling it the new
The new solar market development
income tax credit and
And it will pay out refundable
going forward not from the past
so anything actually it should
make things easier because any
any
Refundable tax credit a person
has then it will make it so the
balance of it would be
refundable and then they don't
have to carry it forward year
after year but it is clear that
it just starts you know.
In twenty January of twenty
twenty two.
Okay Representative I would look
so let me just step back this
bill is going to be the object
of a temporary table motion you
know we I believe I had a
conversation with the
representative about how the
committee does its practice and
since this has a
Fiscal impact on the budget we
can free table and we review
them I would recommend that you
take a look at that because TRD
is saying that it needs
clarification in terms of
protecting those that had that
tax credits prior to this this
bill and those going for with
the rebate so just a heads up
that could be a problem if this
bill comes back but as I said
this bill is going to be subject
to a temporary table at this
point and you'll have a chance
to maybe take a look at that
again I do want to make a
comment just on philosophy and
the.
Public policy point in I tend to
agree to disagree with the with
a few of my colleagues on the
point of refunded bility in
generally is not considered good
tax policy and I also question
really whether or not hello well
intended will really support we
don't really affect lower income
people because when you're a low
income person you're thinking
about things other than solar
panels you're thinking about
repairing your car.
King about many things and you
are really not likely to be able
to take advantage of that was a
thread of discussion that I
think a couple of my colleagues
race and I just want to kind of
reiterate that I think I think
it's.
It has a good intense but I
don't think frankly it's going
to it will achieve the purpose
for which you are offering it
but as I said this is a bill
that would be subject to a
temporary table and I'm I'm
happy to entertain a motion to
that effect.
Madam chair I move to table.
Representative Strickler has
moved to table not temporary
table I want to clarify that so
if we vote yes on that motion
the bill will be at.
madam chair yes yes so so we
there actually is no such motion
as a temporary table we just we
just do that to be gentle and
nice and sweet but either way to
every table tables the same you
can move any bill off the table
at any time with a majority vote
I appreciate that Representative
harbor but I know what the
practice is banned so if the
motion is for a temporary table
I'm happy to entertain it as
such would you like to clarify
Representative Strickler.
Yes madam chair amid the
temporary table thank you very
much any objections to a
temporary table.
I see none your bill is
temporary table.
Madam chair I just
how long does that temporary
table hold this up from going
through the rest of the.
Process good question it it it
could be a little bit of a time
because we have to look at all
the bills that we receive that
have a fiscal impact and we do
an assessment of how much
capacity we have to be able to
adjust to these tax expenditures
so I can't give you an exact
date but it could be a little
bit of time.
Is that but also I just wanted
to let you know that we have the
intention of of working that out
As you suggested with TRD okay
great thank you so much
Representative and I know that.
I I just want to think of my a
co sponsor Representative Lujan
I didn't get a chance to say
that yeah great well thank you
Representative if if I'd like to
take a bill out of order
in that bill in and I apologize
Representative Ferrary but I
believe your bills your second
bill's going to be probably have
a lengthy conversation and I'd
like to focus on a bill that I
think is relatively
straightforward and we can move
it out and thank get back to
your bill and that's House Bill
eight.
The sponsors are Representative
McQueen and speaker Egolf.
They have they been and then in.
Yes the grey eagle has been
promoted to a panelist.
Matthew is in the and you
section.
Representative okay we need
Representative McQueen elevated
to panelists please.
Yes I just sent him a request to
promote him as analyst.
Okay.
We'll be presenting speaker
Egolf for Representative
McQueen.
Representative McQueen is.
The council.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
madam chair chair are expert
witness Arturo Archuleta if you
could also be promoted sure.
Has been promoted the panelists
thank you Kimberly.
For Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair
members of the committee house
bill eight is the Land Grant
assistance fund so are
traditional land grants here in
New Mexico or political
subdivisions of the state of New
Mexico.
And they had no income.
They have no source of income
they don't receive they
currently don't receive your
team taxes are a property taxes
or anything like that well the
try to provide services to their
members of the literally the
ones that have income it is
earned income so they might sell
a firewood permits or the rate
increase some cattle or hold a
bake sale I mean maybe they're
literally
Doing everything they can to to
get some money to perform their
functions they often rely on
donations or donated labor from
the community so this bill would
provide the minimum level of
income it takes a point zero
five percent.
So not five percent two point
five percent pointer five
percent of the G. R. T. funds
after other distributions puts
them into a land grant percent
assistance fund.
And then there's a process by
which the the land grants that
are audit compliance they're
inclined to the audit act our
listed listed those are given by
the state auditor to electric
Council.
They grant council.
Reviews that list and make sure
to makes sure the land grants
are in compliance with their
other obligations under chapter
forty nine which is the area of
law which generally cover covers
there there are elections in
their boards and and things like
that because they are political
subdivisions.
And the by the you have the fund
by the qualified subdivisions
with some reductions that people
are actually earning income.
And then makes a distribution so
the the fiscal impact I believe
it's about one point five
million a year if there were
thirty land grants to qualified
yeah would be about fifty
thousand a year
Currently I think there are
twenty four but this might be an
incentive for some of our land
grants to come into compliance
with other obligations to
formally elected board and
things like that.
The and I with the version of
this bill passed in twenty
twenty their manager there is an
amendment to the bill.
I move on the amendment for
purposes of discussion.
So the.
Thank you madam chair the
amendment to the two numbers to
to to to zero eight point three
and it just typed in the Titans
of some of the language
clarifies the process with
electric Council and also
postpones the first payment the
up by here to to let the the
system get set up.
And madam chair without if I may
I would like to ask a master
researcher Archuleta who is the
program manager of the land
grant council of like give him
opportunities if you were.
Yes in the C. U. R. T. Rowe and
the you for.
I thank you madam chair
Representative McQueen members
of the committee.
Again I'm our trucks are with
the New Mexico land grant
council this is been a priority
bill for land grants for several
years now I two thousand four
land grants were formally
recognized as political
subdivisions of the state which
was a huge victory for lingering
Communities to be able to better
Manage and and received the are
the recognition of employee that
they needed as well government
entities this is been a
tremendous help in areas of for
example receiving access to
capital outlay funding it's a
lot of money grants to also
enter into a corporate agency
agreements with other government
entities but the one thing
that's been a challenge has been
on the lack of a guaranteed
revenue stream land grants do
often times provide services for
local communities I'm not just
Land Grant members but just
double communities in general
often times are the only a local
government entity within the
rural region and so this often
includes community centers that
the that the manage on as well
as someone grants provide senior
services such as senior middle
sites youth programming out of
those community centers and so
this bill would help when grants
to manage the assets that they
have it is often a challenge for
them to be able to pay for the
light for the propane costs to
keep these facilities in
addition to that the opt in
times manage a common lands that
require some upkeep and
maintenance in terms of
water should health on and and
ensuring that they're able to
sort of find all the functions
necessary to properly maintain
those assets and so it has been
a challenge over the years from
and grants because they do have
these government functions of
the required to do they don't
have operating budgets option
time it's difficult for them to
it's all volunteer as I know and
if you're in the legislature
recognize the importance of what
that means to be volunteer
affected officials and
unfortunately from grants they
can't even get often times are
more mileage per diem
to reimburse them for costs are
just just to conduct their to
government functions and so this
is on an important bill that we
believe will help sort of I need
some of that need and demanded
and provide sort of the next
level of opportunity for these
land grants to utilize these
funds generate function is
better government entities but
to leverage those dollars to be
able to allow them to match them
against other opportunities
principal.
Land grants are now eligible for
receiving certain conservation
programming under US
conservation service however
most of those require matches on
insulin requests that have very
small budgets most of them have
a budgets that are well below
the the first year with an audit
of act which is a ten thousand
dollars and so without really a
means for having the opportunity
to come up with those in kind of
or or cash matches it is it is
difficult social just a.
Provided the opportunity to to
better leverage what they do for
their communities on and
hopefully result in additional
services again for those rural
communities.
Thank you Mr Archuleta speaker
Egolf did you want to offer
some.
You're just one one quick point
and that is
Because the
recipient of these funds is a
political subdivision of the
state this is not considered a
tax expenditure so as a matter
tax policy right when we do a
bill like the.
Solar tax credit we're
discussing that's a tax
expenditure because the
the fund for the tax credit goes
to a private individual or to a
business.
It's not good instrumentality of
state here what we're doing it's
it's very similar to what due to
other political subdivisions of
the state other instrumentality
to government.
By providing them a source of
revenue so this would be very
similar to think that we do
where we are portion of the
motor vehicle excise tax to
local governments throughout the
state forty W. I. programs like
that yeah we've got that
questions of the gas tax that
are diverted to the general fund
to go to the department
transportation road budget this
is exactly like that we're
creating a revenue stream for
subdivisions of the state and.
So in anticipation of questions
that may come up in a few
minutes about it okay why is
this tax expenditure.
Being considered I think the
answer is listed at one we're
just making an attempt to.
Right revenue stream.
For political subdivisions in
requests here at exactly the
same basis that we find the
streets for other purposes.
Thank you thank you for that
clarification I also know that
it's a very small amount of
money relative to
our entire budget so I I
consider the expense minimus at
best all right so any
any members of the public who
wish to speak to this issue.
I see two hands I agree hands
all right you can keep your
comments brief I'd really
appreciate we have one more bill
after this bill that we need to
address Mr Chavis.
The US madam chair and members
can you hear me yes.
I want to thank you for allowing
us to speak on behalf of this
bill today it's been a work in
progress for many years and I
want to thank everyone who's had
a role in getting us to this
point it is true we have a
community center and thank you
again that is our only source of
revenue we rented out for
parties for different events and
that money just goes right back
into being able to put propane
in the paint can heat the
building but that community
center is our hub that is where
kids can during COVID to have
access to the internet so that
they cannot turn it can virtual
school it's it's really the
health of our community we have
a exercise area and in rural New
Mexico we really have very
little access to the main basic
things that provide quality of
life for our air so I'd really
really encourage you to support
this bill it is a minimal amount
it would make a tremendous
difference in helping us serve
the people in our rural
communities I thank you for your
service to our state and I hope
you have a wonderful day.
Thank you very much our state
auditor Brian Cologne.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee it's not a
privilege to stand in support of
this legislation as you know I'm
super grateful to the honorable
Matthew McQueen for caring this
legislation and for those of you
that are supporting it and our
tutors leadership with our land
grants because it is my office
right now that is doing
everything it can to support
these political subdivisions in
being able to be the recipients
of the funds that you believe
they should have in order to
preserve and promote our
heritage our people and our way
of life that has been going on
for generations in New Mexico
this is our agricultural
heritage or history or hand
there are people and I just want
to say that this small amount of
money as the chairwoman
indicated goes further in these
rural communities in these
historic districts it just about
anywhere you can put a dollar
and that when I think about the
people in this committee I know
that I don't have to convince
you but I do want to stand with
you and say that I'm grateful
for the work you do we will
issue and we requested this
upcoming budget thirty thousand
dollars to provide for these
entities but for instance last
year we had twenty four
similarly situated entities
apply for small grants from our
office.
And under the budget we
currently have we were only able
to fund twelve of those so the
demand is great this allocation
this bill will provide
consistency and structure to
providing much needed resources
that really celebrate and tell
our story here in New Mexico
with the people that need it the
most so thank you madam chair
members the committee it's an
honor to stand with you on this.
Thank you Mr state auditor if
you see Vasquez.
Yes yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Bonnie fossil lost this I am
the president of the simple IRA
Land Grant thanks for giving me
the opportunity to address this
committee on house bill eight.
We the members of the south our
land grants strongly support
house bill eight.
The land grabbers state
assistance fund will be
extremely helpful to also
operational costs will land
grants and our expenses in our
organizations a guaranteed
revenue stream will help us
become more effective and
efficient so political units of
the state.
Having a state appropriations
will enable us to manage and
develop better future plans and
reach of short and long term
objectives.
You would be also manifold that
we would be able to serve our
communities better madam chair
members of the committee a
guarantee revenue stream is much
needed and very important to a
land grants we appreciate your
support of house bill eight
subject to questions thank you
for your time.
Thank you Andrea the.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee can you hear me
yes thank you my name is on the
left of the I am the president
of the New Mexico land grant
miss circle and president of
some of the more land grants.
And I strongly support house
bill eight which would allow us
to get revenue stream to do the
kind of things that we've been
wanting to do for years and have
not been able to do all we
maintain implement a community
center that we ran out.
The money that we make on that
basically pays the utilities.
We have to have we have we host
a farmers market we have yard
sales Burciaga to make enough
money to pay the insurances and
that kind of stuff which leaves
very little.
To run day to day things or to
implement new programs we were
lucky this past year was
embarassing nations we were able
to grant pool of our community
members of five hundred dollars
scholarships so they can pursue
higher education we want to
improve that and and I'll be
able to offer a lot more money
for that so by getting a revenue
stream our craft fairs in our
yard sales all that money will
go directly to scholarship so
this will enable us to provide
more services for communities
all that are badly needed and I
want to just express my support
and ask you humbly ask you guys
to support this and move it
forward.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you there is a name slice
keeper and you could actually
tell us your real name you
speak.
All right I don't see Mr so I
speak there anymore so I will go
with need to have it excuse me
this is sliced keeper okay okay
my name I'm using my son's
address here because okay.
Anyway
My name is people are going on
the president of the there said
those policies yeah I also sit
on the back of New Mexico land
grant council and I just want to
let the committee know that.
We have all been operating by
donations and all and the we
donate our time to all hundred
percent of everything that we
do.
Sometimes we get per diem.
If we have to from membership
dues are this money that
guaranteed revenue will will
help us tremendously for the
work we do like I say we all
donate our time I'm old I'm
already seventy years old most
of us are or older than seventy
year old years old and our time
is being limited we've been
working on this for I've been
working on this since nineteen
ninety six so we do need the
help we need to support we need
this money to keep our programs
going it's very vital to our
communities our communities have
also helped and raised in fund
raising by Denters and what have
you so this it this stream of
money will be so beneficial so I
urge you to please support house
bill eight Senate bill eight
thank you.
I believe it house bill eight
nito Travis.
Benito.
And just requested to New York
Hamm okay.
Thank you.
Yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name you to vote
for this I am the president for
standing in develop Land Grant I
will be brief the on the other
speaker there we speak very
briefly our land grant located
is how many we're south of the
there that's about twenty three
miles there are seventeen
distinct populated communities
within our the bounty of our
land granting released on the
internet that you're gonna have
to name a few the land grant
does own eight thirty five
hundred square foot building.
We use that building right now
right Neilson senior yeah under
the agency energy and the Sierra
then that and the fiscal agent
and then the interleaved with
our land grant four thousand
dollars a month the very covers
deliveries much less R. three
thousand dollar
Insurance that had to cover
liability in it million dollars.
We have no other source of
income that I think will that
was number it's at that but we
still trying to do that.
Currently we do have a capital
outlay fund of sixty thousand
dollars.
And I listen to the previous
presentation the full panel
we're going to use some of that
money list of eight twelve point
three kilowatt.
Our system in our land grant
help us alleviate some of the
electrical costs but also to be
able to.
To promote some.
Some environmental out help on
this.
The land grant the point is
still a hundred percent.
And.
Hold the that this is the
taxation revenue the committee
will pass a bill and I thank you
for your for your time.
Thank you Leonard Martinez.
The morning madam chair can you
hear me yes I can committee
chair members the committee my
numbers that are the next
president somewhat consider
China Land Grant we are looking
at a bill Santa Fe County we're
located in Google came to
headquarters which is near dina
which is our communities that we
are this of what L. where okay
Regina yeah this so what I'm
talking no and madam chair which
is our Representative how are
you and I'll be doing that we
we stand the trunk support house
bill late our communities out we
have a commissioner this on that
we're in the process of
remodeling we've already put in
a hundred thousand dollars
capital outlay and we're also
responsible or for the PLC W.
Brandt centre we are the
physical agent so we had to do
an audit for that R. as so it
even to the audit and our
liability insurance are
extremely expensive our propane
ingested the list goes on madam
chair but thank you for your
time and we stand strong for the
house bill eight thank you.
Thank you so much Mr Martinez
and I'm very happy were able to
join us
Andrew good tierras.
Speaker Andrew.
More.
Morning madam chair members of
the the.
We're having a little trouble
Andrew connection located self
self a by forty about thirty
miles I'm also a board member of
the chili Land Grant and also
the treasure of.
The land grant consent whole.
And what we're here in in in the
heat to well we're sure strongly
in support of house bill eight.
Our revenue stream here is is
very minimal we only we provide
a lot of volunteer services for
our community not only for
errors but.
Stream is renting out our local
community center that's our only
revenue stream.
be we have a we're fortunate and
and and very appreciative of
capital outlay the capital
outlay funds that we receive but
we have to be very cautious on
how much money we spend because
we don't want to fall into a.
An audit that's good that'll.
Cost us money that we do not
have
so as we're careful here to here
how we spend that capital outlay
there's always a potential of us
using that capital outlay
because it's not spent for the
reasons of we're I mean we're
just it's a balancing act
Where where a.
We're in strong support of of
house bill right now.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you very much Andrew going
back to the committee I see
leader Martinez his hand up.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative McQueen and
Representative speaker egolf
Representative role metal
Representative Christine are yes
Representative Montoya for for
your leadership on this
I had the pleasure and honor of
visiting some of the land grants
along with Representative
McQueen between the old during
the holiday break we went to G.
we want consent on about what
that and spoke to folks on the
ground about what they're doing
in their communities and for
those of you who have not had
the opportunity to visit
encourage you to do so Mistretta
that that was very helpful in
setting that up but you see for
yourself just how how much these
communities are doing and how
self sustaining they are at the
end of the day.
The dog could fire which was
tragic and the men's proportions
appears echo GDP was out there
in the front lines fighting that
fire
incredible ingenuity and
creativity they they took in all
school bus turned into a fire
truck
that's how much.
These communities love in
appreciate their land they're
they're restored ties to the
land and all of us have a lot to
learn from them.
But in terms of the bill itself
I'm I'm pretty familiar with it
because that this is one of the
priorities we heard from your
communities
and to me it's it's quite
frankly a travesty that it
hasn't already happened because
as.
In our relationship as
governments.
we have a responsibility to
ensure that our relationships
are relationships of equals and
you all this group political
subdivisions are exactly that so
I'm I'm glad and I'm I'm very
happy that this goes well
forward
again big props to the to the
sponsors particularly speaker
Egolf for his leadership on this
issue and Representative McQueen
for first reading it I will
gladly cast may as well here and
I hope to be able to do that on
the floor of the house as well
thank you madam chair and thank
you sponsors for this great
legislation great so you Mr
chairman thanks for your work.
Thank you leader Martinez and
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair and the
speaker and gentleman queen
Graeser you this morning.
So.
Question
We're we're basically taking a
very since sliver off of the
total gross receipts tax
received by the state to fund.
And and a continuous way
these these groups
and that revenue that amount
that sliver is is roughly one
and a half million dollars my
understanding this right.
Madam chair representative
partner that's for.
Thank you Madam chair and
gentleman clean.
Were there other.
Funding streams that we are
thank you all considered and
looked at is you were.
determining how to.
Feel this need.
The managers of Herbert the Mr
Gillette might be able to shed
more light on that I will say
this is an ongoing effort this
is with some improvements
requested bill passed in.
Twenty twenty passed the house
floor it was an act on in the
Senate bill sponsored by
representative Garcia
I think one of the benefits of
of this current structure is
it's
It's fairly stable it's it's
predictable the G. R. T.
receipts to go up and down and
and that would be reflected in
Chester distributions well I
think that's that's a reasonable
result and just to clarify the
courses it's one point five
million to the state the amount
distributed to each land grants
of would be you for less that
prospect fifty sixty thousand
dollars.
Representative excuse me I Mr
Archuleta
You do you know the history were
other funding sources
considered.
Madam chair representative
Harper opportunity as you
mentioned this bill is sort of
gone through several years of
analysis and kind of getting to
the land grant in our process
when we kind of initially look
at this bill we proposed
variety of funding streams
potential funding streams where
the order on the funds could be
pulled from
and eventually through the
process sort of landed on the G.
R. T. in a small portion of one
of the reasons that that was
desirable is that that
In the way that the bills
current rate in is that it would
fluctuate appropriately with
either a picture downturns in
the economy so since the gross
receipts taxes are collected the
White and collected from folks
that are in and out of state
residents and if there are kids
that your Recession of the state
takes our our national recession
it affects our our incomes of
state level this would
automatically adjusts so rather
than and choosing a fund maybe
have a finite amount and then we
have to sort of keep a certain
level distribution this will
automatically adjust and so I
was one of the things that to
the analysis came out positive
for for doing it in this manner
this is kind of just and the the
path that we kind of pursuit and
and it seems to make the most
sense to date.
Madam chair and chair cleaned Mr
chair what I think you for that
and and the reason I ask is it
it is a kind of a slightly
awkward
mechanism we do have a few I'm
I'm trying to think we do have a
few.
taxes that are kind of treated
this way
Like our gasoline tax I know has
a few little earmarks in them
you know some go to the aviation
fund and you know and such and I
know that in our gross receipts
tax we do have a few.
A few items why is this but but
it is a little awkward and I was
just thinking okay if if if I
was looking at which you know a
revenue stream to perhaps look
at you know we have.
swear capital outlay process we
do have some your marks there
I'm sure you're familiar with
this.
Chair and ensure McQueen and
research letter that we you know
half of what water.
Your water projects that you
know tribal water you know
infrastructure those kind of
things Claudius that come out of
the.
Capital outlay process and I
think ten percent of the.
water project funds actually go
to the state engineer so that he
can help administer those funds.
And and so I I was just thinking
if I was doing this noticed.
Coming up with the the funding
stream you know maybe something
like that similar to that
what would be where I start but
it sounds like you've explored
several different avenues and.
And none of you just maybe.
Just explore that a little bit
more with me because I'm I'm
like I say I'm I'm not opposed
to the concept industry to make
sure that we're using the right
funding streams.
Representative Parker
I was involved in building the
case for the other avenues I
would say if it was a in your
market in the capital outlay
process and we had the year
where we can do capital outlay
and this there was no funding
that would be it you know huge
disruption so if if we're
funding these these lingering
communities and they maybe they
entered into a lease for a
building.
For piece of equipment you know
they're gonna need to pay that
on an annual basis so is there
funding suddenly gets cut cut
off for a year because we decide
not to capital outlay that that
would not that would not be this
the stable type of funding that
we're looking for.
Gap Madam chairman claim are
yeah I I appreciate that that
comment and and I think.
In general the years that we
don't do capital outlay I think
it's usually the the legislative
portion of the seniors portion
that that we don't do I think we
still do public school capital
outlay and.
And those others but but but I I
do what you're saying that that
G. R. T. although fluctuates
with the economy it's
potentially more stable than
like a capital outlay process so
I so I I I understand your your
argument there she.
And then I guess my my last
question.
Madam chairman queen Mr chair
what I so I understand that the
total cost is about one and a
half million and when you break
this out amongst the I believe
it's thirty something
different groups.
you know
Is this amount sufficient are we
gonna be coming back in a year
two and saying that we need to
increase this amount or are we
gonna be seeing
You know challenges in spending
down this amount.
Representative Harper you know
Representative Martinez talked
about our visit to the some of
the land grants now where we're
standing in the she legally
owned the paschal Gen which the
bills with money they earn from
selling it right away through
some of their comment on it it
was a pipeline and they they had
the sort of windfall in the
neighborhood the you know you
know big dollars like a hundred
thousand dollars so they built
this facility they were talking
about the the challenge of
maintaining it.
Like you know if the something
breaks in the plumbing you don't
just call plundered it's okay we
know they can fix that thank you
come over and donate their time.
And I asked them what their
their operating budget was this
is the Selangor it actually does
have some revenue from selling
you know firewood permits and
things like that he said there
annual budget was in the
neighborhood of thirteen
thousand here.
So you're providing providing
them the opportunity to have
some basic funding to hire an
accountant to do their audits
yes some land grants are we
talking about how they can share
an accountant and you know
that's make money go further
being able to pass a roof or you
have fixed the the oil line on
tobacco I mean these basic think
these are just sort of basic
operational funds and it will
make a world of difference to
Senator.
Sh all right and then chair and
chairman we thank you for that
so then I I guess the.
My final stop question.
These entities.
Do they have taxing authority.
They do not yes thank you
insurers and queen that was my
my understanding as well.
well thank you for
the timing for for a
entertainment professionals.
Grateful for the the the
education and for your efforts
on this thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
representative Lente.
Thank you madam chair with that
would be best okay
Representative Maestas.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative McQueen just want
to take a quick moment just to
talk about land grants because
it's hasn't come up in this
committee I don't think in a
while what a madam chair
Representative McQueen of just
want to thank the leaders for
joining us on the zoom I I miss
you guys look forward to seeing
you soon.
I did get a chance to go on the
tour is over the holidays
I just want to think about Mr
chair that them particularly for
his leadership through the years
a quick quick couple quick
questions to refresh your memory
how many land grants so madam
chair of some of queen structure
at the holy land grants are
there in New Mexico.
Madam chair I I'd like to start
July the answer that.
Thank you madam chair
representative of mass
destruction of queen
currently in terms of active
land grants on this currently
approximately thirty act land
grants we do have some land
grant communities that there's
been some legislation in past
years to try to recognize them
in a different way but there's
currently about thirty land
grants are active on of those
land grants only twenty five
approximately are a political
subdivisions of the state and
the reason that that is is
because the statute that
recognizes land grants chapter
forty nine has multiple sections
to that statute and some of the
land grants that are statutes
specific kept not elected to be
recognized as political
subdivisions I'm so we would be
those land grants would be a
participating in this process is
for just those that are
considered due to government
under under chapter forty nine.
Thank you madam chair arrives in
the queen Mr chairman and
proximity with the average
acreage of the.
Of the twenty five over the
thirty a land grants so madam
chair Representative the
Collectively on the land grants
New Mexico manage possibly two
hundred between two hundred two
hundred fifty thousand acres
collectively but that does
include some someone out years
of more than half of the of
order nearly half of all the
common lands is managed by the
ontological and granted hundred
four thousand acres they're kind
of the last hold on one thing
that I didn't feel madam my last
response is that of the thirty
that's actually a huge decline
from the one hundred fifty a
community land grants that
existed historically and that
we're became defunct over time
for various reasons
but the range for land grants to
do own property we have someone
requests are active that very
little in the only on the
community center in the land
that's attached to it so one or
two acres and then they kind of
go up from there we do have some
that happened hundreds of acres
we have some that happened the
tens of thousands of acres some
of the tens of thousands of
acres of what we have
accomplished sort of in the one
of the largest the next closest
Act would probably be the so we
have to make grant that has
approximately thirty thousand
acres still managing for and one
thing though what I'm going to
do not have taxing authority
they still do pay taxes on the
comments that they all did not
tax exempt the state
constitution and so on those
acreage the roughly two hundred
thousand plus acres that they do
have they do pay taxes to the
state of New Mexico currently.
Thank you madam chair of the
McLean restructures and then
lastly Musselman knows what's
the average number of shares or.
Or owners to a to a particular
land grants.
So madam chair representative a
question is a.
It is difficult to answer the
exact precise number but every
single Land Grant considering
that some of these land grants
were established initially the
seventeen hundreds and eighteen
hundreds the number of errors
can be quite huge land grants in
terms of active members to
participate in to
Vote for example in the right
directions it's determined based
on the the land grant by laws
and everything grant under the
statute has the ability to sort
of determine their by laws and
so they all have different
processes for awhile the
election process is the same how
the register those members can
very it really just depends in
terms of active membership but
in in terms of the number of
errors we're talking nine
hundred thousand anyone's who's
got roots in New Mexico that
go back more than a couple
generations size likely eight
air to a land grant here Mexico.
Thank you madam chair
Representative McQueen of which
are to it than just
I'm glad you pointed that out
that it's private property
private property pays taxes to
the state it simply communally
owned which is foreign and Anglo
Saxon law and laws that I states
but is recognized by the state
of New Mexico that deriving from
you know.
From Spanish locked that the
idea of communal land for each
and every in their own skin
pathology that the land grants
so it's it's it's pretty special
the
lastly miss madam chair of
Representative McQueen because
it's private land it's eligible
it's it's it's recognizes
political subdivisions eligible
for capital outlay it's eligible
for this I'm I believe that this
bill is constitutional why is
that how how how is it not anti
donation for the government to
to give money to private
landowners.
Madam chair representative my
assistance of course we wouldn't
be giving money directly to
private landowners and that the
landowner yeah I could be wrong
about the communal structure but
I believe it's owned by the the
land grant which is which is an
entity and political
subdivisions so that
relationship between the state
and the land grant is government
to government and madam chair of
SMS is Mr arch let the set of
the someone that cost me thirty
act land grants there's only
twenty four twenty five their
political subdivisions some have
opted not to become political
subdivisions which means they're
not eligible for things like
capital outlay but it also means
they're not subject to the open
meetings act or IPRA or other
other burdens and be placed on
governor and they've made the
decision that okay maybe maybe
they don't want to be a
political subdivisions those
that are political subdivisions.
Would be eligible for this you
know there's no intended nation
clause issue because its
government government and they
are subject to all those other
government requirements.
Thank you for that madam chair
isn't required lastly is there a
like a website a handy dandy
place to go to to see the a list
of the political subdivisions
the leadership interactive map
do we have that yeah either a
privately or within state
government madam chair start to
let that.
Madam chair representative we do
have the Mexico and the council
does have a website it's L. G.
C. R. that dot UNM dot EDU where
we do
I'll provide some of that
information we can also provide
that information in terms of
just the we do we do we are
currently working on a mapping
project to sort of get some of
the stuff better identified of
but we we we do maintain the
land registry which is for all
those land grants for public
services are required to submit
of these differentiate we tend
to have an election US will be
given an update of the current
elected officials for on the
land grants are units of
government.
Thank you madam chair thank you
gentlemen Representative McQueen
I I look forward to visiting
with you this this spring and
summer way out of the chair in
the economic policy interim
committee so we should
definitely hearing on what we
can do to
to further assist in developed a
the land grants and inconsistent
with the wishes of the errors
thank you madam chair for the
time.
I'm I just have a few remarks
and then I'll go to
representative Lente for his
motion I as I'm sure many of you
know I'm from Los Alamos which
is a very different community
from most of rural New Mexico
but it has been a real
opportunity for me have included
in my district a number of land
grants and a state kias and and
for the last three years I've
had the pleasure to work with a
number of really special people
on the issues that they face and
I I understand that this income
is very important for the land
grant community and for it to be
able to sustain itself and
continue its very important
tradition for
for New Mexico so it it's I'm
I'm pleased to be able to
support this let legislation so
Representative Lente if you want
to make motion.
Thank you madam chair a motion
to pass.
Second.
Motion by Representative want a
second by Representative
Maestas.
I any opposition to the motion.
I see none am I correct in that.
Okay you have a deep just
Committee thank you.
Shared if we could go back to
Representative Ferrary.
Is Representative Ferrary in the
Analysts section.
I just promoted last great thank
you so much Kimberly.
Representative if you would like
to sent on still thirty five.
Yes madam chair I finally got
all the Houston I'm here it's
taken care of.
To send it.
Excuse me I need to turn my
phone off again.
Thank you madam chair for
letting us come back in
the
House bill thirty five
create a new to get thermal
ground will keep calm tax credit
and
I
emphasize new as that it was
this is to clarify that this is
not a continuation of the former
tax credit and to distinguish
our different programs for
accounting purposes as was
brought brought up in the FIR.
And
There's three significant
differences the personal tax
income income.
Personal income tax credit the
P. I. T. would be refundable the
corporate income tax credit
would remain a credit against
the tax liability we're not
changing or adding to that the
annual cap would be raised
sixteen million and the sunset
date of like the solar
would be changed at twenty
thirty two to harmonize that you
expected expiration date for the
federal tax incentives and do
you ever ground coupled heat
pumps use the ground or water
circulating through heights vary
in the ground to significantly
improve the efficiency of
electric keep calm.
And estimates are that there is
approximately forty percent
higher efficiency in the cooling
mode and a whopping seventy
percent higher efficiency in the
heating road.
And over the next decade
thousands of New Mexican homes
and businesses will have to
replace inefficient
or non electric heating and
cooling systems in order to
achieve New Mexico's clean
energy transition objectives and
this tax credit will provide
important incentives to
facilitate that transaction for
transition I should say.
And with that I'll just stand
for questions.
Thank you Representative let's
go to the audience.
I see one hand raised let me
see.
Rocky brought.
Thank you sure Williams rocky
patches.
Also delivered services
the geothermal heat program tax
credit makes efficiency of
geothermal systems affordable
for low and moderate income
folks would come on with the
federal tax credit which is also
proposed become refundable it
makes it.
Approximately equal in cost so
that people that want air
conditioning systems that he
cool or otherwise into their
home it makes it affordable for
them and so it's a big factor
currently I am an international
gross which are certified
installer and one of the larger
installers jobs are money
problems in New Mexico well
there's about sixty three
thousand instructions to start
each year in the state of New
Mexico less than one percent of
those are currently geo thermal
systems in this program I
believe will.
Preach the number of families
that can afford your thermal
systems by about five times and
so the increase in the dollar
amount you know you are location
of it will allow a lot more
efficiency and it is important
that it's at the time we and
utilities peak in which the
most.
Polluting power is being
generated so it affects the peak
power which is when it's most
useful thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you Luis Carrero.
Please.
There we go sorry I hadn't been
unmuted yet good morning again
madam chair members of the
committee Lewis gonna with the
Sierra Club Rio Grande the
chapter representing over thirty
five thousand members all across
New Mexico we strongly support
this bill as well many New
Mexicans want people to keep
their homes during the cold
winter months in ways that do
not depend on gas installation
of heat pumps make sense for
families from an economic
standpoint from an energy single
standpoint a well installed
ground source heat pump system
is capable to provide three to
four point five times the amount
of electrical energy it consumes
in the form of heat energy from
your home so making this type of
technology affordable to
families as a special just like
the bill that we heard earlier
this solar tax credit this bill
also allows for a rebate which
is a key to moderate to low
income families by voting on
this bill today you're giving an
opportunity to many people in
our state to help achieve the
goal of shifting away from
fossil fuels and into renewable
energy all while saving money
and in insulation and utility
bills I'm asking the will please
go for each B. thirty five today
thank you very much for your
time.
Thank you Jennifer Weber.
Yes
Good morning again chair
Chandler and committee members
my name is Jennifer Weber and
I'm here on behalf of the New
Mexico chamber of commerce the
chamber supports H. B. thirty
five the geothermal ground
coupled heat pump tax credit the
program has helped make this
important energy efficiency
technology accessible to many
New Mexicans and we urge your
support thank you thank you.
Temi.
I both ward and I know what you
tell me so I apologize I.
destroyed your name there.
thank you madam chair members of
the community assistance people
are livestock with energy
efficiency project or sweet heat
pump very credibly efficient and
the integral part of our
strategy the letter I building
the New Mexico five climate
change and reduce our use of gas
this tax.
To make the up front cost of the
palm of portable to low and
moderate income and so we ask
that you do support thank you
thirty five today thank you for
your time.
Thank you
Sam echo.
Madam chair members of this
committee my name is Sankalp and
the climate energy advocate of
conservation voters New Mexico
you all have discussed tax
credits today already for a non
fossil fuel energy and
geothermal Tax geothermal grand
public comments are yet another
way for New Mexicans to use
highly efficient reliable non
fossil fuel energy and the tax
cut expansion will allow more
New Mexicans to play an active
role in reducing the impacts of
climate change and for these
reasons and the reason the party
heard today CBS urges to support
this bill thank you.
Thank you Tom Solomon.
Thank you madam chair this is
Tom Solomon I am the co
coordinator with three fifteen
New Mexico with the thousand
members around the state.
And we are also with the strong
supporter of this bill thank you
Representative Ferrary for
bringing it forward
you know requests are C. pumps
are and one of two very great
ways to electrify heating and
cooling air source heat pumps
are another of the a unique
advantage of ground source heat
pumps is that they tap into a
very constant source of of heat
just a few feet underground you
can do that the down and get to
you know roughly fifty ishe
degrees Fahrenheit temperature
year round with the gross
receipts up and it's available
Court to extract heat in the in
the winter for
heating and for extracting heat
index are are in those in the
summer for cooling so.
It is a great way to decarbonise
poll which is one of the major
sources of climate emissions and
I would note that the use of
methane and homes is been
increasingly identified as a
major health hazard for people
who have gas stoves or gas
furnaces or gas water heaters
that methane less you're really
really good about making sure
the fittings are tight it leaks
that is a source of of health
damage so these ground coupled
heat pumps will improve the
health of residents and homes
and this tax credit will
give availability to lower
income families to take
advantage of that reduce their
carbon emissions and the the
health inside their communities
of their homes and buildings so
for all of those reasons we
support this bill thank you very
much.
Thank you
David Greenwald.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
I'm Kevin Grunwald CEO of the
Mexico like to copy Association
my association supports this
bill
geothermal ground source heat
pumps as far away the most
efficient way to heat homes he
can call home then other
buildings
nine years ago when Central
Valley.
The new headquarters in Artesia
they installed ground source
heat pump
system and there's like a
hundred twenty wells that are
buried beneath their parking lot
and that's the source of their
heating cooling it's very very
efficient we start a major
program in this by about seven
or eight years ago to
We'll try and minimize demand
our systems so the generation
transmission cooperatives
offered rebates so this fits
nicely with those rebates also
about that time we were able to
amend the rural Lecter
cooperative act so that we can
essentially tracks the BTU
savings from geothermal ground
source heat pumps and reform it
we can convert into chill of our
equivalents that would give that
apply to our renewable point
still or follow standard
requirements so those reasons
yeah we we support this bill
thank you.
Thank you Luis Martinez.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Louise Martinez director of
the energy conservation and
management division with the
EMNRD I division hello to Senate
ministers policies for
environmental and economic state
sustainability and to protect
public health and safety for New
Mexico and its citizens
including renewable energy and
energy efficiency to develop and
implement effective clean energy
programs are division would be
responsible for administering
this tax credit.
So I bring to your attention but
we noted in our FIR that
bringing back the geo thermal
heat I'm tax credit we'll have a
fiscal impact associated with
staff support that will be
necessary to reinstitute the tax
credit program since the
existing tax credit expired on
December thirty first of twenty
twenty staff that we had working
on that program that provided
technical review and
certification have been
reassigned to other programs or
other duties.
If the credit were reinstated
staffing would be needed.
Fiscal support for division both
operational and staffing is
important to effectively support
this the timely processing of
applications in the issuance to
New Mexico taxpayers thank you
for your time.
a Cena.
Yes at chair and committee
members my name is Athena
Christodoulou and I'm retired
navy energy and environmental
engineer you're speaking on
behalf of Adelante progressive
caucus and environmental justice
caucus this bill.
Gives us three good points a
clear at a clean energy
transition more local jobs and
it begins because the refund to
provide some environmental
justice for those who suffer the
most I would like to point out
though that when you're
considering subsidies that you
might consider the twenty
billion dollars a year that the
federal government subsidizes
fossil fuels and has been for a
hundred years now and begin
saying let's not even consider
stopping supporting clean energy
because it's the most necessary
energy now I feel we are in full
support of HB thirty five please
give it a do passed thank you.
Thank you Carl Peterson.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Carl Peterson of invisible
Albuquerque we support HB thirty
five and its intent to reduce
fossil fuel energy usage through
the through highly efficient
heat pump technology this is
another step towards addressing
climate change in New Mexico
thank you very much.
Thank you
now back to the committee and
I'd like to us here on this bill
and
I do with the true compassion.
And that is I'm not clear that
we voted that we included the
amendment on house bill eight
and I really want to make sure
we have a clear record so may I
request that perhaps
representative Lente first move
help the amendment to house bill
eight and then we'll take the
will vote again on on the
vehicle itself so that we have
invented when the record is very
clear and I apologize and of
Representative Lente.
Very very good madam chair thank
you I move the amendment on
house bill eight.
And then when appropriate what
will make us to to pass on the
amended version possibly Jerry
good and to be clear it's point
two two two two zero eight point
three that is the amendment
thank you madam chair that the
motion was to adopt the
amendment well enough thank you
yep
is there a second.
Representative Romero.
Thank.
Any opposition to the amendment.
I see some hand raised am let's
just vote on it so we're not we
don't we're not muddying the
waters here this call the roll
Camberley.
Yes Representative.
Yes.
Speaker Eagar.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente that.
Yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative Maestas.
Representative Martinez.
Was it.
Yes.
Presented of Montoya.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler.
Yes we.
Chairman yes.
chairwoman Chandler.
Yes full.
And Representative Maestas yes.
yes and madam chair I'm also yes
okay so Representative Hernandez
is a yes and Representative
Montoya is a yes and
representative of my est yes
thank you for your indulgence I
appreciate that very much I'm
ready for your motion
Representative Lente thank you
and we would do pass on house
bill eight as amended.
Second.
Okay motion by Representative
Lente seconded by Representative
my S. this why don't we do a
role in the home very clear
record.
Really would you call the roll.
Yes madam chair this is house
bill thirty five are you going
back to our house bill's we're
on house bill eight then
Representative Ferrary we're
just cleaning up the record on
house bill eight.
Thank you.
Representative than a yes.
Our.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative Maestas.
Yes you.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler.
Yes.
Vice chair Herndon yes
chairwoman.
Yes okay we have a total of
thirteen Bucks yes they're open
up we have a do passed house
bill eight as amended thank you
for your indulgence all right
Representative Ferrary sorry to
interrupt and I do want to
remind you of substitute would
you like us to move that for me
to move that for discussion
purposes.
Yes madam chair.
Second you.
The floor representatives.
Okay I'm I think I was able to
explain everything I'm ready for
questions.
Very good let's see
representative Lente.
Thank you madam chair thank you
again Representative Ferrary
referred for bringing this bill
I can't make can appreciate
everything that you're trying to
do for renewable energy and
efficiency for our citizens of
the state my my comments kind of
more of what we went through
with your previous bill related
to to solar energy I recognize
that this bill is already gone
and passed through Energy
Environment and natural
resources so try not to
have my comments discussing.
Those aspects that to become a
political expert on what what
geo thermal.
Our real fast and so knowing
that I'm still not an expert I
guess my questions are similar
to my last statements on your
previous bill what does it cost
for these installations on a
system like this for a home say
fifteen hundred square feet and
is the incentive greater the
larger the whole.
Madam chair and representative
Lente
Geothermal is a little bit more
expensive then just getting
solar panels
but for a home out of fifteen
hundred square feet I would
guess about of.
Could be right around thirty
five
thousand dollars and then to get
a thirty percent
Yeah reduction tax reduction on
that would bring it down to say
about twenty twenty one thousand
and.
The tax credit itself has a
maximum of nine thousand dollars
as a cap and this would make it
so that it was you know people
on fixed incomes to find it more
affordable to make that
investment.
Okay okay and so thank you madam
chair and representative so so
back to my question that the
larger the home the more
incentive with the cat the the
the individual would receive
correct.
Yes the more expensive it was.
Okay.
And and and I guess one last
question and I'll defer to other
of the members
mobile homes.
Out of the question correct.
For this type of of of
technology.
I'm I wouldn't see why as long
as you can't move once you've
dug into the ground and put the
coils
but it should be able to be
attached in New Mexico you would
have to have the venting system
and things like that
available.
Okay great thank you madam chair
thank you Representative furry
friends meet those questions
that again that same COVID you
know I'm looking for something
that's gonna find equity to all
of our our our citizens in the
state again not just the the
middle to upper class to the
point where you know I I can I
still can see members of my
community and I hate to always
use my community because this is
not.
At the Olympics and oppression
I'm not trying to to promote
this building but the fact is is
that I live in a Representative
district that is largely not.
Looking at these in terms of how
they can
implement than more so than
trying to make make ends meet so
appreciate the presentations
appreciate the bill again not
not a matter of me not
appreciating renewable energy
but more so just trying to make
sure that we are protecting and
encouraging those on the on the
lower end of of income to be
able to engage in this type of
practice thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
thank you so much Representative
Representative Lujan.
Thank you madam chair and again
thank you to our.
The sponsor of the bill I also
have sent on to dispose well
constructed and I just want to
you know you know at.
Well the conversations and and
and and how we are talking about
the you know how we're moving
into of green economy so to
speak and this is part of the
process and I think that
you know the relative.
Issue of.
Of making this more equitable
hang on just a second I'm home.
Home from school for the snow
day today.
So excuse me.
I'm juggling things around this
morning so I just want to
address that because these are
the conversations we need to
have because we need to we need
to have a conversation that
we're moving into this economy.
Creating that the equity here
it's going to take some time and
if we don't do these take these
measures and look into how this
affects our our tax our taxes
and and everything else that
that we're having a conversation
about to be on that level then
we are in fact not even
addressing moving into the realm
of creating equity so I just
wanna State this is this is
where we are right now we're
meeting the moment of of where
we need to go with climate
justice issues and with our
crime and and with our economy
so one state thank you for the
conversation thank you
Representative Ferrary for
bringing this forward and I
thank you madam chair for having
me allow me time to speak on
this thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Strickler.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Ferrary we heard
there's an energy and madam
chair and representative and
this tax credit credit was in
place the expired
Was it two thousand twenty.
Representative yes okay and the
and the annual cap was two
million dollars per year and
your bill increases that to
sixty million dollars we going
back in time the the when this
tax credit was in place
The subscribers are the.
The the the homeowner should
take advantage of this tax
program was much less than the
two million so why you rise in
this so high.
well because of we could enable
forty ten times of the number of
New Mexicans to participate in
this as previously work eligible
you know by making it refundable
and so more funds are needed
and our climate change is a
priority use of funds and
sixteen million will provide
incentives for at least
seventeen hundred seventy eight
systems per year which will
provide cert us certainty that
will stimulate higher production
and that will quickly reduce
costs and expand market of
penetration.
So sixteen million of incentives
represents fifty three million
of spending on geothermal ground
coupled heat pumps and thirty
seven million of private
investment.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
We are the cost of the systems
are thirty five thousand dollars
roughly what you what you said
and that that's that's pretty
high dollar how much land you
need to put in the system so I
have a standard lot in in
Farmington New Mexico it's about
point one seven tenths of an
acre I have a pretty good sized
backyard but
how much land in a to put put
one of the systems in place.
I'm not much at all they go out
about twenty feet so we can go
twenty feet along side of you
know your property there are
even close to the house and you
know just goes down you know
about four feet to reach that
fifty
degree of temperature where will
go to cool and then also have
your heat pump to raise to heat
up to our.
Whenever temperature around
sixty five seventy degrees for
House
so it doesn't take much landed
all and even well who have of
the.
Like duplexes they can run it
right along the side the outside
part of the house.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative in my district
district to San Juan County we
have a lot of mobile home owners
in our district and in a and
they're low income folks they're
they're blue collar
folks and
they struggling to make ends
maybe and and I I just you know
even with refundable tax credit
I know we talked about this
before with the solar tax credit
is going to be very hard for
them to put this on our priority
list
Body use car nowadays is pretty
pretty pricey so.
I think that's all I have I
appreciate the clarification on
the the settlement land that you
need and it's just like
Of my my small property would be
would be a candidate.
I'm gonna have to
The deal more research on it but
do thermal is a great program.
The Kevin green walls madam
chair and representative Kevin
Graham walls
The report on the
They are believers Artesia had
to be there it's a pretty cool
heating and air conditioning
system on that commercial
property and it obviously that
would work well for residential
and it's just it's just pretty
expensive so thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative.
Thank you Representative
Representative Strickler
I don't see any other questions
or comments and I'm going to
have another true confession and
I'm seeking some guidance here
we have a committee substitute.
The question I'm I would ask
those of you who are more
experienced as we move to adopt
a committee substitute.
And then
after that motion has been past
and we will do our usual
temporary table lists the bill
obviously that we agree that's
the appropriate approach thank
you looking to my colleague
Representative Harper as the
with ranking member okay we're
all in agreement so motion that
I'm with that I'd like to
entertain is a motion to adopt
committee substitute for this
bill and if you would read the
Two two numbers I appreciate so
we're all clear as to what we're
voting on.
Yes madam chair I believe the
committee substitute number is
two two two one eight five point
one okay all right so.
I'm looking to the hands raised.
Motion Representative Maestas
thank you I move the committee
substitute.
I'll second that manager.
We have a motion and a second
really could you call the roll
please.
Yes Chairman representative.
Yes.
Speaker Igor.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente yes
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Martinez and for.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
German chancellor
yes.
Okay now I'm prepared to
entertain a motion for
temporary.
table or gentle table and that
is that Representative chair of
the the temporary table thank
you so much Representative
second okay any opposition to a
temporary table.
Speak now or forever hold your
peace okay we have a we have a
temporary table of
house taxation and revenue
committee substitute for house
bill thirty five thank you and
thank you for your participation
Representative Ferrary we
appreciated the dialogue on
these important issues and thank
you committee members for making
my first committee hearing
tolerable.
The best is yet to come so I
appreciate all of your support
thank you and we'll be getting
to the floor so I all US
adjourned thank you madam chair
committee good job thank you
thank you yep.
