That these that that so that
means that we have what I feel
today which will be.
The this.
The there are more of these.
what we take the role.
Representative Griego present.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chandler.
Here.
Representative Duncan here.
Representative Gaydos.
Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez your.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative Ortez.
Representative Scott.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Townsend.
You're kidding.
And.
The.
We have a committee in the the
faster.
Up the stairs maybe from the
what's.
Thank you Judy and stands at.
She's almost here yeah does it.
Would you also that's all not.
cccs is one.
It's very gently.
Representative Townsend of we've
mission is made the announcement
that we will be rolling house
bill sixty seven
thank
so this is what we have one
it's house bill one nine in the
sponsor will be you're going to.
The legislative.
Okay four Booker told.
This
that's a good idea that you
know.
And he was an adult and he said
to his eight give me my red
sure.
Senator I wanted Richards or
well I moved it I don't want to
see what sure I want.
In the future.
For.
This is my go okay.
Well.
Yeah we're waiting.
I.
It would pop that.
Right.
That was the.
Hold of the builders.
Working.
What up.
yeah she told me she was in the
elevator so she's not going to
be breathless she.
she does reference.
The.
Activated.
Hi it's not your fault and
your way is partly my fault
Representative.
With you on the stairs coming up
just issued.
The.
We can hear this bill does.
All right I got to the on on
surprised but we are the first
bills we we rolled it.
You just let your in the
building at the.
Thank you so that being said
Representative here witnesses
whenever you're ready for
service thank you Mr chair
thanks committee thank you for
giving me five minutes to get
here and I will happy to supply
copies to those for being here
so promptly I'm here today with
me is my expert president of New
Mexico school for the arts
school Cindy Montoya.
She has been with the school
since its inception as you know
this is been a long term
investment that the state has
made its are only statewide
school
and I'll let her tell a bit
about the history where we are
and the bill here today to talk
about how we expand the efforts
for ensuring that students
across the state have access to
the school all right now we've
been investing in having a dorm
setting so that students around
the state hadhousing for this
and and I'll tell I'll let
President when Twitter talk
about how it's been done for the
past decade now fifteen thirteen
years so thank you Mr chair and
I'll I'll let me expertise
herself in the school.
I guess what what good morning
everybody chair committee
members with me today is Craig's
head of school and Dr David
Lopez.
You can answer the questions on
the specifics about the funding.
So I just want to just want to
start with the our origin story.
New Mexico school for the arts
began as a grassroots effort
along some educators and
community leaders who were
involved in the arts and.
Throughout Mexico they recognize
that we have these talented
artists but we also recognize
that they didn't have the
opportunity to grow that town.
So from that came the idea well
New Mexico is a state of the art
and so we should have a
statewide school focusing on art
and that's where we are today we
focus on creative writing dance
music literature I'm the and
visual arts.
also at that time the cabinet
secretary for cultural affairs
informed us that we were
increasingly importing our arts
administrators.
So through special legislation
New Mexico school for the arts
was founded.
And it's chapter twenty two
article fifteen at if you're
interested in details.
The purpose was to establish a
school for the arts as a public
statewide residential school.
to provide those talented
artists with the opportunity to
pursue a career in the arts so
statutorily it was created with
a mandate for the dorms.
But statutorily it was
prohibited to use the SCG for
any of the funding of the dorms.
So today we have three hundred
twenty eight students thanks
study in academic program from
nine to two and then from two to
five there in in parts
intensive.
On that last we are provides
five hundred hours of
instruction here.
two thousand over four years and
our.
Currently we have thirty one
students living in a dorm
offsite.
Our students come from in the
dorm arise secco person Espanola
last Christmas less Vegas New
London Iran today tops Roswell
Silver City so quorum Fe would.
And inTaos property at least
fourteen students travel by the
referendum.
And more students take the blast
from the north
We will open a new dorm we're
grateful to the governor and the
legislature in the state of New
Mexico for providing us with
this fund under construction
right now.
NMSA.
As hoping that will be able to
do this bill get that the
operational funding to operate a
seven day week program.
And this is unlike other schools
we receive the same public
funding of other schools for
that ninety two program but
support for amount of the our
program and the residential
program comes through private
donations and grants.
What about that and as noted in
the Ilyinsky analysis and MSAs
in an awkward ground between
other state charter charter
schools and a constitutional
special school.
So our case for supporting this
or I do we program which exclude
students from areas by this from
Santa Fe because they would have
to travel to Santa Fe on Sunday
evening be picked up on Friday
after school drive to Los crucis
and and do it all over again on
Sunday so accessing the school
is the most difficult the
student artists from the city.
It was provided leader really
created and the requirement
includes that as much as
possible we have equal
representation from all three
congressional districts and
without the dormitory in the
funding to run it that's almost
impossible.
and twenty twenty there is a
memorial and then our task force
through the house and it
addressed the need for dormitory
and it also addressed the need
for additional state operational
funding.
last year the Legislature
provided eight point three
million dollars to build a dorm
and we are very grateful to
everyone for that support.
so now we're looking for H. B.
ninety nine we are looking to
create a non reverting permanent
fund and the state treasury to
support a seven day a week
dormitory program allows
students from around the state
to attend NMSA and access its
part in academic programs and
helping us reach our mission of
providing access to all New
Mexico counties.
And Dr Lopez could speak to you
on the details of that funding.
Mr chair just a couple little
points that really impressed me
about the school and everyone's
invited to come visit it is I
wish I could go back to high
school and do it all over again
the graduation rate is ninety
seven percent it's unprecedented
in the state with a hundred
percent of acceptance into
college professional schooling
after that and just last year
the students received over eight
million dollars in scholarships
alone to go on and continue
their work so it's just it
absolute
gold standard I think in the
state for the opportunity it
presents to the students and to
have this opportunity now to
expand that effort is why we're
here today thank you Mr chair at
this point.
Yes please.
Appreciate the presentations at
this point of time although the
eyes any favors of house bill
ninety nine.
Everybody.
If we full of people our first
of the state.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is.
Hi there I have a strong Mexico
school for the arts issue mile
event at this
and I'm so excited about the
prospect of doubling the number
of students that we can
accommodate our to our receive
are constructed the other one
about thirty students to about
sixty students to increase the
opportunity to do what what we
are which is the state of New
Mexico school for the arts and
so if you well to lower the
barriers by providing seventy of
the program for sixty still so
important for meeting that
mission that that is an
opposition.
We're really looking forward to
this opportunity for people to
out of operational.
The last.
Thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee plans that Lopez
registered lobbyists on behalf
of New Mexico the odds
up you know what we tried to do
in this legislation is creative
vehicle for developing a fund
that would have a sustainability
rather than trying to come for
recurring appropriation it has
no general fund impact
Rather the the the proceeds come
from the overage the extraction
tax and after all of the
mandatory requirements also
filled and whatever's left over
can can come to to this fund and
we would drop from the fund but
beyond that.
At present even after we with
the two million that's being
proposed up the balance of that
goes into the permanent fund so
it doesn't have a general fund
impact I guess the argument
could be made that over the long
haul that that permanent fund
has two million dollars eight
investment over a long horizon
and it would be a minimal impact
is that sense but there's no
direct impact but Mr chairman we
stand and support this thank you
yes ma'am.
impact on on the governor.
What
and is a fund I think looking
for a stable source.
This one seem to be appropriate
especially I don't think we
would even touched it except for
the fact that people in Mexico
voted to take money from the
permanent fund for early
childhood for early childhood
and this is the balance of this
one normally would go into we're
just asking for just two million
off before it goes into the
early childhood but which is
also going to receive one half
percent
I believe so we thought it might
be inappropriate to education
it's just hard to million
dollar.
Thank you thank you.
Senator.
Good morning members of the
governing council money that she
would have and I am part of the
admissions and outreach team at
the school for the arts and I
also one of the the teachers
currently we have forty six
applicants from outside of Santa
Fe including students from we're
told in Artesia how.
Years and further away in order
to serve the students of our
nation I'm reaching further
outside of this and figure those
students who are this eight
hours waiting would not be able
to make that turn around and
give time so providing seven
day access to the dorms will
allow them to have this amazing
artist education thank you thank
you.
The actual pull together
residences rector morning we are
having a seven day week program
after school on his knee and
is an opportunity for the.
Currently they are.
Traveling ten twenty minutes
each way from the current forms
to the school on site.
every day which is quite
challenging and right.
I want to.
Where they were going to be
living for that purpose.
Increasing
the opportunity for them to.
And art.
I see them when they leave at
the end of the week that.
Because we don't have that
opportunity to rest.
are there other options you
have.
Instead of having this
opportunity really.
The very important role impact
students.
Thank you thanks.
Senator.
But a lot
with.
I'm Deborah potter
and first I want to thank all of
you for serving for taking care
of the needs of New Mexicans
like me you know it's a lot of
time a lot of effort and we all
really appreciate what she did
all of you have constituents who
probably have children or
grandchildren they want to go to
put in high school in the state
environment
we have nervous integrators
confidence seniors and they
don't have a place to stay can't
calm to worst will so
it's just.
so it's just important that we
keep them safe and nurturing
environment that we can control
rather than some other place so
thank you very much again thank
you very much anyone else on the
side yes ma'am.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is in this
I served in this body for twenty
years not long time ago.
But I have been with this
project since the beginning and
I will tell you I worked for
thirty years and the gas and
school districts.
And I saw year after year kids I
would have to commend this part
of the account know where to get
involved in so it's exciting to
me to think that kids from all
over the state would be able to
come to the school and explore
there are and not just part we
get
All on academic training to and
and have really good preparation
for college we have a hundred
percent scholarship and so I'm
proud of this project I know
that it's different from what we
do but you know I think it's
it's one time that we have not
come from a deficit we're
looking at what our kids really
could do with the economy
sources and so I spent on this
project I think it's one of the
best rates the state has one.
Thank you thank you it also said
that.
Hi my name is Marissa long and
thank you chairman and community
and I'm gonna board for eight
years I think I'm very involved
with the I can be our
presidential program which I
think is incredibly working.
By the excellence in academics
and the arts our students gaps
around long enough to have a lot
more to come back and we have
the least one if not two of our
students had come back back to
New Mexico after going to public
areas related colleges and
they're teaching at the school
that so not only are we creating
you know four students but
they're coming back to serve our
students continuously and and
that's pretty great remember
that thank you what else.
Not a lot of the work online
of this is in the room.
Hello this is hello and.
Okay very good thank you for
that the interaction let's go to
the committee questions comments
from the.
Representative Harper then
revenues for the next.
Okay thank you chairman
Representative it's great to see
you here this morning and what a
great costs I want to welcome
everyone here to people's house
to the best committee in the in
the state
in I agree this is an amazing
school right it really is a gem
you know I had the privilege of
having Neil swap as my high
school band director and
started dating my wife in the
marching band in high so I I
know.
Pianos been mandatory for all of
our kids right to my daughter
just just declared a loon for me
it was amazing so we are really
really appreciate a lot of the
arts and this really is an
amazing forward winning school.
I do have a couple questions
though.
Chairman and Representative.
So
I guess.
My.
I want to questions my first
line is this is a a state public
charter school
if I understand correctly
Representative Chairman
representative and so that means
the that's it the normal funds
for running the school day today
come from the state equalization
guarantee
for funding formula is that
correct.
Mr chair.
Yeah thank you and and we do
have.
kind of two tiers of charter
schools right we have the end of
the state charter charter
schools and we have also kind of
district level charter schools
like like I know APS has several
charters but there are some
state run charters there.
And and and and gentleman and
Representative there's a state
charter school in my district
were
we're two of my kids for kids
actually go C. asking cat in
the.
so I I guess what was lines.
yes academy right now because
all the boys and girls clubs
were sold no longer has a GM
because they were able.
The boys girls club next door
and so this year in capital
outlay requests they've cobbled
together a few million dollars
themselves are asking us to help
out so we can build up a gym for
rate is so I guess my first
question is chairman and
Representative why why did we
settle on this funding mechanism
persist something like an
appropriation R. or capital
either yes.
I'm sure hello
We we looked at a number of
options and the reason this was
chosen is because we want to
create a fund that is beyond the
needs of the of the day to day
operation the front and and grow
it large enough that if well yes
I five years ten years.
That we have created a corpus
that we can draw on in order to
continue to operate and
sustainable fashion that's one
of those problems.
Madam chair we can just add to
that
Yes Madam chair committee also
we were looking for
Revenue stream funding stream
that didn't happen impact higher
all it didn't affect other
public schools we did not want
to take the pie in slices we're
doing.
Madam chair representative thank
thank you for that I can I can
kind of see how you settled on
this this now and and I agree
setting up kind of in a down
fund you know where you could
you know it looks like you could
invest this and gets you know
like a yearly revenue stream we
can pull from the purpose if
needed
so I I guess I understand how
you got there.
yes and I appreciate your trying
to not impact different revenue
streams I would say that this
does affect education in a way
because this would be taking
money from the early childhood
trust fund
but perhaps.
Not as significantly as it would
if it was you know another
funding stream I will say that
there is
madam chair and representative I
know like the library
association the statewide
library association has been
working hard to get a fifty
million dollar.
Fund to put together their the
concertino in so far they're
trying to get the rest on this
year where they can
you don't have an account fund
that gives them yearly
distributions
I guess if I was in your shoes
that's private direction I would
have gone
is to try to get some
probation and all those up over
the years
my.
I guess.
The other line of questioning
here maybe just the.
for the committees education I
think you all probably know this
but we have a couple pockets
that is set by statute that when
we receive a lot of when we see
revenue right that normally goes
into the general operating fund.
but we receive revenue in excess
of what has been allocated by
the legislature the first bucket
roll into it's called the tax
stabilization reserve.
Right and and that's kind of our
cash
You know.
Bucket that we go to if you
know.
If we have a right eight right
is this we're not getting
revenues we want that we
expected that is kind of what
pays for everyone's salaries
teacher salaries and and current
statutes as that.
Those dollars go into that
bucket know hits twenty five
percent.
Of our reoccurring
appropriations.
And and we're in a good place
right now we take that and then
the next budget it goes to.
Is the early childhood trust
fund which we've set up to kind
of be our third the permanent
fund right.
and that's gonna get a ton of
money this year it's incredible
really a great thing.
And I do appreciate how to set
up that you know you're not just
getting reoccurring
appropriation every year only in
these good years which can
appropriation I just looking at
the FY on page three.
you know the state investment
council particularly nice table
that shows that over time you
know we're looking at you know.
Get out.
Roughly ten million dollars of
probation going into this fund
and then of course over time
lost count timed interest could
be much more than that to the
early childhood trust fund so
I'm just trying to.
I mean obviously you probably
understand that so I guess
that's my question do you.
Having gone this approach you
must feel that
For enough to
have the funding going to early
childhood education.
In this way so I'd like to
understand thought process on
the.
Madam chair
If.
Right response I think when we
look at.
Possible sustainable funding
source.
The door is going to be ready
the end of.
And
there we have.
With different.
And forget every year hoping to
get.
Is.
We never look at except for the
fact public body to take from
the permanent fund going to be a
huge influx of money into early
childhood and there's a my
understanding is is a great deal
of money already in this in the
early childhood and they need to
spend it and we just like to
help million.
when they're all really tough
but this thing to be.
Based upon the fact that we need
to have operation funding over
time.
The fund would be created do we
appropriateness beautiful get
appropriations out of it.
Appropriations
and.
Over time so when they are we do
have our
students we all have and we
still have some funding to be
able to provide housing for the
students that come from this.
Well as well as.
Representative challaned.
Education public elementary.
We can
get an opportunity.
Of our
really was because of because
the public voted to take this
other money and to add to it
that is being a logical source
that would not be too damaging
to would be damaging to early
childhood and my understanding
is have a look at some of that
it would be I guess it was a
minimal impact on.
Early childhood.
Ms Mr chair Representative I
think just to clarify to it
would be an unfunded mandate if
we don't provide the funds for
this type of program is the only
statutory release a created
state school so we have I mean
in order to meet the demand of
what this body has.
Decided to put into statute and
into place and the investments
that have been made already is
being able to fund the the
function of of the mandate Mr
chair that chairman and the
Representative and thank you
having yeah great arguments and
I.
And I'm glad we're having this
conversation I guess my.
My my.
I have two concerns and and.
And perhaps we can work out a
way to fix these concerns but
the first one is
You know I I I really do not
feel like at this point we
should be taking money for the
from the early childhood Trust
Fund right that findings to grow
we need to get those programs up
and running so I I would
recommend it a different way to
find it and the second concern
is you know I agree this is kind
of a unique school that it has
actually is enabling legislation
but but in the end it is
structured as a state charter
school.
And there are lots of state
charter schools including one my
two kids go to and I.
Are we see them start coming up
and asking for special funding
like like this like for the
gentleman my kids school should
have said Hey.
let's uh let's get a.
You know of a reoccurring
appropriation from childhood you
know an intercept try to trust
fund inflows right I just I
worry about setting that
precedent
but.
Gosh this this is an amazing
place and I think we all agree
we'd love to help out let's
maybe find a different way to do
it.
Chairman thank you.
That is the Representative
stock.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative Romero I'm also
concerned.
About setting this press.
I can certainly applaud.
The need for stable sustainable
funding.
Actually need the courage.
Throughout the state including.
Hello.
Regular public schools charter
schools are public schools so.
Many Mr Chairman.
Senator how many students with
the knowledge in this field.
Mr chair.
In the Representative Scott
sixty students yes the adult.
Back in the
Mr chairman we are looking at
thirty three thousand dollars
coach.
For this.
For the operation.
The total state expenditure for
the kids in my district is a
fraction.
So.
I've actually worked as a
question of equity.
Yeah.
To address first Mr chair if
Cindy could address that Mr
chair this Representative Scott.
The the mission and vision of
the school is that it is
statewide so it would be more
expensive to operate the state
line.
Idea is that we have these
talented youth across the state
who have no opportunity.
And they don't have access to an
arts education and so the equity
comes for those students what
these extreme talent recently we
had a student
Jesse Begay and they were after
studying creative writing in New
Mexico school for the arts they
were named a national student
student public of their
selection was one of twenty two
thousand.
the travel to Washington DC
a percentage of the First Lady
if not recreation they are not
representing the southwest and
our going to do some outreach
and training on the Navajo
Nation.
so with that kind of students
who.
I
would never have that
opportunity if it wasn't for New
Mexico school for the arts and
so it's not.
In this case it's not a large
the the size of the student
population but the students that
have these unique account and I
can give you examples of other
students
such as
The on.
Who came to us so no.
Four years study to New Mexico
school for the arts got a full
ride to attend the Juilliard
School.
they select twelfth.
Male dancers here is one of
twelve who graduated last spring
is not dancing in New York City
with LA Hispanic the.
Talent is just big and we're
hoping no one day will come back
to New Mexico and share that
talent so the equity is for
those young artists who would
never have the opportunity to
grow that town.
Mr chair
And representative Scott I think
just when we look at again the
unprecedented nature of this
type of school the only one that
exists in the state and as you
said equitably we're talking
about creating that access point
how else can we do that without
this so if we're talking about a
catch twenty two that every
school building different
everyone having different access
to different quality of
education access education
that's a bigger issue I think
that doesn't focus on what the
necessity of this bill is which
is about programming and
functioning as the school itself
on its own.
Way
And being able to provide that
opportunity statewide doesn't
exist without having that
functional funding how this is
one proposal about how to do
that how to get it funded
but we can't create the access
for folks and we to to be able
to go to the school without that
so rather than compared to every
other school and how it's
funding you know is prepared and
and and how that functions I
think just focusing on how this
this school functions and its
needs you know and I have itself
it's it's important to just
distinguish Mr chair
representative.
Mr Chairman representative.
What.
Create a.
Just put together.
Opened last year sixty million
dollar facility.
The career technical education.
What they are trying to do.
Walked right into.
Turning up well she she needs
and chefs.
Jobs.
Sure in New Mexico.
And they're doing level issues.
The funding.
For the SCG.
So Mr Chairman.
Senator
It would be great.
To support a dorm.
Associated with that facility
that would bring students from
all over the state.
To develop those conditions.
Education.
Yeah.
We are in need.
What is in the forms.
Statewide.
The school system in general.
And.
Two to one.
And say.
These folks are more special.
Then the well she adds.
All the oil change.
What looks to me.
Not since an act.
Thank you Mr thank you
Representative for discussed
Representative a vice chair one
good enough.
Good morning thank you of
Representative ever met it
really fills me up to see so
many of you here today the
committee
process state Senator hopefully
someday with that affects the
rate.
I do believe it some
transparency and I thought of
those today there
what kinds of for this but this
time I want to appreciate your
creativity and looking at a
funding source.
certainly I had to double take a
look at the first time wait
what.
because you and your creative
and I appreciate hearing Mr
chair and representative that
this came to mind after we in
fact as voters in New Mexico did
say yes to the constitutional
amendment to put money to the
early childhood care funds care
education fund
but for me there are significant
concerns about the specificity
of this well I appreciate the
joy and beauty and grace and
intelligence and ensure the
young people in your care and
education come up with and I
personally do you have to do
with you even well well
established believe that art art
absolutely part of a better
world part of their future and
part of hello people have and
always will express themselves I
have a little part of my I I
represent a district about four
hours from here more
realistically like four half if
they stop at all for gas or
right or something to eat a
minute to stretch so for me it's
about nine are relative to for
enrollment my kids art is the
most of the businesses that are
over facetime are of the six
great trombone practice whether
she's playing majors scales
response she's learning and I
know what we need that likely
music will always be part of our
future besides last night she
was sketching
this tax act because Mrs.
No I'm not ready social decide
when and where she have.
Shares that that spirit with the
other kid is in high school.
Hi so I just want to be allowed
I am so grateful Miss Alexis and
grateful for the work that it
took to bring you into this.
and I hope there other ways
moving forward that we all as
legislators honor and respect
with arts mean but also provide
a funding mechanism that isn't.
So just wanted to say that of
those I don't I try not to pay
for my bills or money support
and respect you enough to tell
you right now.
Thank you all Mr chair and
committee thank you bye
Representative speaker Martinez
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for this bill
I think the thing my colleague
Representative Harper hitting on
it at the school.
Operates essentially as a
charter school.
Do something except for a long
time.
Sorry.
What we have to figure out how
we Fund.
Facilities.
And programming less revenue as
recently as our public charter
schools
it's a feeding frenzy every year
capital outlay
There's this.
There is a legitimate legal
argument.
About how you use public dollars
to refurbish for example the
least properties that charter
schools Mr chair representative
might be using right yes I do
make us.
other schools have been very
creative the save money secured
private investments and bought
property and then come to the
state to to help build was
actually a public facility.
I.
Like everybody very appreciative
of the school all of the of the
mission of the New Mexico school
for the arts
I think that it's a place that
provides support opportunity to
students from across the state
students who meet otherwise not
have the opportunity for.
Right reasons to express their
artistic talents and to develop
those artistic talents in the
sport of space
hence the need to have this
residential.
space within
However I think that the
creativity in figuring out the
funding
is what has maybe gotten ahead
of your little bit
As much money as your dollar
trust fund has quite frankly no
one envisioned it would be that
much.
and to to to echo what you've
already heard it.
If we do that for this school
this year.
There will be thirty others next
year who will want to do the
same thing and how can we
possibly say no.
I don't know what the I don't
know what the solution is I do
know that we have excess
revenues again.
and I think what this body
should be thinking about it's
not decisions are in the into
the into the future session.
Is how do we create a specific
fund to help support the
development.
Schools like this in terms of
its infrastructure.
I had a great meeting yesterday
with students from
Representative makes being
funded school
they have been trying for years
to get support from the state
for.
One reason or another it has not
come to fruition in the ways
that that we need to come
through for them so this is not
just a problem
That you need to to your school
Mr chair representative it's I
think it's a problem across the
state.
Why what why not you know why
can't we put.
You know if you million dollars
into a new fund got those are
creating all these funds the
states up to help support these
types of efforts but I think
that coming in through the
retail trust fund that I think
that that opens up a whole can
of worms that I don't know that
you intended to but it's it's
certainly a political reality
and and look I was one of the
people behind the land grant
permanent fund I can tell you
that even with that and the
trust fund we're still not
meeting the full need of the
state
as.
At as amazing as that might
sound we're still not meeting.
so to take money from you know
Peter to pay Paul is saying it
is.
So I commend you for the bill I
commend you for the idea up for
absolute to creative for our own
good
but I think that there are other
ways to do this and and that be
more than happy to you know.
As probably all of you would be
to help support the mission of
the school thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr speaker we if we
could do a really quickly I
us at a dinner of the the hello
a lot like this but I saw that
live gentleman back in the days
one recognizable fast the
governor's executive what
located number one everybody.
I'm
sorry I didn't mean it that way
but I thought helpful that is
due to see governors from a
tribe here so that welcome back
that's that moved up to
Representative dot came.
Thank you Mr chair
I have a couple of questions and
in my first question isn't for
the Representative the first
question I think is when do we
have enough money in early
childhood we can start looking
at perhaps doing something
different with that money and.
Can anybody tell me what that
number is.
Probably not but that's just as
I guess more of a statement than
anything Representative thank
sure.
Yes hello.
Okay
Sure Representative.
Got the buy in from any other
school district in the state
what you're about to do where
your ****.
Mr chair representative
I mean.
I think educators a for
educators and when we talk about
the school district in which
this sits is in Santa Fe public
school district that said it's
it's a charter school so
I mean we have brought you know
statewide support for the
schools you can see but as far
as consulting other school
districts the answer is no not
specific to that thank you Mr
thank you the reason I asked
that question is
my school districts that this
will be a precedent and will be
here next year.
This was the president and so as
the speaker said
will have forty here next year
if this goes through and and
there's its presence it will be
a little bit so that is why I
think we need to be very very
careful about that
Mr speaker when does when does
it stop and wind when do this
state next week at two forty
four is it just for specific
school.
Mr chair all of my experts speak
to that so Mr chair
representative Duncan.
By lone NMSA cannot use SCG.
Operations of the door and so
that is what brings us here
today to try to figure that out.
It's not
not using our resources that we
have we literally cannot
statutorily is that money
and if I may it's just a few
other points
we have.
Raised thirty million dollars to
build the facility and privately
privately to grants and we range
between one million and two
million since the beginning.
To provide funding for things
like the dormitory so there is a
commitment to that investment
but we're at this place where we
cannot use SCG.
To find the door that is one
reason.
Thank you.
Mr
In section twenty two dash to a
dash eight it specifically
states which is about it
specifically prohibits from
using the funds to pay for its
room and board costs and
outreach activities miss the
school to use either private or
public funding sources for this
purpose I like many others on
this committee would encourage
you to to go back in and of find
a different way to fund this.
There's without the arts we are
not a great state our great
country.
And I appreciate that thank you
Mr chair thank you as a
representative Representative.
So I very much appreciate what
your purpose and what you guys
are doing I think that there is
a place for all kids to learn
and kids learn in different
environments and I agree with
Representative Scott Mr chair
I think you know there are
places for skilled labor but
they're also places for arts and
culture and I do question the
source
you know especially when we're
pushing for early childhood
right now and you know I used to
be the president of for the
chairman of ABC schools and I
can see them coming behind you
and other people lining up I
think you have to the best minds
with you right now Dan impala I
worked with both of them and the
other thing that I just wanted
to mention in your in your.
Well maybe go back and look a
little bit at your sources but
the private donors because there
are many people in in New Mexico
that support arts and culture
and I think that this would be
an opportunity to take a look at
care caps of other possible
sources so those would be my
comments at this point.
Representative what we Mr chair
I'm we we definitely take the
feedback from this committee I
really appreciate having the
conversation about the mechanism
I don't what I'm hearing is that
everyone supports to school and
and and its function the
question is where does that
funding come from Mr chair I
know that this committee tables
built prior to passage
potentially if it gets into the
tax path package what I would
ask this committee is to allow
us to work on where the funding
mechanism would come from
perhaps changing maybe that
method of the bill may not come
to taxed me speak to the speaker
about perhaps looking at an
appropriation but we'd really
like to of course keep the the
absence of the bill which is
about the dormitory and perhaps
talk about where the funding
would come from in in a bill
substitute Mr chair.
That suggestion.
Mr chair that point real quickly
this bill Dusko Agency after
this great soul with fix maybe
and if it's the will of this
committee will meet on HSD will
have an opportunity to that
this.
And I think that's the law comes
up if at the end of the day the
point is you know we want to be
fair with everybody in this
committee representative because
of the party affiliation write
anything Representative and so
That we just that because it is
sounds to me that it would not
be.
Dollars to providers of hi right
right but I mean at are you
suggesting that you want to go
into the new.
Committee subset of this bill
and Shirley Mister chair I think
that might be we begin with the
clear indication that we were to
creative about where the money
was going to come from and
perhaps a looking at some of the
appropriation opportunity with
the
historic revenues that we do
have that might be a more
appropriate mechanism to fund
this and create the fund itself
so Mister chair if we can we
would like to just take that and
roll the bills this point at
the that that's probably a good
way to proceed they they have I
don't want you to this point.
But will the artist but we also
need to.
You can get that thank you at
the role of bills
that have let this happen.
You were never here late even.
Thank you part of our office.
And that we will see you on
Monday thank you Mr chair.
