I appreciate all you helping her
if you need any assistance and
giving her any input
As as you need it so when you
call the roll really yes good
morning everyone.
So first things first
Representative.
Representative government.
Speaker egolf.
Madam speaker eva can you
confirm that you're on the line.
Next one he'll he'll make him
make his presence known Charlie.
Representative Harper.
Here.
Present.
Representative Hernandez here.
Representative Lente that.
Good morning I'm here.
Representative.
Here.
Yeah.
Okay thank you Representative
Maestas
I'm here.
Representative Martinez.
Here.
Representative Montoya.
Your.
Representative Romero.
The line but he said that is
trapped in the web in our mode.
And Kimberly the same appear is
apparently so with
them Representative Romero.
Okay I will troubleshoot that
with them as soon as I finish
the rest of.
Representative.
Representative Strickler.
More.
Vice chair Herndon.
But.
And chairwoman Chandler.
Present.
Okay perfect.
Well it's great to see all of
you as I said I'd just like to
start off with a few with
Committee introductions although
I'll go around and ask each one
of you to just talk about
yourself a little bit maybe
identify the district from which
you come a brief reason why and
you're interested in the tax
committee I know a number of you
are that trends of this
committee but others of you are
new so just let's just all get
acquainted and then we'll go on
to a little bit of housekeeping
and of the last item of business
today will be a presentation
from our TRD secretary our chief
economist Izzy Thorez and
Richard and Clemente will be
kind of an overview of the New
Mexico tax structure and a
discussion about the tax
principles that we often look to
when we're considering tax
policy so I'll go down the list
it has representative Cadena
appeared yet.
Apparently not.
speaker egolf.
Representative Harper.
Morning madam chair it's great
to be with everyone again I I
truly love the tax committee.
I've been on it for.
I guess this will be my tenth
year
so I know I'm not a senior is
some other folks but to.
That's been it's been a good
good tenure I can say now.
I represents the money stays in
our representative northern Rio
Rancho area house district fifty
seven.
And
Yeah I really look forward to
a short session
but this will be a busy one for
our committee.
Thank you Mr thank you so much
Representative Harper I see
Representative I saw
representative Cadena Lara
Cadena
Madam chair good morning hello.
Here I I'll go ahead.
I am currently also waiting to
present in how big government
time on multiple devices.
I have not be disruptive in that
way but again my name is
Representative Lara because I'm
not from New Mexico to help with
that thirty eight impact control
New Mexico that Jana County and
I appreciate the opportunity to
serve with you all impacted have
that there thank you madam thank
you Representative
Representative Joshua Hernandez.
Thank you madam chair I'm
representative Josh for
Hernandez from district sixty
which is the other half of Rio
Rancho from what Representative
Harper has I look forward to
look forward to serving with you
guys another session in tax and
a half thank you madam chair
thank you so much Representative
Representative Lente.
Good morning again madam chair
good morning members
Representative Lente house
district sixty five that
includes Sandoval County San
Juan County Reba counties
largest non native community in
my district is the time for a
Leo then all else is includes
seven pueblos I Navajo Nation
chapters and the increased
pagination of very very new on
this committee looking for to
the conversation and learning
more and thank you and good
morning everybody.
Welcome to the committee we're
looking forward to working with
the representative thank you Mr.
Representative Maestas.
Good morning madam chair on
Tania Maestas from house
district sixteen which is a bird
Bernalillo county Albuquerque
west mesa.
From a central to one time you
good to be here.
Good to have you Representative
Maestas I believe Representative
Martinez is moving so we'll get
back to me when we were through
with that others Representative
Rod Montoya.
Morning madam chair and members
and guests yes Representative
Rod Montoya and house Republican
whip and I come from San Juan
county house district one us on
that guy driving around with
that read it looks like it's a
vanity plate census as number
one.
by Representative of all the way
from of the community of La
Plata which is almost to the
well to the Colorado border.
into Farmington and over asked
tech the court wind downs take
so
I represented a big section of
the incorporated areas
and
As far as this committee goes I
think this is one of those
committees were you hate to deal
necessarily with tax issues but
is very necessary and especially
for what we do in government so
I thank you madam chair and I
look forward to.
A short here and hopefully we
don't cause too much more damage
to the state of New Mexico thank
you Madam.
Thank you Representative we only
do good work Representative
Representative Martinez.
Thank you madam chair to get
driving around with the number
eleven.
One number eleven just getting I
don't have one of those one
thing is and I I have had the
great pleasure of serving on
this committee since I was
elected before you was House
taxi was known as the house ways
and means committee with
Representative Harper as a chair
it's been a learning experience
and it's been a wonderful
opportunity I think to to really
work in bipartisan fashion to up
to one do a lot of the you know
damage that's been done to the
tax code in bipartisan fashion
over the past forty years so
look forward to your ten years
chair madam chair into your vice
chairs leadership as well as
well as our Republican
colleagues to do some good work
this session get into good
trouble hopefully and lay the
great related foundation for
twenty twenty three which is
when I think a lot of us agree
we should be able to do some
really good tax reform work
thank you all all by the way
Representative downtown
Albuquerque in parts of the
north valley.
I need to be here.
Thank you Representative and
floor leader Martinez
Representative Romero.
I think I'm on hi good morning
everyone Representative Romero
from northern Santa Fe County
from basically the City of Santa
Fe through the Walker valley
into the city of Espanola we
also host for sovereign pueblos
to see again on that side of the
phone so and people walking
pueblos I and I can call myself
definitely not a veteran still
learning until I'm here on this
committee
I think it's my third year here
well it with the special
sessions it's also confusing so
I don't know we get to count
that but really hoping to create
more progressive tax tax policy
to help especially low income
New Mexicans continue to be able
to to make ends meet and see how
we can do that very supportive
of those initiatives and and
ways to diversify our economy as
of our leader Martinez said I
think twenty twenty three is
going to be a huge year for that
and I'm looking forward to what
comes this year thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Scott.
Thank you madam chair Larry
Scott state representative.
District sixty two.
Which is the northern portion of
all.
And central Lake County this is
my eighth year old agency
committee and always look
forward to the education.
Good to see you Representative
Scott Representative Carol I
think I skipped over you my
apologies.
Representative Lujan.
We'll get back to her
Representative Strickler.
Thank you madam chair.
J. Strickler state a district to
which is Farmington south of a
Representative Rod Montoya.
Also taken parts to rural San
Juan County a lot of a lot of
irrigation the farming and and
whatnot also
venture out to curtain waterflow
area that's kind of New and also
to Bloomfield so but mainly
Farmington is my district this
is my sixteenth year on this
committee hi George very much
very intimidating when I first
got started in a I ask myself
why the heck come on this
committee but it's been a it's
been a great committee and look
forward to the session we've got
a lot of work to do and I have a
lot of good opportunities to to
help business and industry so
thank you madam chair.
Good to see you Representative
Strickler Representative chair
Lujan.
Representative speaker egolf.
Okay
and vice chair Herndon.
So it's a pleasure to be here
with everyone I am
Representative Pamela Herndon
from house district.
Twenty eight I am on my camera's
off only because I'm in a room
here in the capital where I just
need to adjusted at some point
shortly I hi and this is my
first time on this committee and
it is also my first time in the
legislature but I do come with a
great deal of experience in tax
I was a senior tax attorney with
the Internal Revenue Service
working in the districts of of
New Mexico and in Phoenix and
also as a special assistant
United States attorneys
representing the Arvest
interests and bankruptcy matters
so it's a pleasure to be here
and to be part of this committee
and that thank you madam chair
it's often is is very wonderful
to be able to work with you
thank you vice chair Herndon
very excited about having a vice
chair and has experience and
knowledge in the tax arena and
looking forward to working with
you as well I think we've gone
through we've addressed everyone
is Representative Lujan or have
you been able to make it on.
How great your.
A little antsy but go ahead.
Yes Representative terlihat
house district forty eight in
Santa Fe County I'm just very
happy to.
Okay we're losing you
representative Lujan.
Thank you very much.
Okay thank you
I'd like to also introduce the
staff let me see who's online
have already introduced Kimberly
at as hi Kimberly can you turn
your camera on.
Hi good morning everybody.
I'm let's see who else is on
minority and I'll okay bill more
yes.
Yes.
Yes this is my fifth year as an
analyst for the committee look
forward to a great art we have
our analyst Pam right.
You know what.
These computer because we're in
the same room so it's good to be
back and I hope we have a really
good year welcome back looking
forward to working with you
again and our analyst Jackie.
lash.
Nice to be back again.
I'm retired from taxation and
revenue after twenty nine years
of work this two years as major
analyst and this is my previous
committee members thank you I'm
glad to be back great and we
have minority tax analyst Kevin
powers.
And we are muted Kevin.
Still mean sorry sorry about
that
yep.
Great to be back this is my
eighth here doing this for the
on the committee so looking
forward to the thirty day
session.
Welcome haven't now and we have
Tasha young who is our major
analysts Trisha a good morning
chair and members of the
committee I don't seem to have
the capacity to turn on my
camera so if you can do that for
me that would be great very
happy to be back with my favored
Committee I've worked for the
committee and the house majority
analysts before that I was a
lobbyist for the New Mexico
counties all of the counties.
I'm glad you're with us Tasha
welcome.
Think that's everyone I just
wanted to touch base on a on a
few of housekeeping matters you
only know that our committee
schedule is Monday Wednesday and
Fridays for the time being will
be planning on meeting at nine
AM on those days as our state as
our agendas become fuller and
more challenging we may begin to
to have meetings at eight thirty
instead of nine also I think we
should be prepared to have meet
on weekends if necessary we have
a full load as of today I have
counted.
Twenty five bills and
more are coming and I know that
some of the other other
committees are hearing are built
now and we may have a couple of
bills in our committee on
Wednesday so I would plan on
having a meeting on Wednesday at
at this point and
Kimberly I just got a text from
the speaker he tells me that
he's in the public areas and we
need to let him answer could
meet we arrange for that.
Yes one great
So that's that's where we are we
will be conducting our meetings
as we have for all these many
years
Will be as usual with public
comment and so on I I will
reserve the option to limit
public comment on bills that
have a large number of speakers
interested in hospitals and
we'll play that by ear just as
we move forward any questions.
You all are aware that we are
operating off of the share files
so any has anyone had any issues
in terms of accessing the share
file or any any problems or
questions related to that
there's a committee folder and
then there are folders for the
minority and the majority and
those folders are are limited to
those individuals who fall
within those categories.
All right.
I believe speaker you off is now
on the line you want to say a
few words speaker your boss
about your district and so on.
Invite.
We got a few words about my
district Boller and yourself of
course.
Everybody at Brian Egolf the
district forty seven years Santa
Fe circulatory.
Thank you and good to see you
speaker.
On our agenda today is a
presentation by the tax
secretary are our new chief
economist Izzy Torres and
Richard Anklam I see that the
tax secretary is here and I
believe I saw of easy Torres is
well there you are is Richard
Anklam Richard okay great okay.
Good I'm members I recommend
that you keep yourselves muted
unless you you need to speak and
I would just ask the speakers
now to introduce themselves and
proceed with the the
presentation that we talked.
Thank you madam chair I'm
Stephanie Schardin Clarke and
the secretary of the taxation
and revenue department and thank
you so much for the invitation
to be here as part of your
orientation I'll turn it over to
Izzy.
Good morning madam chair members
my name is use my lotus but I go
by is the figure will be that
and I also appreciate the time
and if I could ask Kimberly to
give me access to the share
screen so I can share
presentation I appreciate it
Richard.
Hi Richard.
Hi this is Richard Ackland with
New Mexico tax research
institute happy to be here this
morning and I hope we can add to
the conversation today.
Great well welcome I think we're
very fortunate to have such a
hard hitting and really
competent group of people to be
presenting on this I think all
of us most of us at least of
work pretty closely with all
three individuals and we know
them to be incredible resources
on issues related to the state's
economy and the state's tax
policy so I'll turn it over to
you three I know you've just
speaking amongst yourself as to
how you break up the
presentation so take it from
here thank you.
Think of today we're gonna go in
the order of age before beauty
we're gonna start with myself
and today is going to drive I'm
getting to that age where I
probably shouldn't be driving so
thank you is it
our our first slide again
there's the three of us we've
done presentations like this in
the past we hope to inspire some
some questions or conversation
if not today as as we move
forward into the future and you
discussed various policy
proposals our next slide please.
So gonna talk a little bit about
New Mexico's revenue structure
we're gonna talk about tax
policy principles tax
expenditure reporting and
evaluation tax reform and tax
burden but again we can take
this conversation anywhere you
like I think we have about forty
five minutes plus a little time
at the end for questions so
we're happy to make sure we get
the questions you want answered
answered and try to make a few
points in the process next slide
please.
So revenue structure
this is just a general pie chart
of the the FY twenty three
general fund revenue whopping
nine billion dollars that's
that's extraordinary the reason
we we we want you to look at
this is because even though this
isn't necessarily the budget
committee as the revenue
committee and and the two go
hand in hand just like a
business with different product
lines you have various revenue
sources sometimes we compare New
Mexico to other states and
that's reasonable to do but you
also have to bear in mind that
every state is different
you know you have to play the
hand you're dealt not every
state has oil and gas and other
restate has that you know.
Other witnesses or other
challenges that the state has so
when you look at a chart like
this a few things should stand
up fairly quickly
the the orange piece of the pie
is exceptionally large the
largest piece that's the gross
receipts tax that's that's the
tax that pays the state's bills
primarily as you move around the
pie counterclockwise energy
twenty percent those are direct
energy taxes by the way the
industry pays sales taxes and
income taxes as well but those
are a couple taxes will talk
about a minute as well as
federal revenue sharing on their
lands income taxes twenty three
percent that's the second
largest contributor to our
general fund and that's both
personal income taxes and
corporate income taxes the
majority of that is income taxes
personal income taxes corporate
income taxes.
In New Mexico as in most states
is is a fairly small percentage
of that that's even true in
states with with larger tax
bases and higher income tax
rates
investments that's a fairly
unique sliver the that's
permanent fund earnings
it's it's it's grown a little
bit in recent years as as as a
share even though the pie itself
has been growing quite a bit
but again that represents the
general fund share of permanent
fund investments in other income
that the state receives that's
our most stable revenue source I
should add that the the problem
with sales and income taxes and
energy taxes as we all know with
with oil and gas volatility is
is they can all be Bala tile not
always in sync with one another
but that's something that your
forecasters and your budget
folks have to manage and you all
have to keep in mind as well but
again New Mexico we have a high
reliance on general sales taxes
you don't see property taxes in
that pie we get a small sliver
of a jukebox past you for
property taxes The New Mexico
had a property tax roll many
many years ago and kind of the
opposite of Texas so there you
you you don't see much of that
the other ten percent I believe
we actually have selective
excise tax and that number as
well as other small revenue
sources
But but in any event that's
that's that's the our revenue
pie that you all are charged
with managing next slide.
The to the most important at
least in the dollar relative
sense is the gross receipts in
compensating Tax it's a you can
think of it as a seller imposed
sales tax
It's it's very broad based but
less brought over time broad as
you often good not always things
like permitting we have things
in the base that should be there
and then we have things that
should be in the base that
aren't but the broad base of New
Mexicos imposition makes it such
that most economic activity
tends to be in the base of our
tax and then it's up to you all
decide what you want to keep
that they're getting include
services intangibles that's kind
of our talking about and it
allows an indirect tax on on the
federal government so we we talk
about contributions and and and
how New Mexico's different in
other states we often talk about
reliance on oil and gas because
that certainly out there but the
nature of our tax mostly the
seller imposition allows us to
taxed federal contractors in the
broad base or nature of our tax
means we tax things that other
states don't tend to taxed so
the federal government for
instance is a very large
contributor to our fest
and it's not just through desks
and chairs of computers and
other states typically can't tax
through normal sales tax but
that's all they would tax we tax
services construction
construction materials things of
that nature so it's the for
services to DO DS to DO we of
slabs as the bases of it's it's
the parts of everything
but that's just something to
keep in mind that's one of the
ways that we differ our range
include are you you notice if
you go to Albuquerque or Santa
Fe or Los crucis or anywhere
else it's that rates a little
different typically the gross
receipts tax rate that's impose
that's because it includes a
local option taxes
those are imposed in increments
I primarily municipal and county
governments however there are
few other special districts
training space board there's
some sanitation districts and
things of that nature that that
contribute to the ultimate right
and mean that there's one more
than one beneficiary so often
times when you're kind of
tinkering with the gross
receipts tax you're you're
tinkering with with with
everybody's tax
Next slide please.
So the state chair of the G. R.
T. currently if it's an
incorporated area the base rate
is five point one two five
percent if you add the local
increments that's how you get
the ultimate right that's
subject to tax if the source of
that jurisdiction the state
chair in incorporated areas is
three point nine percent the
reason for that is.
In incorporated areas within
municipal boundaries one point
two two five percent of the
state's five point one two five
percent gets distributed back to
miss miss polity in addition to
their local increments and
that's why it gets confusing
sometimes when you try to give
you have you know what what who
gets what and why
But it is the subject of some
conversation there's no history
to it
the right range is five and
eight the state base rate which
is almost nonexistent given our
recent law changes on July one
very few people pay
you have to be an origin sourced
sourced paying taxpayer which
are only professional services
outside the state to be subject
to the I in an ace that wasn't
the case six months ago but it's
the case now.
Everyone else is gonna be
subject to local rates in some
form or fashion from five and a
half to nine point four three
seven five percent that's
Taos ski valley if you're
curious and that's through the
end of June of this year
the lowest rate is five and a
half percent and that's
remainder of county we and like
to
and that's been the case for a
very long time so you can see we
have a lot of right variability
in the state high rates used to
be kind of relegated to tourist
town to operate on the theory
that they were exporting their
taxed to the tourists and in
some cases that's true but
people actually live in in
places like Santa Fe and right
so and.
And and now
Southern Espanola Santa Fe
portion is has been over nine
percent for quite some time not
exactly interest destination
so you could say that we have a
little higher rates than we'd
like in those rates have been
increasing over time.
I mentioned are sourcing rules
the seller location generally
determines the rate of tax that
was due on the transaction until
June thirty of this year after
that unless it was professional
in person services the customer
location determine the right
that a wise what does that mean
from home depot and I shipped a
pallet of lumber to you in Los
Alamos from from Santa Fe
the the right in Los Alamos is
now do as opposed to the right
in Santa Fe were my businesses.
your meeting earlier
we tax more business imposed
because of the breadth of our
tax than other states that
creates this cascading problem
could you bake taxes into the
chain of commerce increases
prices roll forward etcetera
every state system does that no
state system is perfect our
state.
I'm because of our rate increase
trends and and and the fact we
tax larger array of mostly
business service inputs we our
problem is is you know greater
than some states.
the hold harmless that's that's
been a
a nose bleed for quite sometime
I say that just because it's
been the subject of a lot of
political debate coming out of
the the food and medical
reductions and in a rate
increase that was insufficient
at the time resulting in
well anyway
there are to hold harmless
proposals out in the Senate.
Right now one they both freeze
in some form or fashion the hold
harmless clawbacks but that's
just another feature of the
history of our of our tax policy
we could be endorsed as at some
point if you like next slide
please.
So are compensating taxes are
used to access when you when you
buy something and you use it and
we can't tax the solar
legislative typically college
use tax in most states we call
it a compensating tax prior to
July one it was I an eight
percent C. got a tax break if
you bought out of state and it
only apply to businesses not
individuals applied individuals
but the department was precluded
from from collecting it
as of July one local options are
now imposed on those taxes so
taxpayers have to report where
the where the the goods or
services are used and and the
they are creating the tax of the
applicable applicable right
including local options
individuals are now dragged into
this tax base as well
The media county taxes several
people in on in this body were
were
You know pretty instrumental and
and and making some
simplification changes to the to
the range of options available
to us and giving them additional
flexibility at the county
immunity level but they're still
fairly tightly controlled by the
legislature in the sense that
they can only impose so much
they do not have again local
option compensating taxes in
addition to the G. R. T.
bringing in internet and things
like that should have greatly
expanded their bases for the
most part these changes
increasing revenues with a few
possible exceptions in places
like Carlsbad and Hobbs
The chair to provide seventy
percent of seven five percent of
municipal general revenue that
was a general truism for years
now based on an average I
suspect that number's actually
gone up a little bit because of
the base expansion that we've
seen in the last year you know
we haven't seen the end of that
taxpayers are still conforming
other departments implementing
so what we'll have to take some
time to see how that goes but
the bases are identical this is
a good thing for business and
taxpayers
You know the fact that it is one
right administered in one place
and you don't have to file
separate returns to separate
jurisdictions with separate such
a rules
that's largely a good thing
a few local governments might
might trouble with that.
Tribes their sovereign nations
of their own so the state does
not have jurisdiction to tax
tribes or tribal members within
their tribal boundaries
but but many tribes do align
your taxes with New Mexico it's
a matter of mutual agreement or
convenience we entered we've
entered into intergovernmental
agreements with most tribes and
pueblos the Navajo Nation the
most notable exception
and and thank you Stephanie we
we've added another entity to
the list so that there are now
seventeen tribal entities that
impose gross receipts tax that
the state administers kind of
like a local government they
keep the majority of it if it's
if it's to a tribal member they
keep all of it if it's a to non
tribal member they get seventy
five percent the general fund
gets twenty five percent but
it's a system that again back to
my comment about having a line
tax bases with local governments
there's a mutual interest in the
tribes in the state doing the
same thing it just makes it
easier for ever wanted to do it
and get it right next slide
please.
Course we mention we have a
personal income tax
And it's a general fund revenue
for source exclusively
It's it's fairly it's a fairly
generic tax it's it's it's you
know nothing nothing out of the
ordinary we take you back what
we say piggy back we we follow
the federal adjusted gross
income come as a starting point
and then we have some additions
and subtractions
that yields taxable income at
the end of the day
You know as we no longer have
federal except exemption amount
of **** about it but we do have
an add back in cases where
the federal exemption changes
For some of our families next
slide please.
So we have graduated more
marginal rates that range from
one point seven to five point
nine percent that puts us in the
ballpark of our neighbors that
have taxes maybe towards towards
the high end we we increase the
top and not not too long ago
just a little bit we have
credits and rebates that that
reduce tax do there there there.
Both targeted towards towards
families as well as well as
businesses of different kinds of
credits some are refundable and
so may be carried forward.
we do have refundable rebates
and credits
That are based on modified gross
income
that's like the lowincome
comprehensive tax rebate the
working families tax credit.
Which is increasing to twenty
five percent.
Of the federal credit next year
is based on the on the federal
earned income tax credit amount
can you all of increased both
that and elector and and in
recent years this one twice a
Withholding from from payroll
and an estimated payments
for some businesses are applied
throughout the year
returns are typically due on
April fifteenth and taxpayers
may request an extension.
Next next slide please.
The corporate income tax
We impose tax on corporations
just like we do on individuals a
lot of business entities in our
we called pass throughs which
means the taxes paid at the
individual level it's it's it's
just passed through the same
partnership but some some some
entities can check the box to be
treated as a partnership or S.
corporation others just simply
are corporations and they're the
ones that pay the corporate
income tax you have to have some
kind of problem you know some
kind of connection to the state
more than the slightest physical
presence to have nexus with the
state in order for us to charge
you tax the standard is not the
same necessarily as the changes
resulting from the way fair
Supreme Court case that was a
sales tax case although over
time
it's easier and easier to assume
that the people have nexus with
the state does does.
Standards are are eroding over
time
but it you know this is a tax
that was somewhat revise just a
couple of years ago
With a lot of help from from
this body and we're still
waiting to see how how that
works out but it seems to be a
more modernized version of
corporate tax as it pertains to
multi state and multi national
entities next slide please.
Mentioned General Fund taxes on
oil and gas
The emergency school taxes these
are the tax rates on oil you'll
notice that we have preferential
rates when certain price
triggers are met when the price
falls below certain levels of
the tax rates fall
those have been on the books for
years I can't tell you how long
on the pre date may but I don't
believe we fall in.
Into the lower rates
been many many years if if we
have only briefly so you can you
can look down of the right side
to see you essentially the
applicable rates
From the use taxes on on oil
next slide please.
Natural gas is similar
just computed on a on a on a
different going basically so
again you can look over the
right side I don't think prices
are falling over dollar thirty
five.
in quite some time although
natural gas got closer than oil
next slide please.
We all know that we had some
issues with the trust fund
we had a pretty strong balance
but the elevated employment
claims resulting from COVID in
the associated
shutdowns.
And I'm an employment
disruptions you know resulted in
borrowing federal money the
state used six hundred fifty six
point six million of our foster
played if to repay those loans
but now you know we were still
facing the possibility of tax
rate heights despite revising
the fund.
it's not but certainly not was
sufficient to withstand another
pandemic
But you know because the way the
formulas worked in the
affirmative can still rise and
hopefully we see employment
continue to increase
but there may be formulate
changes necessary at some point
next slide please.
So tax policy principles
These are the tax research
institutes policy principles
and really the take away that I
want you to have you'll see
you'll see all season you'll see
other organizations I want you
to focus mostly on the
similarities rather than
differences because occasionally
there's no on differences will
few different words
but they'll try to get to the
same place adequacy efficiency
and equity simplicity.
Comprehensiveness accountability
or ours that adequacy is the
starting point you know you all
have to run state government and
you can quibble about how big
you want state government to be
or what services you want a
provider not find that once you
make that decision back to that
pile you saw in the very
beginning you have to have a
revenue portfolio sufficient to
fund those required services.
That's what adequacy speaks to
it's not size of government is
making sure you you have revenue
program sufficient to accomplish
your desired budgetary needs
efficiency noted are you this
you know interference with
private economy should be
minimized equity taxpayers
should be treated fairly well of
course they should be treated
fairly but you know beauties in
the eyes of the beholder right
so these are kind of subjective
principles they're also
competing principles I should
add with equity sometimes you're
talking about horizontal equity
that's you know Walmart across
from Kmart I guess that doesn't
exist anymore
but
but equity you know that's
wealthier households for
household kind of comparisons
they all matter they're all
valid but you know keep in mind
what it is we're actually
talking about simplicity laws
regulations forms and procedures
should be as simple as possible
you know that's kind of a pipe
dream perhaps but it's something
that we all try to achieve and
keep in mind because it's all
part of how we make the system
work work efficiently collect
the maximum out of help tax
dollars that are do given the
law with the least amount of
leakage of those are paying
their fair share and those who
don't know are are not paying
comprehensiveness this is an
important principle
Be careful of cherry picking you
know I mentioned comparing to
other states sometimes that
makes a lot of sense but
you know a lot of promoters
We'll try to cherry pick well I
could move to Texas you know not
pay income money five thousand
income tax but you can pay
another five thousand property
tax rate are you comparing those
things fairly and that's what
comprehensive this is about you
know are you actually
considering all the things
as a system as opposed to you
know what off.
Kind of an analysis which can
lead to a you know poor decision
making if you're not careful
accountability that's not really
a principal but you know we
think exception should be rare
you know you should have a well
designed system with rare
exceptions that should be
carefully evaluated justified in
the sectors can speak about that
little bit later with the text
Senator report
the last thing I wanted to
mention you know begin these the
these principles make sense but
they they're sometimes competing
with one another and and
sometimes there's objective so
it's about finding that balance
to make it all work you know
that you know that's maybe a
pipe dream too but it's what
we're all here to try to
accomplish
above you can see this my
organization New Mexico tax
research institute is a
nonprofit nonpartisan members
member supported organization
debt for dedicated to advancing
your tax policy principles right
that first part I just want to
remind you all I know you all
are astute consumers of
information but everybody is a
non profit non partisan member
supported organization or
something like that so so if you
everything that maybe not with a
jaundiced eye but but everyone
has an angle slander biased or
or just a you know filtered
through their experiences myself
included and so I would
encourage you to you know
evaluate absorb as much
information as you can
That I think it's more the best
time to give me the hook and
move and move on to the
secretary.
Thank you Richard okay so I'll
be talking about the tax
expenditure reporting that is
produced every year by the
taxation and revenue department
and I'll dive right into it so
tax expenditure is kind of a
funny terminology the idea being
that for going revenue that you
could have otherwise collected
is a lot like making
appropriation and so the idea of
a tax expenditure report or
sometimes they're called tax
expended tax expenditure budget
the idea there is to make sure
that there's accountability for
reviewing the amount of foregone
revenue and making sure that
there's a periodic review of
those choices to forgo revenue
and make sure that it's it's
good policy still in it serving
as for best so tax expenditure
reports described the areas
where the tax code provide some
kind of preferential treatment
might be by excluding something
or giving a preferential rate
taxed Representative began
producing these reports and at
in twenty twelve and that the
report involves a little bit
year by year we try to just push
the push it forward and make it
more informative each time and I
provided instructions there
where you can find them in PDF
on our website if you have any
trouble with that please reach
out and I'll be happy to show
you where to find them.
every year we present the newest
tax expenditure report to the
legislature's revenue
stabilization and tax policy
committee it's either usually
the November or December meeting
depending on rest up schedule
and that report if you look at
it is going to show basically
and comprehensive list of the
revenue that's foregone due to
tax credits deductions
exemptions and preferential
rates
every dollar for gone cannot be
appropriated in there for that
you know that's kind of the
thinking behind evaluating that
so closely.
Next slide.
So I want to talk a little bit
about the difference between
exclusions exemptions deductions
and credits I I feel like there
are plenty of conversations that
aren't very technical that can
be had where we use those words
interchangeably and then when we
get down to the weeds we have to
be specific about which one we
really need which kind of tax
incentive do we mean and your
committee is always in the weeds
so I want to take a moment to
sort of highlight the
differences between those so an
exclusion it's really just
something that is about defining
the base there are certain
exclusions in our tax code that
are meant to conform with
federal law for example or
prevent double taxation or we
wouldn't necessarily call them a
tax expenditure they're they're
defining the base and so there's
a listing at the back of the
report that lists things that
are not the tax expenditure if
you're ever wondering well I
heard that there's this
paragraph and in the tax code
and I don't see it listed here
it might be that we've
determined it's not a tax
expenditure it's defining the
based and so we've detailed in
the appendix okay exemptions and
deductions are very similar
except for usually reporting
requirements so first of all
think about you know any tax has
a base that's going to be taxed
that gets multiplied by the
right of the tax to get the
revenue generated by the tax so
based times right goals tax
exemptions and deductions both
take something out of that
taxable base so that it isn't
multiplied by the right but
exemptions to take something out
of the tax base and usually
don't require taxpayers to
report that they claim that
exemption so on one hand that's
good because the taxpayer
doesn't have the burden of
having to calculate that and
report it to us but on the flip
side you don't have the
transparency of knowing and
neither do I what they accepted
so we're a little bit blind to
it and if if we're making
estimates of how much is
Representative.
New how much revenues for gone
due to exemptions we have to
make a gas based on some data
that's available because it's
generally not reported to us
deductions are the same and that
they narrow the base they take
something out of the taxable
base however deductions are
reported in some sense they
might not report bureau reported
specifically a taxpayer there
there are some deductions that
our tax code that have to be
separately reported and we have
complete visibility in Arjun tax
system exactly how much was
claim those deductions but there
are many deductions that is that
a taxpayer can claim without
separate reporting and then
again we have to kind of yes
based on some kind of per capita
data or or something that we see
happening in the economy how
much was taken and again there's
a trade off there we if we don't
require separate reporting we
have less transparency and less
ability to evaluate but there's
also less burden on taxpayers
and so you as a committee and we
as a department have to try to
try to weigh those those
conflicting goals of credits on
the other hand so everything
I've been talking about so far
sort of above the line you know
you'd multiplier Tax base times
the right to get revenue credits
on the other hand are below the
line once the tax payer figures
out what their tax liability is
been a credit is a dollar for
dollar reduction of that
liability.
Richard highlighted a little bit
before but credits some of them
are refundable meaning that they
can if your if your credit
exceed your tax liability you
can get a refund so for example
the working families tax credit
is a good example of a
refundable tax credit but some
are carried carried forward so
if your credit exceeds your tax
liability that you carry forward
the remaining credit for as many
years as as allowed you can
claim it in the future and then
summer transferable these are
usually business tax credits
so if a taxpayer they might earn
a credit for certain economic
activity that they do but then
they don't have the liability so
rather than claim that credit
themselves they might sell it
for so many cents on the dollar
two different taxpayers who does
have a liability
that can be beneficial in some
tax credits but I would warn the
committee that transferable
credits because they get so old
usually for so many cents on the
dollar I kind of end up watering
down the incentives that the
state has now given to
incentivize whatever economic
activity so be a little bit
aware of transferable tax
credits you don't get as much
bang for the Buck necessarily
has the state next slide.
Okay now tax expenditure
categories this is a very high
level overview of what we
conclude and the tax expenditure
report this is from the one that
was released this last fall we
try to.
put each tax expenditure that we
estimate into one of the
following buckets we got citizen
budget for example like the
working families tax credit
things that benefit low income
tax payers disabled incomes.
The families the children
then there's economic
development which is meant to
stimulate a certain industries
or job creation or to stimulate
investment coming into New
Mexico.
Next their environmental and
conservation related tax
expenditures that support
environmental clean nested
Health promote conservation
things like that there's health
care as a as a category that
increases access to care lowers
the cost of care and then
finally there's highly
specialized industry basically
something that's very closely
targeted to a specific industry
and you can see that about half
of all tax expenditures in New
Mexico are currently made in
that citizen benefit category
with health care being the next
largest.
I.
Okay so what are the biggest tax
expenditures in New Mexico what
ones are really really
meaningful because there are
dozens but which ones actually
are material so we compared here
for you the rank in twenty
twenty one versus twenty twenty
a free order themselves a little
bit and some of the pandemic
relief that the legislature
enacted over the last couple
years to show up here.
but consistently the largest tax
expenditure is B. deduction for
retail food sales for groceries
and the combined local
government hold harmless
distribution so for those nor
members of the committee many
years ago New Mexico passed
legislation that created
deductions for food at retail
and certain medical services and
in doing so to hold local
governments harmless we didn't
just deduct the state from that
receipts from the state and
local based the the retailer
deduct them but then the state
figures out how much the local
go to government would have
received but for those
deductions and then the state
sends a hold harmless payment
however those hold harmless
payments are phasing out
gradually over time for most
cities and counties there are a
few exceptions and this is that
an area of law that you'll see
many bills introduced to to
tweak every year but in twenty
twenty one to propose food
deductions and the associated
hold harmless reduced general
fund revenue by a combined four
hundred forty two million
dollars.
Next up in twenty twenty one was
the deduction that allows
D. O. H. licensed hospitals to
deduct sixty percent of the
receipts that reduce general
fund revenue by twelve two
hundred twenty seven million we
saw that through the COVID
pandemic hospital receipts rose
and so the size of that
deduction rose over time with
more hospital stays next up was
a prescription drug an oxygen
deduction at one hundred eighty
three million and then on down
the list I I won't cover all in
detail but you can see it that
six hundred dollar rebate that
was enacted in Senate bill one
pretty recently I think that's
gone up now a little above a
hundred million that was at
ninety eight million when we
made this report the working
families tax credit has
increased in size as we've
expanded it legislatively it was
at about seventy six million
and I will go through all the
rest.
Next slide all right another way
to slice this pie is to look at
the amount of forgotten revenue
that's foregone by the state
versus local governments and so
this is that thing that we added
to the tax expenditure report
just two years ago to try to
keep pushing the ball forward
and making it more and more
informative and we find that
about eighty eight percent of
all for it foregone revenue is
forgotten by the state what
twelve percent is for gone by
locals
a lot of that has to do with you
know any any tax expenditure
that is for going he said repent
the two income taxes is really
can only affect state revenue
and most of our business credits
as well as some of our big
citizen benefit credits only
come from income taxes but then
I'm G. R. T. I think I'm pretty
close rule of thumb would be
that on average gross receipts
taxes that come in or about
sixty percent state about forty
percent local but then because
of those hold harmless payments
the state is also for going a
big portion of the local share
of food and medical deductions.
Next slide.
Sh and I believe this before I
turn it over to Izzy.
Not yet.
Slide.
Okay go ahead thank you as
Richard mentioned there's sort
of a lot of these tax policy
principles floating around out
there and this is the
legislative finance committee
to approve tax expenditure
policy principles and they're
largely similar to Richard the
at least maybe in intent
although as you mentioned the
details may be slightly
different.
One that we highly encourage is
batting this of course is.
Typically done you're also
committee or or if it's a tax
policy that might affect another
policy area might be vetted in
the in another committee but we
highly recommend that tax policy
when it's considered it it's
it's vetted thoroughly by the
relevant committees so that
would mean having interim
hearings that would mean having
you know robust discussion with
the experts on the issues and
you'll see in every LFC fiscal
impact report the impact report
is usually accompanied by a
table at the end that shows
whether or not these policy
principles are met it'll have
little check marks are exes are
question marks and we'll have
some comments if if those are
applicable whether or not these
are being that targeted it.
It's important it in discussions
about keeping the abroad Tax
base that you're making changes
to tax policy here hopefully
during them to those that you're
wanting to change their behavior
and you're not applying it to
any number of people greater
than those that you're seeking
to change their behavior
transparent many of the that
there published an attack
reporter gonna meet that
qualification for transparency
because they're able to be
evaluated and that kind of
coincides with the accountable
accountability principle.
I think it is it is one that is
difficult to meet many tax
policy changes don't have stated
purposes LFC as part of their
adopted policy principles
encourages.
A
statement goals that would
accompany the tax policy change
so that we can evaluate their
activity it can be difficult as
analysts to evaluate the
effectiveness of that policy
change if you don't know the
intent that policy change that's
a difficult one but if there was
tax policy changes include a
purpose statement help us
determine whether or not act and
whether or not it's efficient as
Richard pointed out.
This will look like you see this
on the back of your fiscal
impact reports if it's a tax
policy change.
When you're splitting up was
going to discuss with slides I
think I made the point more of
volunteering or the tax reform
section and I think that it's
it's difficult because there are
no easy answers of course when
it comes to tax or so.
As we talk about tax reform of
course a lot of these changes
are are value based judgement
that you all have to make but
it's likely that tax reform and
I'm talking about tax reform we
talk about tax we're talking
about here is that some way
alter significant portion of the
tax structure so this might be
changing the tax base by
definition could be
restructuring brackets or or
altering the proportional make
up of our state revenues and it
typically mean that more than
just adding adding a Rader
lowering the rate tax reform is
a little bit more encompassing
and of course that doesn't mean
that those changes are
worthwhile they are they just
might not be the topic of of
what I'm covering here
we're sort of swinging for the
fences here with this
discussion.
And.
It could be important when
thinking about tax reform and
thinking about how to tackle
those significant structural tax
issues on what those issues are
right you don't want to solve an
issue that that and so this is
maybe one of the issues that
exists and it's it's a topic of
discussion the session and as
you all contemplate lowering the
gross receipts tax rate I think
it's really helpful to think of
this graph think about the
history of those growing gross
receipts tax rates there you can
see the graph that line on the
bottom is state right that's the
current five point one two five
percent that Richard had
mentioned in those topics about
that are the combined rate when
you include the local options
and there's there's just
election of some cities but you
can see that their crime pretty
quickly over the last two
decades and really in the last
two decades the state rate has
only increased once and most of
those increases are coming from
the locals and this is a result
of the repeal of the food
medical from the gross receipts
tax based your laminated those
pieces from the tax based local
governments have to increase
their rates in order to continue
to provide those critical local
government services and that and
you've seen that those have
increased quite rapidly.
And hopefully this this whole
presentation back to the
question on on where we should
be in terms of taxes and it's
not always valuable to compare
to other states but as Richard
mentioned it could be helpful
when you compare them
holistically and depending on
where you look you might find
different rankings but.
You know according to the I
think it's the
Tax research no no no no tax
returns the tax foundation sorry
according to the tax foundation
Mexico's overall tax ranking for
the country compared to other
states is about middle of the
pack is currently at twenty
third and.
If you all have heard LFC
director David Abbey ever talk
about taxes you sort of extolled
the virtues of the meeting and
that's really to say that.
Taxes probably shouldn't be at
the lowest and because in that
case you giving up valuable tax
revenues that could be used to
provide critical government
services you also don't need a
high and you don't miss out like
a sore thumb because that would
discourage economic development
and suppress economic activity
more than you otherwise might be
optimal so we kind of want New
Mexico taxes to be in the middle
of the pack there and overall
New Mexico appears to be
successful at doing that.
This is the maybe hiding.
For the nuances of our
individual tax structures New
Mexico's property taxes actually
ranks pretty typically in the
highest the tax foundation ranks
New Mexico property tax as being
number one in the country
because of its low rates and
it's strong protections against
residential property valuation
growth and our lowest ranked tax
system is the sales tax in the
gross receipts tax that's in
part because of high rates but
also because of its complexity
and so as you all contemplate
gross receipts tax the session.
We you you all can keep in mind
that that does tend to be one of
the state's.
Lower ranking axes.
Receipts tax though there's a
significant issue with state
revenue stability so when you
all contemplate tax reform
hopefully you keep revenue
stability in mine and this line
really shows the challenge that
you all bases appropriators in
budgeting a revenue that has
really whipsawed back and forth
for about twenty years and of
course there are ways to improve
this graph there are ways
without those revenues and
provide stability to the general
fund which is important for
budgeting you all don't have to
increased budgets and come in
the next year decrease but it's
whatever revenues declined and
you all have made some really
large strides in in revenue in
this direction of revenue
stability with the moving of the
excess of the five year average
oil and gas revenues and
distributing them to other
purposes oil and gas revenues
are are of course our most ball
tile revenue stream to the
general fund and so by removing
the excess of the five year
average by taking those peaks
and those boom years and
distributing them for other
purposes you all are taking a
large step in stabilizing
revenues.
Of course the general fund is
still about a third reliance on
direct of oil and gas related
revenues and so obviously
there's more progress to be done
that can help to diversify the
general fund either by removing
or oil and gas revenues from the
general fund or restructuring
revenue make up in whole.
That it's not just oil and gas
related revenues that can
provide volatility or or create
volatility in the general fund
the gross receipts tax can also
be also as you all or as the
basically narrowed and as those
rates climb that really
exacerbates the issue ought to
leave it receipts tax.
In other words when when there's
a recession for example or only
a few industries make up a
greater share of the gross
receipts tax and those
industries rate in your gross
receipts tax is going to take a
bigger hit than if you had a
broad based and diversified that
revenue stream and a good
example of this is removing food
of course that is one of the
most stable consumer goods that
you can including the gross
receipts tax when there's a
recession people are still need
to eat and so that would sort of
offset any other loss that you
might experience more industries
so so that removing food from
from the tax based in.
Create some additional revenue
volatility in the gross receipts
tax there's also a lot of good
research into personal income
tax and of the studies really
show that.
A higher depending personal
income tax so personal income
tax taxes that are highly
progressive they tend to also be
more both tile higher incomes
tend to be more reliant on the
markets as its people with
higher incomes often times have
a market derived income.
Large reason markets could
reduce their incomes and have
have negative impacts to the
personal income tax so
it extremely over heavy
progressive.
One tax can have some volatility
consequences.
And of course there are a lot of
other contributing issues
revenue volatility a lot that we
obviously won't have time to get
into today but the consensus
revenue estimating group like to
make a I always include the
discussion on risks to the
forecast multimillion forecast
already encouraging you all to
read some of our previous
priests are look at our previous
presentations if you would like
more information on that and the
LFC we also publish volumes
every session.
On policies call volume on its
own policy and we have a whole
chapter dedicated to this issue
Representative instability so
there's more information that
you like to see that out.
This is a good example of what
tax reform can look like and has
look like each B. six is
probably the most recent example
of of
over arching tax reform bill
enforced tax reform doesn't only
to be concentrated into one bill
but in this case it was the
house bill six made to change to
destination resourcing so that's
including online sales are gross
receipts tax based it's applying
the local options to those
online sales and this happened
just this fiscal year.
I also added some programs in
the personal income tax and that
top right as Richard mentioned
level the playing field when it
comes to hospitals increase the
motor vehicle excise tax
expanded working families for
the first time.
Of the two times in the past
couple years it reduces the
capital gains deduction and
raised a cigarette related tax.
Revenues.
Because of.
Tax reform like I mentioned
doesn't just have to be included
and one bill the legislature has
made a lot of reforms to
personal income taxes over the
last couple years this shows
sort of the extermination of
those changes some of those are
in eighty six increasing the
working families tax credit to
seventeen percent of the state
that you tax rate of five point
nine percent with HB six.
Introduction reducing capital
gains but in the twenty twenty
one regular session you will
also increase working families
tax credit again to twenty five
percent included a couple you
populations those filing with
the tax identification number
those under twenty five you
expanded the low income
comprehensive tax rebate you can
see that bottom line there shows
the total impact of the changes
that you all made to the
personal income tax over the
last few years.
And I know that there are a lot
of tax experts on this call but
just a little bit of tax when a
one.
Serve on As You will contemplate
tax reform you probably also
want to contemplate the impact
of your taxes or and the way it
showing at the different ways
that page tax reform can can
take shape and of course it's
important to remember that these
words are are not in a political
sense but in the literal sense a
progressive tax as incomes rise
the tax burden progresses with
incomes regressive tax is one
where as incomes rise the tax
burden regressive spending on
course proportional is the tax
burden state same regardless of
income but I really want to
point out here that it's
important to remember that this
is a function of your total
income of a of a person's total
income and not of the tax rate
so it can be a little confusing
that.
Up to think that regressive tax
lightning tax rate increases
incomes decrease but that's not
actually the case and a good
example of this is the gross
receipts tax which what on its
surface maybe up here the
proportional tax everyone and
giving tax district pays the
same rate on their on their
goods but it's actually
regressive tax and that's
because people with low incomes
spend a greater share of their
incomes on consumption so a
greater share of their income is
impacted by that tax and and
therefore it appears it actually
is in practice regressive tax.
Because higher income people
spend less on construction so
their income is less burdened by
the.
Example of New Mexicos tax
system in sort of that scheme of
progressive progressive or or
proportional and this is a
little outdated so our recent
tax changes what changes graph
is the most recently fine and
you can see here that that
impact of that gross receipts
tax is such that the lowest
income thresholds are seeing
higher tax burden and some of
those higher incomes and this is
of course largely in part
because the gross receipts tax
the progressive personal income
tax counterbalance as this to
some to some extent and those
recent changes to working
families and elector what it
likely decrease the tax burden
those bottom two brackets and
the implementation of that new
right and the reduction of the
capital gains deduction are
likely to raise those last two
bars on the highest earners.
And with that madam chair I
think we're happy to take
questions and
in that This slide hopefully is
in your materials and we're
happy to provide and not there's
a lot of additional addendum
slides in the back that are
hopefully helpful to you all as
you go through the session.
Great.
I want to thank the three
panelists I have come to rely on
each one of them as really
trusted and competent and really
thoughtful advisors and I'd
encourage the committee to do
the same if you have questions
about a particular bill or are
have thoughts about a change in
tax policy they're really great
and they're they're all really
accessible so let me see who has
a hand right.
No thank the questions I thought
I had seen Representative
Hernandez is hand up a little
while ago maybe that was just a
mistake of the State all up
yeah.
Okay.
I.
Representative seven o'clock
okay great
interesting.
I don't see your hand raised
representative Cadena but when
you ask your question we can
move to the.
Representative could you madam
chair thank you yes.
Thank you.
And I apologize for being heard
multiple devices and waiting in
the committee as well I just
wanted to again echo that
sentiment and appreciation for
the leadership we have in the
team and then also wanted to
shout out is the that I'm coming
from New Mexico.
New Mexico high school and
graduating in the best way that
we can invest in our young
people and their leadership so
I'm I've often offered
compliment the COVID two the
other two panelists that we're
just really grateful to have in
our state budget also wanted to
shout out our chief economist
coming from down home I often
note that the district I
represent and for long hours a
week and thought that that means
a lot to do to divert the
angiographic leadership in
positions like that though thank
you madam chair and I
appreciated that.
Thank you very much
representative Cadena
I believe the vice chair Herndon
has our hands.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair of the is the I just
wanted to ask you you mentioned
that there were revenues
stability reports that we could
we and I'm just trying to
determine where we find bills
that's one question and as we
continue to watch each and every
one of these tax bills come
before us in the area within
that circle within the diagram
that you provided to us in terms
of the effect of each one of
these pieces of legislation I
just want to get make sure that
I understand that you all will
be providing the information on
the effect of the implementation
of what's been at it just
rather.
Madam chair representative
Herndon I'd be happy to send
those to you those are also on
the LESC website and it and that
would be able to be executive
presentation and the LFC creeks
on those materials but I'd be
happy to send them to you all or
send them to the committee that
could be helpful and for the
second question yeah the yes
that's right the fiscal impact
reports hopefully have a
extensive as as much as time
allows.
Look as to the impacts of those
tax bills and we're really
grateful that taxation revenue
provides a lot of good in what
I'm most this tax bill so
we hope that there is accurate
as possible but that the diagram
that you're referring to is is
included in every fiscal impact
report has a tax implication
and.
It has a table book describing
the the sort of criteria and
sort of check mark or or
comments as to whether or not we
find that they they are at.
Thank you Representative turned
in Representative Scott.
Thank you madam chair just a
couple questions for the
presenters.
Changes that were made.
He destination source.
Have a.
Hey surely significant.
Negative impact on my community
and one of the fixes.
Been proposed is our.
Is so moving and one to two I.
Thanks currently going to the
state.
That one's going to the minutes
politics back to the
municipalities could correct.
If the presenters address
That was created and how the
solution might work.
Sure madam chair and
representative Scott I'll take a
first stab at it and I are
Richard Engel probably have
something to add as well of
course I'm going back to bring
us all to the same page house
bill six that was enacted in
twenty nineteen called for two
year phase in of internet sales
and then R. G. R. T. being
collected on out of state
sellers like internet sellers
market places and and such and
then it also moved us from
origin based sourcing to
destination based sourcing and
this is a two year phase in and
so as of July first twenty
twenty one he was fully phased
in and so G. R. T. at that point
became collectible at the
destination of the product of
the services delivered or
wherever the goods were
delivered verses the previous
origin sourcing where G. R. T.
was reported and collected at
the business location and so
there are a lot of parts of the
G. R. T. base that aren't
affected by this but some
services really are and for
example we're aware that certain
municipalities and counties
especially in oil areas of oil
and natural gas areas have
businesses you know we're
located in a municipality but
they go out and perform services
in an unincorporated county area
and so that has shifted some of
the revenue impact from
municipalities to counties
on the on the flip side of the
taxation of internet goods
internet sales has kind of
reason lifted all boats and so
for for most municipalities and
counties and the state internet
sales is raising revenue but
then there is that shift between
units and and counties that
especially in the oil patch but
to some extent other other
places as well
And really the to have to go
hand in hand and it's something
that this week in the country
after the way fair decision was
made by the US Supreme Court you
you can't really tax internet
sales without destination
sourcing because that's how you
end up with those internet
sellers market places having
listening
But I didn't answer yet your
question about the one point two
two five and I'm not sure I
understood it because there.
You madam chair.
Secretary Clark.
There have been several
proposals on we're several
proposals that are floating
around to.
Perhaps not completely repair
that damage but.
She partially repaired and I'm
not familiar with the
particulars of those proposals I
hope and one of yall my.
You madam chair and
representative we're beginning
to look at some of those
It's a little early for me to
comment on specifics but that
the general comment I would make
is that you know if if I a bill
is addressing a shift revenue
between counties immunities
taxed Rabb isn't really going to
have strong opinions about that
however I probably has the
department and and myself in
particular will have concerns
about anything that increases
taxpayer burden in a significant
way so taxpayers are struggling
right now to adjust to
destination based arcing and
I'll just be on the look out in
those proposals for anything
that's going to make it more
difficult for them to comply one
because of the time and energy
of their compliance burden but
also the more complex the
reporting is the more likely
they are to make a mistake and
we will provide them an audit
for example we could have to
claw back revenues from one
government to another and they
could end up paying penalties
and interest and that those are
the kind of things that I'll be
mainly on the look out for more
set and shifts of revenue
between locals.
Madam chair representative Scott
I might be able to to add to
that I think I believe the
proposal that you're referring
to is Senate bill one thirty
seven
from senators again current and
Bobby Gonzalez there are two
other proposals to actually
directly change sourcing rules
but this one to your point tries
to in the case of services
redirect the one two two five
municipal distribution back to
the origin municipality while
leaving the increments the
imposed increments at the
destination.
it.
If that makes levels happy I
mean it it it only affects the
one two two five and who gets it
and I think the municipal league
is thinking this may be one one
form of solution to this general
shifting problem even though it
appears most acute in the oil
patch with respect to certain
concentrated industry.
It might make sense on the
surface but to the secretary's
point I think it would add some
reporting complication to make
the the numbers work
in in that kind of a mechanism
so.
I know at this moment on that I
I know that we're currently
drafting our analysis on Senate
bill one thirty seven I think
that's the one yeah but the
initial estimate I heard was
that we would have about a two
point five million dollar non
recurring implementation cost of
that bill there is a one million
dollars appropriation but we're
it's it's quite complicated to
program engine taxed.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Secretary Clark Mr Clinton
that was helpful.
Thank you Representative Scott I
am just sort of scanning the
raised hand list and do not see
any other race can't are there
other members who have questions
all up is that you know I don't
see anyone else anyone
physically raising their hand no
great so I want to thank the
presenters I thought that was a
very useful overview of our tax
structure in things to consider
when we're
evaluating the many bills were
going to be seeing session so
super helpful I know we're going
to be seeing these presenters as
we proceed and I do thank all of
you for your willingness to
participate and spending the
time with us today I'm as to the
reports that Representative
turned and asked for I would
suggest that easy send them to
the committee secretary admin
Committee assistant and we'll
put it in the committee share
file if that will work for
people so people can Prue's
those reports as they
feel free are able to and will
send out a note to everyone when
we receive the report so that
you all know that there are
available on the share file if
that works sorry the outlook
seems to be okay okay great so
good seeing you will I we I
believe we have a floor session
at eleven thirty so in this or
any other committee member
comments site I would suggest we
adjourn how do I get to use my
gavel I haven't gotten to use my
old yet.
So great thank you and we are
concerned.
He's been chair thank.
