Representative customer
representative chamber reps end
of dunking here representative
representative harper
representative hernandez
speaker martinez representative
or tell you
representative scott
representative surrounding
representative townsend
madame
byster
mr term i'm here we have a
quarter again good morning
committee members good morning
audience in the room good
morning to those that are
joining us online happy to have
all of you with us today I do
want to take a moment to
introduce my shadow for the day
he is from the new mexico high
and university kyle rainer from
the task bubble that the habit
with this and he'll be sharing
me for the morning so again
welcome thank you and enjoy your
time with me today
yesterday
thank you chairman if I get
patrol stand up patrick is my
shadow today
moved here from ohio
he actually ran for congress
but has been working with a
ready trainer and yes we're say
haven't done this today thank
you very much and welcome okay
so then without further do as I
had promised to those on monday
and i'm falling through with the
alcohol day and it looks like we
have the props or the real stuff
to do to us in the alcohol day
but as we as we look forward to
the day's discussions this is a
continuation of what I believe
has been
that that was introduced to us
well you all be recognized
forever but that is those
introduced to us in this
committee last year if you
recall we had this as as part of
the tax package and this year
it's just there that there are
two stand alone bills and so as
we move forward on the stand
alone bills the commitment is to
try to look at this.
Issue alcoholism and how it
plagues our communities I will
say to the presenters today and
those that are in the audience
as well as those that are
turning in line we recognize
that this matter has been before
the health and human services
committee and so we recognize
that they passed it up because
they recognize that there is a
health issue related to this
matter and so at this point in
time because it went from that
committee and is now in tax
station and revenue that I would
like to focus strictly on taxes
here and the finances around
this matter and we recognize
that there are health health
issues I I get that but today we
are talking in the in the
taxation and revenue committee
about taxation and how to
generate the revenues to effect
change in this matter so I will
redirect people and get them
back on track should they choose
to try to go after another
tangent but at this point in
time we do have house bill one
seventy nine liquor tax changes
and uses we have representative
ferrarian and senators to do a
locus and and senator pinto and
their
experts so with that being said
representative you have
you mister chair and committee
members we will try.
Adhere to your guidance on our
presentation
I would like to also introduce
our co sponsor.
And my experts if they would
each you know give some of their
background my.
Thank you mister chair and
members of the committee my name
is marlena lira so pleasure to
be with you here today I must
substance use researcher based
here in new mexico my research
focuses odd alcohol and canada's
policies as well as clinton call
aspects of addiction and
substance use i'm the president
elect of the new mexico society
of addiction medicine I have
been mph in epidemiology from
harbored and i'm also a health
policy doctoral student at
john's hubkins think you so much
for the opportunity to be here
today i'll pass it to my
colleague sendy.
Got more need here and members
of the committee my name is
individual soccer men I am an
evaluator twenty years
experience here in new mexico
and i'm also the directory and
co founder of the tribal health
providers association thank you
and mr chair we do have a
committee substitute.
As we handed out when we all get
a copy if you can read the two
to go to number please it is
point two two eight one oh six
point two okay that's what I
have and as it's passed out.
The.
Mister charles the committee
substant discussion very wealth
never motion to move the
substitute and
from yes proceed thank you
this
amendments are original bill to
lower the
volume tax to
equivalent of twelve cents her
drink per serving we listen to
what the committee said we
had
um concerns of trying to raise
two hundred and fifty million
but concerns that the committee
and others we lowered it to the
twelve cents per volume drink
and also we were able to because
of the urgency that we see
the
tattoo department let us start
january first of twenty twenty
five instead of waiting until
july.
So those are the
the big changes on this bill.
Well thank you very much
questions are comments from the
committee on this on the seventy
four move for
if not won't work maintain the
normal process but on the
substitute we're okay.
You still have the floor thank
you mister chair.
New mexico had the highest rate
of alcohol related deaths of all
us states since nineteen ninety
seven and that was the last time
we've been able to and race the
alcohol excise tax and our death
rate from alcohol is twice to
our rate of death from overdose.
The.
The solution is increasing the
taxes and it's one of the most
impactful alcohol policies yet
alcohol taxes in the state
haven't as I just mentioned then
raised and raising alcohol
excise taxes by twelve cents per
statute drink would generate
approximately a hundred and
fifty million dollars in the
annual funds to directly help
communities state wide through
robust prevention and treatment
programs and reduce alcohol can
assumption by five percent.
We have many organizations in
our state that we have worked
with throughout the last year
and the gear before also some of
them but this on your hand out
shows at least twenty nine who
have signed up and the cross
section of all of these groups
around the state
shows how important and issue
this really is and how we are
depending on increasing these
taxes so that we have the funds.
And I think cindy will add some
information.
Thank you I think we're kind of
nervous about the mikes
and committee members
first I want to just appreciate
that
legislature for brain back that
christmas of alcohol
conversation it's been over two
decades or most that i'll go
hasn't been brought up to the
for front and we know that we
have a crisis so I appreciate
everyone that has the bell
currently out there and I
appreciate responses for
bringing our are a crime each be
on seventy nine back on in front
of of all of you
so as an evaluator some of the
things that I
notice when I talk to people and
I hear them and I interact with
folks that have lived experience
or youth are doing focus groups
are a couple of things one of
them is that all the hard harms
people and it leads to death but
it's also preventable and
treatable that most people have
tried some former recovery and
average of seven times
but we lapses part of recovery
and without a safety net its
practically impossible
we also know that a lot of our
community members are lacking
some healthy coping skills
and that means that without
programs are services recovery
again that much more difficult
in order to address it or that
sounds
in order to address it crisis we
really need to create a
sustainable sustainable funding
stores
in order to make sure that we
can influence
the traumas that are create it
within our people if alcohol
accessible one of the things
that we know is that folks are
we traumatised I don't know how
many times i've talked to people
that had been raped because
they've been intoxicated or I
see a number of folks that have.
Passed the way in a puddle of
water because they were
intoxicated.
Alcohol is also extremely
accessible which makes it that
much more difficult for folks to
stop drinking even if they've
gone through a treatment center
many times they got back into a
community where alcohol is
accessible to them whether it's
a birthday party
or about to some.
Our state is super lord and
we're and we have very rural
areas nineteen problems a patty
tribes now hanations can be
color loss yes on house
populations traumas and again a
list of disparities that's many
a multi model approach to
address substance use and we
need to prioritize community
base initiatives that address
the needs of the population and
communities who are disproved
personally impacted by excessive
alcohol
one of the things that I noticed
as well over the years as that
women are drinking been
stringing and heavy drinking at
larger rates those eighteen to
forty four
drinking at its enormous
binstring just like men do and
so that gender gap is decreasing
I think the only other component
that I would want to share is
that or two more point sorry is
that all the hall is assigning
killer we don't really see the
impact of it the physical in the
mental deterioration that
happens over time.
We need programs that would
identify early intervention like
espert screen in the brief
intervention and programs like
traffic that would help
community members and family
members identify how they what
role they play in the community
and in their family member
substance
and with that I will pass it
along.
Then give mister chairman
members of the community.
When we talk about him health
care system and we talk about
our judicial system.
We asked for evidence we asked
for data we asked were testimony
not just from our ground people
but also from the professionals
that are in these entities that
see at first hand and if we're
going to turn our back and don't
really advocate in that sense
and relieve those are the some
of the things that we will be
going to committee when we hear
these hearings those are the few
couple of things we asked him to
bring to the table.
Because of the evidence based it
is real it is a reality we have
people in jail just because
they.
Became at some point
irresponsible if you can tell me
at the point where do we wait as
that define at what point.
Can you make it clear.
But yet we come back and we say
well what we are the ones that
have to put all this money and
they're we're paying for this
we're paying for that it is
costing us just.
Well we want to leave it some of
those issues then we need to
take a step into something about
it and that is why i'm really
went to represent ferrari to ask
if I can support this bill and
think you representative.
The.
Thank you and just to close.
The good news is that alcohol
policies work
my own research has shown the
protective affects of alcohol
policies on health outcomes
including suicide homicide
including gun violence which is
on all of our minds as we
struggle with gun violence in
our state intimate partner
hamiside.
Motor vehicle crashes and just a
few weeks ago had a paper come
out about the relationships
between alcohol policies and
disciplinary actions and sexual
assault on college campuses
raising alcohol taxes is a cdc
and world health organization
recommended strategy.
We are very proud of the bold.
Proposal that we have been
working on and have before you
today
as representative ferrari
mentioned it would generate a
hundred fifty million
annual revenue for sustainable
programming that is so
desperately needed in our state.
The problem is large and we need
a bold solution and just to
close I know the focus is
supposed to be on the revenue in
the financial components but
this really hit home for me
which is the every day we have
six people in new mexico die
from alcohol related causes six
of the ten leading causes of
death here are actually
associated with alcohol so the
legislature has been in session
for twenty two days now so just
over the course of time that the
legislature has been incession
we would expect that a hundred
thirty two people have died from
alcohol related causes in our
state and I did a brief head
count when I came in this
morning and at that time I saw
about fifty people it looks like
maybe seventy five people are
now in this room so i'm talking
about one hundred thirty two
people that's more than
everybody in this room who we
would expect to have died just
in the time that the legislature
has been incession we
desperately need action this
session.
To start finally addressing this
public health crisis think you
so much
thank you very much anything
else out from the sponsor before
move to the public comment thank
you all right very well I would
I remind the folks that are in
the room whether in in support
in an opposition that we remain
focused on the tax impacts of
this bill as we've done
discussed the health
consequences they health related
aspects of this bill in helping
human services so that being
said I would ask those are in
support in the room they will go
to online but those in support
in the room of house bill one
seventy nine these raise your
hand.
Okay i'll start here and will
start with user and then we'll
go down the side.
And then also
because of the the amount of of
interest in in these two bills
we will have a two minute timer
thank you
right.
Um.
And also.
Yes.
Yeah.
You know for all my lifetime.
They grow from my people
generation.
You know when it was cultural
people never surface do you.
Our life.
You know my people have been
targeted for so long.
By the general population.
Black off.
Also
has been high.
Thank you for your comments next
good morning thank you.
Committee and share my name is
being side in.
I
recovery from alcohol use
disorder and I also hold a
masters in public health in help
policy.
So i'm well first in all of the
areas of this bill from a
personal and professional
standpoint i'd work with women
especially in recovery mentoring
them as you know their recovery
journey
I personally was actually walk
using alcohol and that is the
story every woman that I work
with
I
wanted to share my personal
experience you asked to focus on
the taxes
I was a cigarette for many years
and the state that I was started
in in that time raised taxes on
I could only buy one pack of
cigarettes with that twenty
dollars and realize that I
needed to make some changes and
stop smoking I want to let you
know that alcohol
will have impacts on people's
you know choices to consume more
alcohol and that even people
choosing to drink one drink less
per bench drinking will have
important health effects in our
state so thank you very much and
i'm happy to be here and
speaking supporter thank you
very happy next.
Those in support next road is
met.
Organization.
The.
Not just because.
Because this is.
That's fun.
Yeah.
Thank you very much thank you
thank you making time this
morning next in the same road it
support.
If not the next blow back
good morning.
Morning mr chair members of the
committee i'm door to see i'm
speaking for the veterans
military families caucus with
about five hundred member state
white.
I want to give you some numbers
since you don't want to hear the
emotional part of my test i'm
happy give you some numbers we
have a five hundred forty
thousand veterans living in new
mexico
around eleven percent to visit a
medical facility run by the ba
have a substance use that it's
diagnosed
that is not counting the number
who are undiagnosed
it's it's made that better in
staff some sort of alcoholism
problem at some level.
So when you look at the hundred
and forty thousand better living
in our state that's quite a
number of people who know from
the medical flight.
What happens without the whole
you're likely to end up in jail
in the hospital in the same
charity so i'm here to street
for my veterans to keep them out
of the jail the hospital and the
semiterry I urge you passed
thank you thank you making time
to join us today next in the
same road those in support yes
me.
Mr chair members of the
committee i'm verification not
speaking three organizations the
late women voters of new mexico
american association university
women
station.
Yeah we stand in very strong
support
first of all the original film
where disappointing in the
compromise but understand the
political reasons for it we need
to have this money.
Intervention
is very very modest increase and
you urge the committee to
support it I think you know we
all know.
Yeah.
And just as modest increase may
I hope you're.
Little bit more that three quite
cost.
Thank you.
I support.
The severe crisis first because
we desperately need.
Over seventy three thousand
seventy two percent of the
mexican suffering from the whole
use disorder we're unable to get
treatment yep.
Identified.
Especially.
One concludes quote the large
the largest health benefits of
the whole text.
Drives down because assumption
that I resources three people
with serious addictions with our
treatment will do whatever.
Yeah.
Thank you very much think you're
making time of doing us this
morning next it's good to the
next row.
The volunteer public health
advocate would be a high
coalition that twenty years with
the sandwich public school then
working on this issue for
fifteen years here in around
house
nineteen ninety three thirty
years ago for last time
taxes raise all dressed finances
actually.
Ourselves we all have that
emotional impact.
Three billion dollars to the
state of new mexico which forty
percent is born by taspayers
we know twenty twenty many many
more parts
because
he rising nineteen ninety three
today this year
the money
between forty five fifteen
warm money
I sat with our cabinet separate
department leaders of the
company
and they said we're there that's
it taught to me different
departments they needed at least
this
legislation.
Around.
Race
is sustainable
thank you for joining us next in
the same role doesn't support
its men all right
hold on to your commission
okay about that
social work and I oversee.
The recognition from this bill
program since then class
programming
there's evidence within our data
that also really get rooms in
the rising our community so this
fiscal year that's part of the
local detail services in santa
fe county I did one hundred and
ninety five plants for excesses
this is not into the hundred and
ninety seven clients.
You talk to submissions have
gone from five hundred and fifty
eight and twenty seventeen one
thousand four hundred and
sixteen twenty twenty two.
The fund food from this tax
proportional health local
programs like standard he's
expensive continue to provide a
complain.
It will increase the level of
provision services
in our communities and increase
the opportunity to determine a
future generations for helpful
funds.
Joining us anyone else in this
room in this room where.
Seeing them as we move the
saddam doesn't support.
Thank you
my name is prior.
Since two thousand and one
and a small business
agency i'm also currently the
president of the new mexico
associat.
The mexico.
My company directly helps
individuals and families were
experienc.
Have a programs in the mexico
and sometimes overseas in these
issues
we currently have progressive at
the other.
And the twenty three years that
i've been feel I can tell you no
matter what crisis were in
whether it was first the method
prices.
All has.
Addiction services whether it's
level residential level out.
Addictive.
This share the burdens to show
the cost of address arms at the
product creates the argument
that this will just.
Really good living wage
professional jobs and.
Thank you next month to the room
doesn't support yes sir.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name's charlie
markets and I represent cities.
City of galaxy is well
recognized for their levels of
alcoholism.
All this type of program I think
the tax changes automatically
which is referred to as
I think that this is a good
peace legislation that will help
with those countries issues.
And not only in the in the
county of donald so
ask you
thank you sir next anyone else's
support yes ma'am.
Good morning mr chair and honor
committee members my name is
katrina and the state executive
director of mothers against
driving
mexico here this morning
speaking support one seventy
four I want to strongly state
that mad new mexico and mad
nationally is in support of this
bill through
and work with traumatized
victims of d y d w y crashes in
new mexico.
On a road ways we know that such
incidents don't just leave the
intoxicated person hard innocent
family's children extended
family's friends by standards
and long enforcement permanently
injured work hill worst of all
this is the crime percent
preventable when victims and
survivors of these crashes asked
why something more can't be done
we in fact know more can be done
and it's through legislation.
We have a national statement
about increasing alcohol
it states we support a
prevention component healthcare
reform through a substantial
increase in taxation on
alcoholic beverages as it means
covering the cost of society
caused by the misuse of alcohol
mad supports and evenly applied
increase in the tax on wine beer
and still spirits that is all to
say that what HB one seventy
four proposes is completely in
line with what the data shows
attack increase in alcohol tax
will save the lives of new
mexico's constituents on new
mexico's roadwakes thank you
very much for your consideration
thank you spending time with
this this morning let's move
then on the same side of the
room and also support
okay we have two more in the
back.
One of you please.
Yeah.
Works.
That would help our prevention
efforts to reduce.
Members about how they have in.
In their early thirties just
roses of deliver
that started when they were
young tv.
To are not worried about paying.
You already heard because next
over three billion every year.
The state that adds up to more
than one thousand five.
On mexicans despite their social
economic status or already for
these related harms and costs
these hard mortgage.
Yeah.
Thank you for sharing with us
this morning next me
never marked it I overseen
programs.
At one point we had more
source of details in our city
population we desperately long
term sustainable if I need to
build comparison.
Thank you anyone else in the
room that support of house bill
one seventy nine c none we have
someone line that's go first to
laurence lower it's good morning
you with this.
What is the elite
mr chair and committee members
my name is laurence media i'm
the executive director for real
good and it all colleges and
treatment program in on profit
organizations serving in the
north day or for the last forty
five years also including some
county model county tales county
and call facts counting I was
shocked and disappointed that
the alcohol excites tax didn't
pass last year and due to the
stigmar related to all the
holiday alcohol use disorder
that promote stereotyping
prejudiced in policies that
describing against individuals
living with the disease
the american medical association
declared all call used to sort
of a disease in nineteen fifty
six in alcohol is the needs to
be treated as a disease and not
a moral this also contributes to
social and institutional
inequities also including bad
policies after reading under the
influence a look at all called
industry and it's includes on
new mexico elected officials
gave a negative perception of
lobbyists in corporate america
influences and some of our
elected officials and ultimately
bad policies which are in that
we leave policies to support new
mexicans i'm here to advocate
for a voice that doesn't have a
voice such as individuals by
media's who are effective by
alcohol use disorder and also
the fact that new mexico is
number one in the nation for the
most death related to alcohol
use disorder I support HB one
fifty nine liquor tax changes in
uses legislation because it
provides resources to help
address alcohol use this order
in the area prevention treatment
in recovery support services
moreover it will decrease the
high rate of costs to the
taxpayers related to his
citibanks and in the judicial
system and same slides.
Much of grass yes
perfect timing it's going to
rich rich good morning
good morning mr share members of
the committee my name is rich
winner i'm a member of
indivisible and it's really are
democracy project I strongly
support hb seventy nine as I
strongly supported the equipment
of this bill no accession was
also very disappointing it did
not pass or go through and any
substantial way and people who
know me no that I am a big fan
of progressive taxation and an
opponent opponent of
aggressive taxes and like the
grt is aggressive tax because it
it negatively impacts a lower
income people well this is also
aggressive so why would I be
supporting it even though the
taxes more heavily on lower than
people when it comes i'm not
bothered by this we're disturbed
by this in any way when it comes
to taxing a substance that is
clearly known to be harmful to
individuals and society
and so I think it in this case a
regressive tax is is reasonable
and it would exclude tax policy
especially bills revenue and
orders provide treatment and
prevention programs to alleviate
this public health problem so
again I strongly support this
bill I
appreciate the sponsors were out
for bringing this forward and I
hope that this committee passed
her one seventy nine thank you
very much and he read it's good
to marry and marry and good
morning with the.
Mary au are muted on you
chair can you hear me now
yes thank you mister chair good
morning to you and the members
of the committee i'm used to
city manager from twenty
fourteen entire retirement past
year as the manager I did our
city council and address many
challenges public saved economic
development health care and
education someone but the
underlying challenge that it
repeated our communities
progress was alcohol abuse and
alcohol death
community very hard
to manage challenges of
addressing of his friend
committed and abused together
brought together an amazing
coalition our community public
safety city the county and non
providers which exist to the day
but he challenges still remain
in our city and across the state
and the overwhelming
availability and density and
alcohol and the lack of
consistent and sustainable
funding to address desperate for
for treatment and prevention
programs for all
and not only does this say why
will also promote healthy safe
and prosperous communities until
we address this problem or not
thank you very much I support
some support
thank you that's good early lane
good morning you're with us.
Hi good morning this is I mean
buried I am a rural physician
with a master's degree in public
health I am in your nineteen of
my four year commitment to
practicing medicine here i'm
also new mexican small business
owner and I do know that there
is no credible proof that are
cherished in all businesses will
close if they're still moved
forward and then it's enacted I
laid on this accident to laugh
but there is ample economic
medical and public policy
evidence that raising alcohol
taxes can reduce the many
negative health negative
consequences that are taxes are
used to try to address including
health costs I have balance in
claim the positions I know where
I am in other healthcare workers
as well as devastated and
exasted by other people were
taking care of we're dying from
heavy alcohol use due to the
widely available and cheap
alcohol in understated when I
tried it try to recruit
physicians to new mexico so many
of them would they ask about is
the problem at alcohol here it
is a real issue and the word is
out and experts world wide and
the experts in new mexico in the
room right now a support raising
taxes to reduce the problem and
also to raise revenue to find
effective prevention in
treatment my patients are
desperate to get treatment that
is presently unavailable to them
because there aren't enough
funds to do so so would they do
as they ended up not getting it
or sometimes they they go out of
state if they can get the
resources to do so I see no
future where we won't at some
time raise our alcohol taxes to
reach whether economic medical
and scientific evidence shows
that we should do based on how
overwhelmed our communities are
criminal just the system in our
healthcare system and all our
buy and cheap alcohol straw so
so let's just do this now as a
real physician and a small
business owner and I am strongly
in favor of this bill and
employee employer the committee
add to support this thank you
for your time thank you for
joining us that's good a jenny
jenny good morning you with
this.
Good morning mr chair and
committee members i'm doctor
jenny way of positioning gallop
for the past twelve years board
certified an internal medicine
in addition medicine I learned
on mckinley county alcohol task
force and I strongly support
house bill when seventy nine
there is truly no way to
exaggerate the challenges that
we face around our state those
alcohol related partners are
overflowing and backing up our
emergency departments hospitals
and clinics you never get used
to telling a grammar that her
thirty year old granddaughter
has just died from alcohol so
see the liver which only happens
after twenty years of drinking
these are not not just our
patience is our colleagues our
friends and our family this is a
societal illness and so many
come down wanting to get
somewhere wanting to get help
yet we struggle to find enough
resources to refer to in our
state so much so that is hard
and healthcare providers and
patients were desperate to see
resources and thus easily for
life fraudulent treatment
programs and phoenix offering
help only for them to be
exploited far from home we
failed to protect them we sell
to fund them the programs needed
to protect them perhaps most
devastating part is that alcohol
used to sort it is a preventable
illness yes a preventable
illness but only when we allow
evidence based strategies like
the carefully and well thought
out hospital one seventy nine
lays out and only when we
purposely allocate these funds
for programming in prevention
three minutes please help us
first responders and healthcare
providers everyone doing the
work on the ground to provide
the best chance of the poster
succeed refer them to the best
services here at home that are
safe accessible and effective
for all new mexicans I want to
be resident I want to be a
doctor in a state that it is not
tolerate having the highest
rates of alcohol related data it
is young time personally this
move thank you so much for your
time
thank you that's good richard
richard good morning with us
mr chair members of the
committee thank you very much my
name is richard sconic I have
been a new mexico resident for
seven years and now live in
white rock i'm in the former
regional director for health for
the south asia region of the
world bank.
Now spent over forty years
working with a wide range of
countries on issues related to
public health and included
alcohol and to back the harms of
alcohol on tobacco and help
financing and tax policies to go
along with them I stand in very
strong support of this bill for
a number of reasons first of all
it's evidence based there is an
extraordinary amount of evidence
that has been collected over
many years from both the united
states and all around the world
that says that the principals
behind this bill are sound two
of the people who put this bill
together have very thoughtfully
sobbed the help of experience
from throughout the united
states in ensuring that the bill
represents best practice three
years as others have said very
well the proposed tax levels are
fair although the taxes are
regression the net benefits of
such chatters to our poorer and
more marginalized populations
would be vastly in access of the
cost to them of such taxes
exactly as others have said as
well and alleged to tobacco
taxes and lastly I want to
remind everyone that there's an
ethical as well as the technical
dimension to this I believe that
we all have an ethical as well
as a technical obligation to
ensure that new mexico this year
passes
b one seventy nine thank you
very much thank you it's good
nancy nancy good morning.
Good morning thank you mister
tere in the community members
everyone else is spoken so
eloquently I am recently tired
after forty years as a policy
analyst that said the national
laboratories were have a doctor
in intervention policies for
national and international
security I stand in various
phone favor of this build both
on its technical merit and
personal and experience with
alcohol is it that is multi
generation
I wanted to bring it for the
point that has not been argued
yet today but I heard in the
previous hearing where those in
speaking I guess is bill we're
arguing that it unfairly taxes
responsible drinkers and versus
for the problem being with
irresponsible drinkers I want to
point out
alcoholism is a progressive
disorder and you cannot
differentiate the quote
responsible drinker from that
one that will become quote
irresponsible some day this is a
community disease of progressive
don't know when and how and
where the person who is drinking
responsibly today might sunday
need the help or might even need
it today and they don't know it
and I speed from a personal
experience where I drank quote
responsibly for more than twenty
years until suddenly I had a dwi
and especially where I wrecked
it to the car is very fortunate
that I didn't tell anyone I
personally was able to get the
help and counseling that I
needed and I stopped breaking
through appropriate my employer
others don't like my father who
drank for responsibly for more
than fifty years until he was
diagnosed with copd and hard
conditions at the medications
where here is required to stop
drinking and he couldn't and on
a limited budget and it towards
you know an elderly person he
became one of these elderly
alcoholics with the disorder
that he could not treat and he
died and i'm very miserable to
the entire family.
So the other is that this is a
hub this bill or thank you
public work
we're gonna have to go to susan
you're with this.
Good morning mr chair members of
the committee my name is susan
welcome and I am here today
representing the new mexican
line support councils I worked
in substance use disorder field
for a report of years to twenty
three at those here in new
mexico and communities
throughout the state I wanna I
bring out there we are enforced
support of the spill not only
does it decrease consumption but
it's a fair tax and will
dramatically increase community
driven solutions whether those
fee investments in prevention
access or helping to coordinate
health consoles that understand
statute are mandated to lead
health solutions and they
recently went through a planning
phase where they identified
behavior hot disorder it's
including substance as a top
priority of over fifty percent
of our county and tribal health
councils so we see this we
believe communities no best this
provides a consistent resource
for funding for community driven
evidence based solutions thank
you we are false support and we
hope that the community members
will support this bill
thank you role good morning with
this.
The.
Good morning is your share and
members of the committee I am
roll for you go to record after
seat alcohol justice are non
profit housing dedicated for
thirty five years to provide you
cooperation with the misuse of
alcohol and other drugs with a
focus on reducing alcohol
associated harms through
evidence important afficient and
community organizing.
We express our gratitude to the
authors of the sport thinking
legislation and we fully support
its passage a buying base tax
increase like this where the
revenue is directed back to
suspected by the product is the
pocket learning strategy to
reduce farm cigarette taxes have
already been successful in
office and in the thought from
tobacco we believe this approach
can be used to address other
substances such as alcohol which
in and of itself can have like
choose in and potentially lead
to the facts considering the
serious never several levels of
alcoholic department new mexico
HB one seventy nine six percent
step towards improving public
health and safety
role residents and visitors on
the state as well as providing
state with a significant
increasing resources to minimum
the harm we strongly urge new
mexico taxi revenue committee to
support this bill thank you
good morning bill you up next
good morning.
Good morning mr chair members of
the committee bill jordan with
new mexico voices for children
and I really want to appreciate
the sponsors of both of these
two bills that you're
considering today I also
appreciate the committee
dedicating a day to this really
critically important issue.
What we had voices for children
would like to see and what we
hope the committee will do is to
look at today's proposals and
prioritize two things.
First let's use this opportunity
to make our alcohol tax more
progressive more expensive
drinks should have a higher tax
than those that are less
expensive secondly let it
increase the tax on all alcohol
products this year let's
modernize our decades old liquor
taxes and much targeted at new
revenue for treatment and begin
to alleviate some of the many
harms about the whole that
you're hearing about today
ultimately we urge you to enact
the best tax policy and the best
public health of the policy
thank you.
Thank you
good morning.
Good morning mister chairman
members of the committee regular
the director of lutheran similar
to mexico mutual advocacy also
expressed the position on the
maximum conference of churches
i'm here today to also express
our support for HB one seventy
nine why would leave strongly in
the positive impact on this that
this bill would have communities
across the mexico in terms of
consumption we do recognize that
we dramatically that they need
to dramatically increase her
related to provide prevention
and treating programs in HB one
seventy nine would make that
possible in the debt that are so
lacky in this state like so many
decision connects to me
personally just two days ago I
was sticking to a family member
who's liberal conadicion problem
I challenged for more than
twenty five years.
And about the incredible lack of
a formal options for those like
him seeking treatment we as
organizations asked you include
one hd one thirty nine year old
tax package and want to think
the bill sponsored for
continuing to bring this issue
forward and thank you for the
stop transperting this morning.
Thank you that's good to read
very good morning with us.
Yes good morning everyone my
name is a door my member of the
never nation and a long time
resident killing
my family offering
experience
interpretation takes a lot of
our friends relatives and
calculation counter i've
extensive experience with metal
health and addiction
in the united states the county
and
increasing alcohol exists tax
beverages
are communities support severely
and certainly from the impact
about the related test would you
increase by thirty percent so
the two thousand
many of you probably are aware
of this
years ago driver replacement
trouble several blocks on a
parade route
in february electronically
thousands of people
code is will benefit from the
revenues that from he once every
night will travel increase
resources for.
Middle health and additional
professionals and the state he
would children will look for as
the pain with losing a child
mother for the grandparent.
In the mid nineteen nineties was
provided opportunity to increase
funding
that a prevention was the
correct
his result
of the custody pickups
republican toxication drop
significantly
by forty percent of the county
and the city most is importantly
up all related deaths and lives
were safe upon related to this
would decrease
about one by two million
generated and from excess tests
good good morning ray you you
within two minute marks thank
you for joining us this morning
where one war on the line melody
million warning with us.
Good morning mr chairman members
of the community my name is
melanie children toyota and i'm
a core member of the new mexico
tribe will be heaven health
providers association and also
the program coordinator for
santa car but properly
behavioral house I am also an
enrolled member of significant
public I support hb seven one
seven nine started because I had
been impacted personally and
professionally and I want to
ensure that my community has the
best chance to read healthy
families and the generation
trauma of alcohol abuse is
addressed thank you for the
authors that put this stuff so
that fully together thank you
for your time everyone
thank you let's now move then to
those in opposition of house
bill one seventy nine in the
room and they will go to online
and this side of the room will
start first yes ma'am.
New amendment and the fire these
comments are going to be to the
the previous version.
I'm christian thompson and
representing the new mexico
restaurant association we are
opposed to house build one
seventy nine because it
dramatically increases the tax
on our businesses thus are
customers at a time when the
state has recorded budget
increases new mexicans already
pay among the highest liquor
taxes in the nation and
restaurants like nearly ten
percent in grt currently on
liquor and food sales.
This along with the extremely
high price for like our licenses
means that new mexicans are
already paying higher taxes than
most states for a restaurant our
members are committed to curbing
heavy drinking in their
establishments and support
spending every time of the
current alcohol taxes collected
on the prevention and treatment
of problem drinking rather than
sending half of it to the
general fund as a currently does
in the flash two years
restaurants have struggled with
inflation which is made us
already increase or prices
multiple times in the last years
we don't need the state to
increase taxes increased.
This economy is already doing
that for you and we ask for your
opposition to this bill and
reassessment current liquor
taxes being collected going our
state budget and work to improve
prevention and securities
progress thank you thank you
anyone else in the sathering if
not it's come to the center of
those in opposition beginning
second row yes.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is I am a
registered obvious for an eyes
and we stand in opposition to
house bill one seventy nine
sponsors
letting us know about the
amendment that is coming forward
so I did some quick math but we
would still be an opposition to
a twelve cent very drink
increase I would point you to
your fire on page eight and
there's a quick chart and that
chart shows you where the state
of new mexico is with its
current tax station rates and as
it relates to taxes on beer we
are the fourteenth high so that
you're starting point from a tax
policy perspective for beer
taxes I would then take you to
page two of your FIR is out the
percentage of increases for
those taxes as it was originally
proposed this bill would have
been a six hundred and fifty one
percent increase on beer I doing
quick math taking it down to
twelve percent
so we're at three hundred
percent
we believe that that is a
punitive approach
is everyone across the board it
punishes both responsible
drinkers and probably drinkers
and we don't believe that that
approach to taxation of beer is
an effective way to try to
address the issues that are in
new mexico and as your bush
dance in favor of
programs to try to treat people
who are abusing alcohol or
definitely in favor of that
we're not in favor of and across
the board approach there
hanishes both responsible
drinkers and problem drinkers
thank you very much thank you
next year
good morning john thompson I
don't make it my normal prices
to read a prepared statement but
in this instance I think it's
important in november twenty
twenty one the oregon department
of health initiative the study
and i'm going to read straight
from that because I think it
goes right to a lot of the.
The.
The existing evidence is not
clearly support the idea that
higher prices will be to a full
reduction and alcohol or
consumption amongst heavy or
bens drinkers population of the
generate a disproportionate
share of economic costs of
alcohol consumption the report
found if organized beer insider
taxes by more than two thousand
percent and why taxes by six
hundred percent it would make a
decrease of consumption by two
percent however when the county
for problem drinkers switching
to cheaper spirits or substances
which the report determined
likely that reduction was likely
not even one percent
excise taxes can need to
substitution between alcoholic
beverages instead of a reduction
and consumption substitution
affects are not limited to other
alcoholic beverages in response
to higher alcohol consumers may
switch to other potentially
harmful substances and anybody
knows exactly
mister chairman members of the
committee I like to echo with
missus thompson said with the
restaurant association the state
has not generally done a very
good job of utilizing excess
taxes that we collected the
state has also not necessarily
looked at other ways to leverage
federal funds to increase those
dollars and increase our funding
we stand opposite the bill mr
chairman I think you for the
time thank you
for the next row then yesterday.
The.
Good morning mister chairman
members thank you my name is
jady police and i'm speaking on
behalf of the greater album
chamber of commerce that
respectfully opposes this
legislation and I say
respectfully because we're all
an agreement that we have an
alcohol abuse problem in this
state that has permeated every
demographic component of our
population the greater album
chamber of commerce has been
predictably consistent on this
issue session after session year
after year.
And it's only issue is this
specific targeted taxation
approach that primarily.
Just proportionately affects.
Responsible adults where the
vast majority of alcohol
consumers restaurant
entertainment and hospitality
the chamber has not reviewed the
substitute version but in the
original version that contained
a provision that indexes alcohol
future alcohol tax increases to
installation that component is
still in the bill it will add to
the inflation harry
costs that we all see in
restaurants every time we could
we go there were all an
agreement that the real goal
here is to expand alcohol abuse.
Treatment programs these
programs can be funded right now
with money that's under control
of the legislature without
imposing attached on the
hospitality industry which is a
key economic driver in many
parts of our state.
So the greater albert chamber of
commerce is consistent in its
message said it believes there
are better targeted approaches
that will be just as effective
without raising taxes on
businesses and raising a cost
and responsible consumers thank
you
thank you next.
The road not back in in
opposition yesterday.
Good morning like the rest of
the new mexico alcohol
organization.
And we write.
While not having
seen the substitute language
just for the sake of revenue
that's everything and half so
now we're looking at.
Yeah.
To get more.
Yeah.
You go to.
Another bill we heard tax.
At least a sponsors.
Yeah.
Thank you anyone else opposition
yesterday.
Good morning mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is leelin I represent the new
mexico marketers we have
hundreds and hundreds of small
business on the state most of
our customers are middle the
lower income and they have been
communicating to us that this
they believe this i'm fairly
target still they are part of
that ninety percent of new
mexicans that dream and drink
responsibly we absolutely don't
agree that you have a glass of
wine
using alcohol we do believe that
the current alcohol taxes going
into the general fund should be
diverted to healthy social
thank you that's yesterday thank
you mister chairman of the
committee journalist on behalf
of sazara company
in addition to the progressive
nature of the tax that was
mentioned by.
Automatic increas.
Thank you anyone else in the
room in opposition
anyone online
okay I don't want to go back
to
get it.
You've had your hand racial
perhaps you want to talk in
opposition.
No I was
in in favor of the bill sorry
okay thank you
so at this point in time that
concludes our public comment for
house bill one seventy nine and
at this point like to come back
to committee four questions and
comments I have no one on my
list let's go down the line to
school you give the
representative scott.
Thank you mister chairman
replaced to the expert.
Reading through the financial
port.
I noted the
correlation coefficient
being very slightly negative
which.
Indicated to me that these very
large increases would not be
responsible for much of a
decrease in consumption and now.
With this committee substitute
it would be looking at hassle
that impact.
So this doesn't mister chairman
representative doesn't look like
it's very efficient way to
combat alcoholism
given that.
We don't have a lot of impact on
consumption with price
increases.
Could could do a dress of
concerns.
Thank you mister chair and
representatives
I think you're pointing to
the fire that were used for you
city and I actually noticed the
same thing and
I apologise to say a costed our
economist who put together the
fire because I wanted to
understand it because in found
the numbers that are established
in the literature are not that
conservative and I was told by
lfc that this is one of the
first times that lfc has done
modeling using something like
price you last disidea and they
wanted to take a very
conservative approach so the
estimates in the fire if
anything are very conservative
estimate and we would expect
consumption to go to decrease
more than what is in the fire in
my own estimates I have used I
have looked at it multiple ways
I used price you asked to see
estimates from
several meta analysis that have
looked at multiple states
populations and the original
version of this bill in my
estimates suggested a ten
percent decrease in alcohol
consumption with the amendment
i'm seeing a five percent
decrease in alcohol consumption
so this is not prohibiting
alcohol we're not going back to
the nineteen twenties what we're
trying to do as one of
our public comment or so
eloquently said is we're trying
to make a very small change that
has a population level impact
that can really read you know
prevent somebody from taking
that one next drink and there is
more and more evidence in the
alcohol community that even
reducing the number of weekly
drinks has a positive impact.
On your health you do not need
everybody does not need to
abstain from alcohol but going
from fifteen drinks a week to
twelve weeks a drink or
tendering so weak to nine drinks
to week those are all small
incremental changes that can
have really powerful health
benefits does that answer your
question representative.
Mister chairman representative
and expert.
This is the first time we've had
this conversation about a
lastist.
And consistently a proponent of
these
pieces of legislation what to
make that alasticity confusion
higher than the studies that we
get referenced in our fires if
we go down
to fiscal because
I believe I hold it discussed
that we were going to save the
state significant dollars as a
consequence of
health benefits that would
accrue to these to these taxes
but.
According to this.
For
hundred million dollars of tax
increases we generate a benefits
to the state of between fifteen
and twenty million dollars again
does not appear to be the most
efficient way to go.
Alcohol could you address yes
thank you mr chair and
representative so the cost to
new mexico or alcohol use an
excessive alcohol use was last
model using data from twenty ten
and at that time the estimates
from the cdc suggested that the
cost per standard drink is about
two dollars seventy seven cents
if we are adjusting or inflation
only the cost for one one drink
right
to society is three dollars
ninety three cents that's the
cost to society and almost half
of that
rating to the state
the current taps on this is for
sense.
So four cents is what we are
receiving nearly four dollars is
what society is paying and this
increase is
really modest when you think
about it in that global contacts
it would be taking the tax from
four sense to drink plus twelve
makes sixteen cents a drink so
we're not going to solve all of
this by this tax increase but
this is a very meaningful start
but mister chair for me we're
having issues with the webcast
the mike is very sensitive in
very close so it it
would suggest you push her back
a little bit because people at
home can't follow
whenever there's loudness in the
way they call thank you this
proceed.
Mr chairman.
Rough limited and expert will
you done
this chairman
representative and expert one
one last question i.
Heard my colleagues on this
commitment.
Complain over and over over
about requesting
this one would seem to be
one of the most regressive in
our tax and then could you
address that comes
mr chair and represent
because we're putting all the
funds that the tax increases and
includes what there is now
and I just might mention that we
are we did remove and I forgot
to mention the indexing to cpi
where we're taking that out
but because the funding goes
into programs that will help the
people who are suffected by the
tax will make it so that it is
progressive it's not really
regressive because.
It only get taxes still beer at
four cents in increase to the
sixteen so your less expensive
out the hall is tax less than
wine in spirits but also because
it is um it's still very low in
the programs go to help the
people who need it the most and
I just like to mention that.
Nearly fifty percent of people
don't drink it all so they're
bearing the burden
of you know what other people
cost were healthcare behavioral
health and all the other harms
where is there not even
drinking.
This chairman representative.
I remain skeptical that they
interested in listening to the
rest of the conversation thank
you very much
for
your evidence got it just a a
quick note here is that because
we have two bills and at this
point I require run to an hour
and a half on this bill I want
to give adequate time for house
bill two thirteen so I think the
approach today will be we'll
hear both bills will go to
public comment will come back to
committee comment and then on
friday at the pleasure of the
committee what will then address
what.
We can make to the floor by
eleven o'clock at this point in
time I have representative
dunkin
big mischairman.
Automobile violence took two
more innocent lives from people
in my county this week
individual driving that vehicle
was rested for his fifth or six
dwi
you could raise the stacks to a
thousand percent I wouldn't care
I don't like alcohol hate
alcohol and a what it causes.
I don't think that's good tax
policy as has been mentioned
we have a ton of money and we
don't use it right
we don't allocate those funds
where they need to go we put it
back in the general sign and so
consequently we're not even
users funds.
One question for you
representative.
On your.
This this peace paper right here
can resolutions were passed by
burning county doing the county
santa fe county but the two
counties that are impacted the
worst in this state don't have
resolutions on this can you can
you tell me why.
Thank you chair and
representative we've been
working tirelessly for the last
year to reach out across the
state to diverse stakeholders
some counties
are in the process of adopting
resolutions are considering them
it takes a while for these to
get past these are the three to
that we have to date I know for
example tales is considering
adapting a resolution as or
others.
So I think that what we have
here is a very long list of
supporters across the state I
would not say that this is
exhaustive by any means and we
are continually continuing to
build our coalition and get more
resolutions.
Thank you thank you mr
my county is similar in county
mckinley county the two that are
hurt worse by this and the same
one county has a really in place
if you reach out to send one
county and talk with them yet.
Chair senders we have we have a
lot of programs in mckinley
county and actually the
evaluator of several programs
are mechanic count including
up the prevention programming
through the county and also
several programs at the city
level and in as you might know
in mckilley county in general
the city hazard because
division and they provide a
variety of prevention programs
through that including the new
program which is more about
resiliency based program which
has been having amazing impacts
as well so there's there's a lot
of programming within that and
then you have seen a lot of the
people that have been either
until more percent sample and
county we've reached out to them
we've been working on prevention
programs out there as well
valuated a couple of them I know
that sound one county has not
necessarily joined or in support
of many bells including bills
that are cutting some other
programs so they've kind of just
been neutral.
Thank you thank you
I think that answers my
questions.
And all the questions I have.
Thank you speaker martinez thank
you mister chair think a
representative for your work
you're tired of this issue
i'm I know i'm gonna make some
comments i've seen his bills
left and right for the last
several years i've had meetings
missed chair with some of the
people at the table including
your expert witness.
I just want to I want to clerify
a few things
first of all
there's no doubt that
all call taxes need to be tied
to some sort of system so that
they're not stagnant for thirty
plus years.
I first walked into this
building maybe twenty
twenty two twenty three years
ago and I sat somewhere in the
seats here in this committee
advocating for my county brand
new county to be given the same
preference as other counties
when it comes to.
And we failed every time
I say that because there's a lot
of
twitter verse revolutionaries
out there who assume because we
bought a certain way or don't
want
there were somehow in the
pockets of somebody or anyone
take read offence to that
because serving is a public
service for every single person
on this committee and every
single person visit legislature
when I met with your expert
at mister speaker
getting days to go
miss chair representative
ferrari when I met with your
expert I I made that very clear
so I don't think people know
that right sometimes around that
side we especially when you're
twenty years old you're probably
invisible to most people.
Now
so that's that's sort of just
the base rate lake there's scott
to be a better way of taxing not
just alcohol but really anything
else and we shouldn't have to be
coming back ten fifteen years
later to do the hard work of
reforming a tax code to keep up
with.
And that applies to everything
so that aside
I want to make sure that we
distinguish between the two
different issues that we're
talking about we're talking
about in increasing tax which I
would still probably most of us
think we should.
And then money for treatment
which I would assume all of us
want to insure is there in those
are two different issues right
I can tell you being as involved
in the budget as I am now it's
not as easy as dumping three
hundred million dollars into a
system we've tried behavior a
health health care rural health
care the practitioners just
aren't there
that is a fact
that doesn't mean we shouldn't
keep trying that doesn't mean we
shouldn't keep advocating and
pushing we have a bill
in one of our other committees
that would incentivise
healthcare practitioners by
paying off your student loans
like i'm at that point we might
have to do that we might have to
bribe people to move to new
mexico to practice in behavior a
health treatment primary care
etc.
So we need to keep trying now
i'm gonna tell you
I am always amazed when I drive
through the rural new mexico.
And for miles
there is nothing else in a gas
station
that sells beef turkey
redball hot dogs and
any type of leak roaming one
approaches including the stuff
you using this props
that's a different conversation
but that's a conversation we
need to have what we talk about
alcoholism in the wi
particularly in a rural
community so I understand that
there this is owners for whom
that's their business model
but I personally have an issue
with that it doesn't make sense
that for a hundred miles there's
nothing that gas stationed that
where I can also buy that bottle
of
so I say that because are we
chasing their rending up the
wrong tree here when it comes to
dealing with the issue that
we've heard we want a deal with
as in a side
and I believe the other bill
sponsor to their team will
probably talk about this because
we've talked that linked about
this there is generational
trauma that leads people
to consume whatever substance
whether it's alcohol whether
it's fantastic
and we've got a sort of dressing
in in all honesty I think we
have started addressing some of
those issues
through legislation and
proposals that many of you have
been involved with republicans
and democrats urban rural
whoever.
As with public safety there's
not a silver bullet I have been
asked by the media well what
about trial detention well the
crime was at control before that
constitutional amendment and
perhaps crime is
there's no silver bullet
it's an all the above approach
so I appreciate your leadership
met mr chairman and and in
representative your tired list
leadership as I appreciate the
leadership of the other bill
sponsorer by circuit now to
bring some truth and honesty to
this discussion
now
what I want to make very clear
and i'm looking out in the
audience people with their laugh
times out
before you make ussumptions
about where my vote is anyone
else's vote
be very careful
because it is horribly the
meaning
when people are soon publicly
members of the media
member of the media probably
should say
that because we what a certain
way
were in anyone's pocket.
It is yesterday
the limited children with their
parents locked up in horrible
conditions were told that today.
Right
now in this chamber.
They were told not today
is it because of the limiting
kids
though now a powerful lobby
behind
that's the assumption
we should make based on the
logic.
On these bills
thank you for the time mister
chair i'm gonna go get ready for
the floor
and will be in touch thank you
mister speaker that's move on
then to represent that though
think mr chair thank you
presenters thank you sponsor for
the bill I wanted to take a
quick moment to think the folks
did come out I know it's very
difficult to be in a tax
committee on an issue that it's
really hot close to home and I
know it's hard to not be able to
talk about
those pieces that that that are
part of our families in our
partner histories and it's it's
always kind of hard to do that
number so I think everyone that
told personal stories but try to
keep it very focused on on the
numbers at hand are and you know
again i'm i'm going to this a
bit pressure than the speaker I
think i'm happy a home and i'm
looking at both of these
proposals and really looking at
what I see were too different
solutions to resolving the same
problem and that's in those
nuances or what's really going
to be part of what we all
discuss here as a committee in
what we get through I did have a
couple questions though they
wanted to answer mr chair and
and representative you're your
expert mentioned that her
calculation in the committee
substitute would be a five
percent decrease in the
consumption of alcohol i'm
curious about at large or if
that's like focused on the binge
drinkers that we talk about in
the fiscal impact.
Thank you mr chair
representative for those
calculations I used different
estimates for each beverage.
For wine and one four distalled
spirits and that was the the
median value for about a large
meta analysis I believe
although I would like to double
check and get back to you that
that looked at overall
consumption but I don't want to
miss speak on that think you
mister chair thank you
representative and experience
you don't I look at the fire on
page six and they talk about in
the third paragraph.
The have you strinkers four
percent of drink the most
consumed thirty percent of
alcohol the top twenty five
percent of drinkers can see
about seventy eight percent of
alcohol so when I hear many of
the concerns from many of our
friends the business community
night I do say friends and I
mean that sincerely
that is from what my reading of
that analysis from our lfc would
I read that I hear that they're
going to be generally everyone
who is is is impacted the same
way by their in in in take of
awkward so therefore when I go
to a restaurant mister mister
chair and representative and I
go and have two glasses of wine
let's say with my dinner and i'm
not a night the tax that I get
tax somewhat on that fancy trial
shall you got there would be I
can't see it anymore what is
that would be about less than a
dollar for two glasses of wind
and I use that number
specifically because many of our
breweries have a limit of two
drinks per trip to a rural or
two glass of wine at a business
so and me is i'm going out my
husband were having a nice night
we're going to know home that
that over home is going to cause
me fifty fifteen box is just
beyond it so that's going to
cost me less than a dollar
that's not going to impact that
but if I may massive up all
consumer and I mean you're
talking you were mister chairman
expert you're talking about
twelve fifteen drinks a week
which
that that seems like a lot of
that out there then you are
getting too much higher number
and that me impact somebody's
activity so again I understand
understand this to see very well
also understand negative
externalities and how this
industry has benefited from the
fact that we don't ever for
whatever reason calculate that
when we're calculating taxes
into the impact on our
communities however.
Regard understand those things
that's fine but on am looking at
how the industry will actually
be impacted I I question the
likelihood that somebody
witchings up behavior now the
difference between the two bills
on how that the behaves that's a
different conversation but to me
increasing those penalties i'm
that those taxes those those are
dressing the negative
externalities that this industry
has benefited from for a long
time like i'm fine with that
that's always a problem as long
as those individuals that are
considering twelve to fifteen
during the week that that twenty
five percent of drinkers who
consume seventy eight percent of
alcohol you know in our
communities they are taking a
moment to reconsider those
decisions because now you're
spending fifteen bucks more
which I mean traditionally would
have been a package that they
are losing out on so I I see
that I appreciate that
the other thing I wanted to
touch on with your aspect is
that
the treatment and and the access
to treatment and so what I do
appreciate both these bills as
we really are directing these
vice funds these vice taxes into
funds that address the vice I
understand that we like to keep
money in the general fund for
good reasons but we have a
society mister shared and and
and sponsor we cannot be
dependent on vice taxes to
support our economy
vice tax that it reduces over
time and that we would have to
change that so I appreciate you
guys have this fund i'm kemp
curious about how you see the
fun being able to grow more
rural practitioners who may
assist in reducing on the rates
of all collision in the
community
chair members of the committee
so when we develop this when we
develop this we actually met
with communities and we ask them
like what is it that they were
going to need in one of them was
more staffing rate that included
cpswe use or certified
prevention specialists that
included a master level license
folks they'll they've talked
about grow our own type programs
and actually in gallup.
With their currently piloting
a program with a pended at last
year it's really increasing
those that are getting licensed
and those that I can certified
in a lot of the times that means
like a weak or two of one on one
interaction with someone that a
professional in in our state we
know that we need we have a
shortest in the workforce we
need more more employees rate
but we also know that these
this employment would be not
only forty to sixteen thousand
dollars how we're talking about
not four dollars with tips and
it would be sustainable and it
would provide the services that
are communities are saying that
they're near right and when I
look at the list of programs
that they've asked for their
they're talking about home
visitation programs they're
looking at medicaid mat we have
act programs in our state they
don't pay for everything and so
our providers are are saying we
know we need to cover these
services and but we also need
that that extra component it
also includes
services I guess that early told
her early child education it
also includes early prevention
right and it in early
screening and we've intervention
which that just means that we
catch to early on provided the
services and then that
eliminates a lot of the higher
level drinking that everybody's
so concerned about not
decreasing thank you mr chair
think your representative and
expert into that end the
programs are talking about those
are folks that are living those
communities that are that that
are get the articipating would
be working in those fields that
correct chair representative
exactly and so we're hoping to
build the the workforce with in
the communities hopefully those
that are representing the
into mr chair and think you
thank you I just like to add
that most me most communities
are counties have the local dwi
programs and there was concerned
that they weren't addressing the
population but we looked at you
know the
people who were having alcohol
problems and going through.
You know a treatment and things
like that and they trapped along
with the allocation you know not
just by dwi but also it tracks
with those who are most in need
so that's why we kept the ldwi
programs because with a hundred
million more into our economy
for prevention and treatment and
that does include going to
medicaid we've spoken with
behavioral health division that
we will put part of that money
into match for two leverage as
much medicaid federal dollars as
possible but how the ldwise and
other programs in farmington and
also the drug courts that
funding helps to
keep the system going that we
have and then expanded as much
as possible like
um
cindy was talking about that
they are growing more certified
peer support people and to get
more into our
needs of the programs that were
identified by your communities
and also meeting with the
agencies
directors that included aging a
long term services early
childhood education
there is a three hundred million
dollars in architect in our
state and we've reduced it to
just a hundred and fifty and I
just like to also mention that
if we do away with the volume
tax and
just take it away totally that
will mean that our breweries are
microburies and our local wine
growers will not pay any
contribution towards
alcohol reduction so we need to
be careful of that and we also
need to make sure that
we aren't gifting the alcohol
hold industry by because that's
about fifty million that is
collected for the volume tax as
it is now.
We don't want to see that go
away you'd like to see it
increased in our bill so that we
can have fifty million to get
started and to do the things and
help the people in our state
thank you mister jones one less
plus piece of this and I I
appreciate the thoughtfulness
that you all put into this for
for two reasons one is that
right now we are really looking
at like a punitive approach to
treating alcohol right and there
is a shame factor that is
touched and folks I love have
gotten d wise that's a shameful
point but in general as a
society we do celebrate alcohol
we talk about the drink
organized where we talk about
the wine mom culture there's up
there's a wide range of these
things and and to be able to
have a pure support program that
really opens that up and and
allows the conversation to to
begin that is my hope one way of
addressing that generational
trauma and that we remain nimble
enough to find new ways that may
do it more impactfully I
appreciated representative
chairman you're you're not about
that the three million dollars
needed one hundred fifty million
provided again i'll be listening
to both of these but you know
it's been like it's like
thirty eight years old so we
haven't changed his losses I was
eight years old by time
thank you thank you reminder
folks and and represent towns in
europe next but that we have to
go to the floor by eleven it's
it's ten twenty I will ask for
excuse for a while but we need
to get to the other buildings
that I finished for the for both
bills printed representatives
thank you chairman
representative couple questions
the
comment was made that
are population does not concern
alcohol I suspect that have the
adopt population would you would
you expand on that little bit
yes mister chair representative
towns and I didn't clarify that
it was adults okay and
mischairman and
representative
of the adopt.
Population concerns alcohol
portion of that
is the problem
what portion of the adopt
population is the group that is
problematic.
The.
Thank you mister chair and
representative.
I'm gonna speak to national
statistics because.
Very very prevalent over ten
percent that would mean you know
if we're in a room with seventy
people seven seven of us likely
have it out the house disorder
hazardous drinking is more
common than alcohol use disorder
and hazardous drinking is
defined by the number of drinks
per week or on a single occasion
for men and for women separately
and that's that's a larger
bucket but the fact that ten
percent of our adult over ten
percent of our adult population
has a passed your alcohol use to
store I think speaks to exactly
what representative serado was
talking about a few minutes ago
about how we really do normalize
alcohol in our society
and yet it's an extra extremely
problematic substance thank you
get that is.
Let's say yeah
population
people are dollars.
And only ten percent of those
are the problems.
And that's part time problem
drinkers.
How effective is program dollars
into a dressing.
That.
Relatively small population.
Effectively thank you mister
chair and representative and my
apologies for not understanding
the gist of your former question
the tax committee had a
substance use progress report
last summer that estimated that
there were seventy thousand new
mexicans who need treatment for
alcohol use disorder but are
unable to get it
the cdc has also estimated that
every year there are over thirty
five thousand years of potential
life lost so what does that mean
potential wife lost that means
years that people could be
contributing to the economy but
they are not because they die
prematurely or are diseabled so
that is a sign of how much
economic value we have to gain
by treating these
individuals who are struggling
with alcohol use disorder.
There is so much potential that
can come out of
getting a handle on substance
use disorders individuals can
become active members of society
could hold jobs be.
Fulfill their obligations to
family members and help us as a
society and their own individual
way so I would say it it's the
cost benefit analysis is
extremely interesting when we
come to thinking about that the
benefit that could come from
from focusing on these programs
thank you.
Representative we could have a
long conversation about that and
I won't go there but I will tell
you.
That.
It seems to me that we are and I
am.
Three million dollars this year
three and a half billion dollars
last year may be probably should
have done is appropriate
money toward the problem as we
see it and not acts the best
georgia doors unnecessarily.
I'm not i'm not
the problem that you're trying
to address I understand it's a
problem in many in many areas I
have been told that this has not
reached out to the association
account to see him
is troubling to
I would say better
toward.
The problem instead of just
general tax to the people that
are responsible taxpayers in the
mexico is just something I think
we are considered and channel
the one thing I would say and I
wish the speaker was here to
listen to because.
I would get my friend.
No the problem with
a lot of the problems with the
medical
mexico we created
issues and then come tax issues.
We can start all over problems
with ourselves and not try to to
fix too long like a right
thank you very much thank you
that's gonna represent.
Thank you mister chairman
representative for your experts
and to the public
so
a couple of things
but I represent it for you have
you all reached out to this
specific weblows
to get their feedback a minute
the you know we have the the
alliance I think or can't
remember exactly what it's
called but we have and i'll let
i'm cindy explained some of our
each mister terror
representatives because I am the
director of the tribal behavior
help providers association we
been discussing this bell for
over a year you've seen some of
our members here presenting so
we have reached out there is
tribal government government
chained in the beginning of the
year which makes it really
difficult to approach I did
during opening session approach
five of the governors and had a
discussion about this and so in
general we've been trying to
return and we have some of our
members here who have been
addressed through him with not
with five of them I believe
there's like over there's
nineteen percent but we have
like as I mentioned
representative terrible we have
met with previous governors but
there's a change of governments
and the beginning of the year
and so we've continued meeting
with all of our
chairman the reason I asked that
question is because it seems to
me like you know we've sort of
put the focus on the the impact
on
members of our pueblows who are
you know
I guess they've had issues and
one of the populations that you
talked about with this with all
ism and so it seems to me like
all nineteen published need to
be contacted and you know I so I
I take a little.
Hars with that and I do
appreciate your holes passion
representative ferrari mister
chair for this issue because I
you know I I think about a
healthy or new mexico
in a healthy community and and I
think about that a lot because I
am you know I worked in city
planning for so long that isn't
a big issue
what I would and concerned with
is
mister chair and I raised some
of these issues before
one is that
you know an alcoholic and I and
I mentioned this before I lived
with an alcoholic for over ten
years and I saw a perfectly
healthy person and become a
severe alcoholic and i'm not
talking about nine drinks a day
i'm talking about thirty drinks
a day and that to me I watched a
person go from then I don't want
to mention any names but
a healthy person to a person
that had a health issues with
copd and then after similar and
was self medicating basically I
watch dual diagnosis I watched
dual addiction
so you know this is personal for
me
and it is concerning and I would
love to see a healthy new mexico
whatever that means I mean it
means different things to
different people but one thing
that I did find mr chairman and
and members is representative is
that addiction does not
discriminate it just does not
and the issue that I have mister
chair and and representative
ferrari is that when we raise
the cost on one thing an
alcoholic addict will find a way
to.
Find another voice
and sometimes that goes as far
as you know right now and i've
come to find that fintenal is
selling for five tablets for
twenty dollars which is of harry
low and if you can't afford
liquor
you know you may consider a
different voice and so that that
concerns me but but even more
importantly what concerns me
about this is that um
why if this is such a such a
serious health issue in new
mexico why is this not already
in the general fund why are
these things being tax on
the backs of people that are
already have the addiction it it
is very concerning to me mister
chair and the other thing is
that this according to this
legislation if there's no re
occurring appropriation so if
this were to to come at this
point I don't understand why and
I saw that in the fire that
there's no recurring funding for
this the tax itself is every
year matter mister chair and
representative it's
it's collected every year I
Duration of recurring because it
does happen it's collected and
it goes through this process mr
chair and representative ferrari
in your experts it just seems to
me like if this is such a severe
issue in new mexico this would
be in the general fund this
would not be something that we
are arguing back and forth on a
taxing you know regressive tax
or a progressive tax or whatever
this would be in the general
phone and that's those are my
comments thank you mister thank
you let's go to last speaker
today represent harbor
thank you chairman and
representative pretty much
appreciate you being here I
think.
I'm all of us have been impacted
by alcoholism
my parents had a drunk driver
crash into their front yard.
Very dear friends.
We we all have
we're not arguing about.
You know bench drinking w all
these impacts in new mexico at
the top of these lists
so.
The.
I think what we're trying to
decide here is what's the right
solution to this problem
and and and so I just a couple
technical questions on your b.
So
just the quick questions first
chairman being convinced of
time.
So in the committee substitute
on people too
we right now
percent of the correct size tax
to the local dwi grant fund
and in your substitute we strike
that and it's now roughly two
million dollars
what percent
does that represent
mr
chairman.
Mr chair representative
we wanted to keep the amount the
same so that it would not
decrease over a time in my
understanding is that in last
year's version of the old this
was a percentage and because of
that there was concerned that it
would go down it would go up so
this has been changed to a
dollar allocation and it
corresponds to about twenty five
million dollars a year which is
an increase of two million to
the ldw I fund
chairman per representative
thank you for that answer I i've
spoken to at several folks that
operate.
In the local grant programmer
received proceeds from that
program and there are challenges
there but i've also heard that
it's effective so i'm i'm glad
to hear that we're not stracking
it out we're essentially holding
them cost in here
and then a similar question on
section c five percent goes to
dreadcourts and here we've got
twenty five thousand.
German representative equivalent
yes.
Okay so um
german representative I I
appreciate that
i'm i'm I will think you
probably understand that i'm not
sure I like going that way
because as a percentage with
inflation and housings
rise and price over the years
we're essentially water news at
the current level and what we
have to come back and adjust
these up I understand if it goes
down that's nice because they'll
have a constant dollar now but
chairman I don't I don't
anticipate the revenue from the
correct size tax going.
Uhm I think you probably and
understand that
and then the balance goes to the
alcohol homes viation find
and what do we expect that total
amount mister chairman represent
to be over a year.
Mr chair and representative
with the twenty five thousand
from those programs plus.
The two hundred and fifty
thousand
it should be approximately do
when it answered that thank you
it would be around a hundred
twenty five million annually
that would go into the alcohol
harm's alleviation fund
so so chairman represents thank
you for helping me understand at
least those parts of your bill
uhm
just I think
we've got into just a couple
comments and and then finish
chairman thank you for the time
so I want to I want to first say
I appreciate hearing about us to
see in the numbers this year
chairman and manager
i'm more accustomed to seeing
packets of information you know
instead of just one one piece of
paper here.
And and i'm just curious you
know what we're saying here is a
twelve cent per drink entries
would result in five percent
reduction consumption.
Uhm
and I don't see a reference on
this chairman and represent you
explain where you got this
number yes mr chair and
representative thank you for my
own calculations i've been
working closely with david john
again at john at boston
university for the last year he
has helped me with the estimates
and I would be more than happy
to walk you through them explain
them to you understand different
scenarios but there's no
reference because I wanted to
keep their spread and just have
a one page instead of a packet
so that it would be easily
digestable thank you so chairman
and representative and thank you
for it for that answer
in and i'll just
say because I don't know often
to my own horn but I want to see
i've got some credibility right
so i'm I am appeared research
scientists to work at san diego
great I have published thirty
pure if you novel research
articles five book chapters in
engineering textbooks five
patterns
and so I I believe I know a
little bit about data and
analysing it and a.
And i've spent a lot of time
analyzing alcohol and tobacco
related data and there's there's
lots of nuance and facets to it.
Uhm and so maybe i'll just ask
the question if we
instead increased the tax per
drink to twenty four cents what
will we expect the consumption
to go down by
thank you mr chair
representative in the original
version of the bill which had an
increase of twenty five cents
per schedule drink we were
seeing an a decreased and
consumption of about ten
percent.
Yeah so so chairman
representatives so what we're
saying is we are in a linear
portion of this curse.
If you double the tax rate
you're gonna double the
reduction and consumption.
Mr chair representative there
are kind of two things going on
because the percentage increase
in the the tax rate is different
from the cent increase
I think we have two curves kind
of coming down and their
intersecting I think i'm not
sure if it's linear I think I
would need to look at that more
closely at least for this
comparison you're making yes I
would say you're right yeah so
so it's so chairman and
representative
if we really are in the line
you're part of the curse which I
I don't think we are but the
question can be how far is this
linear.
Right if
i'm understanding the the
increase in spirits tax here
that is and if every
twelve cents is a five percent
reduction then was proposed in
here would be an eighty would
result in eighty five percent
drop in spirits consumption in
the state in mexico.
Mr chair representative with all
due respect I don't think that
it's rate I I would I think this
is the beginning of a beautiful
friendship
i'm but I would really like to
sit down with you because i'm
happy more than happy to walk
you through the numbers that
doesn't that doesn't found rate
to me my god instincts so
chairman manager and glad to
hear you say that because that I
don't think any of us would
agree that.
Raising that
the tax on spirits by the mel
proposal this bill would result
in an eighty five percent
reduction and consumption.
And so my my plate mister chair
and representative is that
this curve that were on
often looks something like this
not like this
and where are we on that curve
well
mischer and representative we
are
the twenty fourth highest
taxation taxing state on spirits
the fourteenth highest on beer
the fourth are fits highest on
wine.
And.
To say that the solution to get
people to start consuming is to
increase the tax.
I think is not true
and we heard already there is a
study done in oregon that they
try to keep quiet that showed
their major increases in alcohol
taxation resulted in almost no
change in consumption
and i've seen this with tobacco
as well when you look at
the amount of people using
cigarettes
it has very text rate has very
little impact on it
and it's not banning you know
bubble gum flavored cigarettes
it's not increasing the tax
rates that hadn't affect it was
making smoking not cool that had
a huge effect on reducing.
The consumption of cigarettes
right is not cool anymore that's
when I was a kid in school was
cool and now it's not and you
don't see smoking among use
sadly what you see now is baby
right so when i'm looking at how
do we solve this problem that we
all agree with the now do you
like to use when you have a
whole you epidemic
you don't bring a truck load of
crutches.
You need a vaccine
right and we all go through want
to solve this problem we need a
vaccine
and so we need to look at making
drinking not cool we need to
look at funding good programs we
need to make sure that everyone
has access to those good
programs and when we are it's
not just raining money were
drounding and money right we
should be funding those programs
increasing alcohol tax.
Is gonna have this much of an
impact on can assumption.
And mister chairman
representative were not so
worried about the consumption
dropping otherwise we would have
stated at a dollar increase but
we do need the funds for like
you said we need the vaccine we
need the prevention programs to
stop people for
from drinking younger than
younger you are the delay of
unset till you're twenty one the
longer we can do that the more
prepared people are to be able
to consume in a responsible way.
We need to make sure that we
have the prevention we have the
treatment we have at the
behavioral health in the schools
part of the school programs with
ped was to get you know
counseling available we want
access everywhere for people to
get those programs and to have
an additional or total of a
hundred million will help us
grow that and we can do it
pretty quickly IT r d
implementing this tax and it's a
reasonable tax and we need to
make sure that r and u as a tax
committee help us with that
responsibility we
are never one in the nation by
far by far and above other
states and so comparing the
percentages of what we are were
not number one we're not eyes
and we do have a lot of
inexpensive alcohol in our state
and we need to make sure that
everyone contributes by
continuing the volume tax
there's very little under
microburse and the others but we
also need to make sure that we
don't take that away and gift it
to the alcohol industry when we
could use that fifty million we
have now thank you mister
chairman so chair and represent
think you might my last thoughts
and and I thank you I appreciate
that I think now now we're
actually talking about you know
where we're not saying
you have tax increases get a
substantially curb you know uh
consumption and I think we all
agree with that now that's great
so we're right now that the
issue we're trying to solve is
how do we find these g.
As a chairman representative
i'll just say right now we have
a little direct size tax and
forty five percent of that
revenue goes straight to the
general fund
and that is a travesty with as a
committee and as a body have
been making progress there when
I started here was only fifteen
percent was going to deliver but
dwight treatment prevention
programs the other eighty five
percent went to the general fine
we've been moving the needle
over time.
Uhm and and I see
the speaker in general eighty
mi- moving that needle all the
way would be something that we
should be talking about first to
find this alcohol harms program
and see how effective it is and
then there'll be more dollars
that are put into that when we
see that it's being effective.
Right now just looking at the
tax policy
new mexico is not quite an
outwire on alcohol tax were a
bit higher than the average this
would make us a high stamination
in a major outlawyer.
And I worry that the folks were
trying to help the most instead
of not buying one more six pack
will continue to buy like six
pack.
And have less money for their
kids food
or start going to other cheaper
dangerous sources of alcohol or
or
will find the the crime industry
by having them set up you know
alcohol in a disease federal
that they sell so tax policy
wise I worry
I understand what you're trying
to find this this program tax
policy was I worry what the
unantenna consequences would be
and i'd see what start with
setting all of the liquor excise
tax to where it was intended to
go.
Mr cherry I just
that was in a question that was
your there was a statement i'm
done chairman thank you and at
this point we need to move down
to the next
bill so I appreciate that the
two plus hours that we've given
to this bill thank you to the
presenters in this and you're a
sponsors perfect for this and so
at this point in time that's got
a house built two thirteen
mister chair could you clarify
again with the rest of the
processes for the rest of
process will be that we will
hear a house build two thirteen
tick public comment as well as
common here in the committee and
then we will allow this because
of the time constraint that
we're on to go to the floor is
that we will then come back on
friday morning and then whatever
the will the committee is we
will take action that okay thank
you thank you committee would
appreciate it.
So folks if you can exit the the
room quietly we can present
house bill to thirteen.
And take the bottles of boost.
The.
Better by sheriff's interpretal
one representative hoping to be
hill and representative of her
name is
we have a four folks on this
bill appreciate the time and
your patience as we work through
that they believe this one but
at this point in time
representative of sponsored by
straight woman the floor is
yours
thank you mister chair members
of the committee we also
appreciate the patience of the
folk swing in today and the new
mexicans engaging with their
important perspectives and
expertise.
But i'd like to do mister chair
today is talk through hb two
thirteen and two parts first
we'd like to talk about the tax
policy where proposing secondly
we'd like to talk about a new
way of distributing these
revenues that we wouldn't do
today collect from the liquor
tax so I will start in in the
second and different points of
the presentation i'll turn to my
correspondence and supporters
to add in way and what they ring
to this table in the kind of
insight that we are coming up
with together so mister chair
committee I think we first need
to quickly review how alcohol is
taxed in new mexico today so
since the nineties new mexico is
imposed a wholesale tax on
alcohol what that means is when
we look at the style play chain
we have a maker of alcohol
manufacturer of alcohol then we
have a distributor of alcohol
who buys whatever goods they're
eventually selling and mouse
that distributor sells alcohol
in there the only one's license
to sell alcohol to the retailers
including bars restaurants
grocery stores gas stations and
then finally we have the end
point the person buying alcohol
in new mexico so as it stands
today we impose this tax at the
wholesale level that means that
the distributors are responsible
for paying attacks per value to
the state of new mexico I
certainly want to appreciate and
commend the folks that we just
got to hear for their commitment
and raising this issue over
years and i'd like to save their
right we haven't updated these
flat rates since the nineties
and those rates have lost the
value of over time additionally
they were never adjusted and
there was no cpi there was no
way for those rates to go up so
truly they're relating time and
we certainly agree that it's no
longer appropriate to impose the
tax in that way but mister chair
and committee as we've listened
and learned through the previous
legislative sessions and in the
interim committee.
We've started to understand
better where the flaws are in
the wholesale tax.
As a whole field flat tax this
is one of the most progressive
taxes in new mexico the taxes
leveled by volume so today for a
gallon of beer that's the union
measurement we impose a tax of
forty one cents for a leader of
spirits the tax imposed is forty
five cents and for a excuse me a
leader of line and three leader
of spirits the tax imposed is a
dollar sixty from public health
principles that would make sense
that the higher taxes correlate
to a higher
or alcohol by value but because
those are flat points.
There within is the floon the
tax policy usually we would
understand that a better tax
policy is reflective or
proportional to the value or
cost of the product these taxes
have never been so weather it's
a top shelf bottle of alcohol
being sold and ultimately we
keep making it's way to a
consumer or something at a lower
price point in value the taxes
have been the same that's what
makes these regressive.
As we got into this legislative
session or or left the interim
with many of you all the rest up
meeting in our december fifth
meeting mister chair I was proud
to have conversations with both
our chair and house leadership
as well as the senator the
senate chair tax senator shendo
and leader worth to say I i'm
assuming and believing now
there's some agreement that we
need modernization and if if
helpful and supportive as people
on the tax committees it seemed
appropriate to bring forward
proposals to modernize this tax
so at the answer of the
legislation legislative session
we actually introduced one bill
two bills the first one kept the
wholesale framework but moved
the tax rates to a percentage of
the products sold taking the way
the regressivity making those
progressive taxes this bill
which we see today hb to
thirteen is where there was
momentum and why we decided to
bring this bill forward with you
today what this bill does is
eliminate the wholesale tax and
move the taxing mechanics to the
retail level.
We came up with this concept
because I wanted to have an
honest inaccurate debate about
what it would mean for new
mexicans buying alcohol to have
a tax in front of them and make
decisions accordingly so in
instead of talking about a
wholesale tax as a serving tax
are doing some math with some
assumptions along the way to
assume what a serving tax would
be this is a true tax if we were
to move in this direction as a
retail tax who ever was
purchasing that alcohol would be
paying a point in a percentage
of the product they are they are
buying so as we've introduced
this bill we've come up with
four percent for spirits three
percent for wine and two percent
for all
mr chair we've been
clear in our intentions this
bill was not designed to raise
the resources but instead to fix
a flood tax policy now i'm gonna
turn to how we might imagine
those revenues collected I will
outline that and then turn to
represent it but representative
hockey member hill to wait and
on those proposals just like we
did before and outlining how tax
is collected today I just want a
quickly review held these
resources are currently spent so
right now
alcohol tax liquor tax is one of
those the most consistent
revenue streams that new mexico
because again these are flat
price points that haven't
changed since the nineties are
consumption patterns haven't
changed so new mexico typically
corrects collects right around
fifty million dollars a year we
saw tiny bit of a bump during
covered but not even what people
would have imagined so sometimes
it'll come in at forty nine
eight the next year fifty point
one but we're really consistent
that fifty million right now is
was previously stated about half
of that goes to the general fund
to whatever purpose not not
pointed not not focused not
intended to reduce the harms of
substance you through alcohol
the other what happens then and
this was the most recent
addition in twenty nineteen the
legislature elect.
Did to send
a small amount that comes out to
about three million to the drug
courts to support their
operations and making sure new
mexicans that might access that
service
would have a way to cover their
their fee or participation for
engaging in that then the next
piece of the top was twenty
thousand seven hundred and fifty
dollars to the city of
farmington also in place since
the nineteen nineties no other
municipalities got a direct
disappropriate from this dollars
i've been able to appreciate and
learn more over the last month
about what the city of
harmington is doing with that
but also know that there's other
places that are holding the home
and trying to care for new
mexicans and getting them closer
to the services and two minutes
they need after those three
distributions went out the
remaining of the fine today goes
to the local dwa grant.
I'm grateful that we've spoken
at land with this association of
counties about how that money
moved but before it went into a
poor for thirty three wide
formula split six counties
pulled the first two point eight
million off the top after many
respectful conversations thirty
years later we can't quite find
the rimer the reason as to why
those six counties got the first
way but the money part of it was
disheartening to us in this
review is that for example
mckinley and see belar county
were not on that list even
though they are holding the
greatest impacts in harm from
alcohol so that's where it goes
today then what's left is
distributed by a formula based
on population and accurately at
the hall related crashes to to
do all out what's left typically
around seventy million to all
thirty three counties what we've
heard from counties as it
happens today sometimes they get
that money in june and it
reverts by june thirtieth so
that they haven't been able to
grow and really invest the kind
of impact they want with those
dollars because of the reversion
date that means that right now
somewhere between two and three
million dollars I reverted back
to the fund at which point they
become available to the counties
for grants going back out so
mister chair i'll turn to some
correspondence but some quick
comments before we go back to
you.
Mr chair and members of the
committee i'm christine about a
home and i've been delving into
some of the research on
wholesale excise taxes so I
wanted to think some of the unem
students that help with that
randy mel oma recent giant
matter.
Last week I talked to one of the
top researchers in this form of
tax was based on the east coast
I asked him about the
implications of the wholesale
tax on race because I had found
in the research that wholesale
to exise taxes reduced drinking
the most in white communities
and the least in hispanic
communities in the united
states.
The researcher told me that they
had studied race because they
knew what the effects were on
social economic status
that social economic status
could be used as a proxy for
race what he said in between
those lines in that conversation
was that people of color we are
poor we are less educated that
we are not worth your creating
policies in our communities.
Mister chair and members of the
committee when I was a student
at harvard university one of but
a handful of new mexicans at
that institution I saw that the
literature do not center the
experiences of my community and
in the state proclaiming to be
one of perfect friendship among
cultures and majority minority
population I believe that it is
increasing the important day and
also the more normal he can us
that we as lawmakers build
policies that work for all of
our communities and that we were
dared to imagine what would be
possible
thank you mister chair and as
way of introducing our other co
sponsors we've talked about how
the distribution happens today
what we amended in the house
health committee was a
reimagination of how that money
could be more effectively spent
so expensive are thinks to the
inspiration and leadership of
our own committee member
representative harper and
representative hockman be hill
we
propose an amendment that was
passed that strikes the
appropriation to the general
fund and instead directs it to
medicaid to to supporting the
state medicaid program as you
all know that leaves to
potentially increased behavior
health rates and then a big pull
down of the federal match
dollars at three to one so we we
strike keeping the general fund
home.
The.
So yes we strike keeping the
general fund hole with the first
twenty first twenty five million
dollars so after that after we
spend that first twenty five
million dollars on medicaid
related programming medicaid
programming and services we're
looking at about another twenty
five million because the
proposal as we've introduced it
admittedly does not raise
additional revenues it's
designed to fix the flood tax
policy so with that second half
what we've looked at is already
percent to go to the department
of finance authority the local
government's division as it does
now for the DWI grant so that
they can administer those funds
based on an updated formula that
came out of representative
research so moving away from
alcohol hall related crashes
we've suggested that we are
creating updated formula that
instead reflects alcohol related
injuries and deaths crashes
We're saying have to medicate
forty percent to the the
counties essentially with the
updated formula and then mister
chair because we want to count
to the important work that the
city of farmington is taken on
and the other responsibilities
of municipalities and counties
across the country we've
suggested that the last ten
percent of this fund would go to
the indian affairs department to
administer to municipalities
counties tribes or others
jurisdictions that are providing
services and care for indigenous
populations so we feel that's
the right place to send it and
they
could have the appropriate
culture culturally relevant
conversations in our state so
i'll ask represent hockman be
here if she'd like to see
anything about the medicare
thank you mister chair members
of the committee I want so much
except they're there except for
there is a way to do more with
less in this case and there are
other ways to innovate there are
other innovative ways to
identify the communities that
need this help the most and help
them in and equitable and just
way without making this an
untannable tax so that's what
the part of the work that we've
been working.
So mister committee as I end
with our co sponsor that's again
what we're trying to do
of fix and modernize a flood tax
policy.
Take us from twenty five million
dollars that's currently being
pointed to the counties and dwa
programs and grow that to a
hundred million dollars again
not by putting a massive burden
on the new mexicans have the
least but instead making this
progressive keeping that revenue
neutral and being a much more
strategic about how we point
that revenue representative
herpert to wrap up
always gets
thank you representative.
My interest in this bill is it's
time that we as legislators do
something about the addiction
crisis that is in our state I
have been you know focused on
liquor whether that's like a
license reform or anything else
this is the next step in how we
make liquor revenue work for us
in a positive way for.
A mister charles is they we were
proud to have all six of new
mexican leaders public health
advocates and also indigenous
black and round people in
support household given the hour
i've asked folks to
hold on to their comments today
potentially they'll find you an
individual conversations
otherwise they might indicate
their handsfree support but i'm
asking folks again where we're
ready to get to committee
questions and so we can keep our
engagement on public comments
brief thank you
thank you waste your woman and I
I appreciate your your prepared
face on that regards to other
comment and so but I don't want
to stifle that public comment
dealers with their own raiser
hand in support I mean and see
their name and and then who they
represent a more part to them
but that did not do dismissed
that point so at this point in
time I am going to go to the
folks in the room that are in
before we get there
is there an amendment for this
bill mister hair representative
what I had shared was that we
did amend this bill in house
health we brought more clean up
language today just tightening
the definition of retailers and
then i'm catching how we direct
the counties to spend their
money moving forward I don't
feel like we need to address
this amendment now if we're
going to take action on friday
very well thank you so at this
point in time I would look to
the room and request all those
in support of house field two
thirteen please raise your hand
and will begin on this site.
Mr chairman maybe my name is
joys
director mexico counties we want
to say I don't support this
homework to do and appreciate
the fact that in the weeks thank
you thank you.
They did you want to speak its
court okay
support of hospital to thirty
okay we'll do this and what else
in support of house bill two
thirteen
okay anybody online in support
of house bill to thirteen.
The.
Lorry
good morning you're with it.
You are viewed it so please i'm
view.
Well maybe not then let's go to
those in opposition of how
okay there are a couple more
sorry
christian good morning.
Good morning chair committee my
name is christian repair I am
giant report cairo and mexican
and i'm in my fourth year
recovery from alcoholism.
I support aged two hundred
because I attended current
details multiple times and I had
difficulties accessing care once
that is a hazardous for my
traumatic bringing three hours
finally put on medication and
enter the health care system on
a core time basis it took five
years to
achieve my sovereignty and it
wasn't until I left the state or
treatment that I got silver
alcoholism is a hot issue and a
generational disease that was
running in my family telematney
taxes should be used for
treatment that is inclusive to
our communities and cultures I
must include evidence based
practices the compassion and
care please address to have a
bit of dignity when living on
the other side of the alcohol
spectrum and when binding
treatment in new mexico thank
you.
Thank you kelly okay.
Good morning chairman and
committee representatives my
name is kelly
anything that did every failure
to chair and also the director
for a lie county who overseas
rdw program I too when I was
first my appreciation to the
sponsors and there's a bill or
working with us and taking them
a moment to learn and death that
what our programs provide in
success as we have and the
county level are programs work
already increased community
wellness and reduce responders
and monitor justice involved
individuals in the community and
I just again one of the thank
you and I appreciate their
support for the programs by
providing funny to keep the
county's hole thank you.
Seeing no one else this come
back to the committee for
questions and our comments
that's begin with
representatives i'm sorry to be
a opposition.
Okay position i'm i'm ahead of
this so let's go down to the
room those in opposition of
house bill two thirteen
beginning of this.
Right.
From the retail side given that
this is a massive change in the
house.
Cash transactions between the
recallers and
this term these transactions
with our consum.
Swife fees you know between two
three three I have five percent
sometimes on the sweat she's so
worried like that on top of
that.
Actions that really does.
Impacted significantly in terms
of additional.
Which way it's done the whole
cell tax that is
when the retailers find.
Influx of the finding impacted I
would just think the commission
look at that and we just being
her position as this is huge you
know that certainly disagree
with that but.
Look at this in iran be happy to
be at the t.
Thank you next in opposite yes
ma'am.
Mr chairman of the committee i'm
christian thompson with the
mexico restaurant association
you hurt me on the last bill so
i'm not going to repeat that I
want to echo which is now
being able to work with the
sponsors the outreach the
willingness to listen we do
believe that this is a a more
moderate proposal that this
is more responsible in the
administration of the funds are
major problem with with this
proposal is extending the whole
saler exemption for
four breweries wineries
and and still are ease
to the new retail model i'm
gonna use an example down the
street
to my seaters is in the parking
lot
that
second street brewing is you got
a thomas seaters to eat a meal
and maybe have a enjoy some
margarita you go to the second
street
to drink beer and have some not
just the same time they're
having to be all similarly
situated and we don't believe
that we should be in direct
competition when someone were
reporting the same beer
so that is our biggest concern
we hope that car value will not
extend
and again as decent said we do
want to be part of the solution
this is more transparent or unr
archisumers watch every single
dime on their bill
so well under the last example
it might it might be fifty cents
well on top of another fifty
centered another fifty cents
you're not going coming to the
restaurant even for food so that
is in a nutshell our concerns
with this proposal.
We hope to continue working with
the sponsors thank you thank you
next there was an opposition.
Yeah.
Study show that one.
Yeah.
Well.
Our sky high.
Yeah.
Yeah.
In the bill.
Well.
With additional reliable.
While.
I've also read the organ report
I will say.
Thank you one of those again in
opposition to thirteen on the
side of the room it is on the
seller yesterday.
Thank you mr chairman members of
the committee i'm jadie bolinton
speaking on behalf of the
greater opportunity for commerce
which again respectfully opposes
this legislation because we're
all acknowledgment that we do
have a dwi problem in the
mexican all motivated to address
that
however the greater up cookie
chamber commerce doesn't believe
there are restaurants
at brewery
footing the bill as has been
mentioned before you can achieve
the objectives of this
legislation simply by dedicating
the current alcohol taxes
towards the channels that the
sponsor of the legislation has
identified is absolutely gonna
increase taxes for consuming
alcohol on sight now is going to
increase the taxes for
businesses which the chamber of
commerce again is is predictably
consistently opposed to doing
but I think the real key issue
here as you've heard there are
some unique new ones legislature
and technical issues with the
reformation of how we are taxing
alcohol with this bill it's
difficult to address those in a
thirty day legislative session
where we can have diligent
independent consideration of
what we're doing here and so the
chamber respectfully opposes
this bill thank you thank you
next building opposition extra
is now
good morning chair on community
members again my name is between
a lot of the state executive
director of mothers against from
driving new mexico again
speaking to you here this
morning this time in opposition
to thirteen I want to strongly
state that mad new mexico and
mad's national government
affairs team has analyzed this
bill and we stand in opposition
to its language it does not
directly address prevention or
evenly apply for tax.
What the build does not do
what the bill does do is the
opposite on taxing low cost
alcohol which will especially
for youth heavy drinkers and low
income populate populations
which would directly affect dwi
crashes on our road simply put
thank you very much broken your
consideration on its critical
thank you next year german
members of the committee walked
alcohol
and we say mile opposition to
this bill we applied to the
sponsors for thinking outside of
the box
there's a lot like in the bill
repeat those are I will activate
the concern about the
administrat.
I want to say that with the
change this big because it is so
far out of the box traditional
all this read one settings from
the fire this bright change in
tax structure presents major
forecasting risk
actual revenues.
So if we go this route I would
like to make sure we do it right
this bill hasn't locations on
economi.
Next there's an opposition
so my name is ron brown and
small business owner in real
rancho i'm also on the board of
directors with the next rochers
and I head up the mexican liquor
cooperative
in operation we.
Yeah.
Members.
Just under house
can actually.
It's going to be a hurdle and
also a burden is there a very
small most american rural area
the other thing that I would
just caution on I remember being
back in the lady's early
nineties
the point of december collection
from the retailer to the
supplier
tax paying retailer I advocated
for that in the reason for that
most of that players out in the
market that we're going to put
all the honest people out of
business and we work with the
federal government and at the
state level to move it back.
Like the transparency in this
bill but I was just really like
the further study to make sure
because you got happy else you
have large brush
holidays that so leaders on
thirty percent
there there's
ideas hard hard to so there's
nothing for.
That's.
Just a lot more usually happened
especially on that just that's
not making the state that asks
with the social and gasoline
keep it so it's you can easily
auto thank you thank you next
yesterday mr chairman members of
the committee again we look at
the new mexico trolley markers
and is the speaker set many of
our members are a hundred miles
from your small businesses
they've been challenged with the
pandemic with interest rates
plation very likely now and we
take leave
we believe that this is going to
have cost on us for labor and
for technology on the system
that we're going to have to
invest mostly small businesses
so for those
thank you next year spent.
The.
Yeah.
This
industry to.
Thank you anywhere else
to thirteen thing now let's go
online.
Here morning.
Good morning mr chairman and
members the committee on my name
is
the registered obvious for total
wine and more unfortunately we
do have to oppose this build
this morning but we really do
have a bod in the needed
thinking of all of the sponsors
that it's gone into the
distribution of funds that are
collected through the like our
excise we think leveraging
medicaid smart and we all agree
that we need to be using the
dollars we have to tackle an
alcohol abuse more effectively
i'm are opposition is really
based on changing the wholesale
or the look or excited
collection from the whole sale
level to the retail level and we
do have some concerns about
changing it to the person based
on retail value at this is
actually a really big deal on
ever since prohibition ended
about ninety years ago the
collection of liquor excise
taxes happen at a wholesale
level and that is because
wholesalers are the ones
responsible in the three their
citizen for the tracking alcohol
adds it leaves the manufacturer
and before it arrives at a
retailer because of this
responsibility wholesalers are
uniquely positioned to be able
to insure that taxes are
collected accurately and the
statement has the ability to
guarantee that they have a
limited number of people on and
they can close any wood for me
structure
we're concerned that wouldn't be
switch of run the wholesale
level to the retail level we may
actually feel less money coming
into the seat for these programs
that we know or so desperately
needed because there could be
switching that happens of our
consumers from hire price
alcohol to lower alcohol and as
i'm noticed that the alcohol
will have to wait until it's
actually sold off of ourselves
rather than being collected up
front in full at the whole sale
level when a retailer purchases
it we'd like to point your
direction to the tax and rub
department analysis.
They point out a lot of
technical issues with this bill
that again your
food thank you mister chairman
next we have
good morning.
I get morning this is saturated
being buried i'm a rural
physician who spoke before I
have a master's degree in public
health they must small business
owner and i'd like to speak
against hospital to thirteen as
it's presently written it will
increase alcohol related desk
and accessory health disparities
which I know that we all care
about those things and alcohol
really debts are fueled by the
cheap alcohol that new mexico is
just a wash in and and
percentage based tax incentive
taxes incentivised cheap alcohol
we are all an agreement about
the cost to new mexicans help
and also our future based on the
toll of the honor communities
and based on the conversation
saver today we are owned
agreement that there's a problem
we don't yet have agreement and
how to address this problem yet
I believe we all agree that
there are people whose life's
work is understanding the public
policy and reducing homes from
alcohol and we should be
listening to them thank you
thank you robert
with us.
Oh good afternoon thank you
this morning i'm rolling
see alcohol justice I oppose
this bill based on the data that
the world and the world health
organization recently released
in december staying up at space
taxes have begun weakness and
that they made cheap alcohol
even more affordable the
encouraged consumption and
drinking initiation and
particularly among young people
promoting and providing a legal
combination like that will
victimize both indigenous
analytical populations
throughout the state the new
mexico cannot afford attacks
like that thank you
for you more leave good morning
with this.
Thank you mr chair and members
of the committee this is finally
now all the meat very well by
now today I would like to speak
an opposition of hb as a former
speaker pointed out
the world's top organization
recommends against the use of
advertising taxes they can
increase drinking initiation
among you and incentivise the
purchasing of low cost alcohol
which can encourage excess of
the consumption I would consider
things in the support of HB two
one three if it were amended
such that the existing volume
based attacks stayed the same
and the percentage were
substantially increased in the
ball park ten percent as an add
the warm tax that is that point
at which we would start to see
real revenue command for these
definitely needed programs and
we would actually see drinking
decrease thank you so much
you reach the end of our public
comments at this point in time
that's come back to the
committee for questions and and
comment as well first on my
listed represent castian thank
you a vice chair
in looking at there for eyes I
see where it's a significant
issues it says our bill lacks
mechanisms that would ensure the
new research are invested in
evidence based programs and weak
implementations may reduce the
legislation potential to improve
public health outcomes as I see
here listen to discussion I
think that's
And other drugs how would you
guys implement that make it
stronger on both bills my
question mister chairman
thank you mister members of the
committee I am grateful as was
shared in public comment that
we've had extensive
conversations with the
association of counties and
their dwi affiliate chair what's
real is that they expressed
reservations themselves about
the limitations to currently
spending this money earlier
today mr chair someone was here
from from the county I represent
donate accounting and and they
talked about a concern for a
slashing programs mister chair
in the policies as the exist
today i've been able to look at
the spend down from donate
account to fy twenty three again
this comes from their local dwi
program expenditures in twenty
twenty three they spent seventy
five percent on compliance
monitoring and tracking sixteen
percent on prevention nine
percent on coordination planning
the valuation zero percent unout
patient treatment and zero
percent unalternative.
And they're also counties and
likely counting shout out to the
county where mislivington has
explained that they realized
prevention wasn't working
talking the people are working a
finger wasn't working so in lee
county they did something
profound and say instead of
talking prevention we're going
to actually move to community
wellness we're going to meet me
mexicans where they're at have
real conversations about what
they need and hopefully build
out programming and supports to
get there in the amendments we
brought in house health like
keeping that money through local
government divisions that means
there's already this annual
report about where that's been
happened and what I would
encourage all of us as committee
members is I know we have trust
in our local governments let's
figure out what else they need
to make this happen but because
in our proposal we see those
money doesn't revert that those
dollars don't revert they say
instead of spending quickly at a
matter of weeks at the end of a
fiscal year they can do long
term planning they can contract
for more treatment beds the can
invest in details facilities in
ways that weren't happening
before so we have have it money
moving through dfa lgd and I I
think there are capable of
capturing how that money is
distributed out and spends and I
think we can ask more questions
as as we get home to people that
have never been in charge of
these programs and and really
imagine differently what could
work for our family.
Mrperiod terr and a
representative i'll also add
part of the spend in our in our
in the way that we've
distributed the fund is five
hundred thousand dollars every
year over the course of five
years to go towards research and
evaluation of this tax if
research on this on the header
generity between racial ethnic
groups does not exist we as new
mexico want to provide that for
our communities
thank you mister thank you which
representative I just hope that
which ever believe choose to go
with I hope that this money that
we're trying to to appropriate
for this goes to though
in our communities I ray now we
we're working on a
treatment center last vegas and
I think whichever bill like I
say we propose I think would
their money would help my
treatment center in my community
thank you mister chair thank you
thank you represent this gonna
represent a channel
thank you mr chair and thank you
on sponsors a very entry game
proposal I am concerned that we
haven't we don't have the time
to vet it.
You know in depth conversation
mr chair
how this would work I was
sitting here thinking okay well
I was there by a twenty dollar
bottle of wine i'd like to see
how that plays out under our
current system.
You know what.
What would be the additional uh
tax I guess you would say or
payment that the consumer would
have to pay
compare that with the current
system and maybe compare it with
what you know some other
responses have put on these
bills and for me to just get my
head around the idea they're
okay so whatever tax is being
paid at the wholesale is that's
included in the price that we
see in the supermarket I don't
drink much import so I have to
think about supermarkets so
so i'm buying a bottle of wine
that wholesale tax wouldn't
exist anymore mister chair so
the price wouldn't be twenty
dollars at the at the pump at
the checkout counter
but then there'd be something
tacked on to it at the retail
level how adopt show and also
how does that relate to grt i'm
assuming artisan so we'd have
grate and then we'd have another
pain you know tax that would be
delineated a presumably on your
checkout ticket so I mean this
is all very interesting but you
know we need to be able to
misunderstand this and how it
plays out
on the ground not in theory and
not based on all kinds of I
think unhelpful comments
so
you know that's where i'm
comfortable not necessarily
against this but we really need
to know how that's going to play
out for our our residence and
our computer reason i'd love to
talk to my friends in the local
government world to find out why
you all seem to be in a minority
in terms of supporting this so
like does it help you get more
money if it does i'd like to
understand how that would work I
don't see in this proposal
mister chair
a piece of out i'm going to the
local governments the additional
tax.
So how does that going to work
so i'm very it's it's
interesting but I think we need
examples and so people can
actually visualize.
Thank you representative and let
us go to represent harbor
thank you chairman and by share
representatives it's a
great hear this bill I actually
love this bill not because it's
perfect because I think it's
still right thing to do yet
but because it's thinking
creatively trying to look at the
problem from a different.
And not to say you know
no for started here many many
moons ago you know and I assume
this ca.
A lot of garbage in our tax this
way was it that way this is this
is insane well although I spent
a few years diving deep into our
tax code and then I was like oh
that's why it's that way or oh I
see how that got in there and
and when I had that perspective
I could
okay what makes sense
rate and and here I like
chairman and and victory
represents I believe you have
kind of three goals for this
bill that i've heard and just
cracking where american but
the first is to
modify the tax in the way that
is more transparent to the end
user kind of more of a personal
basis than something that's kind
of in the background at a
distributor
this is that one of the mister
representative yes well we've
heard a lot of debate and
discussion and narrative around
her serving tax a wholesale tax
is just not that we are making
assumptions about the supply
chain and yes I think we would
that if a taxes imposed at the
whole level it trickles down to
the final product and increases
the price but we can't see with
certain ts exactly what the
taxes per serving because that's
just a a metric one of unit of
value it's not your question to
the value of that final product
and economic data shows often
those don't trickle down at that
exact price point better
increase sometimes one point
five to two percent to point
higher than the actual tax.
Yeah thank you I think I agree
with that problem and looking
for a potential solution in this
seems to be getting close to
that so like that the second
issue chairman and manage last
year we talked about it in the
last bill is making sure that we
can actually find a factive
programs and so I see here's
changes to distributions and
we're actually looking at using
all of the direct size tax
for these different programs I
love the ideas you know doing
some medicare medicaid match
you know we actually had
this was actually in the tax
package last year part of the
chance to redistribute all these
funds to dream in prevention
said that was line on a veto so
that's something we did last
year.
And in the third thing
and
a vice chair I believe if i'm
understand this rate is by
moving it from a flat dollar
amount to a percentage you're
trying to take out some of the
regressivity in this tax and
make it more progressive and I
was kind of confused by some of
the comments I heard in the
audience that you know this is
going to encourage folks to at a
low age to start.
I've heard you in this community
notes were speed quite
passionately
alcohol
your house incredible late of
impact on folks that are usually
low income and the solution is
not to raise the taxes on those
folks who are low income
so chairman in a vice you may be
just.
A chairman by stored usually the
speak to to that goal of this
legislation
mr chair representative yes
certainly as we got closer to
understanding how how alcohol
tax works that was a flag that
came up quickly and while
there's a lot of consensus and
agreement that we need more
focused and significant dollars
pointed to harms alleviation we
wanted to figure out a way we
could get there without dropping
that burden on the people new
mexico to have the least
representative by the home is a
brilliant scholar and i'm so
excited to be working with her
already and i'm in a turn to her
to talk about some of what the
research shows and why we are
selves were questioning that
idea that massive increases in
price drop consumption I wish
that were too and we would have
a solution to everything pretty
quickly but represented by the
home will speak to some of where
that research comes from
mister chair and representative
one study that was conducted in
new mexico with unam found that
seventy five percent of the
alcohol excise tax would be paid
by excessive drinkers eighteen
point nine percent of new
mexicans and twenty four point
nine percent of the tax will be
paid by non excessive drinkers
additionally other studies have
shown that the heaviest burden
falls on people who are unable
to quit and when we are in a
state where
over ten thousand people don't
have access to treatment and may
never have access to treatment
and detawks we are looking at a
putting those people books in a
dangerous situation
so the chairman member sharpers
and thank you for that
I mean that's very interesting
information as we consider how
do we want to structure or
alcohol tax right and and when
we look at this proposal and you
know going over it.
You know perhaps a little bit
more in the intro and make sure
that you know these different
issues with implementation and
such are figured out we can then
say to ourselves okay where the
pros and cons of our current
system were the pros accounts of
this system and is there one
that is ways out better than the
other right
that's what I do is just one
quick question of.
Well because you've heard
in opposition or regarding the
retail tax and having it be a
force or fist tax at the retail
side of and I get that I think
that's valid but a german
representative
galloped in mckinley right now
already imposed a retail tax on
alcohol is that correct madam
chair representative yes they do
yeah so so
chairman and not sure that might
be something that we look at
during the interest I see how
they do it
and is that something that makes
sense to implement everywhere or
not
so.
So that said all this finish
german manager by saying
we've heard a lot to do about
the evidence that increasing
taxes.
I actually got myself and that's
not true.
When you you can actually we
have data from the cdc i've also
deployed you plot tax rates for
the different states and then
you put on top of that
bench drinking or or any of the
other harms and it's a scatter
plot.
It's not a nice linear group
right
it's it's a scatter plot so you
can't you can't say that
by doubling shipwing quadrupling
blowing up this tax that we're
gonna actually have a a major
impact on consumption and i'd
argue that the driver
consumption reducing our folks
that have decided to leave the
legal system and
get it elsewhere so
that german and manager I just
want to and your members again
thank you for thinking outside
the box here.
This is a very interesting bill
and i'd like to see how it
continues to develop thank you
chairman thank you
representative
thank you sure
just to just couple of
comment in the maybe two
questions in in working with
several county in the city
farming term could you address
what this builders with the
program that we have in place
and how much money we may or may
not lose or how much money we
may or make gain.
Thank you mister terr
representative yes as we got
into the weeds here I first had
to ask a lot of questions like
who is this class they county
with more than this population
and this less than this
population it turns out it's the
city of farming ten and i've
i've learned in the weeks since
then about the pretty incredible
details programming and
sheltering that the city is
doing ask for folks navigating
alcoholism up right now since
the nineties the city of farming
ten before any of the other
dollars are distributed and sent
out to the counties they receive
a monthly distribution of twenty
thousand seven hundred and fifty
dollars they're the only
meanness party in olive new
mexico that has access to those
dollars as the statute reads its
to shelter street immediates
that's that's the statutory
language so yes in fact we have
swept that language and son once
the money gets to the dwi grant
fund son one was one of the six
counties that had a share of the
two point eight million off the
top the lion shared did go to
bernal you but other counties
were receiving smiles a smaller
amounts at about three hundred
thousand what we did in
conversations with those that
you are have contracted with to
represent your local governing
bodies is to come up with a new
way to potentially access more
resources and what we've done is
to say that moving forward this
distribution would include ten
percent to the indian affairs
department to municipality so
we're certainly considering
farming ten in the middle of
that
otherwise other municipalities
counties indian nations and
other jurisdictions to who are
serving significant populations
of indigenous new mexicans so at
ten percent even though after
school estimates are
conservative that she look at
about five million dollars so
right now what's unwanted
farmington is receiving adds up
to about two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars a year they
potentially and others would
have access to much more than
that
to to do this kind of work.
Another
reason and just consideration
that came from the association
of counties but in a leo county
has shared for instance that
their detail center called mats
that serves folks from likely
all of our communities
and eighty percent of the people
they serve in maths are need of
americans so that would be
another example so bernaly would
have their county by county
distribution based on that
updated formula but they would
also have room to go seek part
of the five million dollars for
culturally wrote relevant
programming and treatment as
with any other jurisdiction
thank you mister and
representative I think that's
critically important that those
that are successful in those
programs are harmed by any
legislation
whether it's this one or one
seventy nine
a cease that we just we just
need to make sure that that
those funds are there and when
we have tens of funds like we
have right now III would impress
I appreciate the fact that this
this bill takes those funds in
and diverted where they should
be going one of the question
mister chair
were the ten thousand people who
don't have access to this
program that
your expert witnessed
representative talked about my
actually cosponsor
representative apologize it's
like I have new been here four
months
that came from a study that was
done with the legislative health
service that you and them
contracted.
Thank you mister
but by me specifically around
the state where are they the
rural parts of the inner city
are they can you address that
for a minute
I would have to get back to you
on that and exactly where their
distributed but we would expect
that they would be concentrated
in the current places that are
receiving the detached dollars
from the ld w distribution so
that includes berlio son want
sanity reorder you are send a
ball in sacra
thank mister that's the case and
we're already providing that
that how come those folks don't
have access to that case
anybody's eligible for those
funds in city forming
more of what that research was
focused on was folks in more
rural areas who may not have
access i'm to a detail center
what we found when we were
talking to the ldwi program is a
that the funding that they
received from this distribution
cannot be used for capital
projects so if a community
wanted to build the detaw center
a sobering center or medical so
bring center they would have to
find capital and other places
and instead use these funds to
run the program think mr I would
love to have that information if
you can find it
are note was also who was
missing from those on the
details and pull off the top and
notably.
Related mortality sanity happen
to be on there and they have one
of the lowest alcohol related
mortality i'm so they were
splitting two point eight
million we're doubling that plan
to be expected
and I think it will be more
focused.
With more allowances for them to
make people decisions about how
to spend those dollars I think
thank you thank you
representative
thank you it's got a
representative scott
mister chairman first let me ask
a question of you is it possible
that we could revisit this issue
and some wish some questions on
friday i've got quite a few
questions and lots of time
you know I I think out of all
fairness to the two and a half
hours we gave to the first bill
I I think that's absolutely
appropriate but you can continue
I I i'd like to get to the floor
you know momentarily but I know.
I want to be able to come back
and give us adequate time to ask
questions mister terman if i'll
have that opportunity on friday
out of her at this point very
well okay
reserve borrow did you want to
defer to friday and we can roll
this until friday
mister chair members I think i'd
like to I have
quick question and I think I
probably will have additional
questions on friday
before I ask my question and
i'll try to make it quick that I
nothing seems to be quick this
morning.
I think we've heard a lot of
beginning that you have
to see mr can I just recognize
julie back of the county manager
i'm sorry my mike was in on what
we're gonna do is when a rollist
off friday and will begin with
the questions from represents
god that will go to you
and then that way we can get
down the floor and continue the
work of the legislature so I
