Present.
Representative Strickler
Your.
Chairman Martinez.
And I'm here we have a quorum.
All right.
Good morning members Hey good
morning good morning members of
the audience
welcome to house taxation and
revenue committee we are in the
home stretch of what feels like
a very short session.
For some odd reason I don't know
why state that.
You just feel short I'm sure it
felt long for some of the
specials of you that are there
in person we have a few Senate
bills today we will not be doing
house bill two eighty five
that's our capital outlay bill
it is not quite ready yet you it
was still improving as of
yesterday up in council service
so we should have it probably
today at some point which means
we might be complaining briefly
this weekend to to tackle that
bill
or we might wait until Monday we
we have made that decision yet
but will I'll be in touch with
Representative Harper on any
decision that we make so we're
not gonna do that bill today
however we do have a number of
stand it builds that we we need
to get through and those are
sent a bill to eighteen percent
Senator Shendo Senate bill
ninety nine Senator o'neill
Senate bill forty nine Senator
what's and Senate bill twenty
nine senators souls
With that
is.
Chairman chin though in the
audience.
Chairman I am hearing this bill
on the floor is not there I
think we can bring in the
secretary and we can presented.
Okay that that works out
Secretary Schardin Clarke good
morning long time no see.
And I just promoted her so she
should be popping up here at any
point.
There she is good morning
secretary Schardin Clarke.
Good morning chairman and
members of the committee nice to
see you again.
What is it so twelve hours
later.
We meet again in all things
taxes.
I don't see Senator Shendo so if
you don't mind percent Harper
and secretary Schardin Clarke
why don't you take it away.
Awesome
So.
Chairman and committee members.
Senate Bill at two eighteen what
it really just to boil it down.
As simple as possible.
as part of house bill six.
We adopted a combined reporting
system for the state of New
Mexico and and if folks are
really interested this early
morning I can talk about what
combined reporting it's.
about us but essentially it is a
way for a business that is
located in multiple states not
just New Mexico.
It's a way that we.
Look at all of the business
that's going on.
For businesses that have
multiple groups within that
business the way that we kind of
tie all that together.
And look at what are they going
to what what are we going to
Determined will be the the
income amounts that is taxable
in New Mexico.
and sometimes if you don't have
a combined reporting system
businesses can shift income to
different groups and and kind of
hide that income.
and then there's arguments on
both sides of that question is
it really hiding or is it really
well
There are not but.
The.
It really doesn't matter New
Mexico decided in house bill six
we're gonna drive combined
reporting system.
And
That is part of that we had some
other language in our statutes
that didn't quite align with the
combined reporting system is
still out for folks to.
select how they wanted to
report.
And so this bill is really just
a clean up of that to.
Make it clear in our statutes
that there there is no more
selection process that it is.
Mandatory combine.
And I guess I turned over to
that the secretary if you have
anything you'd like to add and
and and secretary before before
you go I see chairman shin
though is here and I want to
give him an opportunity briefly
Senator Shendo chairman gentle
good morning can you hear me.
I can't hear you okay you are I
can hear you know and I can see
you to running Harper took the
words right out of my mouth.
Yes hi this is the whole thing I
was having trouble but I could
hear so anyway to I think we'll
defer to the the secretary for
any any an additional comments
but this is as as representative
of our processes to claim a bill
from house bill six that was
passed in twenty nineteen and
we're just fixing it so that
people don't have a option to
choose.
Very well thank you senator
secretary please go ahead thank
you Mr chairman and members of
the committee I don't think
there's much more to say after
Representative Harper and
senator Shendo have have
explained it so well so I'll
just stand for questions
excellent thank you let's go to
the audience anyone in support
of Senate bill two eighteen.
You know I it's always funny
when these of these bills come
up there's not a hundred people
wait wanted to speak their
piece.
Any opposition are Harper and I
was trying to.
All our families our friends
additional distances call in
right someone someone.
Thank Richard Anklam would at
least try then
Senator his.
Right.
Maybe we can get the Harper kids
to each call in.
Thank you mom and dad thirty
speak their piece.
All right members of the
committee.
I believe sure mention those
gonna get off easy.
Through.
I'm happy to make the motion
when you're ready all right by
your Chandler.
I move a do pass on Senate bill
to eighteen.
Thank you Mr chair we have a due
pass from by your Chandler and
the second was that
Representative role metal.
Excellent.
is their opposition to the
motion.
Then we gotta get tougher here.
All right well with that it is
no no no this is this is a good
tag team real hard R. arbors my
constituent in my district so
Appropriation though okay.
All right now I know what to do.
All right thank you guys thank
you Sturman Shendo have a great
rest of your day thank you thank
you members of the committee yes
Sir.
members let's go next to.
Senate bill ninety nine.
This is actually my senator
Senator o'neill.
Senator o'neill are you on the
line.
And I'm not caring this bill so
can present Mr chair I did
present this bill in the
previous committee and the I I'm
happy to have my test if the
sponsors are not here John
Chavis is the expert on this
bill it's it's.
Gadget okay let me let me just
let me just send a quick text
and Elaine well well I do that
you can get John Travis in.
But that that might be the way
we go observe Romero if you
wouldn't mind putting it on.
that would be helpful.
It is given a one minute.
Good morning Mr Chavis how are
you.
Very good thank you.
Representative Romero what when
you go ahead and begin and
hopefully Senator o'neill will
join us at some point okay great
thank you Mr chair this bills
Senate bill ninety nine as
amended essentially just raises
the.
Threshold for tax exempt audits
to a modern day threshold that
doesn't basically between those
who are currently under two
hundred fifty thousand are now
subject to or two hundred fifty
thousand dollars and more are
subject to an audit we're
basically extending that price
take up to seven hundred two
thousand dollars before
triggering a nonprofit audit
just for you know the due
diligence that we require and I
will defer to our expert John
Chavis to describe what we're
doing this now.
Thank you Representative Mr chat
is go ahead.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you for
hearing this bill
this bill has been brought about
because of the need which is
really come about over several
years for nonprofits to have
some ease in a.
Regulation restrictions on a
product requirements
what happened is a group of
interested individuals board
members of these nonprofits
mostly CPA's got together and up
having recognized over the
number of years and now because
of the pandemic I just come more
to the forefront that the
current level requirement it's
too low
This group of interested parties
OQO and hand eating's with the
AG's office attorney general's
office and with the the state
auditor's office
through those discussions which
also included the CPCB ocal CPA
society
the resolution came about with
through to propose to to raise
the level of the audit from five
hundred thousand dollars for all
nonprofits to seven hundred
fifty and for those non profits
that
provide funding for state
agencies to fifty to seven
hundred and fifty
What questions that were asked
of us was is there has there
been any systematic fraud at
those levels.
and Bages Office determined that
there was not of the state
auditor's office as not recall
anything although it's not
directly under their purview
eighties office informed but
just some statistics some of
which were that the out of fifty
five hundred nonprofits eight
oversee two hundred of them
would be affected by this
provision
yeah intent is that these
nonprofits General at these
levels do not have a lot of
bottom line and therefore an
audit that might cost from ten
to twenty five thousand dollars
those funds would be able to
utilize to emission.
Thank you Mr.
Senator o'neill is here good
morning center o'neill.
Please proceed with the any
point you'd like to make.
Basically my guy my favorite one
I mean I shouldn't say this but
done Chavis is awesome I love
Senate district thirteen but yes
so this is as as one who as
yourself Mr Chairman is been
real involved with.
Nonprofits you know these small
charities.
You know an audit can cost like
ten grand fifteen grand you know
and then you're just trying to
scrape by with your donation so
I'm so sorry John.
Chavis personally with the idea
of this bill and then we got up
the auditor's office on board
the AG's office and most
importantly the CPA's themselves
so I just I'm really excited
about this bill to me it's it's
a commonsense provision and I
mean common sense legislation
and it really really will help
those folks out there with you
with small children you know
that our involvement and not the
nonprofit sector really help
meet their bottom line so that's
that's all I've got Mr chair.
Thank you thank you senator
o'neill let's go to the audience
and if you have comments to make
on this bill Senate bill ninety
nine please raise your hand.
We will call on you we have a
minute thirty second clock but I
don't think we're gonna.
I don't think we're gonna get.
Droves of public comment on this
one either.
Well good practice for when
you're in front of Judiciary
then that's cool that then it
will give we give you two
minutes and Judiciary after
night so
all I get is a Senator is that
you need to do sherry is is nice
to us as we are to the senators
our cat not dealing noted guy
throughout.
All right we got one public
commenter
so for on offense please go
ahead good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Secora Nefish New I am the
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico thrives the state
nonprofit association and we
stand in strong support of
Senate bill ninety nine and we
thank the sponsors for bringing
this forward.
Thank you for being here anyone
else's supports.
Anyone in opposition.
Okay I don't see any civil
go back to committee members of
committee questions from the
committee.
Representative Harper.
You chairman Senator good to see
you this morning when I grow.
So what is the.
A couple questions.
So my understanding is.
If I'm wrong the the current
threshold.
Is for nonprofit tourist it's
not the.
Gross receipts are nonprofits
it's a certain amount of
taxpayer dollars it's not profit
receives Mr threshold right now
to trigger having to send
information to the.
State auditor
in my understanding that
correctly.
John you can chime in but yes
that's basically as I understand
it the current press so it's two
hundred and fifty thousand so
we're up this legislation would
raise that mandatory requirement
up to seven hundred and fifty
thousand is that correct John.
Mr chairman and the
Representative yes that is
correct I wouldn't want clarity
when you said tax tax payer
funded money the only.
Hey funded money Representative
Harper that I'm aware of in the
legislation is federal and the
federal requirement it for those
nonprofits that receive federal
funding is to have an audit if
you receive seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars with the
federal funding which is the
same amendment as we're
proposing.
Okay
yeah that that's helpful I'm you
know I'm looking at the the
language right now this looks
like it's in section two.
paragraph C.
we're talking about.
yeah no this.
Right now it's two hundred fifty
thousand dollars
Yes I'm gonna chair organization
that receives total revenue in
excess and so I just try to
understand is this.
Total revenue so so for example
nonprofit that.
doesn't receive any
state or federal funding
they've just got donations are
or you know I've got to know
some way of generating revenue
it does that threshold apply to
that or or is this threshold
applied just to federal or state
dollars.
John did you want to answer that
it's it's but.
Yeah.
Mr Mr Chairman representative
yes and in the center on million
you're correct it implies to
both which is that one of the
galaxies about the current limit
some of the some of the yes I
would say testimony some of the
comments that we we see where
this medication should only
apply to charitable
contributions because that is
really what these are the
attorney general's office is
trying to to get a handle on is
that the contributions are these
people are not being taking
advantage of all the only twenty
six states have an audit
requirement and of all the
states around us none of them
have an audit requirement at all
what general contributions
but in short yes you're correct
at all revenues.
Chairman of the and senator and
and it shows that you that that
helps
And.
But I think it.
What what you said Mister Travis
chairman Mr Chavis I think it
makes sense that we do have
Some accountability just in case
you know the trouble
contributions we don't want
folks to be making donations and
then having those.
Well
we we for stories and all so I I
appreciate that we do have this.
Audit requirement and my next
question you may have answered
already.
I was curious why we're going
from two fifty to seven fifty
thousand dollars that seems like
a really big inflation
adjustment
but we're my correct in assuming
that we're just now aligning
what's the the federal
requirement.
Mr chairman and Representative
yes and also you know the
numbers during that testimony
for this bill you know we got
read some input from nonprofit
same will can we raise it even
up to a million and it's like no
we're not doing that we wanted
to be in line with this attorney
general's office and of course
they still have the right if
they sense something fishy with
the with the nonprofit they have
every right and and and
responsibility to to follow up
so it's just for about two
hundred of these you know
relatively small charities I
just know that so personally
because our budget back a long
time ago when I was executive
director Dismas House our budget
was literally two hundred fifty
thousand a year it was and I
just I just know this terrain
really well and that was some
well you know that's just a ten
thousand dollar fifteen thousand
dollar expense.
this is really really hits on
the bottom line and again the
this was a terrible organization
numbers and tirelessly it's a
I want to agree and and your
tireless depended upon
independent donations and so
forth terrible donations so so
this when Mr Chavis person with
the idea for this bill I was
right there with him but but to
answer your question at seven a
lot of thought is going into
that jump.
But I'm I love the fact that it
aligns with the federal
government seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars requirement.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator so
I got a couple other questions
then thank you for that.
so do we know how many
non profits that are currently
subject to this audit rule.
Would no longer be subject in in
New Mexico.
Well I mentioned I'd sent two
hundred I John what it what it
do you have that any more
clarity on that about two
hundred.
Yes Mr chair representative and
that is about the number of it
and the numbers we are getting
our from the attorney general's
office it was the inflection
wasted every years but it ranges
between a hundred and eighty to
two twenty two hundred to get
them.
I think chairman Senator and Mr
Jones thank you and we know
what's the total number of
registered nonprofits that we
have the state right now.
I don't know that John do you
know that.
According to the attorney
general's office does that have
on it requirements those are the
only ones that they provided
with for us were up fifty five
hundred.
Right so chairman and senator
and Mr was thank you that that
kind of put some perspective on
this right that.
I guess we don't know about the
nonprofits that less than TIRS
fifty thousand but there's
roughly fifty five hundred
above.
The but our fifty thousand
dollars threshold and by going
up to seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars we would lose
about two hundred so would be
going to five hundred and I'm
sorry fifty three hundred that
was to require
audit.
and and that I appreciate that
because my I think my.
My my last question chairman
Senator is you know if if we.
You know we agree that there
should be not a requirement we
agree that we should be making
sure that these nonprofits are
taking advantage of folks that
are you know donating giving.
for a particular because.
Why why would we not
audit all non profits why we
putting up a dollar threshold.
Mr Chairman us Representative
you know that's a good question
and I think it's just a you know
as policy makers we come up with
these barometers I just know
that you know if you're a fifty
thousand dollar annual charity
then you know that's that's
really different than a than a
five hundred thousand dollar
charity I just think again a lot
of these.
And certainly the the attorney
general's office doesn't want an
undue burden on there and and of
course to start
this is kind of like a logical
to me just that's just the
logical thing to number that two
hundred fifty thousand and you
and our resident to seven
hundred fifty thousand
your bid again that's like a
policy decision is made so and
John did you want to weigh in on
that.
just just the.
Mr chairman and Representative
Harper just away in up that the
Attorney General.
the amendment that's on that
even though the the program
proposal estimated to seven
hundred fifty thousand there and
then it says that if there's any
complaints it basically says
that there's any complaints to
the serious nature that they can
still order an audit requirement
now that is goes without saying
but they wanted in in the in the
legislation just to make it
clear that Kobe going without
saying they could do that and
they do it on complains that
they received or any level of
revenues.
Are nonprofit.
The chairman and and and senator
Mr Chavis I.
Yeah I guess I was looking for
more like
Are you know a burden on the
nonprofit a burden on the
attorney general's office it
sounds like some of that is
there but I would hope that no
matter what nonprofit you're
you're running that you've.
Taking meticulous
notes and records of your
donations and your expenses and
and that it would not be a big
deal to.
Open that up
to the attorney general's office
but.
But if you want to.
Providing more clarity on that
are.
I think of it again Mr chair and
representative I just for some
of these subjects when you live
the experience it's just not
really well I mean I would
report to my board every month
on my board was that typical
nonprofit board their job is to
make as financial stewardship
and so we would welcome I mean
if anybody had any questions
about anything like Sir but it
but that requirements to do an
audit you know because actually
in my case to our budget as we
expanded and we're really
establishing ourselves in New
Mexico are budget went from two
hundred fifty thousand up to I
think to close to four hundred
thousand so it is just it just
to be saddled with that
requirement I mean I just think
if we talk about you know smart
government smart policies the
oversight is there there's an
issue yeah by all means this
this legislation you know
demands that the AG's office
follow up on that but it's I
don't think it's you know.
Anyway that's just those are my
thoughts to decide between the
oversight is there and just as.
And so.
So John did you want to mention
that mention anything.
And yes yes
just that
the question about brought it
communities levels get come up
and there hadn't been any any
more notable I just occurring at
that level
the
So that I guess the major point.
Okay chairman Jerry Mr shows
thank you for that I'll say
that.
I know that there obviously is.
This is the only level of
oversight right so.
You mentioned.
Senator that there's a board
and.
and then also you know when they
file their their taxes at the
state and federal level no
there's opportunities for audit
there.
so so there are other levels of
oversight and here to saying
that we don't need to have a
mandatory.
E. G. audit every year as well
in my characterizing that
correctly yes you are Mr chair
representative that's a good
characterization.
All right.
Chairman of the Senator
mischievous thank you.
Thank you thank you thank you
thank you Representative Harper
yes Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
and Mister chair if it's just a
couple of questions.
If I could.
Do any of these organizations
that will no longer be subject
to audit have contracts to
provide goods and services to
the state.
John thank you Representative Mr
chair John did you want to
answer that.
Yes Mr chair and Representative
and now I'm I don't know the
only information we had on the
two hundred was the amount of of
of a revenues at the at.
So.
Mr chair Senator Mr chairman we
don't we don't know whether
these folks or doing business
with the state at two hundred
fifty to seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars gross revenue
level.
Mister chair Mister chair of
wrap you know.
Out of those two hundred you
know I would say just from my
experience with in the nonprofit
sector of and most most most of
these organizations would not
but I mean it's hard to come up
with it with us a number for
that but again we're talking
about you know the a mandatory
requirement for an audit so so
you know I I'm I'm just saying
that the basically it's hard to
pin that down how many of those
charities would have contracts
with the state and so forth but
I just I would you know for me
anecdotally it's a small
minority honestly that that
would be my sentiment you know
you've got arts related
charities you've got some
cherries are totally volunteer
you know they're just raising
money just to pay for the
services they provide you know
to the community like clothing
for homeless people I mean it
it's quite a range of of
organizations that are you know.
Actually.
Actually you know that the head
of the the nonprofit
organization she might be able
to to be a little more specific
on that if she wanted to weigh
in
But either way it's it's it's
just it's not a number that that
either John or I could come up
with the Jackley.
One may I say something yes.
Go ahead Mr Chavis one of our
group members is state auditor.
That we did something with the
state auditor Cologne and his
office and he and his legal team
involved in this
they can bring up any.
Ones that they saw that they can
bring up anything regarding
state contracts if that if
that's where the question is
leading to a problem with the
state contracting
in fact the building and then
further in support of the bill
then the AG's office did so but
I don't have the specific
statistics.
Thank you for those censorship
Mr chair Senator and Mr chair
was just one more.
Okay and.
That nonprofit seem to have.
fairly significant influence in
the legislature that is we've
seen of.
Them acting as expert witnesses
helping to draft legislation.
And could you.
Address.
The transparency question.
The.
As a consequence of this
legislation would there be any
issues arise in that regard.
Thank you Representative and and
chairman John did you want to
take a stab at that.
And Mr chair representative
Scott
an audit generally would not
according to generate count
counting sensible generally
would not address that other
than to insure that the
nonprofit is complying with its
final one seat three or or
whatever the federal R. S. co
that it was substantiated under
and usually those prohibits
substantial lobbying in lobbying
costs
to influence but in general
other than that an audit would
not be.
you
Would not be any relevant to to
that.
Mister chairman Senator Mr chair
of the so.
We were
lobbying expenses fall out in
that to balance sheet thank you
Representative you know there's
a big distinction between a five
oh one see three and a five oh
one C. for in a lot of the
organizations you're talking
about five oh one C. force and
they're the reporting
requirements are totally
different they're not we're not
a charity delivering that's
involved services to homeless
folks are incarcerated folks
that are just getting out of
prison it's you know they're
hoping is to advocate and they
have a whole other world of of
like eligibility requirements
transparency so what we're
talking about here is basically
your small charities that are
across the state rural and urban
and that are you know just doing
good work and and just want to
want to minimize the mandatory
requirement from the AG's office
said if that helps at all.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator that's all the questions
I have.
Representative Scott
Representative Strickler.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you.
Senator are you know I'm issue
on the basketball court at you
know I'll let me give you an
elbow every chance I can get and
Right Representative you can
give them a couple elbows right
now.
As I wrote the other thank you
thank you back and not only do
pretty good job you get pretty
bony elbows as I recall no no.
Beard by the way I guess well
you know this is my protest bear
for all this government shut
down.
Listen
You know I have a small business
and my economic services really.
The.
They Cooper may.
I mean for me I'm really small
and my CPA my bookkeepers
maintenance it's a real
challenge is real it's real big
expense so.
in the auditing requirement
aside.
It and and maybe Mr chair was
gonna help us on this.
You know your disability
bookkeeping accounting services
have to be pretty pretty pretty
costly exactly
yeah would it be around the same
amount that ten thousand fifty
thousand a year maybe or maybe
not that much Mr chair
Representative not that much I
mean an audit is very thorough
as you know
expensive proposition again just
thanks very G.R.T.  has routine
you know Financial I remember we
would get a volunteer CPA
somebody like Mr Chavis is so
involved in the community as
well on the to do that sort of a
like a formal audit
so you have by all means in the
as you know Representative the
terrible world is because I know
you're involved with that and to
is so different than business I
mean it's just like it's it's a
it's just has its own logic and
and kind of reasoning in New
protocols and so forth but
certainly everybody that I've
ever been in any of the boards
I've been involved with at the
you know being supervised by
just take it very seriously and
and you know you always have a
treasurer and and you know you
do your monthly report and its
it's yeah that's what that's
what the board is there it's
kind of like the way we are
responsible for the budget in
the state of New Mexico I mean
that's what the these boards are
responsible for overseeing the
budget of the small charities
but anyway that's John did you
want to.
He's trying to get the kind of
feel for your your retained
accounting services and maybe
maybe you know at.
Mister chair Mister are you the
same gentleman that testified on
the liquor licensing house bill
two fifty five.
Mr chairman of the
Representative Strickler yes I
am Google you know I love here
your your testimony there
Hope to meet you someday so of a
anyone well that's all I have I
I just I think this is probably
the right way to go to match up
with the federal.
Requirements.
And the.
yeah I'm trying to cut my cut
down on my just retain
accounting services and board.
It is it's the CPA's are
expensive it's just pitiful how
much they charge
no friends Mr Chavis a and you
guys to get gas do you guys do a
good job really appreciate.
what you guys do and I took
accounting in college and it ate
my lunch so I I admire you
counts and and Jason Harper is a
pretty good accounting it is all
right so that's all I have
gentleman are at risk it is say
is center CNX there when we get
that trophy back okay I'll let
it know why buddy No Way.
I think it was a Strickler
I don't see any other hands up
Mr Chairman Representative
Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
secretary Romero welcome to
taxed just wanna give a shout
out as well to.
Mr Travis he was so persuasive a
Mr Chairman representative
stricter that we remove many of
the deductions from house bill
two fifty five thank you Mr
chairman our.
That's.
You know I've got to say.
With time and you know the last
few days of the session.
We get more relaxed and fun here
and.
Collegial.
And then every afternoon I go to
the other side of like.
So Representative a center
o'neill thank you for for for
the bill I don't I don't have
questions I I the as you know
I've I'm involved in non profits
for a good chunk of my career.
And I I have a have a love hate
relationship with your bill
right now.
My doctor.
I I like we try to do I and I
think you're correct and and I
think you're lying in a way with
the Feds that just make sense.
I'm gonna give you an example
you know we had a we've had this
the these pushes to to to to fix
the gross receipts tax code in
we nonprofits are are big part
of that and
you know I think the last time
there was a bill to to to deal
with your tea exemptions
deductions and credits.
we had everybody and everybody
and everybody's this come out
and tell us how terrible it was
for them including the nonprofit
world and myself in the
nonprofit world I I took the
position that if you cannot
afford to pay G. R. T. is a
nonprofit that maybe shouldn't
be in the nonprofit business
rate
and I also take the position
that you can't afford the audit
you know that's to me that's
just the cost of doing business
right and in many settlement in
most cases you can roll that
into here.
your requests or whatever right
you you always right into your
requests that overhead to help
you pay the light bill pay the
bookkeeping services you know
pay the plumber whenever you
need them to come out and
Pieratt it.
Having said that having said
that.
I know I know that where you're
coming from is from
from a different place right and
I'm thinking for example a lot
of these mutual aid societies
that are popping up all across
the country.
Universe coming together in a
way to find.
You know initially at the
beginning the pandemic to
provide.
You know groceries for the
elderly neighbors perhaps you
know I did a little bit of that
you know on my own time for some
of my neighbors that were
elderly and and you know we just
didn't know enough about this
virus so I said you stay home
give me a list I'll go shop for
you you know
and so for those types of
organizations you know for for
those organizations are working
really really.
MassRoots level you know
providing that warm meal to a
homeless family
you know fighting that very
basic transactional service
you know you're you're you're
right it doesn't make sense to
put those folks through this
ringer that is designed for you
know established agencies you
know agencies that that
that are well rooted and that
are you socially a business I
mean that let's not forget
nonprofit all it needs is here
the type of corporation you
incorporate as as that.
you know you still have to make
you pay roll you know you still
have to do everything that a
traditional business has to do.
So you know.
With that in mind I I think that
your bill really does do that it
really does
address that added expense in
your right it is expensive
You know to to conduct these
annual audit to do takes a long
time
you know these these good folks
on the other side of the audit
are professionals in their own
right and they're doing their
due diligence and and so it's
expensive on purpose I mean it
needs to be so so I I like that
you thought that out in the you
provided some space with the
dollar amount threshold I mean I
think that's probably fair you
know what you have in there so
even though I'm I'm part of me
is sort of like
is that it is do some things but
I also understand that a lot of
non profits are you know they're
not here be it you know they're
not you United ways they're not
your Roadrunner wrote Roadrunner
food banks they are perhaps a
couple of neighbors who are
delivering groceries for the
elderly neighbors.
And for them doesn't make sense
to have to raise ten thousand
dollars for the thousand dollars
for for not every year probably
not so with that
oh one last point okay shameless
plug in how to seventy eight
would provide for
your deduction for accounting
and bookkeeping services.
So that will make
those services a lot more
affordable for both nonprofit
and for profit businesses I
like.
Where is that bill right now I
believe it's in terms tax at
this okay aren't okay that's a
good heads up.
Get a long list of other.
You've got my cell number.
So with that with that members
of the committee.
Mr chair I'm overdue pass on
as second that Mr chair.
We have a due pass on Senate
bill ninety nine as amended by
by your Chandler seconded by
Representative Romero.
Elaine please call the roll.
Speaker.
She.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative Maestas.
Yes please.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Romero yes
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Stansbury yes.
Representative Strickler.
Throw you a bone yes.
Representative covenant.
Speaker it costs.
Thank.
Yes sorry about that.
Chairman Martinez yes.
We have eleven primitive zero
negative.
Okay thank you thank you so much
Mister chair members of the
committee good to see you be is
them and hear your voices thank.
Thank you appreciate it have a
have a good resolution thank you
thank you thank you.
All right let's go to Senator
Woods Representative Crowder
and company.
Good morning senator Roberts
good morning Sir how are you
this morning.
We're doing just fine thank you
Representative Crowder good
morning.
Your muted.
I I sound better that way good
morning Mr chairman.
Good morning to both of you is
there anyone else you want me to
bring into the zone.
Yes I have a.
Mr Mike Morse the more of
Clovis.
Got it anyone else Mr John Ryan.
he is
A uh supporter of this expert
witness so there's.
All right.
Looks like we've got the both in
here good morning Mr more.
Good morning Mr chairman it's
great to be with you.
Likewise thank you I think we've
got everybody senator and
representative why don't you
take it away Senator forty nine
of it also Mr chairman if you
could see if.
Senator Ron Griggs is in the
audience I would he's also one
of my experts I'm sorry we've
got he should be here any minute
there yes good morning.
Senator Griggs.
Take it away Senator Woods okay
thank you very much Mr chairman
State senator stuff Monex was
also a sponsoring this bill and
I want to recognize your I don't
I should ask you she was in this
but the you might look real
quickly institutions there L.
take a quick look here I don't
see her on here Senator okay
what's she is a she's also a
supporter of this and you know
we have several people that are
in the house that are supporters
of this but I just wanted to to
let everybody know and noticed
recognize everybody Mr Chairman
I'm here today on Senate bill
forty nine.
Of.
What this does.
By changing the current law it
allows municipalities of any
size to provide financial
assistance to be tell Ben this
is using their own funds now
they still can't use state money
to do this.
And currently the population is
capped at thirty five thousand
so those under thirty five
thousand can currently do this
we're taking the cap off all
together.
It also allows the state to
provide financial assistance to
retail businesses located and
the unincorporated portion of
the county and removes the
restriction that state funds all
it can be used for a project
that is more than ten miles from
the nearest municipality what
the population of more than
fifteen thousand.
It also allows for their
rehabilitation about remodeling
of the bill.
It's not just the construction
as in the current law.
And it can only be used by a
qualified indicate that pretty
much explains it Mr chair if I
get the ask your Mr Mike Morse
could sail a word or two
certainly thank you senator and
welcome again more Morris.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning committee member states
the with you Senator was thank
you for your work on this and
inviting me along today once
again.
Committee members as Senator was
explaining this bill would
Expand the allowable uses of the
local leader to include
supporting retail as economic
developments and on when I think
about it both expansion as well
as recruitment and committee
members Mr chairman I know
retail is a significant economic
driver in New Mexico city's
provides jobs generates gross
receipts tax and important to
remember especially in our in
our rural communities
communities our retail offering
is a major factor in our quality
of life for the for the
citizens.
And I you're probably also aware
that there are many things
changing and and and all the
with retail and in particularly
in rural communities retail is
struggling in the sense that the
offering is streaking
The more I'm I'm asking for for
some help I have I think that we
need tools with which to address
those holes and gaps there being
left in our in our local
economies.
In in our case in Clovis there
are hundreds of millions of
dollars that we're hemorrhaging
and those dollars many of them
are going to you know not only
outside the community but
outside the state and I think
that's a problem a problem where
the the local government taking
a look at addressing but just
Senator Woods explained the
though the current statute that
ties our hands in the community
our size and
I I'm I'm asking and and in this
bill asks for local decision
making ability regarding the
local leader and how to use I
think that it would have your
support on this we have this
bill it really but city's Mexico
are better positioned to it that
and and respond to the changing
needs of our local economies and
so.
I'm asking for your help here
I'm asking for support Senate
bill forty nine I believe good
for for cities that we could be
good for our state this is going
to be more money at home
it's getting inspiring
encouraging growth in our
communities instead address
quality of life concerns and
issues in in our communities in
particular rule it's and I will
with that I
I'm happy to try and answer any
questions that you may have me
as a more and Mr chairman and
committee members I appreciate
on this morning.
Thank you Mr more Representative
Crowder or Senator Griggs do you
have anything to add.
Thank you Mr chairman
you know the more mentioned that
is hands have been tied and I
agree with that it's it's
difficult.
In the smaller study to to
retain and in attract new
business I give the example in
the other committee to Clovis in
the past.
Twelve months lost our dealers.
The we're only six Masser Texas
state line of the rules in New
Mexico were quite different than
they were in Texas and
State so we we lost that store
we also lost a store called the
children's place there's a small
color for children in the mall.
We're down to where the only
place you can buy children
calling our house is in our
Walmart store and and that was a
impactful we lost the state your
it was a store that came into
the mall that they replaced our
belts and they fold out and so
we we need.
To provide our mayors with with
the tools they need to retain
and and
A tractor business and
Personally I think this is a
good tool in a good bill and I
appreciate the more coming up
with this idea many many months
ago and and work with Senator
which to get to this point.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative Senator
Griggs thank you Mr chairman and
I I appreciate you let me
speak just real quickly I want
to give you an example of a of a
real life situation in my city
of Alamogordo back when I was
mayor there myself.
Alamogordo head to grocery
stores at that time one of them
was Walmart and the other one
was a local school people were
clamoring for more places to buy
groceries.
One of the regional change came
to Alamogordo and considered
moving Alamogordo at that time.
They
They were looking they were hard
look and they asked me to talk
to them about what opportunities
we had the we get all for them
to come to to Alamogordo we sat
down and we talked and they said
you know we're looking at
expanding throughout New Mexico
Texas and Louisiana and every
place in Texas every place in
Louisiana has the opportunity to
give us property tax rebates
other thanks what could
Alamogordo.
My aunt who was Alamogordo could
not offer any.
So what that did is it pushed
Alamogordo down that list not
that they were still interested
but these other guys were
helping him out show Alamogordo
went down the list well in order
to take things in its own hands
and did some other staff which
ultimately allowed us to give
them a little bit of assistance
to come to town and they weren't
interested Mr chair members of
the committee they weren't
interested in lodge they were
just interested in a little
while that we wanted them to be
there so once that happened we
were able to bring the store
there but we could have had on
their two years or three years
earlier had we been able to
utilize leader in some way shape
or form so it's important to
some of these small communities
to have that option and so
Mister chairman and members of
the committee that's what what I
would tell you the local
governments they know what they
need and if we can help them
utilize their resources to do
what they need I think that she
is critical and I I appreciate
the committee listen and I hope
the committee moved the bill
for.
Thank you Senator Mr Ryan
anything to add.
No Mr chairman I I I think these
here these are local decisions
and and its trust in the local
governments to do the right
thing and
I I I think that it's it's more
appropriate to talk about that
the only here in in the event
that there's any questions on
how the bill got put together
and and some of the technical
aspects of it thank you Mr great
thank you Mr Ryan and go to the
audience audience members if
you're here in support of Senate
bill forty nine please raise
your hands.
Jason Espinoza good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with New
Mexico eight PM which is the
statewide economic development
association we stand in strong
support of Senate bill forty
nine local direct direction of
local leader funds will give
local communities the
flexibility to adapt to the
current economic climate in
foster investment well that that
will enhance economic recovery.
Only the increased flexibility
in expanding their own locally a
dollars will allow local
governments to better address
the economic development needs
of their own community including
enhancing the quality of life
for their residents and so we
stand in strong support thank
you Mr chair thank you Mr
speaker also anyone else's
report Senate bill forty nine.
How about anyone okay there's
one more AJ Ford go ahead.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee aged forty of the
as fully at this bill I really
do appreciate more Morris they
they started this process to the
league resolution and also
process.
Six to nine months ago.
This is been vetted by the
municipal league.
And as all the presenters have
said this is another white one.
You know we don't know what the
future holds but we know with
hold harmless reductions going
forward every year.
We we need more like what's
right house bill six came up in
an earlier bills that was a
major lifeline that you gave all
municipalities two years ago
right internet distribution will
start July one.
We'll start getting those
payments September.
Right you did something two
years ago that's going to help
us starting in July this is
another one of those bills that
we're going to be able to use as
another tool in the toolbox to
make sure we can job retention
and economic development in a
rural communities so that Mr
chair members of the committee
we we strongly support this bill
and thank the sponsors.
Thank you for being with us
anyone else's support Senate
bill forty nine.
Anyone in opposition to Senate
bill forty nine.
Right will go to the committee
first on the list Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you
Sanchez
You know for me tennis is
struggle as well.
we lost Sears and Kmart
Annabel's you know I guess a
state you know was our
successor.
A lot of lot of local
restaurants are shut down and
give me the population threshold
and your bill I I'm not real
clear about it
I know y'all y'all done some
amendments on who's eligible for
this this program.
Mr chairman and and
Representative Strickler.
Representative right now as a
law reach today.
Anything over thirty five
thousand can't use retail for
repair.
What we're doing is taking out
that population cap.
And so there's no cap
whatsoever.
So one can use their.
Locally raised tax monies that
is don't that is designated as
economic development money for
retail.
Thank you thank you Sir was that
that really makes me feel better
because we you know are are
working in our State Farm has
forty five thousand and so
currently we're not eligible so
this this to us now make is to
eligible so I appreciate that
very much and
Thank you.
Thank you Representative
Strickler.
Harper.
Thank you chairman senators
representatives
more great to see you all here
this morning.
So I have a couple questions
Those are off was first.
Does this bill.
change.
The any aspects of the state
portion of Ouidah requirements.
And your legislation.
No I don't think it changes
anything in the state portion of
the report which.
Right so chairman Senator thank
you so this is limited to local
use of leader local dollars.
chairman and and senator how how
do.
Local.
governments raise funds for for
Lita.
For locally to Mr chairman and
and Representative Harper if you
would allow me to read.
Out of the the law this is a out
of the chapter five words talks
about municipalities and
counties this particular part is
I she and for section subsection
do.
It says in order to expand money
for economic development fund
for arts culture district
purposes cultural facilities are
ready to open this the governor
and body of municipality or a
county that has imposed admin
this bow our county local option
infrastructure gross receipts
tax for furthering or in in game
economic development plans and
projects as defined in the local
economic development act our
projects as defined in the state
economic development finance act
by this is the important part by
referendum of the majority of
the voters voting on the
question approving the
ordinance.
Imposing the municipal or county
infrastructure gross receipts
tax before July first twenty
thirteen shall be required to
enter Dr resolution the
resolution should call for the
lection to approve the arts
culture districts as a
qualifying purpose and culture
facilities or retail businesses
as a qualifying Energy before
any revenue generated by the
agency for our county local
option gross receipts tax for
furthering or implementing
economic development plans and
projects as defined in the local
economic development act our
projects Mr funding the state
economic balance finance that
can be expanded from the
economic development fund for
arts culture districts culture
facilities and reduced budgets.
The question.
chairman Senator thank you for
reading that.
And yes my my recollection is
that there is a local option
that is open for referendum
so so thank you for that
that the following question is.
Can.
Local governments also use
general fund other general fund
revenue sources.
to fund leader projects.
What.
At.
Forward that question to the
more programs the would be the
expert on that.
More Moores.
Thank you Senator and Mr
chairman and Representative
Harper at if if I may I wanted
to to back up on to the question
about state funding first and
just in full transparency and
this was part of the bill that I
wasn't as involved with however
I think the answer to your first
question about state funding is
yes in some cases because the
bill does open up the use of
lead to an unincorporated areas
of accounting and I believe the
way we have that crafted that
could involve state funding as
well and so I just wanted to
make sure that we were we were
transparent with you on on that
And then for your next question
you know municipalities if they
have passed the lead ordinance
they accumulate leader funds
differently in Clovis we do that
through a dedicated tax and
that's how we accumulate the the
the local.
Leda funding I'm I as I
understand it in other
communities they can they they
are.
They have a lead ordinance that
they don't have a dedicated
taxed so they do they do move
money from the general fund into
their leader funds so there's
there's the difference there I'm
not sure if that answers your
question but in either case the
bill seeks to give municipality
decision making ability on their
it's you edit the funds.
And I feel like I forgot maybe
one of the main points of your
question so all I stopped there
and ask you if I answered your
question and and allow you to
ask for.
chairman and senator and and Mr
more thank you for for that you
you did answer my questions and
but I'm just trying to.
Make sure I'm.
Member in understanding how to
lay of the land here
And.
You know these these are
No taxpayer dollars we don't
have a ton of these dollars
right.
And maybe kind of going back to
the original purpose is a
leader.
And maybe what we we contrast
with the state like Texas.
chairman Sir Mr more so Texas
has a closing fund right they've
they've got.
Millions and millions not
hundreds of millions of dollars.
That agree with the I used to
close projects on
we don't in New Mexico we have a
anti donation clause and we'd I
think is one of the great
examples of one of the few I'm
sorry it is a good example one
of the few exceptions to our
anti donation clause where it's
available for economic
development purposes.
I'm so.
chairman Senator Mr mayor when
we started the lead at.
Program.
knowing that I was gonna limited
dollars like I said at the state
level we usually have about
fifty to seventy five million
dollars.
I'm.
The it was limited.
In a way to try to be the most
effective with those dollars.
and and we we talk about
economic based jobs.
Right so jobs that
generate is more jobs.
and and for that reason retail
was specifically excluded from
we.
because we have an economic to
based job it leads to retail
jobs we have a retail job
that's.
That that's really really it's
not economic based job.
So I'm so that said.
I understand that in the last
few years we did allow for
retail and small.
Areas I think thirty five
thousand population last and I
was an exception made because.
The understanding was it's hard
to.
During an economic based job to
those small areas and.
Retail is a big deal how small
areas so no we made that
exception.
so I guess the question chairman
and senator Mr mayor is.
Why do we feel it appropriate to
now.
Expand this to essentially any.
remove that thirty five thousand
dollar cap
do we really feel like that's an
appropriate use of these limited
funds.
Mr chairman and and
Representative Harper I
apologize to you when you ask
about the state funds because
there is conditions that were
asking to change.
The.
The
Financial assistance and
unincorporated portions of the
county.
That are
close to administrative
authorities that are.
Nations in more than fifteen
thousand so we I apologize to
you I didn't mean that now jobs
there but I apologize to you
just because state money could
be used to that because they're
on incorporated there's no way
to raise that money for those
areas of the county tax and the
in my part of the world County
doesn't have much we are out
there are anybody else to taxed.
So but when you're with regards
to your question why we feel
that it is important.
for expanding retail usage.
Well the the they start is.
One thing you have to have an
ordinance you have to go for
your voters and asked them if
they want to use their local
generated money.
To go towards retail that's the
first thing you have to do and
then you have to go out into
that's not right.
I'm Mr chair and senator Mike my
understanding is you go to the
voters.
To do the ordinance to for them
to approve the G. R. T..
you're not have to go so those
who have already implemented
this this G. R. T. director
after voters again.
To approve retail you.
From what I understand the law
and and again I'm not a lawyer
and you all know that way I've
read them all it says that you
have to go before the voters to
determine the purpose.
You spend this much.
And senator and representative I
think of more Morris can can
provide some clarification here
go ahead more.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members and Representative.
Harper
Senator Woods I have a question
it has been my understanding
that in the case of of close
where we do have the ordinance
we have a dedicated tax that we
would need to take it back out
to the voters
I'm open to to learning
something new about that but
that's my understanding of this
point is that it would need to
go back out to the voters so to
Senator Woods point there is
that that piece you have yep
that the local community
deciding and and if I may
Senator Harper your question and
you know the way friend
question.
To to speak to the traditional
thank you on economic
development and that is that you
should only incentivize economic
bass players and that the retail
sector will will naturally come
up with that I would say I agree
with that except that I've seen
it not work in in in.
The case of my once retail hub
for for the entire tree area
that has now started to shrink
because of how easy it is to I
had to go into the neighboring
state and do shopping there I
had to go have dining
experiences and all those things
and and
our what I would say is that I I
one hundred percent appreciate
where you're coming from as a as
a economic development jurists
and and and and I tracked with
you except that are in the case
of my community and when I talk
to other mayors around the state
it's it's proven to not be true
and that could just be because
retail has changed consumer
habits have changed and and you
know at the end of the day I
what I would say is if we keep
doing what we're doing we're
gonna keep seeing the retail
sectors in the retail offerings
in communities like mine and
others shrink and and that we
need to try to do something that
we haven't been doing before in
order to to stop that emerging
that we're seeing and.
You know and and and at the end
of the day I'm it it is it's my
belief that the the local
leadership the local.
Communities in the best position
to decide if that's good for
them I you know we talk about
needing to go back out to the
voters talked about whether it
goes motors or not we need to
change our ordinances if the
state statute is backed amended
That.
That's a decision that community
to make our community by
community basis if we have a
community says no I'm not
interested we we don't believe
in this we don't we don't
believe that you would consider
by retail and they don't have to
what we're asking for is the the
bell the flexibility and allowed
to to make those decisions at
the local level and and in the
case of my my should be regional
hub border town that's got just
too many people in it to to use
the statute the way it is you
know I'm asking.
For for you to give us some of
that decision making ability and
and then and then our process is
a taken out orders that is
impacted the process that we
need to go through and then and
then how that's implemented you
know we have an economic
incentive for we have yeah you
know there's there's lead time
on any kind of economic
development project there's
there's going to be ownership on
the part of the community if if
we were to support retail as
economic development there there
will be by and and
And then I is more because I
live and work here serving as
mayor is not a full time job so
I'm I'm engaged in business and
and that in providing a living
for myself my family and I and I
wrote all those and with with
other business owners and I have
to look them in the eye and tell
them that you know I I believe
what we're doing here is good
and and I need their support on
that and so I you know I just
really it's a philosophical as
ship I think to say that the
local communities really need to
be able to decide in light of
everything that's changed out we
may need to do things we haven't
done before in order to.
To work on our local economies
and defend our local economies
thank you thank you Mr mayor and
Representative Harper and I I
see Senator Griggs hands up you
know in in this committee we I
don't really follow the zoom
hands so if you want to chime in
as experts feel free to do so.
Otherwise all Mr hand going up
Senator Griggs you want to add
something thank you thank you
for sharing and and I do because
I I completely agree with the
mayor clovers your courage you
know I've been there and I know
what that's like but I do want
to to respond a little bit to
the process that the
here Representative Farber
issues questioning a little bit
of the the local economic
development ordinance is adopted
by a vote of the people.
In that community.
You go out in that allows you to
do and imposed a tax.
What we did in Alamogordo was
exactly that.
The in any time and economic
development project came to us.
It was reviewed by we called Oct
Act which is Otero county
economic development group.
They reviewed it they brought it
to the city commission she
commission then passed an
ordinance.
To adopt that project in
ordinances in as you know our
you introduce a new password the
first time you wait two or three
weeks and you bring it back in
the past and it goes on final
passage and it did either it
goes if you pass it goes into
effect if you don't pass it it
doesn't show the steps or all of
their to get the message out to
the public that you're looking
at this particular project for
support
I also want to add the you know
I agree with the fact that
economic based jobs and I agree
that's the way lied when.
And what I can tell you some of
those jobs those projects have
more down as well as all of us
would have hoped
you know we brought in a call
center we did and those are
those are quantify economic
development jobs but I want you
to know that every job every
business you bring at.
Competes alternately with the
business page there because
people leave.
Jobs are in to go work in other
jobs if they feel like their job
is a little bit better job and
they can they can fit.
In that position so it's a you
don't need a challenging time
for for small towns and I
believe that the people in
Clovis to make the best decision
for the people in call I think
we need to give them the tools
to do that so Mister Mr Chairman
representative Harper I hope
that helps and some of that
explanation but but I'm firmly
behind the mayor and I
appreciate all he's trying to do
for for Clovis in communities
like Al Gore.
Back to Representative Harper.
Thank you chairman and the
gentleman and and at all all of
it I stand corrected I had
assumed that if you already
adopted the ordinance and and
impose the G. R. T. increments.
That no further action would be
required after the connection in
this legislation so.
thank you for clarifying that
for me.
So.
So I.
I very much understand
all the comments that have been
brought up and I'm grateful for
them grateful for this our time
to discuss this.
I.
I do think.
That just the fact we're having
this conversation says something
about the state of affairs in
New Mexico.
when you look at the few.
I'm.
High profile economic based jobs
that we've as male porn.
they've been mostly in the urban
areas not rural.
and so
I can see that in a rural New
Mexico perhaps is not benefiting
as greatly as urban from we a.
And that.
I think that says a lot about
our tax code about.
you know the environment that we
have chair New Mexico when it
comes to being able to attract.
I cannot based jobs to Clovis
Sir Alamogordo or other places
of when it comes to helping our
current businesses grow when it
comes to keeping our current
businesses from from leaving I
think it just says a lot and
there's really only so much you
can do is we.
Right I mean when you look at
what's at the state level you
know fifty to seventy five
million dollars when you look at
the local level what you're able
to generate it's it's really a
drop in the bucket.
and and I understand you're
asking for this flexibility
are.
I really don't think.
If we pass this and and it
signed in Abbas flexibility it's
not gonna stop to dealers or the
children's places from from
leaving.
it might.
You know how.
You know build a building it
might help with the
refurbishment.
maybe maybe it's a sweetener to
bring a business and it's asking
for a sweetener.
but you know I I mention this
right before I just have so much
respect for for Utah.
You know they have a they have a
tax code that makes sense.
and and when yes those going
around trying to you know point
different states there we
decided whether to build the
natural resource it was at that
mountain of out of order they
knew where they're gonna go back
plan they went around and they
asked you Mexico Utah Arizona
Nevada to give them the best
deal we could.
And and they got a they got a
screaming deal.
Where they ended up landing and
Utah.
Utah said we're we're glad that
you're considering us but we're
not gonna give you a deal you
come here because you like Utah
you can hear it as you like Tax
Code.
We're not gonna give you a deal.
And so I I personally just have
problems with we are all
together that it's just a small
part ends up being the
government choosing winners and
losers and in the end it makes
absolute.
Yes we know but it makes a very
very very small difference.
In in the grand scheme of
things.
So I guess the last question
I'll ask.
Chairman and and senator.
We're moving an anti computer
because here.
So it's possible that we could
potentially be using taxpayer
dollars to help the business.
And they would be directly
competing with an existing
business that doesn't have
taxpayer help you explain to me
why we think that's a good idea.
Mr chairman and and
Representative Harper defer that
to the more clothes.
Senator was Mr chairman
committee members Representative
Harper.
That answers your question is is
really for everything that we've
already discussed is
If we believe that the local
community that the local
leaders.
Could be trusted make the
decisions about how to use the
local leader
and to to leave the language in
there.
Is this point it doesn't help us
In Clovis and I would imagine in
any New Mexico community that
wanted to use Lida to Senate by
retail.
We're gonna do that through
opportunity gap analysis
I've already done that on Clovis
we've already been able to
identify the the types of
businesses that that that we
would have the ability to absorb
but because there's that need
for because we we currently at
you know don't don't have enough
of that product or service and
and people are going out of town
to get it.
You know so so to to leave the
compete language in there and in
us not to be able to support a
project on on you know something
as simple as you know we're
we're talking to a clothing
store I'm.
Because we need more clothing
stores however we can't support
them because Walmart sells
clothes you know this again do
we trust the local community to
trust the local leaders to to
make decisions that are that are
going to be the right decisions
for their community if we do
that we don't need that compete
language in there.
Because our.
Frankly it it on does what we're
trying to do and Mr more real
quick just on that point you
know I I think as we continue
the discussion I I don't think
this is about any of us not
trusting you or the local
communities at all I think the
question really is a good one
and I actually think your
response was spot on if Walmart
sells clothes can you company
not be incentivized to come in
and so close as well I would
argue probably they should be I
mean you know I don't think that
it should be barred from coming
in but I don't think this has
anything to do with trust one
hundred percent so let's please
stay away from from those types
of of statements if if we if you
could please Representative
Harper back to you.
Chairman and and Senator is a
Mister Moore thank you for that.
Yeah I can understand the the
Walmart clothing store analogy
yeah I'm just more concerned
about state.
Say we one incentivize the a
particular restaurant to come in
and and now we're we're
Potentially taking away business
from other mama pop restaurants
that have been there.
But.
That's kind of where we're I'm
I'm thinking I I I get your
clothing store.
analogy I get that.
Thank you Mr Chairman and Mr
chairman point point taken and
and I apologize Sir Mr chairman
committee members Representative
Harper I agree great question
you know how would how would
that work in the case of
restaurant I would say that you
know probably because we have
Through our market analysis
we've identified that we have
room for that more restaurants
there's demand for restaurants I
would say that we probably would
need to use it to incentivize
restaurants but I guess to just
sort of think through that would
again we would like the ability
to to if we needed to and if we
think through that perhaps some
some type of.
Specialty restaurant that that
they're offering does not exist
in our community but but we we
through market analysis can
determine that that there's room
for it and it and it would make
sense to bring it in if there
was something that we can do to
help them I in the way of you
know infrastructure what have
you then we we would make the
case for supporting something
like that based on that that
information and data analysis.
Thank you chairman
And Mister Merrett Center so all
of.
I'll conclude I I see that no I
don't I'm not applies to the
committee's time and I just want
to say I.
I really understand your plight
I lived in Sapporo for three
years.
So I I understand rural New
Mexico I I also a great
conversation with the.
Senator Griggs over the phone I
know Rio Rancho stunned.
You know some of this.
You know work with their local
we are funds.
so I'm I understand the plight.
And my heart goes out to you
all.
and I just want to say thank you
for being here thank you for
bringing the bill
and allowing us to have this
conversation thank you chairman
thank you Representative Harper
Representative Montoya.
Thank you are.
Mr Mr chairman and
yes.
I actually have scope of similar
questions as to Representative
Harper.
And and the first one being the
anti compete clause that that
does actually concern me.
and and I actually wanna go a
bit further just to for more a.
We're
Chairman Martinez was talking
about the the the local control
and trust issue local control is
a big issue for me.
I am however a little concerned
that.
Thank you to the clothing store
analogy but I want to the
clothing store analogy or the
grocery store analogy in reverse
you have a local
business that's established and
more and then a Walmart
supercenter wants to come in.
It if we incentivize them what
we've seen with those big box
stores that they can and then
they get preferences not
affected this entire pandemic
they have preference over our
small locally owned businesses.
And so I.
I think what we know when
there's a Walmart superstore.
R. or a lows or a home depot
something like that.
That becomes and economic driver
for that community because
people come in from.
Neighboring communities.
so I am I guess the problem I
have is the.
Local governments knowing that
that's going to help the overall
budget making that decision to
to incentivize that.
In the end harming local
business that's and I understand
that I would understand being in
that position the pressure
knowing what that's going to do
to your community.
On the other hand.
I'm not a static.
Score.
I look at
If you can drive business to the
community from outside the
community that can help other
business like restaurants and
that's affirmative has been in
that position Farmington is a
regional for all we have to
Walmart supercenters we have a
lows we have a home depot we
have.
What's followed has been box
restaurants because we have
a population of forty five
thousand but on the weekends we
have a population of a hundred
thousand
and and that's what we're we're
we're open and that's because we
have become a regional draw so.
There's a concern yet at the
same time don't want to tie the
hands of our our local guys so
this is the tough one for me
because I I at this for this
last year I've been fighting for
those small mom and pop owned
businesses who have I think been
mistreated not not the same
playing field as the big box
stores big box stores because of
what they mean to the state.
Have received preference and and
I'm I'm concerned even at the
local level we could
potentially.
Because of what they bring to
the community receive.
Reference and and what we've
seen with those big guy out.
Those big retail outlets is
We've lost small town America
we've lost in all of our
communities across especially
rural New Mexico we've lost our
downtown areas
Act I hope that house bill two
fifty five the liquor bill it
brings a little bit of that
downtown back for for our local
communities but
The progress the tension that we
feel
however I do really believe
that.
The culture decisions are back
home the better
As more as a county as county
commissioner as a city
councillor you have to go into
the communities and you'll see
the very same people that.
You may have had that made that
tough decision and then you have
to face them so
So I'm with you on the local
control thing it's just from
from my standpoint as a as a
state legislator not just my own
community but looking at all of
the different folks that were
Representative right now because
what we've done that yes the
small businesses across the
state.
That is a concern and and I
guess I want to make sure that
that folks that have that local
control at the same time I just
want to caution that we don't
make decisions that.
I continue to harm small
business and I'm if you have any
thoughts on that and if you
don't mind the center would I
would I would like to the
perspective of the more if you
don't mind.
Thank you.
Mr.
I'm sorry what.
Representative.
I.
Yeah we we have a weird echo
going on I'm not sure why.
Go ahead try it again okay thank
you Mr chairman and committee
members and Representative
months why I.
I sincerely appreciate your your
words of caution and and and as
you describe the the struggle
that that you and and others
have with this site and I am not
share that sure that when you
talk about downtown.
And you know that's.
My my city just like.
We every other city our size
that the downtown is is not what
it used to be and our but just
as a as a more you know what I
dream of doing is actually using
this to support you know growth
downtown we have an old downtown
area with buildings that you
know everyone of them needs six
figures improvements to actually
you know how to put a of
sourcing business in there and
you know if if we could use.
We've got to to incentivize
folks to to locate their
business downtown that on main
street that's going to help to
revitalize our our downtown so
you know when I.
When I dream of of what my city
could be and in terms of a trade
area and and what are each
offering to be you know I.
I hear you and I actually
struggle with what you described
about you know we're you know
the big box stores I agree with
how there's a disparity in the
way that they've been treated
and and the way enrollment
option treated through COVID
restrictions and so for
however when I dream of of of
using this tool to to help make
my community better and and
reach its potential I'm thinking
about the mom and pop style type
businesses I'm thinking about
back filling in and
refurbishing our downtown area
and those are the things that
that I'm that I'm dreaming up as
much as anything
and you know and I and I really
think all all have my community
support on that and you know are
you use the talked about using
it in reverse and and you said
you know you point out that he's
the clothing store simple but
I'll use it again there's a
there's a men's clothing store
in in Clovis fantastic fact
fifty plus year in business it's
the oldest business our main
street and personal friends with
the owner I'm and it's it's a
specialty store in you know not.
You wouldn't consider to be in
direct competition with with the
the J. C. Penney for example
however I I mean I visit with my
friend owner of men's clothing
store and you know I said Hey
you know is gonna upset you if
you hear about me trying to
bring in a clothing store to
Clovis in the system now uses I
wish you'd bring for five more
to close because as it is.
I don't even get a shot at the
business because people have
this perception that you don't
shop for clothes in quotes.
And you know and and and so he's
a business owner to understand
that competition would be good
and and he like hi subscribes to
the.
Philosophy that a rising tide
raises all boats.
And
and that's.
I I hope that that that gets
added if there was a follow up I
was trying and maybe get more
specific thank you
Representative Montoya chairman
committee members.
So thank you Mr chairman thank
you more you know I.
I do subscribe to the fact that
the pies and just one size I
think a lot of times we get to
we hear that a lot and that you
can divide the pie of anymore
I'll just get a smaller slice of
the pie and I and I just
disagree with that I I think
because I have my family owned a
bakery which I.
Live through as a high school or
don't let your family with a
crippling you're in high school
I mean you get up at three
o'clock in the morning and go
after school but
the.
The idea that there's only one
high you can and every time you
slice it up it's it's like
smaller
I just don't believe that you
want to you want to have more
you want to take more price and
and I think that's the case if
we can get a bigger business in
in the small towns that means
employees working there that
means they have more disposable
income and hopefully you have
those dollars.
Stay in town.
A few times and and cycle
through maybe an extra time
because an extra plate House at
that I think that's what helps
small business so
anyhow that's.
Once again that's my thinking on
this it's it's a I think but I
think I'm leaning lots closer to
the local control
but.
Mr chairman and members
and and Senator Woods I do have
a a little bit of concern with
the.
Before I go that let me let me
go to this other
Representative Harper brought up
that that Texas has a closing
the closing fund.
And and and this is just for
that for the committee I think
we're gonna have to have a
serious.
Discussion about it closing fund
for small.
Unity's for rural communities
leader has a very specific
purpose and and I'm with the
with the Representative Harper
on this issue
this this fund has a very
specific purpose and and and I
think we're changing the purpose
of this fund until we have
another source so this is the
source and if we're gonna help
small towns we have to find a
way to DO IT more agile however
I I I very much agree with the
Representative Harper that I
hate to see this Fund eluded
because that could mean we end
up losing that big company that
we can bring in with a lot of.
Of of.
In high end jobs and economic
based jobs where we're sending
our products out of state and we
now state money is the best
money so I I said I
I agree with Harper
Representative Harper on that
but at this point we don't have
that option and and maybe that
the greater conversation we have
as I do we visit
Do we have a greater
conversation on the anti
donation clause in our
constitution that that may need
to be addressed.
and because I don't know that we
can get to a closing fund
we deal with that okay but
Senator what's.
I do see a loophole here and
that is the the the county
Leupold of what's what's been
put in place for the counties is
that for those of the state
dollars.
And
I can see a a a.
County going forward with this
using state dollars in it being
just outside of an incorporated
area.
And I can see once that becomes
a tax producer I could see.
A local jurisdiction.
Going ahead and just and
bringing them into the the city
limits so that they can be a tax
base for that local city.
Is there any thought about that
Senator.
We're.
Mr Chairman representative in
Mongolia.
When I put my mind to it from
where I live I live a lot of
different you know in a in a
different area of the state than
most people.
I live in an area where there's
well between Clovis and it
didn't carry.
It's ninety miles.
Would you like to have a gas
station about halfway would you
like to have a place you can go
in and and go potty instead of
having to go body beside the
road.
We don't have gas station there.
So not a look at some of the
stuff maybe occur different.
Then.
Populated part of the state.
Yeah it says it gives a monument
there.
But.
That's.
So that's where I'm coming from
on this and I'd be happy for my
experts to judgment on this.
Mr chairman and and
Representative monthly.
If you want to experts and
that's that's fine Senator I
just once.
Mr Mr chairman if if I could I
I'll I'll jump in with with.
With Representative.
Mr Chairman representative
Montel here I mean you're right
that could happen.
if we can if something came in
nearby thank you thank you
certainly do that.
If the if the state dollars were
utilized for something and all
make something out of state it
could be utilized for outlet
mall and the county in the state
would together to decided that
they needed to support that and
that increase at outlet mall
just outside the city limits in
Farmington just outside the city
limits of Alamogordo are do I
see those is been problematic.
Personally I I don't I see those
sorts of things as being very
beneficial to the community
where I live and I can see where
it could be beneficial to the
community where you live.
is eight it can't be like you
bash it certainly could.
Show Mr Mr Chairman
representative I want you to
know that I I I understand that.
But I also understand
opportunity and I hate to I hate
to miss out on the opportunity
because we just don't have
anything in place so thank you
Mr chairman and thank you
Representative.
Thank you senator and Mr
chairman I I'm.
I I do have a have a the.
Ideological problem with us
diluting this fun but at the
same time.
This fund has just not worked
for rural part of the state.
It in proportion so I'm probably
gonna vote for this today but
you need to understand my.
My hesitancy and also the fact
that maybe what we do is we need
to create a fund that's very
specific to rural communities
obviously we don't want to take
away Lita from rural communities
because if they they grow enough
and then they can.
Attract no one is economic based
businesses we want to be able to
do that as well but I think it's
pretty obvious that that this
fund since its inception has
been very heavy
those jobs and ended up in in
the in the place where there's
already a lot of jobs and
and we're losing New Mexico and
so any but I am I am the
conflicted just to say we so
thank you Mr chairman thank you
and members for presenters for
for your answers.
Thank you Representative Montoya
I don't see any other hands up
so I think we'll we'll close
discussion all make couple
comments that we saw this bill
and and in house commerce and
economic development I think was
last week you know a lot of the
same questions table I do
appreciate Representative Harper
at the for for really grounding
the conversation into the
technical aspects of what this
means.
You know I eight and I think I
mentioned this in the previous
committee I I have a have a
tough time.
digitalizing you know these.
The these incentives right some
of us will call them incentives
others will call them giveaways
you know and the the simple
Representative Harper use one
time a couple of committee
meetings ago as you know a Tesla
you know back in twenty thirteen
kind of shopping around and
there was a sort of hunger games
between the state to see who
could offer the best possible
deal for yes let him move in and
we've seen that happen I mean we
we see that happen with
Republicans to see that happen
with Democrats whoever's in
office I think really wants to
be the one that brings in
that life saving company you
know that he is that economic
development project that perhaps
will transform a community kinda
like an Intel you know in Rio
Rancho or perhaps Facebook down
in in in Valencia County but at
the end of the day you know
whenever that other state when
it whenever that other community
provides a better deal.
even with all the call back
provisions that we now having
some of these things I think
we're always we're always in
this state of of of you know
Competition and not that
competition the best being in
the private sector but I have a
problem with that when it comes
to taxpayer money right.
Having said that you know I I've
I've spent quite a bit of time
in in your in your home town of
Clovis Mr more I'm I think it's
a wonderful to town great people
I've got cousins who went to
college down there I've spent
quite a bit of time to interim
committees
it is just such a a fantastic
community you know it's it's
really you know it's diverse and
it's got roots dating back many
many generations and and I see
the I see the the.
Position that many of you are in
I I tend to agree I don't always
agree with Representative
Montoya but I I will agree with
some of this one.
That you know we probably do
need to think of some sort of
closing fund for rural
communities something that you
can leverage so that you don't
have to go the route of of
opening up Lida and and you know
perhaps limiting the limited
money that's already in there
that perhaps could go to that
big project because we've spent
it on other things right like
retail writer restaurants.
But we're not there yet and
until we get there I think we I
believe we have to give you
as many tools as we possibly can
it would be it would be I think
in my opinion unfair.
of us to to to tie your hands as
more
as you're trying to do the right
thing by the community
and you know I think hopefully
in the trump
we can get our heads together
the people of this committee and
and and you know Representative
Crowder in Senator Woods and
Senator Griggs I I would love to
explore the idea of the roll
closing fund something you know
and and I I the anti donation
clause is a big problem in my
opinion it was there for a
reason but also it just ties our
hands in in pretty significant
ways and so we can figure that
out then we don't have to carve
out.
Exceptions to what we already
have in the books look like like
Leda so.
Thank you for your work on this
thank you for your diligence
Representative Crowder we can
hear a lot from you today but I
understand from the lane that
you were.
You know you were knocking on
our door when is this bill going
to get hurt and and I appreciate
that that's you know this late
in the game things can get lost
in the shuffle slab thank you
for for keeping keeping me on
track to make sure that this
bill gets hearing and and and
and gotta get its due due
diligence
members with that what is the
will of the committee.
Yes.
I can't.
We have a due pass motion from
Representative Strickler and who
who was the second.
Chandler.
We have a due pass from
Strickler in a second from
Chandler.
Why don't we call the roll
Elaine thank you.
Representative Cadena.
Yes.
Representative Parker.
No.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Yes and I like to explain my
vote.
Representative Maestas.
Sh Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
No.
Representative Stansbury.
Yes.
Representative Strickler.
Yes.
Occur Igor.
Representative Maestas.
Chandler.
Yes.
Chairman Martinez.
Yes.
Nine in the affirmative and to
within the negative.
By a vote of ninety two
Representative Crowder Senator
Woods Senator Griggs you have a
do pass and Representative Lujan
to explain her vote.
Thank you Mr chairman and I I
just wasn't able to raise my
hand during the questions I I
don't I loss of function but I I
I really just want to say thank
you for Sanchez for bringing
this and having a collaboration
on this effort and I would like
to work with you as well Mister
chair on this rule funding
project that you're talking
about because as as we're seeing
through this session there's a
lot of rules concept legislation
coming through we just pastor of
bills from the Senate from.
Senator Diamond yesterday with
that would create in the let's
and position under DFA and you
know how to we have other
colleagues that are moving other
piece of legislation in that
direction so I think that this
is the time to start putting
that in place and I just wanted
to stay I'm I'm in with you on
that effort so thank you so much
and thank you for the time.
Thank you Representative and and
I'm sorry about the race hand
function I just just jump in
just interrupt me in and out
we'll we'll get you will get you
on here if you'd like to speak
I did lose a function to this
week and and then I don't know
my computer restarted and and
that fixed it so you might want
to try that.
Let's so congratulations Mr more
great see you I look forward to
visiting Clovis.
You and
visiting that new restaurant
working on thank you thank you
Mr chairman.
Forward to visiting thank you
committee members for your time
today thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
all.
Senator souls.
All of it so I've been
monitoring that the last bill
and I'll let you know when
you're ready for me to explain
it the twenty nine take it away
Sir good to see you good
morning.
Thank you and I think this is
the first time I've ever been in
front of your committee in the
time we got up here so with the
it's a pleasure to be here.
Twenty nine of comes from the
New Mexico facilities authority
they are the agency tasked with
school buildings around the
state they monitor their
conditions they also provide the
input and for the public school
capital outlay committee to
determine which schools get
funded we have a limited amount
of funding each year New Mexico
has a very I'm not sure unique
is right but it works towards
equitably funding all of our
schools in that it's got a state
and local match system so
districts that are property
court get a much larger match
you for instance gets a hundred
percent of their school
buildings covered by the state
districts that have lots of tax
well get less there's some
districts that only ten percent
gets covered by the state that
come with ninety percent of the
the coverage now I have to tell
you that little bit of
background because SB twenty
nine is an enabling bill that
adds to the kinds of systems of
buildings that the public school
facility authority and thus the
public school capital outlay
committee can consider and adds
photovoltaic system as something
that can be considered for
construction using the state and
local match process it is only
enabling it does not require any
district but photovoltaics on
schools all it does is allows
them to use that as a criteria
and particularly if it is going
to save the school money over
the life of the photovoltaic
system that would be installed
of the meat of the bill really
is back on the very end and page
five it also talks about
districts that need to either
renovate replaced their air
conditioning systems there H.
fax system of debate amendment
higher grade as a result of the
pandemic and some other things
that those are given the highest
priority.
As new money's and then one of
the bills that is coming through
through the federal government
there is a large amount of money
coming specifically for systems
like H. back in schools that
would all well through the
public school facilities
authority again this bill is
just enabling that photovoltaic
systems now can be considered as
part of the state local match
for buildings for for school
building construction and I
might point out that currently
districts spend a lot of their
money on.
Paying for electric costs
putting a photovoltaic system on
the screen shift those monies
over into the classroom and as
part of the operational cost but
with that I'd be happy to answer
any questions.
Thank you senator souls
She's seen you the session here
we always see you at the end of
the session for some reason.
Let's son is going to committee
members actually do have an
expert with you are you are the
expert I am the expert John
Champlin dot the Champlin who is
the executive director of the
public school facilities
authority but we've done this
enough times are you certified
you might be on I don't know but
you know it's it's really a
pretty simple it's just in the
neighboring to to add this to
the state local match thank you
senator let's go to the audience
those in support of Senate bill
twenty nine.
We'll ride we have first on the
list.
Gary Payton.
Maybe he's a famous basketball
player from back in the day.
Good morning Mr Payton good
morning Mr chairman committee
members my name is Gary Payton
representing the coalition of
sustainable communities New
Mexico a coalition of the
elected leaders of the cities of
Los crucis Albuquerque Santa Fe
and Santa Fe County communities
which represent forty percent of
New Mexico's population we stand
in strong support of SB twenty
nine and thank Senator souls for
bringing this forward our
coalition is focused on
sustainability climate action
and social equity in in each of
our communities this bill has
practical impact by allowing the
refitting of existing school
buildings with four wheel takes
school leaders can address the
future of course it has an
environmental impact by shifting
to Wheeler doable Energy with
decreased emissions but it will
also have significant cumulative
financial impact in reduced
electricity crossed over the
multiple years of the school
buildings resulting in critical
savings which will release funds
to be used elsewhere in the
education system we support this
bill and urge you to vote yes on
SB twenty nine thank you very
much.
Thank you Sir my my joke fell
flat but there is a famous
player called his name was Gary
the glove Peyton for the Seattle
SuperSonics but you're not.
Thank you for being with us.
This chart is good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Jim
data I'm from the renewable
energy industry association of
New Mexico over notice ria we're
a local trade association of
major solar companies and by the
way I do remember Gary Payton a
great defensive player.
This bill will help schools that
might otherwise not be able to
finance the installation of
Peavey solar system and enabling
them to produce clean energy at
the point of usage lower their
energy bills.
Also does have an educational
component to it so that'll help
students to understand house
floor systems work and how they
can contribute to a cleaner
environment and finally it'll
help to create good paying jobs
for New Mexicans so we we help
those support Senate bill twenty
nine thank you very much.
Thank you for being here Sir
anyone else's support.
Anyone in opposition.
Okay seeing none Representative
Harper.
Thank you chairman Senator
schools it's good to see you of.
How how's the weather in the
Senate gallery.
Of yeah I'm actually up in my
office this is the the obviously
that the backgrounds of the
people look like I'm I'm I'm
doing the people's work instead
of having like pictures of my
organ mountains in the
background.
No that's so that's excellent
yeah good good to see you so I I
guess chairman and senator my
first questions.
Why do you hate wind and
geothermal.
I don't hate we andin geo
thermal yeah we were trying to
to pick up things that directly
and when with the pandemic
they're actually quite a move
towards doing H. back systems
that tend to be up on the roof
when you're up on the roof
taking those out it's a great
time to be putting PED on at the
same time.
Sure into the future I'll I'll
add that you can put a wind
turbine and geo thermal as part
of those the meeting of cooling
systems for public schools does
it does make sense to do such.
Yeah chairman and senator thank
you I appreciate that answer
would you also consider small
modular nuclear.
Mr chairman and and
Representative no I actually you
know and this often your take
some of my for
conservation minded people but
particularly small modular
Fauria reactors I don't know
about uranium one scriptorium
reactors that don't have nearly
the waste problem your idea of
what you.
Well I think Representative
Harper has an amendment.
Mr chair talking the cost of a
small modular Authority react I
think is way outside the range
of weather a district even with
the ninety ten match might be
able to for the.
Chairman and senator you're
speaking my love language we
said story thank you I I.
I love that this was Mr chair
this is not a set up by the both
of us I'm not sure we had this
conversation before but.
Which is real this over until
Monday.
Chairman and senator thank you
so so real question I have
chairman Senator so we we know
that these funds are limited.
that you know there's there's
way more demand the need for
these funds.
you know my the the high school
my district we would high school
they have a solar farm it's not
on the roof it's just on some
land and they save a lot of
money on electric bills through
that form so so I don't have any
problem with schools doing this
but
you know my district.
He for that out of their own
funds you know out of bonding
dollars they got.
why do we feel it's important to
take some of these limited funds
that really.
Are needed for H. backer
buildings and and and diverts
them to help.
Some districts save on their
electric bills.
And Mr chair and and
Representative that really is a
very good question I think it as
a simple after this doesn't
allow anyone to jump the line
because they're putting in solar
system it is just enabling that
if they get to the line up at
the top of the line if there are
funds available this doesn't
require people to put that in it
just allows districts to request
that as part of their upgrades
and then it is up to the New
Mexico facilities authority and
the public school have to wait
outlay committee to determine
where the most needs aren't
which projects are going to be
that.
Chairman and etcetera so thank
you for for that answer I
appreciate that answer I do I do
still feel though no even though
we're not jumping that you if
you have a bunch that you and
they all start adding solar
maybe but one of the bottom that
could have made the bottle has
to wait for next year I mean is
that is a possibility.
Yes the Mister chair
representative yeah that's way
outside my mic functions that
really is the function of the
public school facility authority
to make those decisions and and
for instance when a couple years
ago we had some concerns about
all the school shootings and
rightly so public school
facility authority jump all of
the hi the hardening of the
schools the fencing the the
gates all of those things and
very quickly got the money out
to take care of an immediate
need of this just put that into
their normal thing that they are
allowed to consider that when
they're making their decisions
about where the greatest need.
Chairman Senator source thank
you I I
Those answers
and maybe offline when I can
talk about IDR the
the huge multi billion dollar.
Project in France to build the
first positive.
Power generating fusion reactor.
Given that a couple decades and
and not need the sort of takes
anymore what little sons across
the Center power in all of our
our our systems I would enjoy
that we can talk up for him some
other time to thank awesome you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative I'm
still waiting for my satellite
internet so you better Sir
delivering soon Representative
Harper.
And all those problems.
Representative Larry Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator.
Just a couple of questions
actually to follow up on the.
Representative Harper was all
forms of renewable energy
allowed to participate in this
arena.
Mr chairman and representative
I'm not sure that there's any
real answers to it schools
typically are places where
they're putting photovoltaics on
they tend to be the most out I'm
sure for smaller scale as
opposed to putting a wind
turbine which they are much more
efficient the figure you go and
you know that so just some
concerned about those other
kinds of things and these tend
to be more retro fit and this is
actually this would all be
retrofit not new construction.
Just one more question Mister
chairman Senator I believe also
in the one of the analyses the.
I am only systems was on the
order of ten to fifteen years if
you will if you factor in.
The annual operating expenses
this would not appear to be a
very high return on investment.
Investment if you will could you
address Sir.
Yes Mr chair and representative
in first I think the the
analysis of ten to fifteen years
is off by about five years they
tend to be paid off within about
five to ten years the efficiency
and the cost of systems it's
come down rapidly to where they
are fraction of what they were
only five or ten years ago and
so typically the the pay out I
think it averages at about eight
years depending on the size of
systems would be and and also
location to construction
companies that can do it but
it's on the order of five to ten
years for the direct payment
cost and the operating costs of
photovoltaic systems are very
very low I typically requires
going up and watching the panels
about once a year.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator dole questions are her
thank.
Thank you Representative Scott
anybody else.
What is the do pass.
The
and I will second share second
Representative role metal lane
please call the roll.
Representative.
Yes.
Thank you.
Speaker ebook.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative at this yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative Maestas.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Romero.
Yes
Representative Scott no.
Representative Stansbury.
Yes.
Representative Strickler.
Speaker.
Representative Maestas.
Representative Montoya.
No.
Yes.
Sherman Martinez.
Yes.
Eight in the affirmative three
in the negative.
Regulations Senators told you
have a do pass good luck the
rest of the way and thank you
for joining us this morning
thank you Mr chairman and
committee and I I hope I get to
come back.
Thank you for all right thank
you members that include project
up for to date
We be aware that we might get
called in over the weekend we
have the capital outlay bill
that I just received notice now
that it's it's it's being proof
read and should be ready for us.
I might decide to just hold it
until Monday and we can hear it
Monday and get it out on Monday
or we might do it over the
weekend at some point but all
coordinate with ranking member
Harper so that we can give you
guys enough of a heads up and
not just called a meeting all of
a sudden so.
And then Monday I think will
will I think we might have a few
more Senate bills coming in
and so we'll we'll tackle those
at that time.
Thank you for a great morning
have a great rest of your
morning and we will see you all
on the floor at two thirty thank
you.
Thank you.
