Representative Hernandez.
Here.
Representative Lente.
It.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Maestas.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Romero.
Your good morning.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler here.
Madam chair.
Okay so just before we get to
our first bill just a few
preliminary matters for the
committee as well as the
audience first this committee
operates in a little differently
than many committees because
many of our bills have a fiscal
impact on our budget and as a
consequence those bills that
have a fiscal impact typically
tabled we call them temporary
table
what that means is well here's
the bill will discuss the bill
and an all likelihood if your
bill has a fiscal impact your
bill will be tabled and then we
re evaluate as we get closer to
the end of the session to
determine what bills might be
let out a committee so that will
likely happen with probably all
of the bills today but I think
it's important that we have a
full discussion and robust
discussion ever ever all the
bills are presented so that we
can hear the pros and cons of of
all of them and and the public
in here that as well so that's
one thing the other thing is and
I I'm interested this when we
were in what we call practice
session or we are offline is we
have a couple of items that the
tax committee's gonna be needing
to address relatively soon one
is the G. O. bond package which
is the responsibility of the tax
committee this year in the tax
year to carry we alternate
between the house and the Senate
every year so that that is being
worked on there's a substitute
being prepared to and I think
that's house bill one fifty two
were and that's about
approximately the right number
will we maybe pulling that up as
soon as it's ready so we can
start that that's an important
thing that we get through the
legislature this year so I may
be asking members to have a call
of the chair type meeting at and
on YouTube in on time not our
typical time just so we can get
that off off and running the
other thing is we are working on
our our annual tax package
that's being tweaked the
negotiated and so on and that
may be coming up towards the end
of the week or early next week
and we.
Mania special meeting for that
as well just kind of informing
everybody as to what's going on.
I think I touched on every kind
of preliminary matters so with
that the floor is yours
Representative Harper and
Strickler house bill two of
seven.
You madam chair and members of
the committee I am very grateful
to be able to present this
legislation again
This is really a discussion
piece you'll notice it got just
one referral to the tax
committee
it'll be tabled and and just
lead by example I'm gonna make
the tabling motion.
but I wanted to spend just.
Maybe ten minutes talking about
just reminding the committee.
what tax parenting is why in
some cases it's fine and in some
cases it really hurts our our
economy especially our small
businesses.
and what I say what I think we
as a committee agree on is good
sound tax policy and hopefully
next year if we actually have a
a good reform bill we see many
of these elements among others
in that legislation next year.
so so that madam chair
I'm just maybe also give a quick
example.
Just remind folks on the
committee what tax permitting
is.
And if you go online and look up
tax permitting usually the
simple it's used is is like a
making a hamburger
and all the steps to make a
hamburger
I'm getting taxed that's a great
example except in New Mexico
we've already taken care of the
permitting on the agricultural
industry so I'm not use that
simple excel just confused
people we don't we don't pyramid
in the food area at all.
and in fact there's no tax at
all in that conversation and I
would argue that's bad tax
policy the the right tax policy.
does measure Democrat Republican
the tax policy wonks agree that
you should tax at the final step
the transaction
in the case of a hamburger it's
when you're taking a bite that's
when you should taxes.
otherwise the taxes get rolled
up into it.
And so I'll give you a different
sample then of how taxpayer
money works let's say we're
making a
a cell phone.
that we got a cellphone or
electronic company in New
Mexico.
and how are gross receipts tax
structure different than a sales
tax sales tax taxes are last up
gross receipts tax really taxes
every transaction along the way.
And so for example you are you
start a company and you wanna
make a.
Electronic a cellphone.
you will
need to up your big company the
only to contract out some design
work well that is an artist
taxed then you'll need to
purchase the raw materials well
that purchases taxed and then
you'll need to have
Sam assembled so manufacturing
services that is taxed.
And then
you know the final assembly
packaging maybe you have another
company do that and that's taxed
and then you ship it to a
retailer.
and and we don't most the time
we don't tax that step in the
state but then it is taxed again
in the final step.
And so this is
an example where you have maybe
I steps of taxation along the
way.
And what are gross receipts tax
started it's right was I'm two
percent.
And so permitting two percent
over and over again is really
not too bad right
if you talk to the tax policy
wonks there are some states have
a gross receipts tax like ours
but their rate is about one
percent and that's really the
sweet spot where it should be.
You twist some arms tax policy
Marshall say okay maybe you can
handle two percent.
But now that the average across
our state is around eight
percent.
That is a big deal
and you can have an effective
tax rate depending on what
sector of the economy here and
not of you know seventy percent
but you know seventeen eighteen
twenty percent effective tax
rate.
And then you have businesses
wonder what how on earth can I
compete you know
what was other states that don't
have this same off the off the
top you know twenty percent
penalty.
So.
So that's what you're reading is
it makes it challenging to
compete especially other states
they don't have the same
structure.
So so I'd like to know shift to
okay what what is okay to
pyramid what is not OK
repairman.
And and where are we trying to
go in this in the state.
Over the last several decades
not just where I think we should
go but with where every really
been going.
So you look at other states in
the US and and many of them also
do some paramedic taxing of
Business inputs.
one one example I like to use is
like computers or our desks
right
The vast majority of states tax
that and in businesses so so if
we remove the taxation on
computers and desks it's really.
It's really not a a great
benefit right as other states do
it.
and and so we need to be.
deliberate was what we remove
the pair meeting on.
And.
And especially as our economy
moves to a more of a services
based economy you know New
Mexico is in a good place that
way that we tax services
already.
and a lot of other states don't.
And so a lot of other states are
looking at how do we tax
services.
But the funny thing is I was
talking with that Richard Anklam
and he was talking with some
folks in South Dakota.
we're trying to figure out you
know destination based or sing.
And Richard asked them okay well
what about how do you decide
your services and they just kind
of now what Richard even we
don't tax professional services
so you know it's a so there's a
spectrum right we we we tax
services all of them and there
are some states that are
starting right well there's a
happy place in the middle.
And that's where that's where
the state has really been going
we have over the last several
decades we have moved more
towards a broad based retail
sales tax.
In fact we look more like a
brought pace retail sales tax
and gross receipts tax now and
that's why I and others have
been advocating that we actually
changed the name our taxes gross
receipts is really is not
actually reflecting what is
right now it should be a a sales
tax that's what it is.
Okay so so what should we not
permit.
And and the answer kind of
coming out that the little joke
out of South Dakota.
Where we really stand out as a
source we really small business
and and just look very strange
is professional services
business to business services.
And this is a problem.
Especially with small businesses
so the example is I mean again
your small business we've got
maybe two three four five people
on payroll do and doing the
work.
and so you contract out a lot of
just regular work that needs to
be done to keep the business
going like HR and payroll
accounting bookkeeping maybe
some occasional legal services
I. T. type services
Those those kinds of things mmhm
I mean the vast majority of
small businesses contract that
out.
Well in our state right now
we gross receipts tax that.
And so there's there's we call
the gross receipts tax penalty
for small business is there a
larger business maybe forty
fifty you know a hundred you
know mid size business all these
folks you have on payroll you
have your own in house.
Rolled personally don't have in
house HR person your own in
house I. T. person.
And so it really is not a level
playing field.
Now.
So you'll see in this bill
we structured it so that there's
there's basically seven items
that are out of business to
business transactions no longer
subject to gross receipts tax.
I think.
At this point I want to make
two comments on that and then
and then I'll I'll stand for for
questions of folks would like to
discuss this further.
There's two important points I
want to make.
The first is I'm not just use
legal services an example we are
not removing taxation on legal
services.
I think that's a bad idea
because again that spectrum of
of Services that we want to tax
and our economy moving more
towards a service based economy
we don't want to move taxation
on legal services.
We do is we want to stop
remitting business to business
so for example if as a business
owner
Your sheet
needs to have some legal work
done for the business.
If this legislation is passed
they would have to find a
nontaxable transaction
certificate to the the lawyer
Water group doing that work and
that business will not be
charged tax.
But if that business owners here
she needs to have legal services
done personally like at what
state are you know a a will or a
trust reinforcer or something
like that.
If it's not directly related to
their business they could not
find that nontaxable transaction
certificate and it would still
be taxed so so that's the good
tax policy right for keeping.
Services in the base but we're
preventing the business to
business paramedic which results
in extra taxation which makes it
harder for businesses to compete
So so that's that's the one one
point I want to make that the
second.
Point and I'll just
give an example
so last year this committee
decided we would take one of
these items in this bill I think
it was accounting services and
move that forward.
And and and it ended up getting
struck out in the Senate you
know I was Senator also about
that was this is a good idea but
we understand that happens and
you know maybe next year the tax
package will be different.
But there was a member of the
Senate that asked me a question
and this this member of the
Senate should know better.
I'm asking questions showed me
he did not understand at all
what this bill that.
You said Hey are Representative
Harper your dad's account where
you are where you get any
council tax break.
conflict of interest.
I just have a look at him for a
minute my my head.
First off yes my doesn't account
I think is retiring in a year
to.
But this is not a tax break for
lawyers or accountants are I. T.
or or any of that
How this works.
I just simple if you are a small
business and you're going to an
accountant for work directly on
the business.
You would not be charged because
receipts tax.
It doesn't help the accountant
income just passes that tax on
of the state.
Right a chart and it's part of
your bill you have to pay the
gross receipts tax and that bill
does that money comes to the
state the count doesn't appear
to keep that it's not a tax
benefit to the town.
The only benefit might be is
right now if you go to another
state or to India have your
taxes done you don't get charge
gross receipts tax so if
anything this makes our New
Mexico accounts maybe a.
On a level playing field
That's that's probably the only
the only benefit.
So if someone says why are you
giving a tax break to lawyers or
accountants or right he people
they clearly don't understand.
how the hell gross receipts tax
how taxes work in the state
because it's not a benefit to
them it's a benefit to the small
business.
and helps them and and of course
we can talk about this for years
and when we talk about this
small businesses like all my
gosh this would be so huge if
you could do that I'm
immediately able to hire one or
two more people.
And that's that's the kind of
stuff we want to hear
that now the competitive and and
that money is not just going to
their bottom line to you know
they're actually you know the
small business owners where
twenty different hats and build
hire another person or to help
them out
yeah yes that's a win win.
So with that madam chair.
Thank you for the opportunity to
to to bring this forward
Representative Strickler like to
say anything but I'm ready to
stand for questions.
Thank you.
Madam chair and and
Representative Harper
this is been on your radar for
many years and I'm proud to to
co sponsor with you in a and
something that we we should
seriously consider to make her
stay more competitive thank you
madam chair thank you.
Thank you Representative
Strickler
we'll go to the audience we are
on house bill two oh seven
business to business service
gross receipts and I just want
to be clear about that because I
imagine there members of the
audience here are here for
another bill I'm all those in
favor please raise your hand
from support this bill raise
your hand if you wish to speak.
Okay JD Bullington.
Thank you good morning madam
chair members of the committee
this is JT pointer speaking on
behalf of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
and I just want to say my twenty
five years that is the best
explanation of business to
business taxpayer omitting I
have ever heard thank you
Representative Harper I think we
all know the taxpayer amendment
makes it harder and costlier to
do business in New Mexico
especially for small employers
and it makes us uncompetitive
and pair meeting needs to be run
out of our tax cut we've known
this for years with billion
dollar surpluses the lack of
money we said we're not
addressing this problem just is
no longer adequate if we want to
help the small businesses and
affects their meeting we have
all the resources we need to do
it right now so please
prioritized making New Mexico
more competitive business
friendly state this session and
we urge your support for this
bill thank you.
Thank you Mr Billington Leri
Sonntag.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I want
to echo that we appreciate the
job that Representative Harper
did in presenting this bill and
bring it forward I'm speaking on
behalf of the New Mexico
business coalition fully support
passing house bill two oh seven
this bill provides for
deductions from a number of
services that were articulated
by Representative Harper.
But it's important to note that
the those services need to be
going on between a limited
liability company of sole
proprietorship partnership
recall corporation or entity
with the New Mexico tax
identification number the
changes to our tax code would
help New Mexico be more
attractive to outside businesses
to establish a presence in our
state that is something that is
greatly needed we fully support
and hope you support house bill
two oh seven.
Thank you I'm Paul guessing.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm Paul
guessing president of the Rio
Grande foundation were of policy
think tank does work on economic
issues relating to New Mexico to
call me.
In our estimation this is
probably the best single bill
introduced this session relating
to taxes it tech takes on the
fundamental problem facing New
Mexico we all know that both
Democrats and Republicans across
the political spectrum want to
diversify our economy to make us
less reliant on oil and gas and
this is the kind of bill that
would most successfully do that
the biggest bang for the Buck in
this kind of effort so I
strongly encourage the committee
to move this bill forward thank
you.
Thank you rob black.
Madam chair members of the
committee it is a pleasure to be
here rob black president and CEO
The New Mexico chamber of
commerce last year the the
chamber did a comprehensive
review of kind and economic
competitiveness factors for the
state where we need to move the
needle to really make.
Our state open for investment
and growth in business climate
workforce education
infrastructure and innovation
capacity with the four key
factors this bill really
addresses that business climate
issue better than almost any
other bill as as Paul said
earlier we believe that the the
pure meaning peace is essential
for addressing that is essential
for small businesses in for
encouraging few future growth
and diversification our economy
we urge your support of house
bill two oh seven thank you.
Thank you Jason Espinoza.
Madam chair members of the
committee can you hear me OK.
Yes.
Madam chair members the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director with the national
federation of independent
business we stand in strong
support of legislation as was
mentioned before really
permitting on services is really
a bigger problem for small
businesses because they often
purchase business services
rather than hiring in house
providers that larger companies
have the ability to do so I'm so
we strongly support legislation
see this is really almost
creating a a more even the level
playing field for small
businesses to compete with
larger companies thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Carrie Robinson
Brunner.
Mr.
Share.
Chair.
We can.
Madam chair members the
committee very robin Broder
registered lobbyists but the New
Mexico Medical Society the
independent physicians and our
communities are often some of
the small business owners who
are outsourcing some of their
professional services and we
know that in our state we have a
lot of work to do when it comes
to the tax structure
particularly for medical
entrepreneurs who are providing
not only access to quality care
but also great change jobs in
their community and we look
forward to working with the
committee and the future on
issues such as this because we
do know that the impact
recruitment and retention issues
for our positions and the
viability of our independent
practices so thank you very much
madam chair.
Thank you Jason Weaks.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Jason Weaks who
have Albuquerque Hispanic
chamber of commerce definitely
feel like this is a great deal
for small businesses that
chamber really focuses on being
an incubator and supporter of
small businesses in the state of
New Mexico I think this is an
important change our tax code
makes it easier to run a small
business in New Mexico and also
using a small businesses to
succeed as they seek to become
large businesses and grow our
economy I think this will lead
to more diversification which
one needed in the state.
In support thank you.
Thank you all right let me just
double check I don't see any
other infants up in support any
hands up in opposition.
Those who wish to speak
opposition.
Jordan.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Bill
Jordan with voices for children
we stand opposed to the
legislation both because of its
enormous cost to the general
fund but also because it runs
contrary to the stated goals of
the interim tax committee to try
to lower the G. R. T. right by
broadening the base over the
years we've cut more more holes
in the Swiss cheese narrowing
the base and driving up the
right this legislation would be
one of the biggest poll yet.
Remitting brings in one billion
dollars to the general fund we
can't afford to and peer meeting
and we should not be eating away
at it with this or any other
anti paramedic legislation
rather we believe we should
continue to work of this
committee in the interim tax
committee to relieve the
impacted permitting by
broadening rather than narrowing
our base allowing us to lower
the rate for all thank you.
Thank you Hannah Burling.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Hannah
Burling and I am president of
the league of women voters of
New Mexico we believe that a
fair tax must be adequate to
finance the essentials of
government this bill would
remove funds from the general
funds without any plan to
replace them.
We are to do not pass thank you.
Thank you Carl Kaiser.
Can
you hear me.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee I'm pro Kaiser in your
fifty year resident of New
Mexico and I oppose H. B. two of
seven the bill drastically
reduces both state and local
revenue to the tune of hundreds
of millions of dollars G. R. T.
was designed to provide stable
revenue but exemptions reduce
the tax base increase the rate
surgery becomes increasingly
regressive think this business
tax preferences promise growth
increase in increased revenue
but the situation seldom if ever
happens the two thousand three
C. I. T. tax cuts simply strip
government of needed revenue for
Medicare schools orphan
extractive industries cleanup
and other items we do not want a
related bill to replete such
events the bill is misplaced and
I urge a rejection of HB to a
seven thank you.
Thank you I don't see any other
hands up so let's go.
The committee.
People.
Questions comments.
Representative Strickler.
Thank you thank you madam chair
you know this is
as I said earlier I mean this is
been
on our radar for many many years
our neighboring states and and
that's that's our competitive
situation all over neighboring
states they don't tax services
and so we're an out liar
I don't know madam chair and and
and Representative Harper
You know.
It's just a fact of life we have
to be able to compete and in New
Mexico is is our growth rate is
as the name make two point eight
percent we still have a we're
still the forty seven point
state the nation and this this
bill would put us on a on a good
footing so we can we want to
track business and industry here
in the G. R. T. is just as it's
just a red flag to out of state
businesses so that like to
expand I they don't understand
it and what what are your
thoughts on that
Madam chair representative
Harper.
Thank you for that the question
madam chair and Representative
Strickler
I.
I think.
So I mean you you'll notice in
in my opening I did not talk
about promising rainbows and
unicorns that all this and that
you have great gross and many
economy in the state
I believe this would
are we to some growth in our
economy the state that's why I
think we should do it but that's
not the only reason why I think
we should do it what I mentioned
the main reasons why is is that
our small businesses are
especially or at a great
disadvantage.
and and so that's why I think
this is the right thing to do
that the second saying you know
I I appreciated the folks in the
in the audience that supposed.
I mean folks know that I've been
will the biggest perhaps the
biggest
proponent here of melting down a
block of Swiss cheese and and
lowering the rate and broadening
our base.
But when we did the mass.
we could not lower the rate and
not for permitting was not a
problem.
And so the hybrid approach the
right approach.
The state has already been doing
is a broad based retail sales
tax.
And and what that means is
you're taxing the last step of
the transaction broadly not
multiple steps through the
process.
And so when when I hear from my
good friends it was for children
saying it was a bad bill we need
to be brought in the base I sure
hope that they will support
moves to broaden the base by
reinstating the tax on food
thank you.
Thank you Representative Harper
and any further questions or
comments Representative
Strickler madam chair that that.
That's it thank you okay.
Any other members of the
committee who wish to speak on
this point or ask questions.
I don't see hands up so I have a
few questions.
And one is Representative Harper
in your presentation you
mentioned you feel like we have
moved to a broad based G. R. T.
or maybe under miss understood
you and I would like to
understand that better because
that idea runs counter to what
we talk about on a frequent
basis here in this committee in
other venues.
Yeah great great question madam
chair and
And I don't have the graphic in
front of me would all describe
it so that the tax foundation
actually has a nice graphic
really have a spectrum of our
staff from one side they've got
a sales tax on the other side is
gonna gross receipts tax and
they have an arrow for New
Mexico where we currently stand
and we're actually closer we're
in the middle but we're closer
to the retail sales tax now than
we are to a gross receipts tax.
And I actually passed this
graphic a couple years ago when
I had the bill to change our our
tax name from gross receipts tax
the sales tax and from your
staff from
Thank you but we we have
compensating tax thank you to a
use tax that's what I'm people
get confused with these but I'm
why why the tax foundation says
at and and I agree that we are
more like a sales tax now is
because you look at
a true gross receipts tax and it
taxes everything every
transaction
and and Texas has a franchise
tax that does that house again
tax that does that those are
true gross receipts tax but over
the years we've we've been
adding exemptions deductions and
credits the gross receipts tax
to the point now where it is.
Closer to a sales tax than it is
to a true gross receipts.
Thank you for the answer a
question for you
will how do you I I think you
mentioned the food tax in your
points that you made earlier.
How else do you anticipate will
be able to brought in our
revenue streams such that we can
replace the the funds that we're
losing through anti permitting
activities yeah madam chair
that's that's an excellent
question and and I've tried
you know I I I know folks on on
on my side our like well we need
to cut spending and and folks on
your salary like we need to we
have services that we need to
provide administrative spending
so all of my efforts on tax
reform.
I've tried to be in the middle
try to be revenue neutral and so
you're asking exact right
question how do we how do we
lower the rate but still keep.
You know that the same level of
revenue.
And and I early on fell in love
with the the Thom Taylor bill
share ideas we can cut our
universities rate to to percent
and but when we did the mass we
spent a whole year putting
together all the data and we did
a mass we found we just could
not lower the rate to to percent
which is not possible if we
remove food and every single
deduction credit out there we
could lower the rate about two.
about four percent.
And that includes state local.
But that rate Turman is still a
problem so we said okay let's
remove the worst forms of
permitting and that would to be
revenue neutral that would bring
us to about four and a half
percent.
And so we said okay that's
that's what we're gonna do.
but to directly answer your
question madam chair
Taxation on food removing the
hold harmless payments
you know so that that amount you
know it goes up larger those are
the two biggest things and then
you have to look at the the rest
of the Swiss cheese and and
those all add up
to a place we can reduce the
rate you know roughly roughly
two and a half percent
Madam it's also harder to do
that when there's a lot of money
coming in because it costs more
when there's a lot of money
coming into your reduce the rate
and I supposed to a normal year
or perhaps a lean here.
So so that number changes
depending on on how much tax
revenues coming in.
One last question and that has
to do with this idea that.
Smaller businesses that rely on
you know contracting out for
accounting services legal
services
are unfairly disadvantage when
compared with the large business
that has in house and so how do
you respond to the point X.
made at those large bill
businesses are paying for those
things and because they have to
pay a whole slew of payroll
taxes and so on and so forth
that.
Denticle to G. R. T. but
certainly add to the cost of
their doing business.
Yeah that's a great question and
I and I saw that in the FIR and
I.
I'm not sure that's a.
That was sought out well so so
the question being okay well
what about.
What we're saying is to be a
great help to small businesses
but large businesses if they
have these people on on staff
there's gonna pay benefits and
salary and all these things and
maybe they still contract out
anyway so was this a benefit to
to big business too and and drug
register is a big business does
that yeah it's it's it's a
benefit to them but again this
is parenting work we're talking
about we're trying to prevent I
mean that that's cost that tax
is rolled up into the final cost
of the product that they sell.
Right I mean so we're we're
trying to stop chairman and I do
believe the small businesses
benefit way more in large
businesses but I just think
about this from a business
perspective.
Right if if I'm a larger
business and I can have an on
staff.
Accountant.
I'm.
This is my account right and
they know my business and and
they
you know don't have the the the
the spin up time or you know the
you know if you contract out
with someone who needs to learn
your business and how it works
there are many advantages to
having someone on on staff and I
don't think the extra that they
pay and benefits
obviously if that was not worth
it.
The business's name when do that
so.
I've chair of I I hope that
answers your question.
It does to some degree I'm we're
gonna have more of a
conversation about that this
during the interim but thanks
for bringing it up.
NMAA
of the Representative
representatives I thought I saw
Representative Maestas is hand
up and I after I started talking
so I apologize if it was up and
I didn't notice is represented
by us to see up there you thank
you Mr the the color of your
hand Representative.
You madam.
No you and you ask the questions
I was about to ask but I'll look
forward to the conversation this
summer Representative Harper
with the rest of that last
question thank you.
Great thank you Representative I
see no other hands up from are
any happy to entertain a all I
think Representative Harper
wants to table oh wait excuse me
I see Pam Representative the
person that did you have your
hand up sorry it yes madam chair
I I just wanted to bring one
question and for Representative
Harper madam chair I but a could
it's we're looking at these
costs and you talked about being
tax back on the food I I'm
wondering how you are bringing
in I'm considering all of the
credits that we're giving also
is part of the reduction in our
tax so before we start taxing
all the individuals who are
already having a hard time
eating I would like us to take a
really close look at the credits
that we're giving and to make
sure that those are being
equally distributed as part of
this conversation.
Madam chair by you're hurting
your singing my song
and just so you're aware when we
carried when I carried house
bill four twelve five years ago
that was a big reset on our
gross receipts tax we limited
every.
Credit and.
personally every deduction.
and and I had
lobbyist after this come up to
me and say Hey you know we we
really need this one credit can
you please keep it in there and
I I just told my work if I if I.
Remove yours that opens the door
for everyone else.
And this would say okay I get it
but you know there's there's and
all of a line of forty or fifty
lobbyist you know speaking
against the bill.
Rachel harvest you're you're
exactly right madam chair and
vice chair that's.
We have to be wholistic about
this
and and and be consistent.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Harper that that
was my only question.
Thank you vice chair Herndon and
I believe you're prepared to
make a motion Representative
Harper.
Madam chair I move that we
deliberately and thoughtfully
table this bill and and and have
some good conversation reentry
second.
Right is there any opposition to
the tabling motion.
I see no opposition we have
fully table then say gently and
appreciatively tabled you're on
your bills Representative Harper
okay this committee.
Course and thank you for the
conversation we're now on house
bill forty eight and I'm gonna
let's say forty eight but will
also be talking about forty nine
right after that bill and I want
to talk about structure for a
little bit so it looks like we
have the two sponsors of are at
least two of the sponsors of
this bill Representative Brown
is here and I notice
Representative Gail Armstrong is
with us as well welcome to the
committee good to see both of
you.
The way I would propose we do
this will small here house bill
forty eight first where you'll
talk about the bill will we'll
take public comment on it I
would like to suggest to the
committee that we take public
comment on both forty eight
forty nine does anyone have any
problem with that so okay well
okay I don't see any objection
to that and then we'll talk
about forty the differences
between forty eight forty nine
does that make sense so what we
can and will vote on forty eight
first and then we'll talk about
the differences between forty
and forty nine.
We're gonna go okay good.
Thank you the floor is yours
Representative Brown and
Armstrong.
Thank you very much madam chair
and members of the committee so
Representative Gail Armstrong
and I are presenting first house
bill forty eight
it's proposes the repeal of the
social security income tax
levied by the state of New
Mexico so madam chair and
members it's been in the news
quite a bit lately that New
Mexico has several billion
dollars of new revenue and we
all know that this is an
unprecedented unheard of amounts
and so there's a lot of extra
spending that's been proposed
for our state agencies but
retirees are aware of this
increased revenue and they're
wondering out when the state of
New Mexico will get around to
lifting the tax on social
security benefits benefits that
they rely on in retirement.
madam chair the proposed budget
for fiscal year twenty twenty
three makes space for four
hundred million dollars in
general fund tax cuts in the
bill that representative
Armstrong and I are presenting
today proposes as I said to
repeal the tax and if this bill
passes and the governor signs it
into law the loss of revenue to
the state or the cost of the
repeal would be covered in this
tax cut space.
Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham
madam chair has repeatedly
stated during this legislative
session that she is in favor of
repealing the tax for all
retirees regardless of
retirement income.
And on this there is clearly
much agreement and this
agreement is bipartisan.
I bills are being considered in
this thirty day budget session
to achieve this and.
Representative Armstrong and I
were first out of the gate with
house bill forty eight we pre
filed this legislation on
January eleventh a week before
the start of the session.
Senator Tolman and Senator
Hickey filed their bill Senate
bill forty nine on January
eighteenth which is our opening
day.
Senator Padilla filed Senate
bill one oh eight on January
twentieth.
His bill is identical to house
bill forty eight calling for a
full repeal madam chair and
members are next Senator
Gallegos and Senator Moores file
the bill on January twentieth
and it to calls for a full
repeal and that is Senate bill
one twenty one so these bills
are floating through the system
and we're thankful to have forty
eight heard this morning in the
house tax and revenue committee.
All but one of these five bills
would result in a full repeal
the one that would not is Senate
bill forty nine and in contrast
it would impose a cap above
which a retiree would still pay
taxes.
And we've heard many times madam
chair that currently only twelve
states tax social security
income.
We've heard also in seen studies
that this taxation is a
deterrent for many retirees to
either stay in New Mexico for
retirement or to move here for
retirement and legislatures in
other states have figured this
out and that's why so few states
are still taxing the the
benefit.
Madam chair I believe that a
full repeal is the best course
of action.
If the New Mexico legislature
sets a cap perhaps your
amendment one of the bills this
will not yet New Mexico out of
the call of the states that
still tax social security the
narrative does not change quoted
being a Mexico taxes social
security benefits people are
necessarily going to dig into
the details of what that might
look look like they just know
it's still being taxed in some
form or fashion so madam chair
and members of the committee I
say let's make a clean break of
it the time has come to abolish
the tax for every New Mexico
retiree once and for all.
Madam chair in truth social
security was never meant to
provide a source of tax revenue
for the states.
So how did this come about what
happened.
You may remember hearing in
previous hearings we've had on
these repeal bills that the very
idea of tax so since the social
Security stuck into the New
Mexico tax code through a bill
that lacked public input and was
heard at close to midnight when
most citizens have already gone
to bed and we're paying
attention.
So people who had retired for
the night so to speak had no
inkling that their retirement
benefits were headed for
taxation.
There really was not a betting
of the idea nor debate.
And just another bit of history
madam chair originally the
federal government did not tax
social security income however
this changed in nineteen eighty
four the fed started taxing
social security in order to
shore up the system.
They did make an exemption
however and that is for an
individual taxpayer.
there would be no tax on social
security if income was twenty
five thousand dollars or less
and the other exemption for
married filing jointly was no
taxes income was thirty two
thousand dollars or less.
So as I mentioned earlier New
Mexico soon followed suit
copying the federal way.
The differences the federal
taxation was meant to shore up
the system but the New Mexico
tax revenue created through this
did not sure up in the system
all it did was send money into
the general fund for general
spending.
So again it all started in
nineteen eighty four and for
decades have now gone by and
these tax triggers have not been
adjusted have not been adjusted
for inflation or to reflect
increases in wages over those
four years.
The minimum wage madam chair in
nineteen eighty four was three
dollars and thirty five cents an
hour and today the minimum wage
is nearing fifteen dollars an
hour so it's not uncommon.
For people entering retirement
to have social security income
of more than twenty five
thousand dollars and frankly
that amount is not much to live
on these days.
So in terms of present value
from
in nineteen eighty four dollars
of twenty five thousand the
current value would be sixty six
thousand dollars today so what
Justin for inflation and other
economic escalators a retiree
who is a single filers should be
simple at up to sixty six
thousand dollars and likewise
for married filing jointly at
thirty two thousand dollars
threshold which which has been
in place for almost forty years
today would be the equivalent of
eighty four thousand dollars so
clearly the exemption level has
not kept pace with the reality
of life.
And madam chair and members even
worse when it comes to social
security taxation New Mexico
seniors are actually being taxed
twice first through payroll
deduction and you see that in
the on the pay stub where it
mentions social security and
then there taxed again when
benefits are claimed.
So the money is taxed when it
goes in and the money is taxed
when it goes out and we don't
treat any other benefit that way
much less double tax in it but.
So madam chair house bill forty
eight will not help New Mexicans
who are already exempt from
social security tax however it
will help the middle class and
we know that many people in the
middle class truly do do tax
relief especially with
inflationary pressures the way
they are today the cost of
living has gone up tremendously.
Madam chair it's my opinion that
all senior citizens deserve to
retire with dignity they worked
all their lives they paid
faithfully into the social
security system.
And they should not be penalized
with the tax when they reach
retirement much less a double
tax.
As I indicated earlier many
retirees are barely making it.
it's been said in some previous
discussions on on these bills
that the state of New Mexico
wants to keep social security
taxation as a reliable revenue
stream but I think we can all
agree that retirees need a
reliable revenue stream as well
or income stream in their golden
years.
We also know madam chair that
many seniors are raising
grandchildren.
In fact we heard from Senator
Padilla.
That forty nine percent of
foster children are being raised
by their grandparents.
And so house bill forty eight in
terms of putting more money in
the pockets of retirees is
actually helping grandchildren
so we are there for the voices
for grand children
with this bill.
We believe that several hundred
dollars extra for retirees would
really help them and we seen
estimates all the way from four
hundred seventy dollars as
additional income because a
stopping Tax we've seen seven
hundred dollars but we think
it's closer to eight hundred
dollars and we think this is
very significant for so many
people.
Madam chair as a matter of tax
policy and practice New Mexico
does a tremendous amount to help
low income families.
But there are a whole lot of
people in the middle and what
have we done to help them.
We know that retirees to live on
a fixed income and so what looks
like you know secure retirement
to some can actually evaporate
very quickly with medical
expenses utility costs going up
groceries are higher fuel as
fire that suppose it security
may not actually be all that all
that strong.
So we believe madam chair
members that the time has come
to return the money to the
people who earned it.
And that's what house bill forty
eight does so madam chair like
to turn this over now to
a co sponsor Gail Armstrong I
believe she's online with us.
Representative Armstrong
welcome thank you madam chair
and members of the committee and
thank you for here in our bill
today I sort of have the same
statements for both bills so I
won't need to reiterate when we
called up the next bill I just
explain the differences and so
as my cohort said she's stated
so ballot very eloquently
what happens in New Mexico was
so security income tax I first
this was first brought to my
attention madam chair members of
the committee by some
constituents that
were struggling.
And they told me the whole story
at a meet and greet at Sierra
here at the L. bar.
And I found it appalling first
of all and and they were very
upset and they needed this
income.
Our he had worked for the state
highway department for many
years and retired from there and
she for a doctor's office for
many years as well they raised
three beautiful girls have
several grandchildren and great
grandchildren.
I'm an article madam chair that
was posted in the Albuquerque
journal on February second
by voices for children
throughout our state states
throughout our state and
nation's history we've sought to
create government that serves
everyone well.
No matter their race ethnicity
or gender.
New Mexico leaders have taken
many actions to protect and
support children and families
through the uncertain through
this uncertainty including
hunger relief funding emergency
economic relief for those left
out of the federal state and
federal stimulus payments a new
paid sick leave policy an
increase and expansion of the
working families tax credit
which put money in the hands of
families who will spend it
quickly and local.
I also saw that New Mexico
families use their X. expanded
monthly child of federal child
tax credit to pay down debt and
cover basic needs like food
clothing and shelter I believe
the same thing is what retirees
would use this additional the
exemption of tax on their social
security for they would use it
for food clothing and shelter
and as Michael work stated many
grandparents half of those
Hispanic are raising their
grandchildren foster
grandchildren.
In a year we are flush with
dollars isn't it time that we
take all New Mexicans into
consideration let's work to get
New Mexico off of at least one
back list.
Thank you madam chair and we
stand for questions.
Thank you Representative
Armstrong now we'll go to the
audience and I just want to
review kind of how we handle.
This audience participation
we'll hear from those in favor
and those opposed each
individual gets one minute and
we're limiting debate one at two
ten minutes each side so at this
point I will all on those who
raised their hands in favor or
so everyone less raise their
hand you wish to speak in favor
of these two bills call
guessing.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Rio Grande
foundation strongly supports
legislation to eliminate New
Mexico's tax on social security
for all the reasons the Sanchez
state but we do want to
reiterate that this be a cut we
have the money to cut the tax
not a look to eliminate it
completely out without adding
additional revenues from other
sources or limiting the
reduction and keeping the tax in
place.
And maybe eliminating eighty
five or ninety percent of it
this should be a complete
elimination of the unfair
unnecessary so security tax and
we support these efforts
wholeheartedly thank you.
Thank you Katrina for trump
Lopez how trump Lopez.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Katrina hope from Lopez I am
the cabinet secretary for aging
and long term services we are in
full support of this bill and
just really appreciate the
Sanchez bringing this forward
you know we have seventeen
percent increase costs and and
food over the last year and
gasoline we have we you know by
twenty thirty we're going to be
the fourth highest populated
state of sixty plus per capita
in this country we need this
bill and and I don't think
seniors I want to be told if
they think that they have enough
money or not and that our
seniors are fine because they're
not and with these rising costs
and with the vulnerability of
our seniors it is important that
we pass this bill as it is we've
got several people who have come
to talk about how important this
bill is and they're paying taxes
on it and still can't make their
ends meet thank you madam chair.
Thank you
Is I help me with your name
thing by I'm only.
Yes near me.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is O. T. the only I am the
advocacy director for a a RP in
New Mexico and on behalf of A.
R. P. New Mexico's two hundred
fifty two thousand members
statewide eliminating the tax on
social security benefits is one
of our top priorities most
recently serving New Mexico
voters age fifty and over and
they overwhelmingly agree across
party lines that it's time to
remove this tax burden entirely
this will help lower middle
income New Mexicans who face
increase health care costs
utility costs and a rise in the
says he's like groceries and
medication in addition to help
retirees got limited options for
rejoining the work force and
have little time to increase
their income and savings
complete elimination this tax
with the immediately help
preserve the financial security
middle class retirees and their
families especially those who
tell us that they're using
social security to help care for
their own parents or spouses and
their grandparents raising
grandchildren we support this
bill.
hardly thank you.
It's not a name it's an
identifier com zoom.
if you could please identify
yourself thank you.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee this is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce and I'm actually in
your committee room room three
so okay grace.
Thanks date sorry.
The chamber supports this bill
only a dozen states tax social
security income and our tax on
social security is one of the
most onerous of those twelve.
Here pay taxes on the money they
put into social security and
then they get taxed again as
benefits so far most of the rest
of the nation has realized this
doesn't make sense the New
Mexico should follow suit.
Mexico can and should strive to
be one of the best places in
America to retire and policies
like taxing social security
benefits once counter to that
goal thank you.
Thank you Mr Billington Leri
Sonntag.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee
speaking in on behalf of the New
Mexico business coalition we
fully support house bill forty
eight and other efforts to
remove tax on social security.
The sponsors that outstanding
job of laying the foundation for
why it's important and why now
is the right time and it's a
fact that there are many
retirees who are barely making
ends meet and we're living in a
time where inflation has hit a
forty year high many retirees
are living paycheck to paycheck.
New Mexico is long overdue and
stopping the tax on social
security earnings now is the
time New Mexico business
coalition fully supports house
bill forty eight and other
legislation to remove tax on
social security thank thank you
mark Mickelson.
Yes thank you madam chair and
committee members I'm mark
Mickelson I'm the vice president
for the New Mexico branch of the
national active and retired
federal employees association we
represent the fifty four
thousand federal employees and
retirees living in New Mexico
and our members strongly support
this bill as they face rising
costs the average retiree from
the federal service.
Since the current system with
retirement system was introduced
in nineteen eighty seven lives
on about thirty four thousand a
year from a combined pension and
social security income so this
is very much needed and that
money that will be saved by
repealing the tax will be
recycled back into the economy
by our members so thank you very
much for this opportunity to
support these bills.
Thank you John block.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I want
to first of all thank the
representatives Armstrong and
brown for providing this bill
for us and both bills forty
eight forty nine to allow no
taxation on social security as
well as the taxes already taxed
by the government so I think
that it's very important that we
pass this legislation I think
especially for low income
families and for people who do
live paycheck to paycheck and
rely on their social security
income I feel like it's been far
too long that we have not had
such a measure passed through
this legislature in a last
session of the legislature
failed to pass this legislation
and died on arrival so I pray
and I hope that we can pass HB
forty nine to completely
eliminate social security taxes
in New Mexico which is an unfair
disadvantage to our senior
citizens many of whom I have
served our country in our
military or other places and so
I really hope that this
committee passes this
unanimously so thank you all so
much and madam chair
Representative thank you.
Thank you.
Lee that includes those who want
to switch to speak in favor
Individuals who wish to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
This is opposition.
Okay
Bill Jordan Jordan.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Bill Jordan with
voices for children we really
appreciate what the sponsors of
this bill on the other bills
like it are trying to do and I
think you know we've always been
champions of trying to help
those in need but it's clear
from the FY are that these
proposals do not help those who
need it.
In fact it would make our tax
system more regressive give yet
another tax break to upper
middle income and the rich the
FY our state.
seniors with adjusted gross
income levels less than two to
three times the poverty level do
not pay taxes will see no impact
from this bill.
New Mexico is a lot of needs we
don't believe we need to spend
two and a half times the entire
budget of the ageing Department
or another tax break that will
provide no relief at all for
seniors who need it most they
would get not one dollar nothing
zip zilch zero zilch nada.
Let's help those seniors who
need our help and not pass what
is just feel good legislation
thank you.
Thank you
R. L. Kiser.
All madam chair members of the
committee I'm proud because I'm
retired I'm a middle percentile
of senior I'm also an AARP
member and I strongly oppose
both H. B. forty eight and the
faced an HB forty nine those
bills are expensive not targeted
and are not necessary the
initial cost is a hundred
eighteen million every year on
rises over time for H. P. forty
eight of the funds could be used
for for many neglected state
needs press worst portion of the
bills affected sixty six percent
of the exemption value goes to
the top fifth of household
income this is simply given to
higher income seniors.
We need no assistance currently
target exemptions to low income
seniors and elector reduce or
eliminate the impact of lower
income senior households elector
could be increased.
If one wants to increase excuse
me if one wants to construct a
better P. I. T. system for the
Middle percentiles and let's
have have lower rates and a lot
more marginal tax brackets.
I'm it is poor pot tax policy to
reduce state income treat
streams in yeah hi hi Revenue
years.
Hi there I think your time is up
okay thank you.
Thank you I'm in a Berlin.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is Hannah
Burling with the league of women
voters of New Mexico we stand in
opposition to house bill's two
forty eight and forty nine for
all the reasons previously
mentioned in the league believes
our tax system should be
progressive this is a flat
exemption without any means
testing.
Will reduce overall tax revenue
and threaten the ability to fund
essential services we urge a do
not pass thank you.
Thank you Ellen pines.
Madam chair members of the
committee el and comments I'm
speaking on my own behalf as an
individual citizen today
I was going to start my comments
by pointing out that this is
really not a very targeted tax
break it will mostly benefit
upper income people and result
in very large revenue losses Mr
chairman and Mister Keiser have
covered those points very well
so I don't need to go into
detail all simply add that
according to the FIR this these
bills being none of the LFC
criteria for good tax policy of
the sponsors have argued quite
passionately that the middle
class needs tax breaks and help
with the rising cost of that
applies to everybody and should
be limited based on source of
income I I agree with them that
we should provide assistance to
kinship caregivers raising
foster children but many of
those people would not benefit
because they don't risk receive
social security and we should
find that help to all not just
social security recipients thank
you madam chair thank you Jim
Jack just.
Janet Jackson.
I'm not too sure what's
happening on her and.
We'll go back to the committee
now.
Unless so I see Representative
Harper has his hand.
Thank you madam chair and
representatives it's it's great
to see you this morning
Very much appreciated the to
open discussion I think you guys
are are getting are you gals are
getting really good at to
delivery and other messaging
here.
and and I'm I'm really not going
to speak in favor or opposition.
I'm just gonna talk about the
mass just to make sure that we
understand.
What what the truth is here
because we heard it by heard
several people in the attendee
list in support said I really
don't think I understand
just the numbers right and if we
understand the numbers then we
can talk about okay what's the
right policy.
So so I'm just gonna go over
briefly how social security is
taxed in the United States.
And we'll start with before you
retired.
so so madam chair and
representatives
and you know this I mean
Representative Armstrong you
have a small business that you
own right I mean so.
when when when I'm working.
I I paid into social security
it's part of my deductions on my
on my paystub.
My employer also plays at an
equal amount and and social
security to the federal
government.
And the amount.
That I pay comes after taxes.
So it's already been taxed but
the amount that my employer pays
is not taxed.
So only half of the total amount
of money that went to pay for
social security is taxed.
And so at the federal level when
you're doing your federal taxes.
they account for this when you
are receiving payment when you
retired and receiving social
security benefits.
When you're doing your federal
taxes you take half.
Of that total amount that you
got a year and you to drive it.
from your income so that that
part is not tax because you
already paid taxes on that.
But the other half that was not
taxed stays on and it is taxed
at the federal level.
The United States government
taxes social security half of it
at the federal level.
And the reason then why New
Mexico taxes it is because we
pay you back off of the federal
taxes.
There are several states that
have their own tax structure.
I.
They have different reasons for
why they did that I personally
think it's great that New Mexico
piggy backs off the federal
taxes because it helps the tax
payer it makes
it easier to
compliant takes the burn down
when it comes to the mask time
and money to to develop your New
Mexico tax return so I I think
it's a great idea that we take
it back off of the federal.
Tax Policy.
So maybe maybe in a different
approach to go to the feds and
say Hey you guys need to stop
testing shows social security
and then automatically we want.
just a thought.
Okay so now let's talk about
Mexico taxes so you've
You Mr Mexico tax return you use
the same number for your
adjusted gross income that you
use for your.
Our federal attorney plugged in
there.
And let's say I think I heard
one person from the attendee
list say that thirty four
thousand dollars was what.
Someone got who had worked for
the Feds and that was the
combined retirement from the
feds and our social security.
Okay so thirty four thousand
well you take.
again half of the social
security.
out of that equation so let's
just say maybe a.
Maybe.
Half of that is some security
the other half is their
retirement so half of thirty
four is you know fifteen sixteen
you know seventeen thousand so
maybe about seventeen thousand
is what they're getting so scary
so half of seventeen thousand
you take that out that's eight
and a half so you take a.
You know eight and a half away
from their total of thirty four
and I know it's that early in
the morning this is really you
know operable mass here you're
talking twenty five twenty six
thousand dollars.
Income well.
The federal standard deduction
for a married couple right now
is twenty five thousand dollars.
So.
He was a track at twenty five
thousand dollars not twenty six.
Thousand and you're left with
one thousand dollars that's
taxable.
And and then we have other
programs in in New Mexico
Not sure if that would qualify
for our income tax.
deduction.
but we have.
Property tax benefits for
seniors we have what you're
which was mentioned earlier and
we did just tribal leader and
index it.
so I mean by the time you take
that one thousand dollars to our
our our our state taxes I think
you're paying almost nothing.
you know maybe maybe two percent
of the very most on that.
so I mean we're talking about
with the.
One thousand times two percent
twenty dollars.
Right.
I just want folks understand
that
Those who are two or three or
maybe even four times that
current poverty level are not
paying tax on social security at
all.
And so.
if we.
Decide you want to move forward
with this
legislation which need
understand that those who will
be benefiting.
Are those who are in the middle
class which I believe Sanchez
already mentioned or or in the
upper class.
And so this really is
a question of.
do we just think it's morally
wrong to tax social security so
we should remove it or do we
really think this is putting the
port which is not
So I guess all posture for just
the second I've I've just one
more complex posture for second
and Representative is if you
have you know any anything you
like to to add or or or comment
on that I'd be happy to hear.
Madam chair and Representative
Harper so I appreciate you
reading through the tax return
portion of this but I think the
biggest obstacle we have is.
People don't look at the
information they don't dig into
the details like you're doing
here and yes the the poor
already benefited by being
exempt from taxation so you know
they they don't need to help
they already have the help.
There is a perception that
really works against our state
and we want to be a place where
people want to come retire in
state of retirement so
all the details like I said
earlier those don't really
matter all that much it's just
knowing that we tax it if it is
in some ways a moral issue is as
you said it's just it's the
right thing to do to repeal this
tax and you know we look at
factors here and there but we
also know too that when retirees
have more money in their pockets
they're very likely going to
spend it and it's going to boost
the economy so whatever we lose
in terms of tax revenue will be
recruit to a large extent
through gross receipts taxes and
other things that we right
through through that higher
spending level but you know you
can take your cell phone I know
that Madam chair representative
you held up your cell phone in
an earlier bill this morning and
you know all you have to do is
take that cell phone and and
type in the words best places to
retire who taxes you know
retirement income and it'll pop
up immediately and tell us.
You know what the story is
regarding New Mexico and it does
hurt us I I have spoken madam
chair to quite a few people I I
try to get into my district as
much as I can and meet with
people from all walks of life
and I do here when I need with
the the retiree groups when are
you going to stop tax and social
security and so you know it is
it is very much a perception
thing and they want this and I
don't know if they're
Republicans or Democrats and
that doesn't matter to me the
point is it just seems so
entirely unfair to them that we
need to do this so some people
will budget and as we said
earlier a lot of folks risk
raising their grandchildren in
retirement and and that they
need this money they really do
thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
representative brown
Representative Armstrong if you
want to comment as well thank
you madam chair and thank you
Representative Harper I always
take need to to the information
that you have at your fingertips
and and in your great minds and
you know ultimately I would like
to see a full tax package
addressing all of the issues
this is just one of them and and
I understand you and I hear you
but I am here to represent my
constituents which is the
largest district in the state on
the house side and and this is
what they're asking me to do
this is what they're wanting and
at and I know that there's
valleys and hills all through
taxing and but I agree with
Representative brown that when
people are looking to retire and
I got several emails saying
we're not gonna choose New
Mexico because they tax social
security income so I appreciate
your comments thank you madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I.
And I I agree I mean perception
really is everything right
there's this perception that we
tax.
Social security and and we do
but when you again we put paper
pencil you realize well it's
really your folks who have some
decent retirement income who are
getting the half that wasn't
taxed taxed but there's this
perception right that.
Mexico's back as a tax security
so I I totally get what you're
saying to get it.
I'm I guess the manager of the
pandemic last when I just wanna
race I I I'm going to take time
away from the other members.
In.
When when you look at a state
and their tax structure it's
very easy to pick one part of
the tax code and say see this is
bad all the other states do it
differently.
And and you can do that with
almost anything in our tax code
you really need to look more
holistically at it and and an
example.
I like to use is our property
tax.
the state of Mexico if you look
at the the tax foundation they
rate our property tax it first
or second best in the nation it
goes it goes one or two every
year.
and and it's because we have a
really low property tax except
for Bernalillo county.
and we protect our property
taxes and and the constitution.
But I don't hear anyone say I
move to New Mexico because of
low property tax I've never
heard that.
in fact we often have bills that
come before us that say we need
to exempt property tax for
veterans or other people and I
just kind of scratch my head and
go.
I'm so grateful for their
service but
what ends up happening is
government doesn't spend less.
the burden of the taxes shifts
to other people.
And and to me that's just that's
just not fair and and that's
what would happen here you know
governments not gonna spend last
to make up for this this
it's it's a the burden is going
to spread out.
and so I've been an advocate for
your tax policy should not be an
out wire on the low end or or
the high end we really should be
kind of middle of the pack.
and so so in this case.
You know
Yeah again just understanding
the implications the tax policy
what we want to do what do we do
we feel that changing this
perception is worth the cost
knowing that to
who could be the beneficiaries
not something left Russell rest
and and I'm gonna start my
committee here but I think I'll
just say again just like my last
bill that had a big fiscal
impact right I think it was a
semi five thousand dollars to
the state
and we we table that in this
committee I just wanna make sure
folks understand I know I know
you you representative
understand those who might be
listening or in the attendee
list.
In this committee we table every
bill with the fiscal impact
And and the reason for that and
it's been done for decades it
doesn't matter who's been in
charge we follow this practice
right now we have about
almost four hundred million
dollars of tax expenditures
tabled in this committee.
And if we just let the always
goes out
What would end up happening was
the appropriators in and and you
know but I have both of you
being on on probation would have
to call up the speaker and say
Hey you gotta you gotta semis
does to appropriations we did
not put four hundred million
dollars in the budget for these
things I mean I mean there
and we talk about that but how
it's been done in the past as we
find out from appropriations how
much room we have in the budget
for for tax expenditures and
they will bring those off the
table and get them through that
we agree to on a bipartisan way
working together in this
committee we you know right the
bills what we think will be the
biggest bang for the Buck and
get those out and so you know
obviously in this case these
bills will be tabled I
appreciate madam chair and
representative Armstrong what
you said I've I've been told
that
there may be a good tax reform
bill next session.
And this should be a big part of
the conversation at whether to
include this in some form or not
as part of that that legislation
so I want to thank you for
bringing this forward for help
along Soto conversation
and and just because it's being
temporally table today doesn't
mean it's instead we're we're
obviously this conversations for
the instrument and and it's next
year
so thank you Madam.
Thank you Representative
Representative Strickler.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative
You know I understood I really
appreciate Representative
Harper.
Breaking down the.
The tax burden so security taxed
and we we talked earlier on
house bill two oh seven on the
G..
On the permitting and the in and
that's very important for for us
to be competitive and I always
remind myself.
Madam chair and and
representatives that you know
New Mexico is in a competitive
situation with our neighbors.
and they don't they don't tax so
security I think the only state
that does.
Other than us is Utah and they
have a lower tax rate than we
did I also want to.
all I'm also reminded.
That last several years thank I
believe in twenty nineteen
madam chair and and
representatives of the
legislature raised a number of
taxes.
In our state the personal income
tax a cigarette tax.
Motor vehicle tax and others to
the tune of five hundred million
dollars so we've been raising
taxes on one end and that we
need to throw we need to throw a
bone to to
Our taxpayers and this is a this
is a great tool to do that may
not be the best tax policy
but to
we are we're we're in a
competitive situation and what
the representatives I think this
is a time is.
Important we've we've got to the
the funds to pay for this
tax cut.
I think the people in New Mexico
or in favor of this our
governors in favor of this and I
think
I think the.
House Bill two oh seven the
permitting of our businesses is
something you would need to
consider too so these are
I don't know the expenditures up
for this believes a hundred
twenty million dollars is that
is that right the
representatives of madam chair
is it is that the fiscal impact
Yes madam chair and
Representative Strickler so
we've seen a number of numbers
the fiscal impact report at
least a hundred eighteen million
that we scrutinize that we had
some people look at it and that
they think it's probably closer
to what it was the last time we
brought this bill which was
eighty three million because the
the difference between those two
numbers it just doesn't make any
sense that it would have
skyrocketed the way it did so we
think it's closer to eighty
three million maybe eighty four
as far as we know.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative Brown.
I believe the they were that the
Appropriations Committee is set
aside four hundred million
dollars in tax cuts interface
three million dollars is.
You know
the true fiscal impact then they
should be they should be part of
that package I know we'll have
to temporary table this bill but
totally in favor of it what's
what's really good for our state
I thought I think it's a real
bonus for our state is it's a
beautiful state to retire.
And perceptions everything.
And and this would really help
help that market and the a lot
of these are these retirees
in late they have small
businesses they're still we're
still working
They're they're a taken care of.
Should family members so it's
just a I think it's just a win
win and that with that we do
this and and and join our fellow
states of of a lowering the tax
social security so thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative Brown
representative Armstrong thank
you.
Thank you Representative
Strickler floor leader Martinez.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members thank you sponsors
of of this bill I echo a lot of
questions said and and I truly
appreciate the not only the
intent but really the
conversation we've had this
conversation for several years.
and I think it's an important
one to keep having as we heard
earlier in this meeting madam
chair with percent Harper's
Representative Strickler is bill
on that's a permitting.
you know this is this is all
part of the same conversation
and you know we have a tax code
that is in dire need of some
good work and we've done some
good work to it over the last
couple years but more needs to
be done.
I think unfortunately we turn
the tax code into sometimes what
seems to be a political
economic.
Right and and if you vote
against children born again
senior C. prequel to tax food
that for being
it is something that is slapped
on a political flyer political
mailer and it happens on both
sides not just once it happens
on both sides
and as a tax committee I'm very
proud in New all of my time on
this committee and I've been on
this committee the whole entire
time I've been elected to this
office I'm very proud that for
the most part we've we've risen
above the fray and
Representative Harper and I have
gotten into some.
Pretty pretty hard fights over
the years just on our own
visions of tax policy.
But it's always been about for.
I think that the idea of.
You know exempting all taxes for
charges Committee budget I have
a problem.
I don't think that people who
are.
Retired and and relatively well
off necessarily need to break.
And so if we're looking at this
from the perspective of helping
seniors.
I would like to see.
Our policy proposals that do
exactly that and last year with
the house bill two seventy five
I think it was we're twenty one
I forget the numbers madam
chair.
But with that tax bill that we
sponsored we
for the first time in twenty
plus years increase the
lowincome comprehensive tax
rebate including four seniors
seniors in need got some help
last year.
I think that there are ways to
accomplish the goal of helping
seniors now I've got to say this
you know I'm I'm.
Yeah I think we heard one of the
executive
cabinet secretaries are
testifying earlier about the
need to help seniors and and I'm
all ears you know I'm I'm we all
but like it's also here all day
waiting for our some suggestions
from the executive to help
seniors I think blowing the top
off over social security income
tax rates is not the solution
who are you helping at that
point truly and that is my
question rhetorical question who
are we trying to help.
Now this is about making New
Mexico attractive to retirees
that's a completely different
question madam chair and
representative brown I I know
it's in New Mexico because my
staff is now out of the office
You you mentioned earlier that
you know it it it the
There is a perception that
perhaps you Mexico because we
taxes string benefits is not a
place retired.
You know that that perception I
think
it could be valid I don't know
why I haven't seen date that I
haven't seen a survey or a poll
of seniors were contemplating
retirement and where they might
be able to get to so I I
couldn't speak for that but I
would also argue that public
safety.
Is a big reason why people may
decide or not
decide not to move into New
Mexico I would assume that our
beautiful weather and
environment are a reason why
people would want to move to New
Mexico I would assume that good
schools and good speed near
Senators and you know a healthy
community to which to retire
might be more well the reason
why to move to New Mexico to
retire in New Mexico as opposed
to whether or not we taxes
security benefits now I will
also add to that that if we're
looking at things through a
tweet or through some sort of
you know or you know some more
innovation publishing a survey
best states to retire who
doesn't tax your social security
income yeah I mean if you if you
look at it that superficially
you Mexico is on that list and
some people maybe skip us
because it says we.
Tax.
Income but I don't think that's
the full picture and so I think
we need to decide as a committee
as a legislature do we want to
help.
Lower and middle class retirees
social security recipients or do
we just want to make New Mexico
like the gold standard for
retired and those are two very
different things and I would
urge members of this committee
and I will urge members of this
legislature to look at these
things.
You know separately because they
are separate things the last one
bill make madam chair is.
I have tons of respect for the
gentle ladies for bringing this
bill forward because you all
have been working on this for a
long.
and I find it odd that sometimes
a you know the the Senate can
assume sin to maybe try to save
the day I'm not sure trying to
do but you know I I know I'm I'm
only the Majority Leader I'm not
the minority leader but I gotta
tell the both of you you all
have to work in your hearts out
on this thing.
And and you know I I
I I wish that
you know I I wish that
Representative Brown didn't have
to at the beginning of a
presentation can I give us the
dates of when these deals are
popular.
Because you did file your first
I noticed I sighed as it only
got here we go again anyone
generate eleven
and you've been doing it
consistently the last two three
four years before you know it
became politically
comfortable I guess or
politically expedient for for
for some to do it so lots of
respect and and love for the two
of you for you doing I do
disagree with the policy
proposal
and you know I hope that we can
find a way to support those
lower income middle class
retirees social security
benefits recipients because I'm
with you one hundred percent of
the way but I don't want to blow
the top just because you know
you might make us more
attractive to retirees in
Wisconsin in Michigan or
whatever the case may be with
that madam chair all you'll
floor thank you both
Representative Armstrong percent
route really appreciate the two
of you and all of the hard work
that you put on a put into this
over the last three years thank
you.
Thank you leader Representative
Maestas sorry your hand this
time.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Brown thank you
Representative Armstrong doll
just up.
My my twenty minutes beach was
cut down to five minutes one
just what the leader said
because you've taken up a
principal position on this issue
for years and it's not for
political expedience you believe
in this in this policy and and
pushed it.
Just Google three years in this
committee and in that and during
the summertime and interims.
And I would up.
I would be very very persuaded
by this by this by your
presentation if I was a
knowledgeable about the entire
tax code of the state of New
Mexico and and and and didn't
up.
Serve in the legislature three
times in which we had to come in
the special session and cut
budgets a tool to those to those
times in the middle of a fiscal
year.
cutting budgets that we had
previously passed you know six
months earlier nine months
earlier including a five percent
cut.
The department of of aging and
long term services.
I'm here five years ago.
And so the
And and I appreciate folks
speaking today on this bill.
But frankly that half of them.
Would support any tax cut up
any.
Of any type and would oppose any
tax tax increase of any type.
So they're just not credible.
With regards to this particular
policy position
I am persuaded by the folks who
were advocating for seniors and
I'm advocating for.
For elevating the economic
stress of folks on fixed
incomes.
And in an age of a.
You know in the age of inflation
you know as a result of trying
to save this economy from the
pandemic so just to be clear
Madam chair representative
brought up from so if if the
senior is on a fixed income.
They have no other source of
income other than social
security.
And they're making thirty
thousand dollars a year single
person thirty thousand dollars a
year from so sturdy income.
How much how many dollars does
this bill affect them.
Madam chair and representative.
So I'm you know we could we can
get someone in here probably
Representative Harper could
crunch numbers for us on this
but
I as I mentioned earlier I think
this is a really critical point
the thresholds for the
triggering of the tax for forty
years out of date.
And I know people who you know
we look at the income of
retirees but I can like and that
also is the right income of.
Young people who are just out of
college starting a first job in
trying to make ends meet now
tell your fifty thousand dollars
is is not a lot to live on when
you consider the cost of renting
that's gone up and all the other
costs of of living plus if they
have debt on top of that state
from school loans you know what
they're just really struggling
so it's you know I I I don't
like to look at a at a at a
dollar threshold necessarily
because everybody situation
stories a little bit different.
And so what we from you know an
outside perspective I think that
person is rolled in clover
they've got enough to retire on.
Well it's presumption was of any
of any of us to think that
because we don't not know their
circumstances and they may still
have a mortgage to pay you're
not every retiree has a house
paid off effect I think probably
most don't so when you add it
all up together any savings we
get by giving back the money
that they earned and that you
know was was put aside for their
retirement I think that makes a
difference so I'm not sure I
directly answer your question
but it's it's going to help a
lot of people and again if we
had adjusted for inflation madam
chair
there would be a lot less
stress and pull on whatever
income is coming in and some
retirees you know the ideal
situation madam chair members is
to have basically three sources
of retirement income social
security was never meant to be
at the end all it was supposed
to be a support
some people have some retirement
income state from the pension
that they paid into through
their working years and some
have savings as well so but you
know that's not that typical
quite frankly that's the ideal
but I don't think it's the norm.
Madam chair thank you madam
chair representative brown no
not appreciate your arguments
are and I and I here we are
coming from for those folks
keeping score at home the answer
is zero.
If you make thirty thousand
dollars a single person and your
how to percent of your income so
security benefits this bill will
affect your life.
In zero dollars.
And so the next question I'll
answer it up that I want to put
you on the spot but if you're
just a a married couple.
Of that files together and you
make fifty thousand dollars you
have no other income you make
fifty thousand dollars of sister
income how much will this bill
benefit you.
The answer is zero.
Zero because at it doesn't
benefit those folks because
their income is not taxed under
New Mexico law because New
Mexico law focuses not on the
source of the income but the
aggregate amount of your income
my next question would have been
if someone makes a million
dollars through various sources
of.
And say you know fifty thousand
dollars of it is or say how does
all of this was carriers the
state fifty how much with this
budget that person the answer is
a lot because then they could
they don't have to pay taxes on
that fifty thousand dollars that
they made from social security
and so that's that's the that's
the contradiction and so I
appreciate you not.
Pitching it as
helping poor seniors struggling
because this simply wouldn't do
it we're.
We are close we are close I
think that.
With conversations today
tomorrow this spring and summer
and fall we're gonna have a
massive.
we rate of our entire tax code
next year that will benefit
everybody.
but like but like a doctor souls
would over the next nine days we
just have to do no harm.
Do no harm to our tax code if
this were to pass as is version
house bill forty eight this
would be the second biggest
Swiss cheese hole in our entire.
Tax code
of a Swiss cheese that we've
been trying to fill over the
past you know five ten years
through you know.
Conversation after conversation
education after education.
a motion after coalition
bipartisan this and and
bicameralism course our chief
executives have their own
agendas
the chief executive back in two
thousand three felt that we
could afford massive tax breaks
and and in two thousand nine two
thousand.
seventeen and then again after
the pandemic in two thousand
twenty we we had to cut budgets
in the middle of fiscal years
because we simply could not
afford them
so you know we just have to be
cognizant of ten twenty years
out of when we do stuff like
that because the best thing we
could do for seniors.
Is it is is create a society
where they're not afraid to go
to the wall Walgreens at nine
thirty at night because they are
the Tylenol for a headache you
know
we up.
You know are are a.
We're this close to to providing
a lot of chatter a lot of
chatter for New Mexicans
I would prefer that over over a
over a Swiss cheese thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative Maestas
Representative Herndon.
Thank you madam chair.
And representatives and
Billsponsored I just have a
couple of observations that I
would like to share with you one
of the things that we talked
about today are that was in your
presentation was the number of
people who buy come here for
retirement here meaning New
Mexico and madam chair of Bill
Sanchez when I look at the state
of Texas right next door to us
they have no income tax period
and so I I don't know that I see
people flocking to New Mexico to
Texas to retire and if we if we
look madam madam chair and and
bill Sanchez at the state of
Arizona right next to us you're
right they don't tax income they
don't take social security but
let's look at the bigger picture
of what's there they have the
Mayo Clinic their health care
system seems to be a lot higher
level so those are the types of
things that are bringing seniors
the state of Arizona and so what
I would say to you madam chair
and bill sponsors what we have
to do is look at a bigger
picture if what we want to do is
to bring more retirees here to
the state of New Mexico we need
to look at our environment
particularly we need to look at
our health care system and how
they would be cared for here and
so those are those are big
picture items and and madam
chair and members bills bills
Sanchez the other thing that I
want to point out to you is that
when we look at the at the of
Arizona system one of the things
that is happening there is
because there are so many
seniors who live there because
of the weather the health care
system when it comes to the
schools and they need to rates
of more income for the schools
they're not getting it because
the individuals who are retiring
don't have school kids and so
it's not a top priority for them
so then what else happens to the
rest of the community so the.
The only by my one question that
I do have for you madam chair
and members of the of the the
Sanchez so there's a lot of
conversation about if people
move here to retire they will
spend more money in other ways
so can you please tell you are
to recommend it if I've missed
it I apologize where's the data
and statistics on that at madam
chair.
The members of the a bill
Sanchez.
Madam chair representative
Turner thank you very much I'm
I'm really actually glad you
raise that question because it's
something I wanted to expand on
a little bit.
So unfortunately New Mexico does
not do what's called dynamic
scoring so when we we look at a
bill that has a fiscal impact we
look at kind of the outgo but
not the potential in go so do we
have the data well we can
extrapolate from you know other
other states that that do
dynamic scoring but we know
there's always an upside.
When there's a tax cut needs of
that that translates into more
spending so we've seen the
pattern before are we think it
will hold true for New Mexico
and Representative Madam chair
representative right.
I really listen to my
constituents and what I'm
hearing from many it I mean I've
heard so many stories I have one
the lady in particular who came
to New Mexico to help with the
raising of her grand children
and when she's trying to become
a resident and and and to
register in every way here and
when she found out that New
Mexico taxes social security she
decided not to make that extra
extra step to up to be kind of a
permanent resident here so she's
going to go back and forth to
Texas I think it is and you know
I I will say to madam chair that
what I've seen in my district is
of a fleeing to Texas yeah we're
you know we're not that far from
Texas and people are going there
for a lot of reasons and it is
multi factorial as you mentioned
there are a lot of reasons
people make decisions that they
do and as people get older it is
you know often around health
care and availability and our
climate matters and you know
just the beauty of our state is
unparalleled and so that would
be a great reason to come here
but people look at multiple
factors and the the taxation
situation as one and Madam chair
representative heard and when
people start contemplating
retirement they have to do the
math they have to try to figure
out can they make ends meet on
on the likely income that
they're going to have in
retirement and you know that's
kind of a scary proposition for
a lot of people so
you know we the numbers would be
nice if we did dynamic scoring
that we could really pin it down
but we've seen it before the
pattern again tax cuts tenderly
lead to increased spending and
and those dollar circulates
through the economy a number of
times it's not just a one time
effect it can have a multiplier
as well.
Thank you Representative I just
have one of the COVID Madam
chair representative in
Billsponsored you know as I was.
Talking to individuals through
it in and out of the state
recently and talking about the
co concept of taxation of social
security you're absolutely right
is it is a big item but people
are talking about but I also
brought up to the people that I
would that I was having a
conversation with some of the
things that Representative
Maestas brought up that the
first twenty five thousand of
your dollars I'm not going to be
taxable if that's all you have
the social security and some of
the people were saying well you
know I didn't know that but this
this concept of no tax on social
security with that the bigger
understanding of what is
actually tax now is sometimes
misunderstood so I look forward
to how we continue to work on
addressing this matter how we do
get more seniors to come here
then how how we do this in a in
a in a manner that is.
What I would say fair and just
and equitable for the entire
group of people who will be
living in our state and it's
always wonderful when we work
together and thank you madam
chair and representative.
Thank you vice chair Herndon I
just have a couple of comments
one is yes correct the little
bit of maybe Mr on intentional
misinformation and I just want
to point out our twenty nineteen
tax cuts.
Twenty nineteen tax changes
there were net tax cuts when we
a clue that with house bill six
so seventy percent of families
receipts tax cuts through
various initiatives that this
committee has been engaged in in
the last few years and those
cuts meant there are.
About a half a million New
Mexicans benefited and fifty six
thousand seniors benefit from
those from those cuts let's just
a point of clarification
the other point I guess of
clarification I'd like to make
is I intended and economic
development the thing I
secretary keys I believe that
was sometime during interim and
I wish I could have the exact
committee hearing I attended so
many this summer she made the
point in her presentation that
New Mexico is the second second
most popular place for seniors
to retire currently.
Sanchez have you heard that
information before and I'll be
happy to try to pull it out if I
if I can be shown to be wrong or
right what what's your reaction
to that.
Sure
so I I don't know about that
particular statement but I do
know that I listened in on the
hearing on Senate bill one zero
eight which is Senator DS Bill
and the secretary secretary keys
appear in strong support of the
full repeal of social security
taxation here in New Mexico so
she might be seeing some of
those things I've seen actually
some data that indicates there's
an outflow of seniors that that
you know it's it's it's a number
that changes from time to time
and we do know that our
population before the.
Census was taken was about two
point one million and we're
really sticking close ten years
later in about two point one so
we're seeing some changes in
terms of who's going misleading
but again she did very strongly
support the repeal of the social
security tax in in that
committee hearing okay thank you
I need I have another commitment
so if we could I'm happy to
entertain a motion and then I'll
turn the turn the reins over to
vice chair Herndon so.
Happy to hear a motion.
Madam chair can I just say just
one funding on that point.
I think we're three discussion
representative Strickler okay
thank you.
Madam chair I would attempt
early table hospital forty
eight.
Madam chair.
Any opposition to the tabling
motion.
I see no opposition the the well
as temporary table I could turn
the reins over to my mom I
strive another commitment I need
to make an just to remind
everyone I just the Sanchez to
be prepared to outline the
differences between forty eight
and forty nine and then we would
go to a discussion of those
differences and inappropriate
motion most likely be a tabling
motion given its fiscal impact
I'm not saying that for the
purposes of as chairman and
primarily so that she understood
where we were and I will attempt
to be back as soon as I can for
the next item thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
So we so proceeding with the
agenda as described we should
have an outline now of the
differences between the house
house bill forty eight and house
bill forty nine so of so in
terms of the the numerical
presentation so I would as the
sponsor of house bill forty
eight if you would have lied
would you see is the differences
between the two bills and then
I'll just the Sanchez of forty
nine thousand on their
differences but and then we'll
go into discussion so sponsors
of house bill forty eight
Representative Brown would you
like to start that conversation.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee so house bill
forty eight is a joint effort a
bipartisan effort of members of
the house and on the first name
that appears on that bill and
senator excuse me Representative
Gail Armstrong is is following
but I'm gonna let her address
house bill forty nine since
she's the the has the first name
on that bill and it will take
very long Madam chair for her to
explain what forty nine does and
how it compares to forty eight.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
Very simple difference between
the two bills house bill forty
nine is a phase out of the tax
twenty percent every year the
first years twenty percent
second year is forty sixty
eighty until it gets to one
hundred percent those are the
only differences between the two
bills thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative
Armstrong is there anything else
that I the the bill's sponsors
would like to bring forward
before we go to discuss.
Thank you madam chair so just
just a little footnote on that
Representative Armstrong and I
favor house bill forty eight the
full repeal we talked about and
brought forty nine house bill
forty nine because we know from
previous discussions with in
committee hearings that there
was a concern that repealing the
tax all of a sudden might have
too much of a fiscal impact for
the budget to bear so the
phasing was designed to give a
transition period in kind of a
soft landing so the fiscal
impact not be that high but I
think I speak I know I speak for
both of Sanchez on this that we
much for for house bill forty
eight number only offering forty
nine as just another
alternative.
Thank you Representative so go
to the committee is there any
discussion on the comparison of
the two of the two bills house
bill forty eight forty nine.
And it if there is no further
discussion on that comparison we
have not taken a vote on house
bill forty nine in terms of how
to proceed it will be open for a
motion right now.
Representative Maestas madam
chair is there time for
discussion just yes there is
insurances thank you
representative of our from
Representative Brown I
appreciate the.
With that thought in this
because you're right we up.
We normally would face something
out or face something in or
things like that I think
You know given the.
Given the coffers and stuff it
at this particular time I don't
know if that's necessary but
what's what's persuasive is is
the
Is it is the inflation once that
this was last put in you know
and so we should definitely keep
that conversation going with
regards to raising or lowering
the thresholds.
but if we really want to target
I personally want to target
A lower income seniors and and
maintain the program
progressivity in our income tax
and I think that may be.
That might be the way to go but
I think you Madam.
Thank you representative of my
assist is there any further
discussion from the committee.
Regarding the comparison of
house bill forty eight or forty
nine.
So I see no other hands raids.
The floor is open for most of on
house bill forty nine.
What temporary table for also
forty nine.
Thank you that is the most
important very table.
Is there any objection to the
motion.
State no objection to the motion
there is a temporary table for
house bill forty nine thank you
Representative for your
presentation today.
Thank you Michael and very
informative thank you for many
times we appreciate it.
Thank you.
So members of the committee
We're moving to the committee
substitute for house bill one
twenty nine.
Representative Sweetser are you
here yes ma'am I am here and
ready to present madam chair if
you are ready for me.
Representative Sweetser we are
ready for you please proceed
thank you and I'm going to defer
to my co chair chairman my Estes
are my co sponsor rather
chairman my Estes to begin but
we do have a minor technical
amendment and I didn't know if
you wanted us to deal with that
first before we proceeded on the
bill or what your your
preference let's.
Representative Sweetser was the
amendment for the presented are
prepared the distributed before
today's meeting yes ma'am yes.
All right would you please tell
us the amendment that the two oh
two number thank you madam chair
it is at two two two six hundred
point one.
Madam chair of the amendment for
discussion.
Thank you Representative.
Representative Sweetser would
you please explain the amendment
yes ma'am so it is a minor
technical language change
related to compliance that it
just how audits are done under
the bill on page six line six we
would strike shall be certified
by and insert in lieu thereof is
subject to and that is the only
change from the amendment.
Is there a is there any
objection to the passage of the
amendment.
If not go ahead Representative
thank you so much thank you
madam chair was in part per up
co chair representative which we
are for for allowing us to
discuss the amendment there
there's not a motion to move it
just yet madam chair but we
I could move it as a sponsor but
if somebody else wants to move
it
madam chair all move that we
adopt amendment.
Thank you is their second to
that motion.
second chair thank you it's been
moved and seconded to about the
amendment is there any
discussion any further
discussion on the amendment.
This sandal hence range of is
there any objection to the
adoption of the amendment.
No objection we will about the
amended by consensus thank you
the amendment is adopted we're
back on the bill as amended
Representative Sweetser and
Representative Maestas I thank
you yes thank you madam chair
and we do have to experts I'm
not sure if they've been let in
Jason Espinoza and Richard and.
And if we just let them and then
I will defer to my co sponsor
and I'd like to say a few words
before we turn it back to the
committee after he's done thank
you madam chair thank you very
much I'm asking our technical
assistant are the two experts
on.
On this panel as now as the.
Jason Espinoza and the other one
is William boards that correct
no Richard Anklam.
To see Richard and Graham on the
line if you can please raise
your hand if you are.
And we can proceed madam chair
while he's coming into the room
thank you representative
Representative please pursing
thank you madam chair thank you
all will members when the Madam
chair representative for the
state committee substitute that
was from a previous committee
so we're looking at a house bill
one hundred twenty nine as
amended just now and this deals
with the apportionment of
Business income tax and it's
sections seven dash four dash
ten in our in our tax code the.
We tax businesses essentially
madam chair based on three
factors
And those three factors are.
News.
Want to read from the bill but
I'll just talk about the two
factors that three factors are
labor in other words employment.
of physical capital.
Or or
or the the building of a sale
factory or and then there's and
then there's sales so
essentially property payroll and
sales and so this proposal would
move that business income tax to
a single factor sales with the
certain exceptions and I'll talk
about the exceptions but this is
our great public policy from the
get go if we were to invent
State Policy and and grow state
out of a.
You know out of the frontier
this would be the way to go the
states are moving in this
direction and and here's the
policy argument that when you
tax sales you do not
disincentive eyes in any way
economic growth.
Of you talk property there may
be a disincentive to.
To grow property or to build
property or to expand the
business or to bring a business
to New Mexico if you tax payroll
there is a slight disincentive
with regards to hiring workers
and expanding your your business
output or or setting up shop
here in New Mexico with
additional workers when you tax
sales.
There is no disincentive to to
to wanting more sales
even though that sales tax and
so it moves from a three factor.
Three factors of taxation to a
single factor sales now we know
that there are many businesses
here in New Mexico are not you
know going out of state out of
the wild frontier.
but rather we have of many many
businesses New Mexico businesses
that have invested massive
amounts of property that have
invested in their payroll and we
want to be cognizant of that so
the house commerce committee
adopted a an amendment which
then was rolled into a committee
set up to make it easier to read
in which the single factor sales
provision is excluded for those
businesses in this on page six
madam chair.
Representative stay in be on
lines two and seven respectively
that those businesses with one
or more employees and a
cumulative investment over time
of property exceeding fifty
million dollars that those
businesses are excluded from
this act and essentially have a
choice they can they can file
their taxes and pay their taxes
as they do today or they can opt
into this new tax policy world
of single factor sales but this
this policy was tweaked as you
recall chair in the two thousand
thirteen tax package it is been
tweaked a couple times since but
it was those provisions in the
two thousand thirteen tax
package moving to toward up a
higher percentage of single
factor sales that in fact led to
company staying in New Mexico
and and and was the reason many
companies moved to New Mexico so
we think this is the way to go
we appreciate the time this
morning and we look forward to
building this conversation and
and rest step which is our
revenue stabilization tax policy
interim committee.
And and move this forward
in a in a much more positive way
and not in in two thousand
twenty three thank you madam
chair and with that I'll turn it
over to my co sponsor of
Representative Candie Sweetser.
Thank you chairman I assist and
thank you chairman turned and
such and and I want to open up
to get some conversation I know
our time is short we're doing
this for eleven so basically I
just want to say that we talk
about diversifying new Mexico's
economy all the time.
Often we overlook the various
ways that our tax code could be
modified to help accomplish that
and and that's what we're trying
to do here today we're basically
trying to encourage investment
in our state and this is
something that's happening it's
it's good tax policy I'm told
it's a trend across the country
and we just would like it to be
considered as part of what we're
looking at as sort of an omnibus
tax overhaul in the interim so
with that madam chair
Our expert and Representative
Maestas and I would stand for
questions.
Thank you are there any
questions from the committee for
the bill's sponsors or from the
air expert.
I'm.
I do but I I I believe we want
to go to the attendees first.
Yes.
Thank you all right with respect
to the attendees would you
please do we have the PO ready
to take for our attendees.
The poll.
Madam chair we usually don't to
uphold the committee would have
people speak and in favor or
against all right well thank you
very much Representative Harper
all right if you are if you are
close the bill.
Would you please raise your
hand.
If I may madam chair if we could
just folks.
To to just get fast there's a
lot of folks that are neutral
but want to give thought so what
we have that third category as
well okay you wanna neutral.
All right we can do that thank
you Representative I just this
so is there are those who oppose
would you raise your hand.
I see one in opposing and
Would you please do yourself and
identify and and and you have
one minute to make your
statement.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Hannah Burling I'm with the
league of women voters of New
Mexico I'm here to speak in
opposition to house bill one
twenty nine is once again we see
a bill that would reduce overall
tax revenue and threaten the
ability to fund essential
services.
Thank you.
Thank early.
Is there anyone else in this
opposition.
All right now will go to those
in favor of the bill if you
would like to speak please raise
your hand.
Thank you I see I payments that
are right I'm sorry I need I
don't have the ability to see
the the names with the hands
that are yes I do.
So miss Jennifer Weber would you
please proceed you have one
minute.
Thank you
madam vice chair and committee
members my name is Jennifer
Weber and I am here on behalf of
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce in support of house
bill one twenty nine the
chamber's recent economic
analysis driving New Mexico's
future identified New Mexico's
business climate including its
tax structure as B. one of the
four key economic competitive
competitiveness factors that
need reform or improvement as
you heard from the bill Sanchez
most states use an apportionment
formula either based on sales
only or on three factors with
the cell factor being more
heavily weighted than the other
two New Mexico's evenly weighted
three factor formula can be a
disincentive for some businesses
when they consider locating in
New Mexico we thank the sponsors
for bringing this bill forward
for listening to the concerns of
the business community when
crafting the committee
substitute that was in the
previous committee the chamber
urges your support thank you.
Thank you Chris Webber yeah
we'll go to take the billing to.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee this is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce.
Later Albuquerque chamber of
commerce's long supported this
apportionment method we will
join around thirty states with
this change our system currently
penalizes multi state companies
from a tax standpoint and gives
the same companies an incentive
to invest build an employee
people elsewhere so the chamber
believes this bill will help
drive investment into our state
that is perhaps not occurring
here now this is a tax reform
measure that deserves full
support and we urge the
committee to pass this
legislation thank you.
Thank you Mr Billington karla
Kugler.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Carla
who are I am president of
associated builders and
contractors we stand in support
of this legislation and thank
the sponsors for bringing it
forward although this bill
doesn't have a specific relation
to the local construction
community but we do believe that
this legislation is overall
beneficial to the growth and
economic development of our
state so for that reason we ask
that the committee support
legislation thank you.
Thank you Mr we're Carlos
Sonntag.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on Carla Suntech
president of the New Mexico
business coalition we support
this bill we think that it will
provide to the supplication to
the New Mexico tax code.
And it will ensure that all
multi state C. corporations are
treated the same which is
important and the way our tax
code should be administered.
It's also going to be a driver
for.
To be an attraction to national
and international corporations
to come to our state that will
promote job creation and that we
hope will help our economically
challenged people get out of
poverty that's a critical move
for our state B. one of the top
three poverty states in the
nation thank you for your
consideration we hope that you
will support house bill one
twenty nine.
Thank you Mr Jason Weaks.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Jason Weaks and we
have Albuquerque Hispanic
chamber of commerce chamber
stands in strong support of this
bill really what this bill is a
spot of creating a more
favorable business environment
in the state of New Mexico by
intelligently reforming our
corporate income tax cut on the
should have the benefit of
attracting larger corporations
in terms of their investment in
the state which then in turn
should benefit on a smaller
businesses in the chamber
specifically focuses in on
representing and helping create
a better business environment
Mexico for those small
businesses with large businesses
locate in the state invest in
the state those small budget
businesses benefit because it
creates Commerce around those
larger businesses operations the
thought is that if we thought we
intelligently reformer Tax Code
we alternately will make gains
in terms of economic investment
that will help us diversify our
economy and keep our tax code in
a manner and in a way to put our
tax in a position where we're
not actually causing in a
negative fiscal impact it's a
positive fiscal impact so we
stand and support for those
reasons.
Thank you Mr Weekes is there
anyone who would like to speak
who is neutral the the for nor
against but wants to make a
statement among our our
attending this is so please
raise your hand now.
Hey I don't see any further
hands been raised will go to the
committee.
Are they committee members I see
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair I I just
can't help myself that this is
great tax policy
Representative a Sweetser and
masters thanks for bringing us
forward we've been talking about
doing this in the state of
Mexico for for at least the last
eight years.
and and I think you've done a
great job describing how this
works but if I could just maybe
come at it from a different
angle so folks maybe understood
you know.
By Google that explanation how
this works and and why why the
school tax policy
So so think of your favorite
multi state entity it could be
whole foods you know capellas
you know what enough Wendy's
whatever.
well the question came up many
decades ago.
Well.
I mean obviously they pay
federal taxes that's easy but at
the state level how do they pay
their income tax.
Right if you just let's just
tackle food and say they made a
hundred million dollars this
year.
Well what what portion of that
should be taxed in New Mexico.
well you could easily say well
just divided by fifty to fifty
states with our undivided and
that's that's the the person
it's taxed in New Mexico well.
That's not so very
Representative because there
might be some states that do a
lot more business in some states
they do a lot less business and.
So that's probably not fair so
in how you do it.
And and chair of some I just
described it very well but what
happened I I believe this was in
the fifties.
Folks said well.
Let's break it up into three
main areas how much property do
they only come in the state
compared everywhere else how
much able to have in the state
compared ever welts and how much
we sales we have miss everyone
else as we get fractions right
so maybe it's one percent.
whole foods properties in New
Mexico one and a half percent is
of payrolls in New Mexico and to
percent of sales New Mexico we
take an average of those three
numbers.
You multiply that by their
hundred million dollar revenue
and that's the part of their
more revenue this year that
we're gonna play New Mexico tax
to.
And and that makes that makes
sense we're just thinking about
okay what fraction of their work
do they do in New Mexico and
virtually every state that had
an income tax back in the
fifties adopted this three
factor formula we call it to
figure out how much of their
income is taxed here.
Well what.
As we've gone through the years
and and those things have
developed.
What we've actually determined
what we've we've kind of been
unintended consequence of that
is.
Let's say a whole foods wants to
move their corporate
headquarters here they want to
make a big investment in our
property here.
All the sudden the fraction of
their property in New Mexico
goes up from one percent to five
percent.
Our ten percent.
we now take the average of those
two numbers and that's a big
jump in there and their taxes of
the percentage there revenue
that's taxed here you say will
be well that makes sense we got
more stuff here you go that's
right.
but.
There are other states that saw
that and said we don't want to
penalize whole foods for
investing in us so we're gonna
change our formula we're not
going to include those first two
anymore we're gonna say.
Include how much rate property
or payroll you have because if
you want to increase your
payroll.
We think that's great if you're
interested property reason
that's great so we're going to
let your sales.
And so what happened is as more
and more states have gone to
only looking at sales.
We're in a position now where
are fifty sixty seventy year old
tax code not only disincentive
ISIS for someone from growing
here but also rewards them for
going somewhere else because of
whole foods decides to set up
shop somewhere else the more.
Property imperil factors go down
in New Mexico and actually pay
less tax in New Mexico.
So so it's a double edged sword
not only revitalizing them as
they grow here but we were words
if they go somewhere else.
And so that's why depending on
how you count it thirty seven to
forty one other states have
already gone to single sales
factor it is not just a growing
trend it's it's.
It's what states do now.
and and again we're New Mexico
is behind the eight ball sadly.
On this
and also mention of five states
don't tax income so so you
subtract you know you're you're
only forty five states the tax
income and thirty seven forty
one or you're doing this.
And the other thing I'll mention
is we also already do this
we already do single sales
factor for manufacturing.
And for a headquarters.
And one of my favorite moments
when I had the privilege of
chairing this committee
many years ago we had a.
Right education on corporate
income taxes and so when a bill
like this going forward
you know looking at the quick
single sales factor I was just
so pleased that instead of the
Republicans you know pounding
the table say we love
corporations and the Democrats
on tables a we hate corporations
the discussion was all about the
merits of single sales factor
apportionment and I just loved
that and we all agreed that was
the right thing to do and moving
this year other states have
moved in this direction we
wanted to as well and so that's
when we adopted the
headquartered version but it's
time for us to go the rest of
the way.
I'm and madam chair
representative the last thing
I'll mention is regarding the
FIR.
I'm.
I really believe looking at the
data and who is set up as
corporations in New Mexico there
are very many almost like ninety
nine percent of our businesses
are LLCs or partnerships other
pastors there's very few
corporations looking at those
that are corporations and the
way this bill is structured.
This is gonna be revenue
positive to the state.
so it's again kind of one of
these unicorn bills that not
only helps put us in a better
situation tax climate wise but
also will generate a little bit
of extra corporate income tax
for the state.
so I understand
madam chair that we are going to
table the bill here and again
consider it was other great tax
policy for for the tax reform
that hopefully happens next
year.
I want to say again for our
Representative Sweetser and
masses thank you for for
bringing this forward we this is
something we should on a long
time ago.
and and I'm.
Hopeful that it will will come
to pass next year.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative
Representative Lujan I see your
hand thank you madam chair thank
you
Sponsors of this bill I just
have a couple questions
and really thank you
Representative Harper for that
explanation when you're taking
notes if you like and then that.
Class every time I get
information.
was really helpful and it just
sets it sets the it sets the
framework for for questions and
project really excellent
discussions of my question is
madam chair.
What are we missing if at all
anything to this bill because it
seems like there are still are
gaps.
Madam chair representative Lujan
if I could turn overview of.
Jason Espinoza to maybe address
that and and and make a comment
or two.
Madam chair representative can
can you restate that questions
are amazing and sort of for a
second thank you madam chair yes
so we can discuss and having
this discussion and.
Multiple discussions about taxes
in in cheddar and Swiss cheese
is what if anything is missing
from this bill that would would
benefit us here or.
We make it stronger I guess
Madam.
Madam chair Representative
members of the committee I I
really think that the changes
are and and house commerce and
industry with the substitute
bill to really do the opt out
provision for ones that for
companies that have already made
a significant investment both in
a role as well as capital
investment was really the thing
that I I think really improve
this bill so you know causes no
harm to add to any existing
business that needs those
requirements and other than that
really is just a switch and and
tax policy that's going to
benefit New Mexicans and
incentivize folks to hire New
Mexicans and investing capital.
Thank you for that thank you
madam chair so it's just for
corporations is that correct.
Madam chair.
Madam chair representative on
correct.
And I guess I would chair what
when I'm concerned whether
whatever the question I have gap
I feel it's with our small
businesses are and I understand
that that's that's kind of a
separate thing here
Representative and I heard you
know some COVID today that it
does benefit our small
businesses and respect that if
you bring in more destroyer or
corporations that.
The fact helps our small
businesses but.
That's not always the case as
far as I.
I learned is well living here in
New Mexico and Santa Fe but I do
like that we are fixing and
correcting our tax code and
bringing it into a better place
and and looking at the factors
that have inhibited you know
growth in economic growth that
just in some way don't make
sense any more with the three
factor thanks explanation so I
do like I do like aspects of
this bill I just do you have
some
You know we have more
conversations that we make this
whole as we're moving to a
bigger tax package.
Looking at everything as a whole
down the road hello for sixty
day session but I do like this I
do that like that we're doing
some cleanup here and I will be
supporting this
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Lewis
at I don't see any more hands
for discussion I will entertain
of.
To temporary table.
Madam chair I move we temporary
table the adopted version of the
committee so.
Forget the amended version of
the committees.
Thank you madam.
Thank you very much for the for
the most and thank you for the
clarification and does so it's
been moved and it to temporary
table the.
Committee set up as a doctor it
is amended.
so all in favor of it is there
any objection against such a
very table.
Saying that there is a consensus
both so thank you we have a
temporary table I turn this bio
of the floor back over to the
chairwoman.
Thank you so much and vice chair
for handling that item.
Well we have finished our agenda
for today I just want to remind
everyone there may be some
meetings called on short notice
in the next few days to consider
the bond package and or the
the tax package that we're
working on so thank you for your
attention it was a really good
discussion today I think on
social security as well as peer
mentoring and single what a what
an agenda so thank you and we're
ready to go back to the floor
thank you.
Great Canadian thank you we are
turned.
