Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez.
He's coming like
OK. Representative Montoya.
Representative Pajon.
He
Representative Silva.
Representative Terras.
There we go.
Representative Vice Chair Kana.
Sure.
Representative Lente chair. OK,
we have a quorum, folks. So a
couple of housekeeping items.
House Bill 46, uh, we, we had a,
a couple of things going on in
the office this past weekend.
Uh, I, I take full, uh, blame
for, for what happened, uh, we
didn't check the emails on the
weekend. The bill did come in as
a substitute on Saturday, but it
was, it was, it was our fault
that we did not get it to the
committee on time and so true to
my commitment to this committee
that we will not hear bills that
were not given to all of.
24 hours prior we will, we will
roll that bill and it will be
first on the agenda for
Wednesday. So keep that in mind,
and that is again House Bill 46,
reminder that it does have a,
it's a substitute now. OK, so,
so again.
Uh, my apologies on behalf of
the committee for for that
taking place, that being said,
apologies to our sponsors and
and to your expert for, for
That error, uh, thank you for
being here, but we'll hear you
all on, on Wednesday.
Thank you.
Uh, moving on now to House Bill
51 as amended.
Energy storage system, income
tax.
Read it
Representative Sareana.
Good morning.
And the floor is yours whenever
you're ready.
Good morning. Oops.
I should know in this committee
every day.
Thanks.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, I am
Representative Sarahana, and I'm
here to present.
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee substitute
restored income tax credit.
Those of you who've been here a
while have heard this for a
while.
Um, it's a great bill. Hopefully
we get it through today. My
expert witness is Jim De Jardin,
um, executive director of
renewable Energy Industries
Association of New Mexico.
because we do have some, a few
new people.
Energy, what, what is an energy
storage system? It is technology
that captures and stores energy
or used at a later time.
51 would add um a new section to
the income tax Act and the
corporate income and franchisese
Tax Act.
This legislation would create a
non-refundable tax credit of 40%
of the cost of taxpayers to
provide energy storage system.
On their property, be beginning
on or after January 1st of 2025
to January 1st of 2030.
The maximum credit
Of $6000 for a residential
property and 150,000 for
commercial, industrial or
agricultural property.
Taxpayers must apply for a
certification of eligibility
from Mner within a year
following the calendar year in
which the system becomes
operational.
The taxpayer may not claim both
a personal and corporate income
tax credit for the same
property.
The aggregate amount of credit
for Enert may certify the a Ener
may certify to eligible
taxpayers annually is $6
million.
Property owners must obtain tax
credits for the next.
May obtain tax credits for the
next tax year with available
certification if the aggregate
cap of credit has already been
certified.
Any tax credit that exceeds the
taxpayer's liability in the year
that credit is claimed may be
carried for.
And Emner would provide
information on certificates
issued to the tax the tax credit
in this I'll let you know on
Saturday we heard a bill similar
to this, um, from a
representative from Riodoso
area, and this would help them
in the fire if they had an
energy storage system, you know,
they could turn it on when they
need it.
And hopefully get a few hours of
So is your microphone on?
OK.
Thank you, Chairman. I apologize
for that. Uh, do you want me to
repeat what I said or should we
just
Keep, keep going. So, um, the
one thing that we have in New
Mexico, however, is a very low
attachment rate, so we're
presently only 1% of all the
50,000 solar systems that are
installed in New Mexico have
energy storage with it. So this
bill is designed to incentivize
a much higher attachment rate,
the national average is
approximately 10 to 12%.
California is over 50%.
Thank you. It's time for
questions. All right, thank you.
Uh, let's first go to uh anyone
that is joining us online,
anyone in support?
This bill
One person to support? OK, very
good. Who's with us?
Hello, I'm Charles Goodmacher,
uh, with Healthy Climate in New
Mexico registered lobbyist, um.
And I said,
Uh, sponsors said about the need
for these in emergency
situations, uh, it's absolutely
critical. People who have
medicines that need to be kept
refrigerated and also uh
You know, to keep air filters,
filtration systems, and so on
during a wild parts. So thank
you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else in
support? 2 more.
Who's with us next?
Stepy
Hi, um, my name is Stefie
Weisberg, um, with 350 New
Mexico. Um, and I live in the
East Mountains and I have solar
and heat pumps, and we recently
had a power outage and um it
would have been so great to have
some batteries to keep like our
pump wells, um, functioning for
water. So, um, uh, this is a, a
great bill and I um we stand by
it. Thank you so much.
One more
Andrew, good morning.
Good morning, committee and
chair.
Andrew Stone of the New Mexico
People's Energy Cooperative.
And what I would like to say is
that as we go more and more to
renewables.
We have this problem on our
distribution circuits where
there's just too much solar
during the day, and that
prevents more people from
hooking up their solar. So this
is a problem that P&M has
addressed by trying to get
batteries at their substations
which we highly encourage, but
it would really help all of us
if with every solar system there
were batteries and this bill
makes that more affordable, and
Um
That's the way forward and
that's what everybody's doing,
and that's the whole notion of
the virtual power plant where we
could even have P&M aggregate
our batteries and use them as a
resource for meeting peak load.
Anyway, thank you very much.
Please do that.
We have one more.
Enrique
Yes, sir. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Enrique
Nel, and I do represent the
greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. We're here to testify
in support of House Bill 51.
This is a textbook example of a
positive way to incentivize
individuals to make an
investment. And in this case,
it's energy storage. By offering
this tax credit, um, off the
purchase and installation costs
of an energy storage system, uh,
the state creates a
cost-effective bridge for New
Mexicans to make that financial
leap.
Into new energy options as well
as showing up the resilience of
our electric grid, uh, the
sponsor has provided for enough
varied and widespread response
to make a real difference both
in New Mexican bank accounts and
in renewable energy. Um, also
that sunset in 2030 ensures that
the program will be evaluated
and adjusted as needed. The
greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce applauds this approach
and urges the committee to uh to
approve House Bill 51. Thank
you.
Thank you Enrique. Anyone else
in favor? Anyone in opposition?
Oh
OK, let's come to the, to the
room.
All those in opposition of House
Bill.
51 is amended. Please raise your
hand.
OK, all those in support, please
raise your hand.
You choose to make comment,
please come up to the to the
front and form a line behind our
attendant and we.
Grab your comments.
I
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Randy
Sadwick. I'm the president of
Positive Energy.
We have been in business for 25
years, I started
Installing off-grid systems back
then, people couldn't get power,
so batteries work and they have
been working for decades.
Um
As Jim had mentioned we're
behind in New Mexico.
And uh this bill would change
that game.
Um
Right now, batteries have
10-year warranties.
And uh the batteries you can
extend that warranty up to 20
years, so that's the operational
life of the batteries.
The National Electric Code.
is, is, um, a standard that
maintains safety of battery
systems, and this.
Uh, requires stringent uh
requirements with listings to
protect consumers from risk.
Finally, um, incentives have
worked. I've been in the
industry 20 years.
Incentives have made the
difference in not only lowering
costs but making it more
accessible and available to all
members of our society, it will
boost jobs and create economic
opportunity for New Mexicans, so
I support this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you for coming
out today.
Next
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, my
name representing the Sierra
Club Rio Grande chat supporters,
um, not to
Repeat any previously uh made
points, um.
But
This tax credit would enable the
on-site capture of energy,
whether that be from solar or
other sources of energy. So
that's the basics, uh, rooftop
solar and on-site electric grid
as been mentioned, and will be
beneficial both in cases of
emergency, but also in allowing
homeowners and businesses to use
energy when they need it.
Batteries can even be tied to
essential on-site energy needs
for when and if electricity is
out. So for example, if you have
an extended power ISS, etc. We
have credits for rooftop solar.
Now it's
A quick personal example of
trying to walk the talk of
family here and working for the
Sierra Club, but also really
wanting to have the, um, I do
not come from a family of, of
great means where middle class,
but we tried to stretch. We got
a, uh, used EV in terms of power
outage, and we looked in the
sessions tax package. It's a
great way to help New Mexican
families have that stability and
security. Thank you. Thank you.
Next, yes, sir.
Uh, Mr. Chair, committee
members, my name is Glenn
Schiffbauer. I'm the executive
director for the Santa Fe Green
Chamber of Commerce and New
Mexico sustainable business.
We are in support of this bill
for many reasons. Um, one of the
reasons being that we as a
country and um.
As a state we have been
subsidizing or incentivizing
energy since 1917, and the
reason for that is to make sure
it's accessible to.
B
Who um who might need it and
want it and also for national
defense. So this is just another
uh.
Start for a nascent industry
such as solar and storage, and
it doesn't matter what the
energy source is, if you can
store it, it gives our
businesses a little more
certainty and a little more
ability to be resilient in the
case of.
Mentioned before and business is
really rely on a certainty, so
we support this bill and we hope
it makes it into the tax
package. Thank you.
Thank you, sir. Seeing no one
else in the room and support or
opposition. Let's come now to
the committee. First on our
list, we have on House Bill 51
as amended Vice Chairwoman
Karena.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, madam sponsor, um.
Is this proposed Bill HB 51, any
different than the bill you've
brought forward in previous
years.
Um
Mr. Chair, um, Madam Vice Chair,
thank you for that question.
There has been some minor
changes.
One was the increase from 5
million to 6 million for the
annual funding.
The other change is to add all
corporations being eligible for
the tax credit.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I'll keep my comments brief,
but as we've discussed in
previous years, I found it to be
problematic that we aren't
income testing these credits
that.
are being pushed by the 4th
floor of the governor's office.
So as I read it and as I
understand when this credit is
non-refundable, so that means
like a lower income New Mexican,
a Mexican, a New Mexican who
does not have a tax liability,
won't see any benefit from this
bill. In order for a New Mexican
without a tax liability to see a
benefit, the credit has to be
refundable, so they have to get
some money back after they file
their taxes. What that means in
practice is that we're reduced,
we're reducing the tax
liability, Mr. Chair, Madam
Sponsor of
someone who's filed and claimed
this credit.
So fundamentally that means
we're reaching a different
economic class of New Mexicans,
um, and potentially, we're
reducing the tax liability of
New Mexicans that certainly can
afford.
These units
And are likely going to purchase
these units, no matter what. So
if we have someone in our new
top tier bracket, the 1% of New
Mexican New Mexicans claiming
this credit, they in fact would
be able to reduce their
liability by that.
Um, $6000. So I certainly
appreciate the intention of
this, if something like this
were to move forward, as I've
shared over previous years, I
would really want to see some
income test on this. So if it's
those middle class New Mexicans
we're going for, I'd want to see
an income test so that this is
not a liability, um, claimed and
accessed by people who can
afford this kind of investment
for their homes. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
I agree it is
income level, but I'm getting
one, I'm getting my solar and my
energy storage. I'm a retired
teacher and I can spread it over
and I have a little tax
liability and I can spread it
over 5 years. But we also have
to look at the large systems,
Energy storage system is we have
150,000 for for large systems
for agricultural, commercial,
and those are, you know, our
fire stations when we have these
um extreme events, fires and
floods like we have, and we're
going to continue to have them
as long.
we have this industry that.
You know, worms to earth, um.
Fire stations, grocery stores.
gas stations, these critical
places could use energy storage
like this, so, um.
You're right, every energy
storage system that we present
in front of this, even if it's a
generator is for the higher end
people, but we also have to look
at who can and and and can use
this and why they use it like I
would use it when my grandkids
come.
4 kids turn on that thing. I, I
would use it and, and even if I
didn't have a, a, a solar
system, I could still plug it in
and charge at times. So there's
benefits. You just have to
figure out what you're right,
what's that's important. Thank
you.
Thank you for that response.
Let's go to Representative
Chandler.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, thank
you, Representative.
So help us uh following up on
vice chair Kadena's question.
What's the rationale for not
Supporting lower income
individuals in their efforts to
try to be carbon neutral. I'm,
I'm really struggling with
understanding why.
We're not doing that, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman, um, we tried that
last year and uh it was asked to
be stripped out of, out of our
bill, so we did try it last
year.
Um, so it was asked to be
stripped out by the governor's
office, Mr. Chairman, I believe,
yeah.
I don't think so.
So, um,
I
I will not support this unless
in the package unless.
We start accommodating.
Lower income people in these
efforts.
I, you know, I, and I, and you
all know I come from a very
middle class community and my
constituents would love to see
this.
But I need to be
in supporting everybody in the
state in their efforts to become
carbon neutral. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Mrs representative, we would
gladly put it back in.
But it was taken out last year.
Um, but we would definitely
support it.
My, my district is primarily's
move on now to representative
ranking member Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm, I'm gonna beat the dead
horse for one more second here.
No, I'd prefer either a
standalone bill for the low
income.
Or I prefer a standalone bill
for commercial.
Mhm
I guess I'm not, I'm not on
board for another tax break.
what it does, so.
One question, a couple of
questions for you.
Um
How many low income
Mr. Chairman, we don't have a
number.
Thank you.
Spect not very many.
I would prefer even standalone
bill that
We'll give you $1000 to go get a
generator, propane generator.
Propane lasts for millions of
years.
You could use that
Mm
You know, for $1000 you can get
a really, really good.
Low income
or data.
Um
Right, those reasons somebody
that doesn't need it.
Mr. Chairman, um, in our last
meeting when we talked about
generators, not only the the
pollution that they emit, but
the cost was $500 to $10,000.
If a representative said in the
meeting.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Now was
that for a full blown generator
that would operate the entire
home itself.
I believe so, Mr. Chairman. OK.
I've got one at my house.
100 $0 and it'll take everything
I.
With that. Thank you.
OK, let's move on then to
Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative, um,
I also have a concerns about,
about
The
Folks who would be buying this,
but I think that the reason that
That
Um
That is limited to them is
because these are not.
Cheap
Batteries
Um, I mean, we're we're talking
and I believe
What, what, there was a minimum
size, I believe in this. What
what was the minimum size of a,
of a battery that could be
purchased with this.
Mr. Chair, uh, represent
Montoya, I believe we have in
the bill 3KW.
To be consistent with the
federal standards.
OK.
And, and I believe
If once again, I did some
research on this when we heard
the bill the first time in
energy.
Um, and I believe those are
17,000 or something like that at
a starting point. Does that
sound right to you? Is it?
That sounds a little high for
3KW battery, so.
Typically you're looking more
like an 8 or 10 kW battery and
that installed would be
somewhere around 10 to $15,000.
It would depend.
So, um
I'm not gonna go down the route
that everybody else seems to be,
although I agree with that, um,
folks who are buying these that
are in that price range, they're
they're buying them because
they, they want them and I don't
know that we need to.
Necessarily
Help them do that. However,
My concern is I, I, we had a
little bit of discussion about
The fire danger that these pose,
at least currently the, the uh
The uh
Tesla battery storage packs or
or the lithium.
Batteries and the power
powerwall uh batteries.
Um, at least currently that's
the technology I understand from
maybe from the Saturdays.
Discussion, there might be a new
technology out there, but, but
the reality is,
If we're looking at the Tesla
battery pack, which is a
pretty nice system.
Uh
Those
pose it pretty
Tremendous fire danger if the
home catches on fire.
That you can, you can dump those
things in water, submerge them
in water and the and they'll
continue to burn.
Um, so I reached out to
My insurance agent.
to ask about the
Uh
About kind of the trend that
insurance is not ensuring
Holmes and, you know, uh, that
they're starting to, uh, on the
coast where hurricanes are,
they're trying to either raise
the rates really high or not
insuring folks where there's
high fire danger, they're not.
You know, if you live in the
forest, that's why we're doing
some of these deforesting.
Uh, bills that we see coming
through, but
Uh, when I reached out to my
insurance agent, this is a
discussion going on in the
industry.
As to whether or not they will
in the future unless there is,
unless the battery packs are set
off and not part of the
building.
That they may not.
Insure the home. So,
I, I'm a little concerned with
this, uh.
We may encourage folks to do
this and then they
And the possibility is around
the corner that they may not.
Be able to get insurance. So
that's just kind of a side note,
that's not a reason for this.
Me necessarily did not.
Uh, at the discussion before,
it's just something that is
around the corner that
It's a trend that's coming.
And we've seen it in the last
couple of years for insurance
companies are deciding.
That they will not take on the
liability, and I'm, I'm
concerned.
Fire danger at least of the
Tesla uh
Power packs.
That uh that that is a
consideration. They won't be
insuring those homes. So thank
you, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Anyone else, questions or
comments from the committee.
Seeing that I have a couple of
comments in regards to the
discussion that just took place
and I can appreciate uh our
committee that that we do the
work that we do and in many
cases, we can come together in a
in a very much bipartisan manner
to talk about what's real within
our communities, right? And I
think what we heard today was
that uh.
We're not OK with subsidizing
the rich. We're not OK with
continuing this method of trying
to subsidize renewable energy,
uh, because we have yet to
understand truly who it's really
benefiting, right? And I think
about the committees that or
the, the committees, excuse me,
the, the communities that I
represent.
I don't know.
I don't know any anyone, and I
say that out loud and and
honestly, I don't know anyone
that has
Solar panels
battery pack, you know, any of
those things, and I, and you
would think that with all the
work that we've done throughout
the years that everybody in our
state should have them by now,
but.
I don't, I don't know many of
them, and I'm still waiting for
That map that I've asked year
after year of what are these
communities that are enjoying
these benefits? Where are they
at? Is it Santa, is it
Albuquerque, if it's Santa Fe,
what part of it's Albuquerque,
what part? Just so that I have a
better understanding of of of
who we're helping in these in
these matters. So with that
being said, uh, as it, as it
would go, because this does have
a, a physical impact to our
general fund. It will be uh
Uh, the process is to table it
and then we will revisit it
should it, should it come
forward in a manner in which we
can appreciate it to fit it into
our tax package in whatever
capacity that will be, and so,
uh, Madam Vice chairwoman, if
you would please. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I move that we table HB
51 as amended.
Second by representative
Montoya, I think it was.
Oh, OK.
Oh, OK, it was Hernandez. Either
way.
Um, that being said, it's the
opposition, seeing none.
We appreciate your presentation.
Thank you all.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Next we
have House Bill 179 Saturday
after Thanksgiving GRT sunset.
have Chairwoman Gallegos, and I
know that we also thank you.
We also have
And we also have Representative
Herndon in the room.
The floors, ladies, whenever
you're ready. Mr. Chair.
uh, Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, I'm pleased to
reintroduce House Bill 179, the
Saturday after Thanksgiving GRT
sunset extension. This bill was
first enacted in 2018, um.
since 2018, we have offered
small businesses those.
With 10 employees or fewer whose
primary place of business is in
New Mexico, the opportunity to
deduct retail sales up to $500
this Saturday after
Thanksgiving.
I'm sure many of my colleagues
know it's hard being a small
business owner in New Mexico,
speaking with constituents who
own small businesses throughout
my district, I hear about so
many challenges rising costs,
labor shortages, and increased
retail crime, just to name a
few, at a time when maintaining
a small business is so
challenging, we have the
opportunity to lend a hand, um,
by extending the small business
Saturday tax, we will aid small
businesses throughout the state
in attracting
customers with competing uh with
national and competing with
national chains during the
busiest shopping season of the
year.
Uh, since implementing the tax
holiday in 2018, we have seen an
upward trend in small business
taking advantage of it, offering
them a needed advantage at a
minimal cost to this day.
Uh, with that, um, I stand for
questions, does my co-sponsor
have anything to add?
Uh, thank you, um.
Madam Presenter, Mister Chair,
members of the committee, the
great aspect of this bill is
that it goes across urban and
rural areas, focusing on small
businesses, and we are affecting
the people who need it the most,
and right after Thanksgiving and
before we go into the holidays,
so with that, Mister Chair, like
my co-sponsor, we stand for
questions. Thank you both for
presenting this morning. Let's
go to the uh internet first.
Anybody in favor or opposition?
We have one Enrique and uh
support, I imagine.
Yes, Mr. Chair, thank you so
much. Uh, give me just a second.
I apologize. um, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Enrique Nel and uh we
are here today to speak on
behalf um I'm here to speak
today on behalf of the greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce,
and we are in support of House
Bill 179, that the tax holiday
on gross receipts tax is a very
effective tool for supporting
our local small businesses,
encouraging people to buy local,
helps keep money in our
community. It supports small
businesses.
and it helps create jobs, um, a
strong, a strong local
businesses mean a stronger tax
base overall for New Mexico, out
of $100 spent, $68 stays in our
community if you shop local. So
it's important for policymakers
to support our small businesses,
both owners and employees and
help them be competitive and
successful. Uh, in fact, our
overall goal as a chamber for
this session is to make New
Mexico more competitive, and
this small business Saturday
deduction.
helps us make local businesses
more competitive during one of
the busiest shopping weekends of
the entire year. Therefore, we
respectfully ask for a do pass
on House Bill 179. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you Enrique.
Anyone else?
No. OK, let's come to the
committee room, and it is empty,
so I don't think there's anybody
here in opposition that's come
to the committee, Representative
Montoya.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representatives.
Um,
This is a really good
Use of tax policy.
Um, obviously there is a, a
potentially
And what we've seen maybe a
growing uh cost to local.
Uh, community governments,
however,
Um, in the end we keep small
business in business year round.
And this, I believe this helps
do that, especially when people
are out doing a lot of their big
shopping right before Christmas.
Um, making sure that our local
Businesses are able to
participate.
Uh, in a, in a grand way, really
can help ensure that they are in
Uh, stay in business through the
holidays and beyond, so.
Once again, concerns, there's
always concerns when, when we're
taking money out of the pocket
of local government coffers.
However,
If the
Result is that those local
businesses stay in business year
round and continue to pour into
those local communities.
Um, and also those are
Definitely the jobs created in
small businesses are definitely
local people.
Uh, so, uh, with that,
I, I support this. You have a
concern. It did seem to jump
dramatically.
Maybe 4 times over.
Uh, from one year to the next,
so I think we do need to keep an
eye on it.
Uh, because of
Who knows that with inflation,
And with everything else that
could be a a growing number. Um,
so I, I'm sure, I'm sure some of
my local officials are gonna
say,
They're gonna probably reach out
to me and say that they have
some concerns, but the reality
in my mind that this helps local
businesses stay in business. It
helps uh those communities year
round.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Montoya.
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I've
got a couple of pages of
questions here.
Um
Yeah
You know, I, uh, Mr. Chair, I'm,
I'm, uh, I started, uh, a uh
career several years ago as an
elected and uh so I
There's two sides of this coin.
One is, you know, we
That's what we depend on.
But also small business.
I appreciate
Um
Could you walk me through, Mr.
Chairman, could you just walk me
through and how.
Um
Oh that small businesses
designated designated as a small
big box stores, how would I
become part of that for you?
You walk me through that?
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative, so you, uh, a
small business would qualify if
it's a local business, it has to
have its main headquarters in
New Mexico and it can't have
more than 10 employees.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So,
Um
That right there is so on that
specific day there would, there
would be discussions or contact
with the state or how does the
state know that I'm a small
business with 7 employees.
So, um, they are are TRD has the
uh information that that.
has a number of employees, uh,
course through W-2s and
different ways of of monitoring
that and uh that's how they
qualify.
Thank you for sharing. I
appreciate that. I hope there
are people that are listening
that, that didn't know how to do
that. I do know that.
Like
Thank you
Thank you. Other questions or
comments from the committee.
Mr. Chair, Madam sponsor, thank
you. Um, just to make sure I'm
remembering and reading the SIR
accurately when.
Something like a tax exemption
is coming up on its sunset
window, which, as I understand.
Uh, the previous tax sunsets in
2025, madam. That is correct.
And what you're proposing is
that we extend the sunset 5
years out to 2030. What I was
asking cause I, I just wanted to
clarify and confirm, is that the
FIR we're looking at in front of
us, which does say that there's
a cost right in parentheses of.
Almost a million a year. It's
showing up as a cost again, even
though our budget previously
accounted for it because the FIR
analysis and the, the
projections, um, include the
sunsets in them. So that's why
even though our our budget had
accounted for this for 5 years.
It is going to appear as a new
cost because the budget that
we're working with in HB2 and
other places does not any uh
longer account for this
exemption. So I just wanted to
confirm and clarify that we see
um RLSC.
Economist nodding her head as as
to how the FIR reads and where
that's accounted for.
So, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair for
that clarification. So that
being said, uh, as we do in this
committee and, and you're well
aware, chairwoman and.
With the Representative Herndon
that whenever there's a fiscal
impact of the general fund, uh,
these bills like, like this or
any others will just be retained
tabled temporarily and then he
brought back for the potential
inclusion into the tax omnibus
bill. So, uh, that being said,
uh, can I get a motion then,
uh, representative vice
chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I move
that we table a. Mm.
Seconded by Representative
Duncan and the opposition.
Seeing none. Representatives,
thank you very much for your
presentation. Thank you, thank
you, uh, folks, we have come to
the end of our agenda. I know we
zoomed through today, but do
remember that uh we do have
House Bill 46, again, that's,
that's my fault. I'll take, I'll
take the fault on that, that we
didn't get that committee sub to
you out on time. But now that
you do have it, uh, it will be
first on our agenda for
Wednesday, uh, along with any
other bills that we have
referred to our committee. Thank
you very much for the work
today, and uh we'll see you.
Have a great week.
Richard.
