Thank you thank you madam chair
so the two to five number is
point two two five eight five
two point three.
Rescue have seven.
Thank you thank you and and and
before I do begin.
Allow me to introduce my expert
witness I ninety five done this
two times already with their
time we won't do this again I
want to introduce the is the
Torrez who is the chief
economist for the legislative
finance committee who was
absolutely are are right hand
person to go to to work up
numbers and look at everything
related to the financial aspects
to this tax package thank you
for joining me is this morning
and as we begin I want to first
thank all the members of this
committee or.
Your commitment to this process
over the past forty eight days I
know that the past forty eight
days we've heard a plethora of
tax proposals tax ideas and
issues that that were were far
ranging that affect every
portion of this state everybody
in this state and I want to just
once again to just thank you
that your commitment to openly
here of almost fifty pieces of
legislation up and openly and
objectively discuss their merits
you know in a very respectful
manner with their Sanchez is all
that I could have ever asked for
from the committee so thank you
very much and I hope that
throughout that process that the
commitment that I made on day
number one as your new chairman
related to being respectful
objective transparent and
communicative was help through
from that point until today that
all of you felt like you had a
chance to be part of this
discussion part of this
development and part of now
hopefully the passing of this
tax package so that we can
affect good policy for the state
of New Mexico and so from that
day.
To being here are process has
been done we follow of.
I wanted to make sure that we
all had a chance to look at each
piece of legislation objectively
thoroughly and that the process
would be would be follow that if
they had a fiscal impact that it
would be temporary table them
come back and visit some day in
the near future.
If you recall that for the
public benefit how this tax
package was created I created a
matrix table that helped me to
realize what exactly we were
talking about as a tax committee
verses just looking at taxation
and looking at numbers I want to
know if we're looking at those
types of aspects what are we
actually trying to affect what
subject matter what issues are
we trying to effect and that's
why after hearing those close to
fifty pieces of legislation I
created this matrix table that
looked a lot like this that we
handed out about two weeks ago
to each and every and every one
of the members.
From that we had all the pieces
of legislation broken down by
categories income tax children
health care gross receipts of
renewable energy in the list can
go on and on the bill number the
sponsor description and what the
fiscal impact was and from those
discussions I was thankful that.
That all members in this
committee took advantage and
participated in sharing with me
what their priority legislation
was and with ranking member
Harper and democratic members we
within condensed that list
of to about twenty pieces of
legislation and and the list was
further developed into what you
see today.
And so I will I want to first
thank everybody for
participating in that measure
because as a visual learner and
it was individual worker that
help me out to help understand
what we're doing with this tax
package.
Our capacity.
Based on the work conducted
throughout the twenty twenty to
interim session by the LFC
Revenue stabilization Tax Policy
Committee and passed by the
house it was determined that we
have about one billion dollars
in tax capacity.
Given that perhaps once in a
generation opportunity to have
one billion dollars of tax
capacity it was important that
all options would be better.
So waiting up to this tax
package it was it was made clear
that in governor Michelle Lujan
Grisham state of the state
address on day one of this
legislative session that
statements were made regarding
the issuance of taxpayer rebate
checks recall that in the amount
of seven hundred fifty to
fifteen hundred dollars for a
married couple.
Realizing that that task
capacity of a billion dollars
would be eaten up by that amount
had we just gone with that
option it is totality if you
look at and and have been ended
up to the committee.
Able.
If you look at the table that's
being handed out to each and
everyone of you.
We took a step back and said
okay if.
We recognize the the governor
wants to return some of the the
dollars back to its taxpayers
but.
Given the amount again of if
they want to do so under fifty
for single filers fifteen
hundred for married couples the
total amount of that payment
would be one billion dollars.
Forty seven one one billion
forty seven million nine hundred
and seventy thousand dollars
which would be enough completely
our capacity to do anything
creative with our tax package
meeting that we would have
meetings for not we were just
sat here to pass or look at
legislation not being able to do
anything so that being stated we
recognize that many members of
the public legislators alike
commented that instead of using
this magnitude of money it will
much be rather spend and
utilized making generational
investments in tax policy far
reaching for all New Mexicans to
appreciate.
So in this twenty twenty three
this tax package we appreciate
the focus of our governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham and
returning money into the pockets
of hardworking new Mexicans so
we framed this tax on this bill
with that consideration in mind
but use the contest number of if
you look at your table in front
of you option number three.
Single filer would receive three
hundred dollar tax rebate
America always would receive six
hundred dollars in a tax rebate
to total four hundred nineteen
million one hundred eight
thousand one hundred dollars
which would allow us deal to get
have some capacity to do some
things creative for this state
it would allow us to make
intentional generational tax
changes that will have once
again generational impacts for
our state.
With a little more than half a
billion dollars of now this
capacity or or we're detail five
hundred eighty million dollars
eight hundred nineteen thousand
nine hundred dollars we want to
go to work and at this point
utilizing the priority
legislation that we worked out
in this committee we did I not
in my mind just enough to help
all of those but also just
enough to upset every single
person perhaps in this room.
But it is all tax on this bill
we focus on what I think is
important to the state it's
progressivity in our taxes.
Reforms to personal income tax
rates to lower taxes for lower
middle and income before for low
and middle income filers well
ensuring those at the top of the
income scale pay their fair
share.
Reduced what was considered
unfair capital gain tax breaks
for those investment income.
Improve follow improvements for
low income comprehensive tax
rate brackets Lichter increases
child tax income tax credits
provide childcare G. R. T. tax
deductions provide tax credits
that work in health care for low
that work in health care in
rural New Mexico.
Make modest increases in alcohol
tax to further and frontier
address programs we to alcohol
abuse and prevention programs.
We make adjustments to tobacco
taxes.
We provide consideration to
renewable energy initiatives we
extend veteran tax benefits.
We propose finally lowering this
chart tax rate by another point
five percent that will benefit
both New Mexico businesses and
New Mexico families.
Legislation the tax package well
I will go over every single one
of them in detail I do want to
go over with the Brasco those
that made it into the tax
package for each of our
representative.
And for those in the public
they're all online as well so if
you look at the first being
house bill one nineteen
sponsored by Representative
Chandler it just a marginal tax
rates to lower the bottom rates
and raise the top rates brought
in the back of the the bottom
broadening the brackets excuse
me so for those that are blue
collar workers those that are
teachers and police officers
firefighters in the state they
will receive a tax cut of what
once was five point five percent
will now be reduced to four
point nine percent.
House bill one twenty which is
also Representative Chandler's.
And now of limits.
Two three hundred thousand
dollars the cap of the state of
New Mexico businesses protecting
those businesses.
But eliminates the forty percent
net capital gains reduction and
when was the capital gains
deduction to two thousand five
hundred dollars.
That was a discussion related to
the three hundred thousand
dollar rate that both
Representative Harper
Representative Chandler did
agree on of at the last moments
of the creation of this tax
package.
House bill eighty one is amended
also Representative Chandler
bill increases income amounts
and inductions for calculating
New Mexico's low income tax
rebate allows for inflation
adjustments.
House Bill three twenty two
Representative Harper is bill
would modify corporate income
tax rates upward to a flat rate
of five point nine percent
multiplying the income by sales
factor and allow for certain
appeal rights and that.
If I'm wrong reserve
Representative Harper to get to
the point includes your
amendments if we look at
children as as a focus of this
tax package Representative
Chandler has house bill one
forty four that increases
childcare credit amounts as to
the three tiers of adjusted
gross income up to five thousand
dollars and allows for rate
increases based on positive
inflation.
If you look at also referencing
Children house bill one thirty
seven Representative vice
chairman because they're not
allows for a G. R. T. deduction.
For childcare receipts.
Through one the early childhood
education and care department
for licensed childcare
assistance programs and for to
for profit prekindergarten
services percent to the
prekindergarten act it also
provides a ten year sunset on
that bill.
If you look at healthcare.
If you recall the passionate and
dedicated work of Representative
Miguel Trujillo and his work on
house bill three twenty to the
committees up to do that.
It adds to the list of health
care professionals qualifying
for the five thousand or three
thousand rural health care
practitioner income tax credit
with enhanced definitions.
And with the help of.
Committee member that's not even
part of this committee ended
presented her bill at all House
Bill three fifty one
Representative Jones and that
was brought to my attention by
Representative Harper thank you
for
mentioning this is that she has
as a nurse she has some great
clarifying language regarding
hours as well as regarding rural
definitions so thank you for for
that edition and that's give a
shout out to representative
Johnson we do see here.
The real definition now rural
county or incorporate area of
partially rural counties as
designated by the health
resources and services
administration of the United
States health and Human Services
so that's that's a that's a
helpful addition to this entire
package if you look at gross
receipts.
This was once a reduction of
gross receipts as well as a as a
look at the pyramid structure
within the state of New Mexico.
I want to first begin by seeing
and acknowledging the work of
one of our own members in this
committee ranking member Harper
for the work you've done related
to the pair meeting aspects of
of what we're at today.
Your intelligence your ability
to openly discuss and
communicate how you see things
in that amazing mind of yours
and how you've educated me I I I
I I am forever thankful and the
work that you have done related
to PNB while we saw the the line
up the room that day in regards
to how this would affect and may
affect the agency apologies of
the counties.
I feel was one aspect of it but
I want to thank you for your
commitment yet to this to this
aspect but I also want to also
bring into the light that the
administration was also part of
this as well and that they need
to also have some type of
responsibility to making sure
that they can stand up for their
priority bills just as use that
up to this priority bills thank
you for you've done to this
initiative related to the G. R.
T..
It further reduces the G. R. T.
point five percent.
So if you look at last year's
quarter percent deduction in
addition to this year's point
five percent it's a three
quarter percent tax cut from
this year and last year's if you
look at the median real income
of New Mexicans this year it's
about fifty five thousand
dollars if you look at their
consumptive right being about
twenty seven and a half thousand
dollars per year this could
essentially turn into B. into
being about a little over two
hundred dollars per year in tax
savings and so that being said
thank you Mr Harper for for your
introduction of house bill three
sixty seven.
Further related gross receipts
taxes house bill two twenty
Representative cakes allow the
G. R. T. deduction for qualified
environmental modification
Services reimbursed by the
medical ID to assistance
division that also has a ten
year sunset.
Related to alcohol House Bill
three twenty one Representative
Harper.
Removes the liquor excise
allocation for municipalities
percent increases the allocation
to the W. I. grant Fund drug
court and Human Services
department to match federal
Medicaid funds.
It reduces the met the motor
vehicle excise tax allocation as
to the general fund now with
increases of twenty five percent
of the transportation fund and
seventy and seventy five percent
increase the road fund which is
consistent with grant taxes and
vehicle fees so thank you for
that Mr Harper looking at house
bill two thirty related to
alcohol Representative Ferrary.
Originally increased liquor
excise tax to twenty five
percent per measured serving in
applies to inflationary index is
at this point what we do is we
hold harmless all of the local
was mall distributors and the
local breweries so that those
are not impacted nor are the
wineries what we do though is we
affect change by applying a
fifty percent per gallon
increase on alcohol for the big
distributors in this state which
will go towards the issues
related around alcohol
prevention alcohol abuse and
trying to mend the problems that
we realised plagues the state
today.
Related to the renewable energy
house bill thirty two is amended
Representative Sariñana
accretion income tax credit for
energy storage systems that are
purchased and installed after
March first twenty twenty three.
that also has a sunset which is
an eight the the focus of this
bill is limited to forty percent
of the cost of a maximum of five
thousand residential hundred
fifty thousand dollars for
commercial or agricultural uses.
For those solar systems.
Related to house bill sixty
seven the substitute to that
house bill's Representative
Chandler amends for statutes
conferring mon Authority adding
energy storage facility as well
as solar and wind equipment.
Our disparities of counties
requiring energy storage
facilities unless the school
districts within the
government's boundaries we see
in lieu property tax payment as
specified.
To that.
Finally under renewable energy
hospital for twenty four one two
Representative grow up income
tax credits with a sunset one
related vehicles costing up to
fifty five thousand dollars and
one for charging units up to
three hundred dollars.
Thank you there cat credit
capped at two thousand five
hundred dollars or four thousand
dollar from households with AGI
of under two hundred percent of
the federal federal poverty
level.
Finally going to veterans and
property Representative Harry
Garcia had house bill four
thirty three removes the sunset
date but instead it's a ten year
sunset related to armed forces
retirement pay at thirty
thousand dollars.
Also related to tobacco is that
apparently in two thousand
nineteen somehow cigars were
excluded from the tobacco tax
rate that is going to be erased
so now that tobacco will be
equivalent the tax at a rate of
other tobacco products at twenty
five percent.
And with that ladies and
gentlemen again surrounding that
all of this is built around
those tax rebate checks we
believe that once again that
this affects positive change for
the working families of the
state of New Mexico and with
that madam chair and committee
members I stand for any
questions.
Thank you Mr chair today we're
going to start by hearing public
comments with the opposition we
will start in the room and then
go to them and ask for a show of
hands if you're here either in
person on.
Please raise your hand if you
like to speak in opposition.
What okay I will ask you to
please make your comments in
less than two minutes starting
here on the left hand side
regions against.
Thank you yes we will be on the
microphone these sergeant me we
work with.
Thank.
You madam chair so I begin to
get madam chair and members of
the committee good morning my
name is Terry Cole and I'm the
president CEO for the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce.
With all due respect I want to
be can.
Ask you to take a couple of
steps that give our present is a
bit of room chair we put the
make.
My apologies please be no
problem Mr madam chair members
of the committee so good morning
my name is Terry called I am the
president and CEO for the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce with all due respect I
want to be candid with all of
you for business this is a
disappointing tax package and as
drafted we believe represents an
incredible missed opportunity
first the legislature has added
numerous burdens on the backs of
small businesses in the past
years and are considering more
this session.
Yet this legislation excludes G.
R. T. Karia meeting relief that
are small businesses really need
in order to compete with big
corporations and that New Mexico
businesses need to compete with
companies from out of state
second this bill delays the G.
R. T. rate relief that consumers
and businesses should receive a
share pushing part of it to next
year to apparently make way for
even more government spending as
third leading economists have
called taxing capital gains
about the most inefficient
source of tax Representative
revenue new in the economy the
last thing we need is capital
flight out of New Mexico And
fourth we have a chance to
session to offer substantial
personal income tax relief and
reform for small businesses and
the middle class instead this
last legislation offers only
marginal scant personal income
tax relief while raising taxes
on countless families small
businesses and skilled
professionals including the very
health care professionals we
can't keep in this state and
let's not forget that all this
is on top of the proposed brand
new tax on most employers and
employees in New Mexico to pay
for a likely insolvent massive
government mandate around family
and medical leave.
We do not need tax increases we
have an over three billion
dollar budget surplus a
workforce shortage a health care
access crisis and we lost
population last year we need to
compete for jobs talent and
business growth and staff this
legislation tells all about to
go elsewhere respectfully madam
chair members of the committee
we urge you to oppose the bill
thank you very much.
These are.
Good morning madam chair members
my name is Jimmy Bates I'm with
Primera distributing company.
We're only approach that size
increase on alcohol yes the
district that for reasons you've
heard before but if if you must
have a.
I just.
Change language that I think
representative Lente stated that
just fifteen percent increase
across the different categories
beer wine and spirits that's
what we would like to see the
weight fitness fifteen cents.
wine and spirits are distinctly
different not taxed it
differently for that reason
we're being the lowest alcohol
beverage bought him a BB forty
five percent with spirit your
hard drive forty percent A. B.
B. the way this tax reads at
fifteen cent increase per litre
on hard liquor at your whiskey
or your part because that's a
nine percent increase in excise
tax.
Fifteen cents a litre online is
a thirty three percent increase
and then you get the beer the
choice of beverage choice of
moderation that's a thirty seven
percent increase in excise taxes
so where is that the date you
have the lowest HB V. aka
product taking a thirty seven
percent increase and the highest
and hard liquor taken nine
percent increase and if we don't
change that to where to relative
increased by making it a percent
versus the cents per case it
will result in price compression
on the shelves.
And I believe that's going to
have the opposite effect of what
I believe you're trying to get
this through this legislation
you're going to Representative
consumers away from four to five
percent A. B. A. B. B. beverage
and to a forty percent one.
And that's what if we have to
have a tax increases please take
time to get it right make it a
relative increase across the
different categories so that we
what price compression and
unintended consequences that are
sure to follow but that thank
you very much.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Brent more
of a registered lobbyist for and
has a bush and we stand
respectful opposition to this
tax package I heard a testimony
earlier in the year on the the
specific proposal that was
brought before you that had a
very large increases on the
liquor excise tax my comments
are focused on the the portion
that raises the liquor excise
tax we continue to believe that
increase in the liquor excise
tax is not appropriate this year
because you have such a large
budget surplus there but we also
believe that how the state is
never fully realize the
potential of the revenue general
generated by the liquor excise
tax as you well know the state
has diverted about half of the
liquor excise tax revenue to the
general fund we believe there
are more appropriate proposals
to get after responsible
consumption Senate bill two
twenty as an example we believe
that is a necessary first step
towards addressing the needs in
the state and maximizing the
dollars that are put towards
responsible consumption so with
all due respect to the sponsor
we stand in opposition to that
the increase in the liquor
excise tax thank you very much.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee that Germans on
behalf of Swisher international
we respectfully oppose this bill
particularly with respect to the
increased tax on cigars
premium cigars are not
cigarettes they're not they
drugs they're not full of
cannabis you don't use them to
get high you don't see high
school kids walking around with
twenty dollar premium cigars and
those adults who do choose to
smoke premium cigars we don't
smoke a pack a day
they're different
What this bill effectively does
is increases the current cigar
tax from fifty cents to
twenty five percent of the
product value so for of twenty
dollars premium cigar that would
become a five dollar tax
we respectfully oppose this bill
and and thank you for your time.
Yeah.
Others in the room I would like
to speak in opposition.
Madam chair members the
committee my name is Marco
Gonzales and representative of
Verizon and I am here to speak
to just one portion of the bill
the single sales factor and we
don't necessarily stand in
opposition but with regard to
that portion of the bill we ask
for amendments that have been
previously creating included in
in prior iterations of this bill
essentially what it does is it
would establish a threshold for
a level investment and
employment in New Mexico of a
hundred employees and fifty
million and and in order to
obtain an election that would
allow Rising and other wireless
companies to be able to
maintain the current law portion
of formula so we hope that as
this bill moves toward we can
address that issue we don't take
any position on the remain tax
package and we ask for the
committee's consideration of
that previously considered and
adopted a portion on also chair
because there are other members
out there from the wireless
community can't get in I would
also say that eighteen T. also
supports that as well thanks
bye.
Thank you we have any sections
of the room.
Can we confirm if there are
people outside waiting to also
speak in opposition.
Okay.
I will go to opposition economy
if you'd like to speak against
our with concerns on house bill
forty seven your hands now.
Alright what.
That you today you're next.
Good morning madam chair it's
Leri Sonntag here on behalf of
the New Mexico business
coalition and better together
New Mexico a grassroots
organization we represent
hundreds of businesses of
thousands of New Mexicans across
the state.
We respectfully oppose this bill
there's a lot of good part but
with over three and a half
billion dollar surplus there
should not be any part of a
omnibus bill that raises taxes
especially on small businesses
and those that provide jobs.
The impression.
That was given is that there is
an opportunity for investments
in our state and that the state
knows better how to make those
investments that individuals to
reducing the amount of a tax
rebate is also something that
we're completely opposed to when
there is a surplus that money
should be returned to taxpayers
in prejudice local no on this
omnibus bill five forty seven
thank you.
Thank you is there anyone else
that has.
Thank you eight.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of eighteen T. we are
in the same position as rising
and that we are not specifically
opposed to the bill but we do
have concerns and would
appreciate the opportunity to
continue to work with the
Sanchez to address those thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you I will now go to those
that would like to speak in
support of house bill four five
forty seven starting here in the
room I'm here in the second row.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you my name is
amber Wallin and I'm the
executive director New Mexico
voices for children we sent in
really strong support of this
bill you know I love to say that
in the past few years New Mexico
has really become a leader in
the nation and what it looks
like to put kids and families
and communities person tax
policy is built on that
important progress takes it to
the next level your increases in
the child tax credit will
benefit three hundred fifty
thousand New Mexico kids in a
way that shown to improve
childhood outcomes your changes
in the personal income tax will
cut taxes for ninety four
percent of residents your
performance in elector will help
those in our communities need
help the most and all of these
changes will improve equity in
our tax code that you're making
some really common sense
improvements in our corporate
income taxes our personal income
taxes slightly reducing the
capital gains deduction all of
these things improve fairness in
our tax code and level the
playing field in it and then on
top of that your significantly
reducing the gross receipts tax
rate for every single family in
the state every single bit of
business in the state this is
going to improve outcomes for
state for future just like to
ends with a lot of gratitude for
chairman Lente for vice chair
Cabana up for every sponsor in
years past in this year for
every piece of this great bill
including speaker Martinez
Representative guy a ghosts
Representative Chandler and
Representative Harper we really
appreciate your work your smart
debate and proving that you can
put kids and families first in
tax policy thank you.
Yes please.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
money and then the set on the
with the center for the axion
and thank you for bringing HB
five forty seven forward with
CDC rebates elector we believe
that these are great tax
policies that move us forward
into pets money into the pockets
of our families to spend locally
the same workers for the corner
store of our economy thousands
of New Mexican families like our
member you let him out of thin
is a mother of four daughters
this spans firsthand the
struggles of keeping her family
afloat while navigating
education health taxes no to
well the impact of policies in
our community I community
continues to share stories about
inflation in the pandemic
continue to affect the questions
in power with the current wages
making it hard to cover basics
of survival like food and
shelter which is why we believe
that increasing the C. D. C. the
update of elector and the
rebates refunds for low income
make New Mexican families
including essential immigrant
workers is necessary policies
like CDC have proven to lift
children out of poverty while
also boosting our economy we're
proud The New Mexico state in
the steps to move in a direction
to make art Tax Code fared in
ease the strains in New Mexican
families budgets this this bill
reflects a New Mexico that
invest in families and
children's well being thank you
so much.
Madam chair members the
committee on Charles good marker
of speaking on behalf of three
different groups real quickly
first that statement natural
resources defense council we
stand strong support this tax
package very grateful for the
inclusion three environmental
house tells tax bills that were
included and thanks to the
leadership the chair members of
the committee and sponsors for
that the help bring us to to
towards a cleaner economy
on behalf of the NM BC action
fund we're extremely happy to
see this tax package restore so
much balance that was lost
during two major changes in
recent decades that had
distorted principles of equity
and had resulted in an enormous
volatility of our tax system so
this is a major step forward
towards more stability and
reducing our reliance on one
industry.
For the American heart
association I applaud the
inclusion of cigar tax increases
haven't had time to thoroughly
analyze the impact on other
tobacco products
but we look forward to working
with the session with that
legislators during the interim
and hopefully make more progress
on that next session thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee was kind of
what the Sierra Club you're
gonna chapter representing our
thirty five thousand members of
we stand and support strong
support actually of the the tax
package we're deeply grateful
for the inclusion of three
environmental bills
in in this package thank you to
the leadership to the chair
members of this committee and
Sanchez I'll just highlight the
those three bills real quick I
H. before twelve helps New
Mexico families purchase
electric vehicles which is
important as companies such as
GM and Ford Committee only
producing EV's by twenty thirty
five this bill focuses on
additional lower and moderate
income New Mexicans which is
refundable and transferrable
a point of sale V. thirty two is
also extremely important tax
credits for energy storage
systems for their homes and
businesses home storage protects
against blackouts supports
electric grid and lowered
utility cut costs to customers
SB sixty seven energy storage
bonds make energy storage
facilities eligible for industry
industrial revenue bonds and
some tax exemptions just as in
dispersal facilities are in the
face of climate driven fires
this flood
fires and floods this summer the
house commitment to solutions
that protect our children and
communities is very encouraging
there are two key remaining
climate tax credits in the
Senate the geo thermal tax
credit that will help build out
this clean renewable energy and
also credits for ground source
heat pumps that make heating and
cooling extremely cheap and
efficient thank you again for
your support and building New
Mexico's clean economy thank
you.
Thank you madam chair
I'd like to congratulate the
committee chairman okay I've
been doing this a long time
since a top live during the
legislative session to try to
take all these tax measures I'm
trying to balance something I
think what you've done here and
what this bill represents is an
is a up a path that leads us to
lowering the regressivity of
this tax system as a whole
others only couple areas that I
think you should probably think
about changing or adding one is
the continuation of the.
income tax credit for nurses
that we put in place last year
nurses deserve some additional
credit I believe they work
really hard and we should have
such a long third of nurses in
the state we need something to
incentivize them the other area
is another client a
representative and that's the
the wine industry of the one
industry is looking at.
Thirty three percent increase in
per litre on.
Online we think that's a little
exorbitant would like to see
that little bit but on par this
is an excellent piece of
legislation act actually to
committee again on their work
thank you.
Yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is lance on a
policy director for the center
for civic policy we stand in
strong support of House Bill
five forty seven AM as mentioned
previously from the supporters
that stated for me the
restructuring of personal income
tax rates for the wealthiest
earners will make our tax system
more fair more racially
ethnically and gender equitable
right now is the perfect time to
really continue to invest in our
disinvestment communities I want
to thank our sponsors and our
leadership for bringing this
bill forward thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee aged forty within this
fully.
I want to touch on with the
chair start with the
transparency at this really do
appreciate the time that's been
put into this the timing where
we're at and session there's no
surprises what we've seen
historically is the mistakes are
made when we rush this at the
very end of the last few days
this is been the opposite of
that so thank you all for that
in the balance right the lower
to G. R. T. reduction helps
everyone in New Mexico.
We thank you for that that's a
benefit to everyone a motor
vehicle excise revenue we
understand that there's needs to
be balance there the state needs
more revenue than the locals the
cost of a road miles is much
more for the state we understand
the need for balance there and
what's not in the bill that's
what we thank you all the most
for protecting our cities
protect our local governments
are actually using the services
that we have to find thank you
madam chair.
Thank you for.
Chair members of the committee
Marco Gonzales at this time on
behalf of plus power and we
think the sponsor of house bill
sixty seven and the chairman of
this committee for including the
tax package versus much
supportive of that and just want
to mention that we hope that
there could also be a little a
technical fix to and clued
language that simply makes clear
that standalone storage is
included with that we think the
committee for bringing that
portion of that of this short
thank you madam chair members
the committee.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee choice
person executive director for
New Mexico counties and first
off I want to say thank you to
the members who reached out
talked through the concerns of
the counties had I specifically
want to thank Representative
Harper for taking time to meet
with us and understand not only
are concerns about the fiscal
impact of the anti permitting
but also concerns about the
possible risk it might have for
the other four hundred million
dollars that local governments
receive for County specifically
and the implications it might
have had on our reporting our
lost revenue things that were
not intended to affect but may
very well have so with that we
think this was a very thoughtful
discussion we appreciated being
part of it we appreciate the
effort and time it took for all
of you to that it and work with
us and with that we stand in
strong support thank you.
Anyone else in the room that
would like to speak in support
of HB five forty seven.
Going online New please raise
your hand if you'd like to speak
in support of this bill chairman
of the state are.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Karen
was terrible I am with the
American physical therapy
association of New Mexico and we
wanted to specifically thank you
for including an increase in
health care professionals who
would be eligible for tax
credits for working in rural
areas physical therapists have
been added to the numbers of
people that get some tax credit
we need and we were very much
appreciate that thank you.
Thank you.
Read your next.
No you yourself if you'd like to
make public comment.
I'm sorry.
Sorry.
I thank you madam chair members
of the committee my name is rich
Weiner
I strongly support HB five forty
seven I remember all too well
twenty years ago when the the
personal income tax was
flattened at the highest the
rate went down to eight point
two percent to four point nine
percent a forty percent
reduction and everybody was
making over sixteen thousand
dollars paid the same rate as
the millionaires and
billionaires that may was
tremendous injustice to the to
the people of New Mexico and on
top of that the capital gains
deduction where under.
Income is taxed at a lower rate
essentially then earned income
is also tremendous and Justice
and there was simply no evidence
that those tax cuts.
A produce a it influx of jobs
into New Mexico and there's no
reason to think that that
raising the taxes back towards
the levels we had before because
capital flight or any any other
of the three departments within
here.
the.
I I would I would say that the
if if there are any amendments
to this bill I would appreciate
if those amendments went further
in the direction of restoring
Act with the not not not not
lessening the the restoration of
of the.
Tax cuts that we experienced
economic twenty years ago so
this is a step in the right
direction a sizeable step in the
right direction I would like to
continue in that direction and
not back off anyway and I think
the members of the committee and
the staff is working on this
really important tax package
thank you very much.
Others.
Alright right.
Okay
good morning madam chair members
the committee to support right
right the director Leuthard and
Mr New Mexico we also speak of
the happy to conference churches
I too am here speaking in favor
of the committee so I HB five
point seven we've always
advocated in favor of tax policy
brings fairness and purpose of
the back table here in New
Mexico we think HB five for
seven continues in that
direction we're specially please
the bill continues to build on
the gains made to increase the
elector of the state child tax
credit tax policy we know
through data is linked to so
many possible outcomes for New
Mexicans missing however in the
gains of last year's as a
portion of issues to our
community and capital gains
deductions so we're pleased to
see those recruited as well
making sure that I I would
invite my saying that her with
you state made by proponents
already and also I think the
representative Lente
Representative Harper
Representative Chandler all work
so hard diligently on this bill
I urge your support for HB five
forty seven thank you.
Yes.
Members of the committee my name
is Erin her right hand and on
the chief executive officer of
child payment serving children
and families in San Juan
McKinley County then also board
member of the New Mexico
behavior behavioral health
providers association
representing over sixty five
behavioral health providers
statewide rural track rural tax
credits for behavioral health
providers are critical to
ensuring a more comprehensive
mental health and substance
abuse array of services for all
New Mexicans in all communities
this is a central step toward
reestablishing our statewide
behavioral health services in
our state human lives depend on
it we lack sufficient numbers of
healthcare providers especially
in our rural areas.
This is real tax credit.
Is the central for expanding the
services we thank you for your
support of this bill.
Tom.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Tom
Solomon I am the co coordinator
with the Anne environmentally
Vermont group focused on the
climate of three fifty New
Mexico.
And we stand in full support of
this bill and want to especially
part of the committee were
including the three clean energy
and electric vehicle tax changes
these are important provisions
that will help stabilize the
grid with energy storage as we
move forward with the clean
energy transition in the very
changes in particular will help
New Mexicans especially note
lower income residents four
electric vehicles and home
charging stations which is the
future of transportation so we
stand in strong support for this
bill thank you.
Thank you.
Our appraiser.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm Carl Kaiser a more
than fifty your wrist in New
Mexico and I strongly support at
H. B. five forty seven this bill
would significantly benefit the
residents of New Mexico and
provide for more stable
inequitable staff tax structure
frankly this is the time for
this legislation specifically
section seven P. I. T. rates
would make the tax far more
equitable than recent years I
know that we should look to
effective tax rates for the
majority of taxpayers and not
simply the highest marginal
rates elector section eight and
the child tax credit these are
helping the the the most in need
in our state we really need to
support these people section
eleven on capital gains puts
earned and unearned income on
the same plane very good policy
goal
I have one question with respect
to the the business deduction my
understanding from previous
discussion in the committee that
this was really to reward for
multiple years in business or
perhaps even a lifetime in
business and the wording here
seems to allow someone to
receive multiple three hundred
Kate budget so I don't know if
that was intended by the Sanchez
G. R. T. was a general reduction
in and this is really good
rather than additional CarMax
which which can effectively
destroy proficiency of the tax
the committee has done great
work here and I urge you to pass
and I thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Someone calling in but no name
associated.
What is the phone number hi all
I.
Nine two one one four.
But now they've got
a number for the public if you
like to make a.
Do you like to speak in support
so you're tired.
Are you can you hear me yes we
can.
Okay I've never done that on
phone records I'm driving so I'm
sorry.
All in one thanks committee
chair the committee members
produce opportunities.
We heard you introduce yourself
please can you hear me yes now
we can get please carry on.
My name is Paul Gibson and the
co founder retake Our Democracy
for four thousand five hundred
member nonprofit statewide
advocacy group and I want to
thank the committee.
Chair and the committee members
for this opportunity the
transport of HB five forty seven
credibly impressed with the
amount of work that went into
this and that and that of
monofilament they're all perfect
create a perfect balance between
preserving state revenue for
programs and distributing state
revenue to target benefiting you
know people who are most in need
of the greater impact would be
the child tax credit which has
the potential looking three
hundred fifty thousand children
in New Mexico out of poverty.
I want to thank I think that the
delicate balance that has been
achieved in this bill could be
done by making changes at this
point we have had such a good
work by so many committees and
subcommittees Sanchez and
committee members it feels like
this is the bill let's not act.
Let's not Tinker with it and
disrupt our thank you very much
for this bill.
Thank you.
Arturo F. you know you're next.
Thank you can you hear me.
Yes we can get them chair
members of the committee I know
you and I am the program
associate with conservation
voters New Mexico one of our
primary mission that CNN is to
achieve a just and equitable
transition away from oil and gas
we've heard many bills that
offer tax incentives to New
Mexicans that will greatly
affect our ability to progress
in this transition we deployed
many renewable energy
technologies.
And our incredible it's
hasn't ari our state has
incredible solar and wind
potential that we must take
advantage of we also need to
ensure that our sins and are
able to keep up with the
transition to electric vehicles
we are very encouraged to see
that the for twelve thirty to HB
sixty seven and the geothermal
tax credit have been included we
think the sponsors of these tax
credit bills and we urge you to
support eighty five twenty seven
as amended thank you very much.
Thank you.
Tom foreman.
Tom you're next.
Your last chance and soon
miscued wanted to speak up or
against each be five forty seven
reserve hands now.
Thank you for all the
participation today we're Mr
chair any other comments before
we go to the committee no ma'am
right thank you first we have
Representative set up set up
the.
And she stepped out.
Right Representative or that.
Advisory assessments that
especially today
thank you madam vice chair thank
you Mr chair for presenting this
bill I just I want to say
quickly that you I think this
package helps so many families
across our state I think it
really helps businesses as well
It puts us that puts our state
on a better foot to address
climate change and renewable
energy in and puts us on the
path to to reduce our carbon
footprint and I'm really
I'm really pleased that we
figured out the alcohol issues
in this budget so that we can
start addressing.
In terms of education related to
alcohol Mr net madam chair
Mister chair I'd like to and
accessible from you which is how
much is this going to cost
state.
Madam chair and representative a
lot.
But in all honesty when we were
given the one billion dollars of
capacity what we looked at that
and and recognizing that the
this amount also includes the
income tax rebate checks that
that we're proposing that are
proposed in this bill the the
number comes out to nine hundred
fifty nine million four hundred
forty two thousand and so that
yeah we did quite we reach that
billion dollars which gives us
about the more than forty
million dollars of state play
but forty million dollars in
excess but at the same time we
felt it was a responsible
approach in that sense to effect
the change that we did within
this bill.
Madam chair Mister chair and so
that tax rebates Representative
about what percentage of this
the representative close to a I
think it's close to half of of
this whole package.
Other conversation comments
questions.
Representative.
What it meant to him.
We know going.
Representative but.
Thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative at
In reading all of this
information is a lot to read and
to catch up on
as a freshman which I keep being
reminded out
No one of the things that I
remember when I started in
politics was they told me you
can't be all things to all
people.
And I took that to heart and I
still remember the person who
told me that the former
councillor Vicki program
And I had the pleasure of
working with her when I worked
in the capital improvements
department of the city.
I what I see in this package and
what I heard through the
comments is that we are really
helping our children.
And that to me resonated the
most is that we are helping our
children but the other thing is
that we are helping our roads
and.
I worked in city planning and or
title road to my career
I know that are are in need of
repair.
And so those two things or two
things that resonate with me the
most is tapped tax package
Some of the things that I did
not see and I'm I am a small
business owner and it kind of
pays me a little bit not to be
able to to help our small
businesses as much as we'd like
because they did experience a
lot through COVID and it was one
of the hardest times that I've
ever had to deal with personally
my own business but more
importantly as a city council
seat but small businesses that
went through so I'm hoping that
next year we can look at for
small business shifts a little
bit more and find ways that we
can help them
the other thing that really
really.
sort of patients with that is
that we don't have anything in
here for our seniors because our
seniors are struggling as well
especially those that are on
fixed incomes so the two areas
that I really want to see.
Here hopefully in the future tax
package is how we address issues
of small business but also how
we started dressing some more
issues with regard to our
seniors and our disabled
population
the other thing that I don't see
in this tax package if we are
truly willing to you know look
at and we we have a conversation
about this Mr chair.
If we are putting some
additional burdens on
although hall
we just approved cannabis and I
think that I know that I don't
want to put the burden on
cannabis but
if it takes and we need to treat
cannabis especially now that
it's not only for
healthcare but if it becomes an
industry that we are hoping we
need to think about that in the
future in relation to how we
treat it with alcohol so it
means those are some of my
concerns I do support the tax
package but I do have those
concerns and I hope that in the
future.
Thank you some of those areas
thank you Mr chairman thank you
for putting this together.
Thank.
That thank you thank you madam
chairwoman and thank you
Representative for your comments
and if I may respond to those
you know I I think that when you
look at seniors at as a portion
of our state I I think this tax
package absolutely
representative some help to
those seniors it when you think
about the child tax credits to
help and and we and this is a
reality I mean the the to help
seniors raising their
grandchildren I mean it's a huge
issue and and are states I think
that's one huge aspect of it we
look at this security exemptions
that's another aspect of seniors
of the building helped we look
at the veteran
Resetting of the sunset as well
as the rural health care aspects
that's another huge aspect of of
us helping us see needed and
finally two seniors and two
small businesses I mean.
Lowering the G. R. T. will help
in far fetching far even former
reaching ways than an anti peer
meeting I ever do in a case.
I I think when you talk about
those even those up and.
You know I I think we've covered
each of those respectfully in in
various ways so thank you for
your comments.
Thank you Representative Vegas.
Thank you madam chair and at
thank you chairman wanted
we had taken that federal
sabbatical office this committee
the last two years and now I'm
back in
glad to be back in Glaspie under
your leadership I think this has
reflects
I I use in the things that are
important to me so very very
pleased with that
I did have specially with the
child tax credit and I looked
over at me my co conspirator
because I know that her path
Representative.
Have have worked hard on this
for for a long time and so this
I'm glad is is in this package
I will I would like to make it a
couple of comments as you know
I've worked really hard with
early childhood trust fund and
just wanted to bring our have
some conversation regarding the
L. D. W. I find
I am concerned.
That we're in establishing
another fund and so I know that
it's it reflects on page sixty
seven sixty eight and so I I
would just be concerned that we
would be diluting some of that
fund I think that all the
programs that we want to
Address are already in.
If you are already in there and
I think that we just need to
bolster to fund that we do have
it simply by using the idea of
HB three twenty one in at
behavioral services so I would
just throw that back at you to
because I know that every time I
I get nervous when they start
talking about deleting the early
childhood yes but I also want to
look at other funds and what
they're meant to do and so if we
can look to is it having all
these other funds bills looking
at really both during and and
filtering where we need to
especially with behavior health
so thank you Mr chairman if you
want to respond to that.
Madam chair and and and
Representative a.
No response other than noted and
I appreciate your comments thank
you.
Thank you madam chair and
chairman I.
Appreciate the opportunity to
speak here and I guess I want to
first to start by saying.
I really appreciate are you run
the committee chairman you just
been.
Sarah you've been respectful
transparent I appreciate you
working with me all of our
members and everyone on this.
Committee it's it's it's really
been a great session I just want
to.
State for the the first tax
committee out of the gate.
You've done a great job and I
appreciate it
And and I want to say to Madam
chairman there are.
A lot of good things in this and
this bill and I and I said
earlier he noted.
A good tax reform measures you
know usually you do you like
about seventy eight percent of
it you hate the other thirty
percent and if and when you say.
What you like and it is
different.
it's so yeah I think I think
there's a.
A lot of things in this
legislation that we can be happy
was
I'm I'm of course
Cited by sending more money to
roads that's that's huge
I'm from our you know it but
cited that we're going to.
You know look at joining the
that's very of other states and
doing single sales factor for
corporate income tax rate I
think that's a great change.
There's also some things in here
that are a.
You know I'm I'm not so excited
about you know like
I think I mentioned earlier
committee that I think.
EV's are naturally.
You know get a started coming a
larger segment of.
cars that we drive
and I'm not so sure we need to
be taking
state taxpayer dollars and
sending them in that direction
but you know what are the
government's right I.
I get
I also like the.
You know the fact that we still
have rebates in here right so
something was appointed the
governor but you know the spirit
of compromise again we're.
Where wanting to do some.
Additional measures This Is just
rebates are I really see that
Madam chair with the done a
great job trying to balance lots
of different voices lots of
different interests.
This legislation I really liked
the
reissue the distributions for
the litter excise tax I think
this new fund actually I heard
about it is could be very
helpful because I think
currently.
We can't use treatment or the
dollars that currently comes
from the collections taxed not
used for treatment and so I'm
I'm actually very curious to see
how this might improved things
by having those dollars
available for treatment as well.
I'm also very grateful that we
you know we got a real health
care practitioner tax credit in
here that to.
The chairman you included some
suggested changes from
Representative Jones in there to
make it so that there are
several folks are qualified.
Originally and then the
definition was changed
and also there's a lot right I
mean that was never this
legislature's intent so having
that definition there making
sure the hours works what they
can actually take a vacation and
not
Is qualified to salute their
lots of good changes you're also
think madam chair Representative
Chandler for for working with me
on the capital gains portion
I think we all understand that
you know someone says a business
mask their nest egg
You know we all need to know one
million dollars at least in our
for one K. to have a good
retirement right and and so
yes I wish that number was a
little bit higher but you know
we we work together we
compromised so I'm I'm I'm
grateful for that.
at that change as well.
So.
I guess we're.
Where I am just out of.
Will this little disappointed.
we had an opportunity when we
brought the brackets for the
personal income tax to eliminate
the marriage penalty we're one
of facing twelve states that
stopped our specialty.
I understand those gonna cost
some money
I get why it's not insured but
that really was a missed
opportunity to wanted to the
marriage penalty and I hope that
we continue to think about that
in the future.
Also
you know as I look status
package that the the two items
that I I think you know what's
in here when it's not today
this would disappointed by the
missed opportunity no increase
in the income tax
you know the higher brackets
into two brackets.
you know I I get one why my
what's next on the oil field
that that's important.
I look at that as a tax increase
on our small businesses who we
lost
about US forces during the COVID
and the rest are you know many
are still kind of hanging on by
their their claws and and for
sort of taxes were these folks
pay their taxes and so we're
gonna be.
Increasing taxes on them.
And.
And it also we know that there's
a shortage of doctors one of
them are leaving this will be an
increase in taxes on them so I I
just think it's interesting that
we're.
Increasing your overall health
care proficient Act credit at a
midwives with one hand on the
other hand were increasing their
taxes.
Sad to see that in here.
And then of course the the last
one.
You know the the elephant that's
not in the room yes hi provided
provision.
You know when we look at our tax
code that is.
The provision that is the most
harmful.
That leads not only to.
Issues with competing but just
makes it.
Hard for small businesses.
makes a stand out like a sore
thumb and I'm.
I just.
You know I I just a few times
early on the session no civilian
recurring dollars if we don't do
it now you know are we talking
the talk.
And in.
And you know in this package he
does all the great stuff in
there I have to ask myself are
we really just talking the talk
are we serious about real.
So was.
That manager and chairman thank
you very much.
If I may madam chair and
representative you know we
regarding the anti permitting
aspect of this bill you know I I
I was right there shoulder to
shoulder with you you know that
up until by the eleventh hour
when we we just had to come to
terms with this is probably not
going to fly because we could
come to some type of compromise
to make sure that the counties
and and and the state
municipalities feel comfortable
with the way that was going but
I mean I I once again I I know
your hearts that I know that you
were trying to and I think that
this whole body on the there was
ever and the notion that we
didn't want to help small
businesses that we want to help
those professional services but
the fact is is that.
We have to come to terms with
with trying to balance
everything within the state and
and unfortunately it came down
to that but I I would I would
just.
Mention to you that I don't
think that it's a medical
building of getting lip service
I think that there was actually
a strong
coalition of folks that were
standing next to you and and
maybe next time around we can
just roll off of you know what I
mean and and try to try to do it
again thank you thank you thank
you Representative Jack.
Thank you very much madam chair
and and thank you chairman for
putting together really fabulous
tax package I appreciate how
inclusive you've been in terms
of consulting with every member
of the and and taking our input
so I appreciate that very much
madam chair and
chairman so we were charged or
we have been talking about tax
reform now since relate well
probably well before I was on
the committee and probably in
time and memorial but it's
certainly something that really
came to the forefront in the
last few years since you know I
was elected many of us join the
tax committee and everyone of us
I think on both sides that's
said tax reform isn't just
cutting taxes every single
person here.
But all were to focusing on is
the parts were cutting taxes and
saying that's the tax reform but
it's not the tax reform when
reading programs city into our
income taxes well I just totally
reject that we are fortunate
enough right now to have
sufficient funds to be looking
at re balancing how we drop
revenues in the state.
And that's what this package
does and that's tax reform.
That's tax reform not just
looking where we can't give
money away.
We're trying to rebalance
rebalancing will add stability
we know we rely too heavily on
the gross receipts tax so we're
increasing personal income tax
tiny tiny bit but it's going to
help us move in a different
direction where relying less on
G. R. T. and we're looking for
other revenue streams.
That's something we talked a lot
about your in respect of this
past summer it's something we
focused on in this package and I
think it's we've we've
accomplished a lot in doing what
we're doing this a whole notion
of pure meaning as I I think
Funny in a way this Germany's
been our tax code since it's we
created it.
We rely on we knew it at the
time it's been baked into our
system taking something out it's
been paid into the system is
extraordinarily difficult and
then you might want to ask why
you would even consider it.
Pyramids been in there and what
the problem has been is over
time are we we have increased
the G. R. T. too much it's the
G. R. T. the size of the G. R.
T. that aggravates pyramid by
lowering G. R. T. we are
addressing pyramids we hadn't
really heard a lot about
climbers about germinating until
our gross receipts taxes got so
high so by pushing those down we
are also addressing the pyramid
in problem every state in the
country yes parent meeting
it to a greater or lesser extent
so to act like sometime we have
some something in an evil in our
Techsystems is just plain not
true it's not true it hasn't
been true it hasn't been true
for fifty years that we've
relied on it so I know that it's
a national thing out there I
read all the national tax stuff
in every business oriented tax
think tank quote advocacy group
talks about peer meeting well
we're trying to solve a problem
that doesn't exist let's focus
on G. R. T. which will help
every single member of the state
in their purchasing and will
help local governments.
Let's get off the purity
bandwagon because it's really
kind of up not really true
problem with the address other
problems
I want to talk a little bit
about focusing on special
categories of people.
we talk a lot about seniors and
veterans and all these other
groups well and why are we
concerned over concern because
we think a lot of them are low
income people and they are so
what are we doing for helping
low income people in this tax
package we are helping seniors
we're helping the disabled we're
helping the poor we're helping
single moms and dads who are
struggling is to make ends meet
what how are we doing we've
increased the child income tax
credit we've improved elector so
that it will
it grow with it when inflation
grows
We've improved the program said
that he is of the income tax
over a million people are going
to get a tax cut through our
income tax changes that we've
made it only a very few are
going to see some marginal
increases very very few relative
to the total number of people
who pay income taxes in this
country this package is tax
reform we have taken on the
problems that we've been trying
to address for the last twenty
years and we have moved the
needle forward in a way that I
think we should all in this room
on this committee should be very
proud of thank you to the
chairman for leading this effort
it's very important thank you to
the speaker who's also been very
very involved in many of these
initiatives so thank you
chairman.
Thank you Representative.
You madam chair.
Sure Mr Chairman there are some
really good things in this this
package and I'm just going to
talk about one the students out
of school everything is as it
this plan goes into effect and
that's the correct size taxed
for the look at tax rates.
So there increased.
It might have been instead of
creating new fund the state
should discuss going into the
Ellie W. I. it's fun.
and and add behavior helps to
that with the increase in taxes.
And and and I will see you know
my question is would it be
easier if we did that as opposed
to creating a new fund.
To do that.
However.
The other concern that I have an
and and my my County reached out
to me and said we think that.
Practice flooded that uses too
much of the original H. B. two
thirty in assumptions of
increased funding.
That hope that's wrong.
I I hope that statement is wrong
and and that that funding is
there and it will be able to do
with it.
Her state you live in six eight
that's one six sixty five
percent of the funds that San
Juan County gets has to go into
treatment.
As per statute.
And and that's critically
important for our county because
of the problems we have with
that
the distribution cut on LED L.
B. W. I. funding for forty five
to thirty seven point two I
would directly and impact our
funding to the San Juan County
for jail based the W. I.
programs and and that's a
concern and then on the work do
like ten.
The long service distribution
yes the W. I. programs like to
total.
And
With that.
Let me just share a couple of
things here that I think are
critically important.
That's fund would now go down
from twenty two point twenty two
million five hundred thousand
eighteen million six hundred
twenty five thousand and then
with the carve outs included in
this it drops it down even more
and so.
And and this is where my hope is
that from seventeen point two
two percent that would be a
twenty four percent reduction
unless this funding is what we
hope is going to be and that's
my concern this Mr Chairman.
Madam chairwoman and and
Representative appreciate all
your sentiments and and the and
the question and perhaps even in
case cause for concern we talked
about the the new fund and white
what why new fund that I think
it's it's clear that what we do
we were told that we could get
Medicaid matching funds if we
did not go we could be opted to
do a new fund so that that was
primarily the reason and and and
the rest of your comments are
well taken and and understood
and I think everything that's
within this bill is everything
that it represents and the plan
is to move forward with those in
mind.
Senator Mr chairman with that
and
you know if we start hearing
back to the counties that use
these funds that in fact this is
funds aren't as high as they
were leaving given back to the
table next year the year after
so can we need to we need to do
something.
Madam chair representative.
This body it's always a work in
progress right so we know that
once we do something we're gonna
fix another thing so it's like
repairing a leaky faucet right
but in this case were tried to
affected policy change with with
taxation and in mind but I think
of my my experts has the next
expansion on maybe press one the
other regions Madam chair
representative Duncan we we ran
these percent distribution
calculations based on your tax
rate in order to make sure that
San Juan that L. D. W. I. that
all those funds and folks are
not hurt if anything they can
now experience growth for the
first time ever like in the case
of San Juan County was flat rate
ofpercent so we can grow over
time so.
Miss madam chair representative.
Nobody should have a reduction
in their distribution.
Thank you madam chair I am gonna
take easy's word on that.
Thank you appreciate that thank
you Representative Townsend S.
thank you madam chair thank you
Mr.
The
First
I would.
Echo many of the sentiments of
money I.
Cheers
As the label on this committee
and expressed to you personally
and and.
In your office and I do
appreciate it.
I think
I think the the Mexicans
And that's what I think.
I don't think we ought to be
taxed on special interest all
the time.
Representative Los Alamos
mentions I.
I think we ought to be looking
at.
How we make.
Mexico.
Reach that perform.
A lot of low income families.
And I think what we're done is
is helpful to
Mandate on the issue and I think
we ought to be figured out how
the.
Create more jobs.
And in employ more people they
pay more taxes and I I honestly
I just I don't believe there's
anything in New Mexico.
Positively affected when we
create jobs.
And I and and I think we can
unfortunately missed the our.
I think we put a bandaid on many
thanks a lot of people are out
the question about but we
haven't created jobs and I
think.
On the cursory review the that
we have put ourselves in New
Mexico.
At eight.
With that New Mexico businesses
and for years.
At a disadvantage to their
surrounding neighbors and I
think that that's going to be
problematic in the future so I
Started things in the in the
package I think it will go down
as we missed a great opportunity
unfortunately.
I believe I can meet you and
your work image on the on the
manner in which you and the
community
I wish we had been able to
create more jobs public here
madam chair thank you thank you
speaker Martinez.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr chair.
So a couple of comments.
A couple of questions the first
one is the first question is up
just for the body through the
REC.
Attendance for those webcasting
at home.
What is the total gross receipts
tax reduction in your bill.
chair woman and Mr speaker the
total.
Tax reduction is point five
percent but in addition to the
tax reduction from last year of
a quarter percent that's going
to bring that up to thirty four
percent from last year this year
so madam chair Mr chair into
legislative sessions
legislature's reduce a gross
receipts tax by.
One percent Mr Caplinger that's
that's huge.
It's a it's a small number.
But it's a lot of money.
And for the first time.
In.
Years
we have we have been able to do
something that was unthinkable
even a few years ago that is to
reduce arguably the most
regressive part food.
The part where the tax code that
are small businesses have been.
telling us is to.
To overbearing not good for
business not good for job growth
in the private sector the
legislature over the last couple
of sessions has reduce that
rate.
By three quarters of one
percent.
Should get lost in the seventy
page which is for of a lot of
compromise a lot of good things
things that many of us like
other things that not almost
like.
But it is three quarters of one
percent G. R. T. reductions so
for folks who.
you know.
During.
Public comment stated that you
maybe this is not good for
business I think this is really
good for business three the most
pro business tax bill I've seen
and I've seen several at this
point.
I also want to emphasize how
important it is that this bill
continues to do the work the
hard work of reforming the tax
code
Up until a few years ago
or personal income tax was
essentially flat.
that was done in twenty plus
years ago before any of us were
here I think
And it was done as a.
Way to.
Really come on.
Fortunately.
Those.
Legislature's and and you know.
Folks in government at the time
we're really looking at
reforming the tax code it's
going to give a lot a lot of
kudos to our up to our colleague
Representative Harper the
ranking member of this committee
for his intellectual honesty in
continuing this porch
I don't know that we will be
here talking about tax reform if
it's not for the work
Representative Harper over the
last ten years
I came into this legislature one
I believe he was on his second
term you Mr chairman of this
committee of time he's been
talking.
And doing the hard work of usual
medical.
I think that all those years of
work have led us to.
To to.
Build.
Debate and pass tax legislation
that is chipping away at those
inefficiencies and that those
bad tax policies passed by those
before us.
When you look at the personal
income tax restructuring of the
brackets that is huge
particularly in the sense that
it doesn't raise taxes on middle
class middle income people.
That is a huge win.
For most New Mexicans while also
ensuring that those who can
afford to pay a little bit more
remember this is marginal rates
this is above a certain amount
of income that it kicks in so
you're impact.
The impact of my bottom line
will be pretty minimal at the
end of the day in exchange we
are.
We are continuing to fix a
broken personal income tax
brackets system.
capital gains
the ability to essentially hold
harmless those wind vest in New
Mexico.
And those who who.
Transition that business to
to somebody else holding them
essentially harmless is a big
way and and again kudos to
present Harper for helping us
think through that I think three
years ago as we started that
discussion in in in fine needs
here in this bill.
while also ensuring that those
who are not investing in New
Mexico.
to pay their fair share the way
they always do until about
twenty years ago.
When we were told by those in
government that if we did this
New Mexico not be at the bottom
of every.
Well I think what she got.
that's why we're would bring it
back
Lastly I think that this bill.
is the culmination of forty
eight days very hard work for
you Mr chairman madam vice chair
ranking member Harper and every
member of this committee
we take a lot of heat for debris
tabling bills and I don't care
how gently we do it was to take
it easy.
but that's the nature of this
work.
That's why we have this tax
package.
And to members of the media
might be wondering why it's in
this tax package well because we
have a lot of tax bills that if
we let everything out on its own
it's almost impossible to keep
track of how it affects the
capacity in house bill two.
The reason we're doing this sort
of the one of the one of the
public comment stayed at this
resort and historically.
Because often times be like the
last few days.
We're doing this early in the
session we're doing this at ten
o'clock in the morning.
Peter is on line know what's
hiding the ball.
It all will be as we used to be
that.
Representative advocate like
sitting outside the chambers of
the Senate sometimes and three
in the morning where these guys
up to.
Because you never really knew.
Well here it is.
Varices.
And it's been built in the last
forty two days.
And it actually hello also
distribute built over the intro.
For the rest of.
And arguably a lot of this was
built over the last several
years.
There's nothing here that is not
fully vetted fully cooked eight
eight forty five.
That by us.
Our Steve dentist.
But.
So I commend you as well Mister
chairman chair up for all of
these hard work.
Out to support this bill.
I will be very proud with this
bill hopefully needs this
committee it's lord of the.
Put this bill on the floor for a
vote because this is probably
the best tax bills yeah.
And it is such an honor to be
part of it along with all of you
Democrats and Republicans on
this committee because I truly
do value all of the forces and
all of your perspectives on this
bill in on this work hard work
of tax reform thank you madam
chair and thank you Mr that you
have the I go to Representative
I also just wanted to see my
have.
My admiration and respect for
chair landing here and certainly
for the process he's over the
sixty day session this is my
third term on this committee
after at I got to spend the
sixty day session on agam Water
jumped over here mid term
and like our speakers that the
level of transparency and
engagement and accountability to
what's in this tax packages
something like I've seen or
heard of us so Hey expected such
things winter Lente was
appointed to this committee I
appreciated his humility and
openness in naming that he's
ready to be here learn as we all
are I think that's a rare
quality in politics and it takes
a lot to say.
I don't know what I don't know
yet so I'm willing to look
around the room turned expertise
that's established leadership
that's being developed I mostly.
That kind of commitment to New
Mexican families that it takes
to get something right so I just
want to also before we take this
to appreciate your listing for
this process that's he's built
in I hope will become standard
for how we moved tax policy and
New Mexico Representative Gaydos
thank you madam chair I now
moved it to pass also.
So just expect a we have a due
pass on the house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
House Bill five forty seven of
the four we call the roll I want
to remind everyone that our
colleague here Representative
Castellano hospice deposit for
comment and will be
participating yes you
pursuant to that house rules.
The roll call.
Representative for New Mexico
yes.
Representative Castellano.
Yes.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Duncan nope.
Representative guy and goes yes.
Representative taxes.
Representative Hernandez.
My team is yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative staff.
Representative Serrato yes.
Representative Sam.
Vice chair.
Yes.
Chair LESC yes Representative.
We have nine yes for now.
I yeah.
But I so the house taxes
committee separate twenty seven
has now passed thank you Mr
chair thank you madam chair the
committee members for the
discussion we.
Yes Sir.
That was our only agenda items
