Representative Hernandez.
Here.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Maestas.
Representative Montoya.
Here.
Representative Romero.
Here.
Yes Representative Scott.
Yes
Representative Stansbury.
My name.
Representative Strickler here.
Your December.
Here.
Your Martinez.
I'm here we have a quorum Elaine
Representative Harper is
presenting a billing health
committee he just let me know.
If you could please note that
our members we have three bills
on the agenda today we're gonna
start with house bill two forty
eight insurance fee changes
Representative Chandler and
we're gonna go to house bill two
twenty eight motor vehicle tax
distribution Representative
Castellano.
And then we're gonna conclude
with house bill one seventy two
Representative black good
morning Representative black.
Representative.
Thank you very much Mr chair is
I'm superintendent Russell toll
M. can be elevated to be a
panelists Mr chair and Elaine.
He would be coming in
momentarily okay great thank
thank you very much
Mr chair and committee this bill
is a bill that I was asked to
carry by the office of the
insurance superintendent and it
I believe stems in part from
encouragement by LFC four
agencies to look at ways to
adjust their fees be more in
line
with or surrounding states in
and other factors which I'm sure
superintendent told and share
with you so just and I do have
an amendment Mr chair would you
like me to talk about that now
it does change the fee structure
some some might be appropriate
to have the whole package at
least presented at once Mr
chair.
Yeah let's do that give us a
second to get the.
To get Citrix rolling
members if you don't have your
Citrix up this is probably a
good time to do that.
All right shall I proceed are
wait.
I just give it give it a minute
to admin okay also at.
And if if my if my internet
accessible ocean of my video
I've I've got I've got two kids
on doing right now we're okay
but we might get knocked out.
yes Mr Lopez we have a two a two
number on your amendment I do it
is two two zero one six eight
point one and again this is
house bill two forty eight.
Thank you.
All right everybody have that
amendment in front of them
committee members.
Yes Mr chair was able to access
to share.
This awesome okay up it is our
motion to discuss it but we'll
be able amendment for discussion
purposes.
So move thank you Representative
Chandler please explain the
amendment and then sort of in
the context of the bill and then
we'll go to a superintendent
told and then the audience okay
I'm very good Mr chair thank you
this bill adjust and find some
additional fee adjustments as
I'm sure you all recognize when
you review the bill before the
meeting the bill provides for
fee adjustments that
the Office of the insurance
superintendent have deemed to be
more in line with what is being
charged in other states and this
these additional amendments are
additional changes so for
example on page two Buffy.
Spent for filing manage health
care plan annual compliance
documentation is change from
fifteen to twenty dollars so on
and so on so for example
wealth of multiple welfare
arrangement plans three thousand
dollars and and that continues
on to page three although I
wouldn't know at a certain point
FIA just means that were
originally approved in the bill
and commerce are brought back
down so starting with I think
line looking at my notes here
lines on all of the entire page
all of the fees that were
initially raised in commerce are
dropped to the original feeds
that's noted on page three so
for example on the first line
line for fifty dollars had been
approved in commerce and the
superintendent of insurance is
proposing to drop that to thirty
dollars the original fee that
was in the schedule and before
we we started to amend this the
statute so that's the case all
on page three this page for
stays the same and then again on
page five there is a fee
adjustment online twenty four
from two hundred dollars to
three hundred dollars and I
believe that pretty much covers
of the there are a additional
amendments on page nine where
for example line six we had to
attend and actually proposed to
make it an annual renewal and
now it's a bi annual renewal
returning it back to the
original language
with that Mr chair I think I've
I have covered the the essence
of the proposed amendments.
Very well other questions on the
amendment.
I have a couple question the
amendment so of Representative
Chandler that this went through
commerce
yes Mister chair and you are are
you amending amendments that
were made in commerce or these
are amendments just to the bill
the bill.
Mr chair up these are amendments
to the original bill and I think
Miss stated anything I would ask
that Mr till correctly of
course.
Mr till are we is are are you in
agreement with that.
Yes the main thrust of the
amendment.
Western address.
Basically the only concern we've
heard from the insurance
industry.
and that was the the they didn't
think this time was this was the
appropriate time to be adjusting
fees on individuals brokers
agents and producers so what
we've done in this ammendment
with Representative Chandler is
consent is to.
Take those back to where they
work make some biennial and
Insure that there's no negative
impact on the broker business
community.
we've had we've worked for this
what the insurance industry on
this bill.
and I there's no opposition that
I'm aware of what we did Mr
chairman and and looking at
these fees at the request of
both DFA and LFC.
We compared our fees.
Compared to what we can present
to Utah there is on a Colorado
Texas.
And where we are fees were out
of line out of line meaning.
They were lower than those
surrounding states we're
proposing in this bill to
increase those fees if our fees
were
Are ready at those other states
levels there's no adjustment
propose.
but
The main thing here was to
generate some revenue now I do
need to note for the committee's
interest that the original
version of the bill had a
revenue cost impact of about
seven point million dollars and
by removing the brokers agents
producers increases that number
is dropping down to about four
million dollars four point four.
We're doing this in part at the
request of those two agencies to
help diversify some of the
revenue sources we contribute
money every year.
to the general fund and this
will slightly increase that
amount.
Very well superintendents all
and then welcome by the way
just you're not welcoming
morning
all right members are there any
other questions on the
amendment.
Your motion to adopt the
amendment.
The native.
Okay we've got a motion to adopt
the amendment by representative
Stansbury is our second.
I can Mr chair.
Second by Representative Romero.
Yes Mr chair.
is their opposition to adopting
the amendment Mr chair I just
have one more question if we
might discuss a little further.
Sure go ahead Representative
and.
Mr chair representative just to
clarify what's happened in this
ammendment I apologize we can't
see it in context I'm just
working on a laptop trying to go
back and forth yes our did you
say for those two particular
groups because they expect
expressed opposition.
That their fees remaining the
same or they're having an
increase but moving to a
different timetable what's
happening to the two groups that
expressed opposition okay
Mr chairman and representative
thank you for that question I'll
defer to superintendent till.
Mr Chairman representative
continue we're leaving the fees
as they are today.
So no increase to their fees at
all.
I'm so Mister chair
representative and
superintendent.
Some.
Where are the so I understood
where the fees are being leveled
on the original bill so.
Just to make sure I understand
we are not leveling increased
fees on a couple of groups that
opposed increases as I imagine
many might cause who wants an
increase that
but why are some still being
leveled is it because those
folks didn't raise opposition is
it because those receive
notification gaps then and I
understand Mr chair
representative I'm sort of us
between the impetus of the bill
and the amendment but I just
want to make sure why these
particular
fees were removed from the
amendment when you all thought
it was an appropriate strategy
to increase them in the first
place.
One of the Mr Chairman
Representative Chandler
Representative continue you know
there's a distinction between
the fees on the producers are
these obviously are individual
fees there are other fees that
you're looking at here there
were adjusting to make us in
line with the surrounding states
are really company fees.
And you know given what is going
on in COVID given that changes
in the market place where for
example it used to be that the
insurance companies themselves
paid for other affiliations and
associations and an individual
license or licensure fees that
is no longer the case so the
individual brokers agents
producers or having to pay those
fees and we did not think it was
appropriate to adjust them.
The.
The fees for their other
entities you know we I think we
haven't heard anything from them
because they're very much in
line with the surrounding
streets.
Okay I appreciate that Mr chair
and representative and just one
final question then on that
piece is this something you all
would pursue moving forward is
is is this something that might
be more appropriate if you
thought increase in these fees
was called for is to put a delay
on it instead of removing them
completely I'm wondering if
we're going to need to come back
close comment to actually level
please fees or if it's an
appropriate policy to just leave
them as is for the time for for
time and what's foreseeable
future.
Mr Chairman Representative
Chandler Representative.
Continue we do not intend to
bring back an increase next
year.
Okay thank you I'm done and Mr
chair.
Thank you representative Cadena.
Anymore discussion on the
amendment we've got a motion and
a second to adopt the amendment
is their opposition to adopting
the amendment.
Okay see none Representative
Chandler you have an amended
bill.
I suspect you've kind of talked
out about the bill already
within the context of the
amendment unless you want to
offer anymore insight on Mr
chair I I think it's covered in
less superintendent told would
like to add anything thank you.
Now Mr chairman.
Excellent thank you
Representative Chandler thank
you superintendent told let me
go to the audience see if we
have.
Public comment on.
On this legislation in front of
us please raise your hand and
I'll call on you all give you a
couple seconds.
All right we have Mr JT
Bollington in support to worry
about what we're doing in
support.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee this is JD
Bullington representing the
independent insurance agents of
New Mexico and we want to thank
the superintendent of insurance
Russell till and the bill
sponsor Representative Chandler
for bringing this ammendment
full board up I I a and M. was
one of the groups that had some
issues with this bill previous
committee but with this
ammendment all we are now.
Happy to fully support this
legislation and if I could just
address representative Mick I
look at Daniel's point earlier
what the issue was originally is
that while these vehicle
proposed fee increases look
fairly small at face value the
independent insurance agents or
producers as our call they often
are appointed to represent many
many plans so.
It wasn't just in some cases a
one time doubling of the Fiji
this Madam this issue is
compounded and sometimes it
Karia equipment I think you'll
appreciate that term Mr chairman
the tax start so it's not just a
it's not just a doubling once
but when you were appointed to
represent multiple plans you
have repeated doubling of the
state and it can it can add up
rather quickly and we want to
thank the superintendent of
insurance in the sponsor for
understanding that like I say
the independent insurance agents
in New Mexico are are happy to
fully support this bill thank
you.
Thank you for being with us Mr
Clinton others in support of
house bill two forty eight.
Anyone in opposition to house
bill two forty eight.
That concludes public comment
members of the committee.
Members of the committee we've
got a couple has come up we'll
start with Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman faster
settlement posture.
Mr till.
Could you describe the
disposition of the four million
dollars.
Revenue to to this is going to
generate.
Mr Chairman Representative Scott
no I I cannot because these
revenues will not be retained by
us.
Our office they will go to the
general fund and of course you
and your colleagues are charging
deciding what happens to that
money.
Thank you Mr mistral.
I see that we were originally.
Going to give some money to the
fire protection fund is not
going away now.
Mr chairman
Representative Scott that is a
great question when they
responsibility for collecting
insurance premium taxes were was
moved from the OSI to tax and
revenue the distribution to the
fire fund went with it no we
still make a small contribution
to the fire fund.
From any excess fees that we
generate
but that really comes through
the jacks and Revenue Department
I want you know that we are
throughout the legislative
process very much supporting the
two bills that would increase.
funding to the fire protection
fund the biggest problem for
consumers that we have is a OSI
is both the cost and
availability of.
Homeowner's insurance and to the
extent that fire protection fund
can help support local fire
departments and volunteer fire
then forgive the gender slam
that that helps lower homeowners
costs and so we're strongly
supporting those bills.
Okay.
That's Mr Chairman.
Chair Mister told me
concludes my question.
Thank you Representative Scott
Representative Strickler good
morning.
Sure good morning Mr chairman
and and Representative and the
US insurance director
You're trying to get these these
phase
Up to staff from compared to our
surrounding states hello has it
been since we've Gracie's face.
Mr chairman and Representative
Strickler most of the fees were
last adjusted in twenty
fourteen.
Okay to start to for.
You know I'm at I really
appreciate the amendment.
You know I I I'm with farm
bureau and they they're bigger
company and
you know they they cover
my homeowner's insurance my my
car insurance and and some life
insurance so really appreciate
what they do and so these things
will be passed on to the
consumer I sent him.
What Mr chairman and
Representative Strickler I don't
I don't think there is a direct
line now these fees are really
incremental for the companies
it's sort of their cost of doing
business the things that drive
premiums obviously are the
losses that they incur
and.
These are some minimal of these
fees for the insurance world are
so minimal that I do not believe
it will have any direct impact
on premiums.
And
If you'll forgive me.
If they were going to have a
direct impact on premiums we
whatever heard directly from the
insurance companies and that
hasn't been the case at all.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
gentlemen a I know our our
homeowner's insurance in the
Farmington area I think you're
quite reasonable
you know we don't have a lot of
fire risk up there
but in and southwest Colorado
they're quite high because of
the fire risk and and I can can
understand that even though
certain neighborhoods to have
Pretty trend for so but anyway
you get you have to pay the good
with the bad on that
depends on where you live I know
in Tulsa Oklahoma we have a lot
of risk with the the tornado so
they can and they can of
increases your insurance there
too we're blessed in Farmington
we have good weather no
hurricanes no tornadoes no hell
damage we're we're pretty
fortunate up there okay why that
that answers my question I'm
always a little nervous about
raising fees especially this
pandemic world that we live in
and it seems like you know all
these all these free increases
economic up.
For the overall economy so
that's that's kind of my concern
but
thank you Mr chairman thank you
gentleman thank you.
Chandler.
Thank you Representative
Strickler Representative role
metal.
Mr chair and like to move it to
pass.
Okay we we have a due pass
motion as amended
is there a second.
Thank you Mr chair.
Seconded.
is there further discussion.
Okay
I don't have any questions other
than to say thank you I saw this
bill.
Its first rodeo in commerce and
and I do appreciate the
willingness of you by trial by
chair and and Representative
told are in working with the
different parties to come with
something that you know that I
think works for everybody and
you know I I I appreciate also
Representative till your
willingness to take the hit of
raising fees at our request
I know I know that this was a
sort of a directive if you will
friendly directive from the LFC
to to to you in your office to
do so so we we certainly
appreciate that and and ones
that money comes in will
definitely appreciated as well
with that Elaine please call the
roll.
Representative.
Yes.
Speaker eva.
Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative Maestas.
Representative Montoya.
No.
Representative role metal.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Stansbury yes.
Representative Strickler no.
Yes.
Martinez.
Yes.
In the affirmative and to the
negatives.
Okay but what we need to have a
new path for graduation
superintendent and
congratulations by your
traveler.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee.
Right members
Next we have.
House Bill.
One second.
House Bill to twenty eight
Representative gusty I know
welcome to house taxation and
revenue committee good morning
to you good morning thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee I'll can you
please bring over my expert
witness Mr cabinet secretary
Seneal please I would be happy
to.
Good morning secretary some of
us.
He is in proceed representative
Garcia thank you thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee so what house bill two
twenty eight House Bill to
twenty eight changes the
distribution of eighteen point
seven five percent of the motor
vehicle excess tax revenue
collected from the local
government real fun the
transportation project fund and
all it my experience describe a
little bit what that those two
different funds are going to be
the function or the function
those two funds are Mr Chairman.
Very well Representative
Let me find my my screen good
morning this is on the web your
son about there you are good to
see you Sir thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee Mike Santa cabinet
secretary for the New Mexico
department of transportation I
did we did send over one slide
and I'm not yesterday I hope the
committee got that it's not I'm
happy to share my screen and
kind of summarizes exactly what
this bill is Mr chairman if you
like me to share my screen
without slide it be happy to do
that.
Secretary I do you have those
Capabilities as a panelist I if
if you can please go ahead I'm
not sure if you do the okay let
me check real quick and see if
that's something it'll let you
do.
no it said the hosts is disabled
that so let me just explain the
bill Mr chairman or
basically house bill six in
twenty nineteen one of the
things that that date is raise
the motor vehicle excise tax
from three percent to four
percent.
for the first couple years that
extra money was coming to the
DOT which total about a little
over a hundred million dollars
and that was designated to the
oil fields down in southeast New
Mexico but after two years
starting July first twenty
twenty one so here in a few
months it changes the
distribution and half of that
money will still remain going to
the D. O. T. and the other half
was designated to what's called
the local government road fund
and so this local government
road fund is a fund as a seventy
five twenty five match it's a
little more difficult for locals
to spend some of the smaller
cities and counties can't meet
that match
and so a couple years ago also
we created a new local phone
call the transportation project
fund and that was given one time
money.
And so instead of that new motor
vehicle excise tax or in July
going to the old local fund we
wanted to go to the new local
funds for the new local fund is
a ninety five five match there's
a hardship waiver so if there's
communities accounted for the
match they can we can waive that
match you can spend it on any
transportation issues so you can
use it for studies designs this
C. construction and those type
of things it's a lot more
flexible in our local
communities really like the new
fund in the way that it works
and so all this bill does Mr
chairman is instead of the new
forty million going into the
existing local government road
fund which by the way also
already has a funding source
increase this to be reoccurring
in the new fund which is easier
to use so the bottom line
doesn't change it's the same
amount of money it's just you
wanted to go to the old funder
the new fund that's all this
bill does Mr chairman.
Very well thank you secretary
Seneal Representative casino
anything else
yes Sir Mr chairman members of
the committee I think this one
is is very helpful for small
communities that can't afford to
match on the secretary said they
do have they do help them if
they can afford to match the
funded you know small areas like
Eckels more a tumor on those
areas are able to get projects
done in their district Mr
chairman and I think it's.
It's important that we we we
have a to pass on this
legislation Mr chairman thank
you members of the committee.
Thank you Representative let me
go to the audience.
We have a.
We have a lot of people in the
audience we have a six people
have like half a million people
from from the legislature anyone
is support of house bill.
Two twenty eight.
Anyone in opposition.
All right.
Members of the committee.
Representative Montoya followed
by Representative Romero.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative Castellano will
come to our committee.
Just a couple of questions first
off so the association of
counties the municipal league
where are they on this
legislation I I see that they're
not.
here commenting one way or the
other so do we have an idea of
where they're where they're at
with this change.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Representative they have shown
support in our conversations
with them I'm not sure why but
they're not here today there
also is a duplicate bill Senate
bill twenty which is already
passed over the Senate on to the
house
but the all of their indication
of in that they have been
supportive of this change
because a new fund as much more
flexible and has a lower amount
Mr Chairman.
Yes thank you Mr chairman of
that.
That's exactly what I was
surprised not to see them here
saying something
Positive about this and so I was
wondering their their absence is
noticeable today so Mister
speaker
And Representative Castellano
Is there any different criteria.
Other than the match.
To qualify for this fund is
there a.
is it is the
process to apply and get
approval is there any mechanism
that is used to to wait.
Projects are early chairman
which projects are are more
feasible the speaker and and
John.
Mexico in a century I think it
might be short ready but all it
Mr several sectors are want to
that question Mr trump.
Thank you Mr chairman urged
Representative Montoya yes it is
a competitive process just like
the old fund however the old
fund there's a certain
percentage that goes to cities
and certain percentage goes to
counties and certain percentage
goes to bus routes you can use
the old fund for studies or
designer those types of things
the new fund is also competitive
so it funnels through either the
metropolitan planning
organization for the rural
transportation planning
organization so the NPOs are the
R. T. P. O.'s will gather the
the proposals from the cities or
county's funnels through them
then a competitive the go to our
districts are districts right
amendment comes up to myself and
then gets voted on by our
transportation commission we do
focus there is a rule that's in
place the regulation that's in
place for the new fund and is
focused on projects that are
shovel ready so back in twenty
nineteen we were given one time
general fund money of fifty
million dollars we've already
there have expanded our projects
in place that are over ninety
five percent of that money and
so it's a little easier to spend
like I said we want this money
to get out quickly and not sit
around and so that's what we're
able to do with the last a lot
then and I think this bill just
gives us that yearly funding
sources and not rely on one time
money.
Okay Mr chairman of those are my
questions thank you
Representative Andrea
Representative role metal.
Thank you Mr chair I think I'm
just reading through the
analysis first I just want to
thank secretaries on the water
and you're at your local
as I guess they're based on
districts.
That your staff there
They were very responsive to the
needs that we've had early
throughout the year and so I
just wanted to say thank you
just reading through the
analysis I'm just curious so
that motor vehicle excise tax is
that project is that I I just so
I know where it's coming from
does that come from the purchase
of a motor vehicle I'm I'm just
trying to follow where the pots
of money come from Mr chair.
I could answer Mr Chairman
representative yes so when you
purchase a new vehicle it's four
percent is that on which is a
motor vehicle excise tax certain
percentages coming to D. O. T.
for this and the rest goes into
the general fund.
Thank you Mr chair thank you as
a representative and secretary
that is very helpful because I
think this is extremely well
times just what we know about
what I think folks are getting
ready to do and purchasing new
vehicles I that's a follow up
question with does this at I
know there have been built in
the past floating around about
electric vehicles does they are
they also affected by this Mr
chair representative and
secretary.
Mr chairman and Representative
yes so regardless of the vehicle
whether it's electric or gas
engine this taxes assessed to
those vehicles as well when you
said.
Excellent thank you Mr chair
thank you Secretary this is a
great well time to bill I
supported and looking forward to
putting us thanks.
Thank you Representative.
By your Chandler.
Thank you are muted.
Thanks Mr chair if it is
appropriate I would like to make
a do pass motion on house bill
two to eight.
Okay we have a due pass motion
and house bill two twenty eight
is there is a second a second Mr
chair thank Representative
Romero
are there any other questions or
debate on this bill.
I have a I have a couple
questions Representative Casiano
and and secretary Seneal left so
in in in twenty nineteen when
the when house bill six
gentleman agree you'll
So work on the bill wrote that
bill
this was very important to have
the the excise tax and and I
remember him negotiating at
length with folks in the
industry to get it sort of about
a place where everybody was was
okay with it and as we
negotiated with the Senate you
know that became part of the
agreement that for the first
couple years you go to those
roads end up in the south is I
think it's district three or
district to Senator Santa to
thank you.
and then after that it would go
to local road fund up this
transportation project fund was
was it not in existence in
twenty nineteen when when that
when that excise tax was was
increased.
Mr chair Mr Chairman yes so it
actually the project fund was
created in twenty nineteen so it
was going along with house bill
six that wasn't officially a
fund yet
but now that is in yeah.
Got it okay
and and Mr
Representative Castellano
incentives on the web
this is just there's just a lot
more flexibility with the is
transportation project fund
and and that's what you want to
shift it now you did mention
that the local road fund does
have a another other sources of
funding
Can you explain how it seems to
me that local governments would
rather.
The fourth five percent match as
opposed to the the the local
road fund which is a twenty five
percent match
why would you apply to the local
road funding not the
transportation project fund.
Mr chairman of the local
government road funding has been
around for quite a long time and
it's funded with gas tax
and so we really think at some
point maybe even next year we
should just combine the the fund
and make it in just that the
transportation project fund the
local government road fund
that's funded with gas tax yield
fund
I think it's just outdated I
think it you know we've we've
Progressed and and how we do
projects I think the new funding
really involves a local process
which is important so at some
point I'd like to just have one
funded not to but we just
thought for right now let's move
this of the into the new funding
we can tackle that maybe in in
the upcoming year to.
Very well Representative Jesse
and and and secretary Seneal
when was the last time the gas
tax was increased.
Mr Chairman I believe it was in
nineteen ninety three.
Well the last century Mr
Chairman.
The last millennium.
Yeah well
I I think that that's for.
I thank you for all those
chairman yes Mr chairman you
frozen thanks to address
chairman you froze right time
later.
Representative Garcia no and
that saved us on the web
you mentioned that there's also
more flexibility within the
transportation project fund you
can do studies you can design
that you yes we you cannot do
out of the local growth fund is
that your dad right.
Yes Mr chairman that's correct
the the old funding is much more
restrictive with uses where is
the new fund I think sometimes a
local might not have something
shovel ready but they need money
for design to get it to the next
step and so the new fund would
allow for that to help them take
that next step to getting that
project done where the old fund
is not and so we really I think
that's why the counties and
cities and in addition to the
match really in favor of the the
new fund got it and and
representative Garcia no is it
is on the wall just for my own
information and and thank you by
the way because we
that this is super helpful to me
at least in terms of better
understanding the transportation
funding system I don't serve on
the transportation committee I
know Representative Harper does
from this committee so I think
if you were here he would
probably shed light as well.
But these funds can they be used
for things for things not
related to roads I'm thinking
you know eventually light rail
you know buses
you know mass transit type of
projects.
Mr Chairman right now it is
focused on.
May need roads that's what the
rule states I think the
the statute is more flexible
with our rural wanted to focus
on on.
Construction design and studies
and and not necessarily buses
and other things but it's really
you know up to the counties and
the cities we want to support
what they need and if they
thought that there was a I need
to expand that we would
certainly look at that it's not
our money we do manage it but so
we we want to be supportive of
what the cities and the counties
one and they wanted to expand
that that's something we would
certainly support.
Yeah that's something I would I
would certainly encourage
Representative and secretary I
think that the you know in many
ways if if we have these funds
available for these local
communities
you know if if if we are
even if it's by rule restricting
it to building roads and not in
any way you know incentivizing I
think thinking outside of that
box that our roads
I think that that would be good
you know I I think that being
able to fund
you know out of the box ideas if
you will in specially in these
local communities that that
might be able to to support you
know more mass transit
the that I think that's probably
the future and and hopefully
hopefully the the department is
is is you know thinking ahead to
ensure that those funds.
To ensure that those projects I
should say can also be funded I
think I have a let's see that
those are the questions I have
Representative Lujan I saw your
hand up do you have a question
or comment.
Thank you chair I just Mr chair
I just need to be moved over as
of panelists I'm sorry about
that.
got you okay good to go
well present because you know
thank you for your bill you know
this is this is totally forward
looking and I'm glad that we are
thinking about the restrictions
on local communities and how the
local road fund.
You know because it was written
however many years ago I think
can be a little bit a little bit
cumbersome and and and clunky if
you will and and I'm I'm super
happy that the that we're
thinking about not only the
match but also the diversity of
uses that's that's importance
I'll be I'll be happy to support
a bill.
We have a due pass motion from
by your Chandler and we have a
second by I think it was
Representative role metal.
is there is there opposition to
the motion.
Okay look at that reserve
Cienega unanimous to pass out a
tax that is rare you should
enjoy it.
Well you know thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee thank you to my
experts with this particular
Santa
you guys made a lot easier for
me to get through this because
of you guys are great and I just
want to thank you guys for
supported this will help our
communities thank you Mr.
My vote.
Yes somebody wanted to explain
their vote to was it.
Representative Maestas please
thank you Mr Chairman
representative number of yes and
no.
All roads lead to Vegas Mr
chair.
So that's a beautiful place
would you get up to the castle
in Montezuma it's it's beautiful
there thank you Mr
Representative Maestas for the
compliment a Las Vegas.
And and Mr chair point of
personal privilege because you
did freeze right as you're
making a comment on the gas tax
not having been renewed since
nineteen thirty nineteen ninety
three I believe you were going
to comment on that and I would
just follow up with the fact
that it needs to be increased
thank you Mr chair.
that I froze in my record my
comments were not on the record.
Thank you guys I think you have
a good day the two.
Members
House bill one seventy two
Representative black welcome to
house tax revenue.
Expert that we need to let in no
Sir Mr chairman I do not it's
just me and I hope that I can
get a unanimous do pass like
cost unity I'm a little jealous
of enrollment.
All right let's make it happen.
so Mister chairman I'm bringing
that house bill one seventy two
which is a really simple bill by
part bipartisan support I might
say basically what this bill
would do it instructs the
department motor vehicle to
create a database where margins
to contact information can be
held I intentionally have the
the bills drafted pretty broadly
in order to give the department
the flexibility in the
rulemaking process to be able to
to set it up whatever way they
saw fit and the easiest way for
them I was I was worried about
creating it.
That it was too tight out into
cumbersome so I wanted to I want
to give them the flexibility to
set it up the way they saw it
I'm the reason I brought this
bill basically.
In doing my research I I found
out that law enforcement across
the state use several different
databases to obtain at people's
information emergency contact
information and there's kind of
a lag in time on on some of
those instances I'm and there's
a cost where.
For instance Bernalillo county
dispatchers office uses a just
as particular database which
costs about a hundred dollars a
month which is that much I'm
when you look at the cost
however for a small county like
Harding County their budget is
much smaller than Bernalillo
county and to have to pay that
fee that that's coming out of
their their budgets I'm so I was
looking at trying to get a cost
savings for those local law
enforcement and to have one
central place that this
information could be House.
And only available to law
enforcement
I do have a letter of
recommendation from the odds.
they feel this bill is very
important and we help them
tremendously
so I guess that's all I have at
the moment and I will stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative black
let me go to the audience is
there anyone in support to an
opposition.
Okay I don't see anyone here so
we'll go to the committee and
first up is Representative
Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative blacks I take a
moment and I don't think a bill
is like hit me so timely and
personal as this one
Hello hello a loved one of ours
we found out that her of
vehicles been abandoned.
And so we're doing up you know
missing persons and all that
good stuff but if but if we
would have got a phone call the
second the officers found the
vehicle
It would've been a good thing so
we're we're good on our end Mr
Chairman representative black
but it's just this is really
important
For for folks who may have you
know had a flat tire inner
walking three miles down the
road or whatever or or or more
serious situations so I
appreciate the bill
Representative up Mr chairman
thank you very much.
Thank you were some my status
committee members.
Speaker you go.
Thank you chairman.
chair representative like can
you tell me a little bit about
the privacy provisions.
Here is the information Mr
Chairman representative black is
it subject to the inspection of
public records acts as a as a
start.
I'm.
Mr chairman Mr speaker
I honestly.
Don't know the answer to that to
that specific question I've been
in conversation with the
department motor vehicle and
I've actually been told by
jury resultado who is the deputy
director of central correct
appropriations that is the the
tapestry system what the
department motor vehicle uses
It's encrypted with the M. S.
transparent data encryption.
And all traffic on the public
and private network is encrypted
with the S. S. L. encryption I
don't know if I'm answering your
question Mr speaker.
Gentleman Representative the I
appreciate an answer in and that
really speaks more to the
security of the system just
hacking I I'm more interested
in.
I take for example we have
provisions in the lawn out that
allow victims of domestic
violence to have
their physical address where
they register to vote for
example be kept private.
If you know if they have someone
who is out there to cause them
harm we've got other provisions
to keep folks personal
information private one of the
ways you do that is being sent
disclosure that information from
the X. inspection program
project I did not see it brought
exemption in your bill and that
would tell me that if someone
is trying to track down I mean
let's use the domestic violence
simple because that's what it's
that's one it's already in law
if we got some of this try to
track down.
you know a former spouse for
your partner with the purpose of
causing them harm or harassment.
It seems like they could serve
in April request on the
department of motor vehicles and
and perhaps get access to
emergency contact information.
And and I that that gives me a
little bit of pause on this I I
certainly understand the concept
and Representative Maestas is
simple is exactly what this bill
is meant to do.
But I I have a little pause in
what unintended consequences
might be might be here occurs Mr
Chairman representative like if
you have any thoughts on.
Whether we might want to add and
it brought exemption.
Into this bill to make sure
that.
If we have a domestic violence
victim whose eight year
qualifies for the privacy
provisions in state law to make
sure that
that this privacy provisions
extend to this information and
that we get an extra exemption
Mr chair representative Chris
you have any thoughts.
Mr speaker Mr chairman I I had
not thought of that but I do
agree I do think that is
important
something that we probably need
to add to it.
In the other the other thought
Mr chairman and and
Representative black is are
there any what are the
circumstances under which.
Rather we explained what is a
law enforcement officer need to.
Established in order to.
Gain access to this information
or or how how does the process
work right so it is if you
the law enforcement officers say
has holdover someone on a
traffic stop.
the is the officer able to
access the content the emergency
contact information under those
circumstances.
Yes the way it's written and
when I when I spoke with Tim
Johnson the secretary of the
department of public safety
he felt that.
tool in their in their toolbox
I'm.
So it would be it would be
assessed at accessible to law
enforcement.
Mr chairman and everything about
that might be another thing that
I think would be important to
look at and that is.
If you have someone who is a the
tents with legislation.
for a for the commission of
crime.
Yes so if you got someone.
impact the.
And if you're in the in the in
the arresting officer is able
to.
Access.
The name and contact information
are yeah that person's loved
ones or friends.
I am the I am I some degree of
pause as to.
Whether or not.
Automatically providing that
information to the investigating
officer.
Is
Mystery that we want to do
within the criminal you know it
appears as.
Acting the.
Right that it had to a suspect
or defendant in a criminal
proceeding.
Mr chairman of the black
committee other members of the
committee and curious if anyone
has any thought on that.
Mr chairman Mr speaker.
I do.
I have guess I'm I'm I'm on the
glass half full person.
I would a would you suspect this
would just be access in those
certain that the system would
actually just be access in those
certain situations where it was
needed.
But you make a valid point Mr
speaker administer chairman
that I guess that that would be
available to officers at any
time.
Mr chairman and been
Representative black I think
that.
If we're gonna if we're gonna
pause in this to deal with the
issue I think we might also want
to can can find a constrain when
the information could be.
The issues are not issues when
it could be accessed by law
enforcement it would be your
available officers and in the
event that a person is found in
the unconscious.
For their non verbal or they are
you know clearly
You know in some sort of
physical distress.
Yeah I think that's what we're
going for here right is if
someone founded in you know the
the committee have ID on them
but they don't necessarily have
the ability to speak to an
officer and it is clear that the
persons in distress.
Yeah I think that would be an
instance when.
The information should be
available but you know if it's.
You know if it's the Mr Chairman
yes so we get.
You know arrested on suspicion
of commission of a crime.
And then the arresting officer
can go in this database to get a
list of hear names and phone
numbers of.
You know friends loved ones and
associates of the of the suspect
I.
I don't know if that's something
that we we should be doing
Representative black I I'm
curious you know if it's my.
let us take a look at that and
that is well.
I'm.
Mr Chairman and Mr speaker I the
only.
Highs that I have with that is.
What would I guess the question
would be what would what would
require law enforcement only to
look at those situations.
Senator I'm.
I guess that's my thought.
I think.
It leaves for the issue of.
you the domestic violence
victims and the inspection
public records act I would I
would ask if we could because on
this one to see.
See that having an amendment
done
So that we can make sure that
it's.
Yeah protective of
Of those people where we already
have other statutory
protections.
Do you have a history of being
the victim of a domestic abuse.
Mr Chairman are on that point
Representative.
Yes Mr chairman on a point if if
Representative black girl would
be willing to do that can we get
that back on.
the agenda on Friday.
Representative so yeah that is
my plan I I think I'm I'm
keeping notes here and I've
directed our our staff to to
work with percent of black on
some of these
some of these concerns because I
had the same concern not
necessarily the second one but
that first one I think for for
for sure was something
concerning to me I think what we
can do Representative black is
take the feedback I would ask
you to draft the substitute bill
that way it's clean and easier
to read and will reconsider it
for staying on Friday that's
what we could do.
Mr speaker back to you.
Thank you Mr chairman and if you
know.
You know where I'm I do not
think we want to get judiciary
is us super backed up and we so
we don't want to.
Senator over there but I I would
appreciate it of the analyst for
this committee would
visit with a lane or with the
make Dorsey in my office to see
you know what might be a
workable fix for
we have maybe.
Not having L. unfettered.
Law enforcement access to the
your contact information of
emergency contacts you know I
mean there's a there's a bit of
a privacy piece to this as well
right I mean if if you have if
let's say I decide to give to
the state of New Mexico your
contact information Mr chairman
right I give me your at name
address email and cell phone
number.
And then I become yes this
legislation of you know a crime.
You know.
I'm a suspect for trafficking in
a controlled substance.
Right then law enforcement looks
me up.
And they start you put you're
looking at or or calling up
talking to all the people on my
emergency contact list.
you know I mean that's that
would be using information for
purposes not intended.
And it implicates your privacy
Mr chair right all this and now
you're getting a call from law
enforcement because I gave them
your name and number.
And I.
It yeah we we often talk a lot
about how much information
governments have about all of
this and.
This seems like a situation
where if the government is going
to have the information either
they should have it Mr chairman
with your consent and with your
knowledge work.
If they have it without your
consent and without your
knowledge the ability of the
government to use that
information should be limited
in some way to the the more
purposes for which it was
provided by.
I.
Yes I completely understand Mr
chairman and support the idea
that.
You know like if it's you know
some day.
Help us some day both of my
daughters look driver's licenses
and they will be out you know
motoring on the public roads and
if one of them gets in an
accident I want law enforcement
to be able to call me to say
that you know my little girl is
you have been hurt in accident
come on down.
To be of assistance for you know
I I want that call we get the
call school force as we make
sure that we're not risking
opening up
A lot of people's private
information.
What forces for other purposes
so.
If we could look at that as well
in preparation Friday Mr
Chairman.
Representative black I certainly
would appreciate.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative got in a.
Thank you Mr speaker and
representatives I just wanted to
follow up on a couple of points
the speaker raised but first
stab Representative black I just
want to appreciate the
simplicity in your bill and
really honor what you're trying
to capture I like others have
commented today have had a
couple of occasions during this
pretty horrific last year in
which I've wondered about
emergency contacts and how you
fine folks in someone's at the
hospital or what
responsibilities I I had an
employer have to communicate
with someone's emergency contact
if there's a situation with an
employee at work and it's just
reminded me Mr chair and
representative that New Mexicans
really appreciate when we have
honest and accurate information
and I certainly in line with the
speaker's comments
totally appreciate that you are
willing to take time to focus
this and and the other example
I'm thinking of like many New
Mexicans for most of my life I
probably had my mom listed as my
emergency contact and in this
last year I've thought about it
and I help you sometimes when
that would be appropriate and
other times it might not be
appropriate for a whole variety
of reasons and madam chair Mr
chair and representative knock
on wood I've not been arrested
but I just thought in the course
of this discussion
my eight someone like me and
small town New Mexico if I was
unfortunately arrested Sunday
want my mom to get that call
potentially not potentially I
would want to know the
limitations of who I put my on
down on my emergency contact
we're very well confined and
within parameters that were
important so as I would love to
see the follow up you all come
up with in addressing the
speakers concerns I might also
consider that part of this very
simple legislation includes a
couple of lines that and.
E. D. clearly an affirmatively
US state what the emergency
contact would be used for so
that when folks answer that
question whether they'd like to
add an emergency contact or
update or remove that New
Mexicans are consenting in a way
that is well defined so that
basically we know what we're
signing up for so we can make a
decision about whether we want
to put anyone down at all or who
that appropriate person would be
so I think I hope
Representative that that's in
line with your attention so
whatever whatever that magic
fixes however we decide to focus
it I think it's really important
I'd like to trust that would
happen in rules but I think also
in this case it might be
appropriate just to name in
statute that that that the the
use of the emergency contact
will be provided to someone as
they consent to provide that
information back so thank you
madam chair and representative.
Thank you.
I don't see under any other
hands up Representative black
thank you for bringing the bill
forward as I stated earlier I do
share some of the concerns
particularly the a prep piece
as I said earlier as well please
work with our analyst in
conjunction with the good folks
at the judiciary to to time it
up a little bit I think the
concerns are very well founded
that was one of my that was one
of my questions as I was reading
through your bill
you know I I my I think it was
my second maybe even third
session you know I I I I was
asked to carry a bill
And that and I'll never forget
it because it was a tough bill
and I I was very proud of it
but it dealt
in serve similar issues.
and that the house passed it at
the time and I remember sitting
in the Senate Judiciary
Committee I'm not I'm not
kidding you for six or seven
hours getting reeled over
different the last banks.
Of privacy and and you know
different pieces and you know
after that first of all after
that I said a a I'm gonna try to
stay away from Judiciary
Committee so as long as I can I
was in move to the Judiciary
Committee is a vice chair so
My my wishes certainly didn't
come come true but but I can
tell you you know as a as a tax
committee.
You know just looking at this on
its face it makes a lot of sense
as as chairman SO said it makes
a lot of sense but there's a lot
of intricacy is a lot of
unintended consequences
potentially that I think we need
to look at so I've texted
or analyst they're they're ready
and able and willing to work
with you and your staff connect
with the analyst at Judiciary
time this up as much as you
possibly can it's a get a sub
drafted and then get it into our
committee and and you know we we
have we have a technically we
have a twenty four hour rule
that we try to follow up I told
our members as we get closer to
the end of the session twenty
four hours maybe becomes twenty
maybe becomes eighteen as long
as we have it I think with
reasonable enough time for us to
to analyze it and look through
it I think that's fine so you
know take the rest of today and
and you know as long as we have
it at some point tomorrow we'll
get you in first thing on
Friday.
Great thank you so much
Representative thank you
Representative black.
Members that is that is our
agenda for today thank you for a
good day were done a little
early enjoy the rest of your
morning enjoy your afternoon
committees and we will see you
on the floor thank you very
much.
The chairman.
