This is Representative Hernandez
I'm here thank you.
Representative.
I'm here.
Representative Montoya.
Here.
Representative Romero.
Good morning.
Representative Scott.
Representative.
I'm here and
vice chair Herndon and
representative Cadena did give
me a heads up that they may be
and other committees and they
will
join us as soon as they're done
presenting their bills and.
So welcome everybody we had a
late night last night but I'm
hoping we'll be able to focus.
And have a good discussion
so in terms of order I would
like to hear
house bill one forty eight first
then we'll do Senate bill one
thirty four and then get back to
one twenty five and just for the
audience sake I know members
understand this
For for those bills that have a
fiscal impact it is the the
policy of this committee to
table those bills and review
them later and in terms of what
our package might be moving
forward so I just want to give
remind everybody of that and
remind people to as we get to
bills to which that policy may
apply
we welcome public comments and
we have a policy of limiting
into ten administrative side and
one minute for each individual
cell there we are in the floor
is yours Representative Dow.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee house
bill forty eight this extends
the date applications for loans
for the small business recovery
instant Act we used federal
stimulus start dollars and
created a small loan application
for businesses in New Mexico
that we put five million dollars
next count a hundred sixty
million have been encumbered and
we are simply extending the
deadline for applications and
extending the date for the
reversion and my co sponsor
Majority Leader Martinez is on
this committee I don't know if
you want to add meeting that
with that stand for questions.
For later Martinez did you want
to add anything.
Thank you probably step away for
a moment why don't we go to.
Well things are silly season
over there you go.
Well my friends here to the
office I guess I think we know
from from what we saw last year
a lot of our small businesses or
hurting and the loan program as
well intentioned as it's been I
think it's unfortunately a lot
of small businesses have been
slow to access it and so I I
think this just makes makes
sense if we can extend the
deadline to allow for more
pieces step into it especially
those that are.
In you know version two or three
of the pandemic may not be a bad
idea to to allow for that.
Thank you for before leader for
that why don't we
to the audience now in.
First we'll hear from members
attendees who are we to speak in
favor of the bill so please
raise your hand if you are in
favor of the bill.
See any hand raised are there
any attendees who wish to expand
speak in opposition the bills.
It is not a controversial bill
will go.
Committee there is no interested
in speaking of analysts
Committee members.
Are there are members of a
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair good
morning I'm really curious about
whether or not this is in the
budget already are we asking to
table this I remember doing this
in the special session last year
or was it twenty twenty actually
to try to get this through so
I'm I'm very supportive of what
we done I know a lot of
constituents had reached out to
me in the beginning about how to
be able to access this
opportunity and and so I'm I'm
curious about how a how it's
gone how much have we actually
gone through I'm looking at the
FY are now so
With that said is this already
in the budget.
Yes madam chair and members of
the committee and thank you for
that Representative Romero
chairman Romero I wish that
market was with us from the
finance authority we thought
this was the third item on the
agenda so I know there'd be
people joining to support later
or into explained that the money
has not been recorded yet so
it's not re appropriated the
house budget so this doesn't
change the budget that we
passed.
It and and and really at you're
right a lot of folks opted out
of the federal grants they voted
they they opted for loans that
they knew had forgiveness in
them but now as one man Majority
Leader Martinez said folks are
reaching out for funds again and
we should keep this fund
available.
Thank you I'm madam chair thank
you Representative I I I agree I
think we're still not out of the
weeds on a lot of things as we
continue to see our economy
change quite a bit for those
especially who need access to to
possible loans and
I think if if if if in fact this
is still accessible and I'd love
to hear a little bit about the
fiscal impact so far if anybody
doesn't always get you into
Marquita is available but if
anybody does know about how much
of this has been access to our
you know eight is it doing what
we hoped it would that would be
excellent and I'm I'm gonna keep
listening to the I see
Representative Harper is hand up
so I'm supportive of this in
particular because of the what
we're what we're still trying to
get out of thank you madam chair
thank you.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative of
the five hundred million that
we've appropriated only a
hundred and sixty million has
been encumbered and so it people
have referred the grant programs
at the federal and state level
those are exhausted we don't
know what is coming down the
pipe and so this just creates
restrict keeps keeps an option
in place for businesses that are
that are still dealing with
recovery and one quick question
since it is in the form of a
loan is are we seeing the
paperbacks are they mostly for
given how are we managing them
at this point.
Madam chair and representative
it's my understanding I mean it
I mean it's sex workers finance
authority and see if they can
get someone on but it's my
understanding that it is alone
at that it is very very generous
in the left repayment and that
folks are beginning to prepare
those if they're not able to
then at at.
Accommodations are being made
for but for repayment madam
chair there's Representative
Montoya looks like Marquita is
okay raise.
Great thank you for pointing
that out Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam chair could we
please elevate Marquita Russel
please Kimberly yes she's been
promoted to the panelists great
wonderful welcome Marquita thank
you madam chair thank you
members of the committee I've
been listening to the debate I
can answer a couple of the
questions and so I don't know
where you'd like me to start but
I let me start by saying that
the loan program has been in
operation since August of two
thousand twenty we made about
eight hundred and eighty loans
in that first year that was the
year in which we had more
restrictive requirements to
access the funds the program was
then expanded substantially as
part of the twenty one regular
session and we've been able to
lend a significant amount more
so we're now at a total of
almost fifteen hundred awards
made to date our decline rates
gone from about fifty three
percent down to about thirteen
percent and we're seeing a
steady stream of applications
coming in the interest rate
right now is still at half of
prime rate so we're still at one
point six two five percent and
the provisions of the second
loan program the the the
The retooled program don't have
interest accrue it does not have
interest occurring for the first
year the interest is interested
the programs interest free for
the first year and then at the
end of the second year they make
their first interest only
payment and that occurs for
years two and three so we're
seeing a handful of loans in
repayment are we seeing a lot of
those first borrowers take
advantage of the option to
refinance their loans as through
the second program and so their
payment has stopped and they
were able to borrow more dollars
but we you know we currently we
have as I said a steady stream
we've seen a little bit of
uptick in the last couple of
weeks but we probably have three
hundred loans that are currently
you know between having recently
been submitted and in the
process of being dispersed.
Thank you so much mark you guys
still create you and and your I
remember your fierceness and and
that getting this through our a
recession in twenty twenty and
and helping us understand the
needs so I just want to thank
you for that I I support this I
think it is necessary to keep
this
you know settled for for the
needs that we yeah anticipate
through twenty twenty three and
I hope that my colleagues will
support it as well thank you
madam chair that's thank you
thank you Representative
Representative Harper.
Morning madam chair thanks to
the as couple questions good
morning Representative.
Now and and Martinez.
I I guess the first question I
have is I I think it was stated
that this.
the five hundred million that
was authorized came from federal
stimulus dollars but my
understanding is that's not
correct that we actually
authorized that I heard million
to be borrowed from our existing
severance tax permanent fund can
you help me understand that.
Madam chair representative I'm
sorry you're correct.
Okay.
thank you for that so yeah I I
remember this legislation I
think it was what a year and a
half ago that we pass this and
when we put the sunset on it we
thought yeah we'll put it out
there what way out there COVID
will definitely be done by then
and.
Lo and behold you know for I you
know significant variances later
you know we're we're still
in the pandemic soon to be
epidemic I believe but
I think it makes sense to extend
the deadline here I just want to
bring up a couple quick points I
mean I I did support I did vote
for it I'm I'm supporting this
legislation as well but I think
you know there's pros and cons
to every single bill that we
bring you know mine included and
just wanna make sure
understanding some of the
important contours well.
So a.
First.
Madam chair and and
representatives and has miss
Russell I believe you mentioned
that.
There's something on the order
of we had about eight hundred
businesses take advantage of
this and and now we're getting
closer to roughly double that
have how many businesses have
taken out of this so far.
Madam chair if I might so right
now we have
We have made for about about
fifteen hundred loans totaling
of about a hundred and thirty
five million dollars
so a couple of us about three
hundred of the exist of those
fourteen or fifteen hundred
loans are a repeat borrowers so
we increase the amount of money
Yes we increase the amount of
money to those borrowers.
understood thank you madam chair
and and presents miss Russell
for that
No detail I I appreciate that
what one of the one of the
concerns I had
and and there's not much we can
do about it really is you look
at the total number of small
businesses in the state of New
Mexico and depending on the
source you're you're looking at
roughly
a hundred sixty thousand small
businesses in the state.
And and you look at
the size of loans and and the
the five million we have really
the the most we can help
this about three percent of our
small businesses in the state
and and you know.
You don't want and I wish we
could do more but on the on the
other hand
I'll talk about next with this
impact on our terms tax refund
as but we've we've probably had
one percent of small businesses
take advantage of this.
which which is good we've we've
helped some good businesses and
and also understand this is a
loan versus a grant so perhaps
the federal grant money being
utilized by more businesses was
enough and that to.
For some businesses that wasn't
enough and now they're taking
measure this loan so.
Right.
And madam chair I guess my my
last little
Spread of our questions goes
here to the severance tax
permanent fund and yeah we we
are you know just to remind the
committee we have two great
permanent funds in the State
land grandparents on in the
severance tax refund.
And the Land Grant profundas is
a concert to be very healthy.
and you look at the stats and
and inflows and outflows and not
fund is a healthy fund it's not
is subject to the ups and downs
of the market.
Or a where as our.
and contrast our service tax
refund is not healthy fund
over the last ten years I've
been here I've carried some
legislation help strengthen it
it's been passed so sore on a
better trained than ever before
but when I first came here.
the models are pointing to this
fund actually dying
and.
And this when you look at the
inflows and outflows and they're
all over the place and just
because.
We the the legislature also
often turns this fund to.
To provide you know different.
projects like this one.
And so you know I'm again I
voted for this I thought it was
worse the cost but.
We're we've got you know roughly
a hundred and sixty million that
came out this Fund we're with
this extension will see a good
amount more maybe two hundred
fifty total coming out.
And the.
And the earnings on that you
know
it was the target here six point
seven five percent of that's the
opportunity cost versus what
we're seeing here.
and what's going on here because
of the cost of administering
and.
And really you know not we're
not looking at you know charging
is businesses huge amounts for
these loans right I mean I I
don't think that makes sense
either we want to be charged
like a ten percent interest
rate.
But just look at the analysis
the of our says we're losing
about two percent
The stock.
You look at the dollars coming
out the fund versus the gain of
roughly seven percent.
So again another another to the
fund which
you know gives our general fund
a lot of great stable revenue
especially when oil and gas
industry oscillates this gives a
ton of money once the land grant
permanent fund for education and
Medicaid and those other
essential government services so
I guess chair and representative
I guess I'm just asking you
thank you to share your thoughts
on.
You know making sure that we.
don't continue
this in perpetuity forever right
I mean I was gonna be with us
for a long time to actually see
that we're going to perhaps and
this program that and and.
In all referring making sure
that we're we're doing those
things to protect us but.
Madam speaker madam chair and
representative descends December
thirty first of twenty twenty
three.
I'm madam chair and
representative thank you do you
anticipate asking for another
extension after that time.
I guess it would depend on where
our businesses are forty seven
percent of our small businesses
have closed permanently and and
so at no fault of their own and
so I think that it's incumbent
upon us which you know might my
ideal circumstance would be to
an emergency health orders and
resume life as normal let these
businesses recover that's not
where we're at as you mentioned.
Thank you madam chair and
representative.
I guess I'll just I'll just
conclude by thanking the the
chairman committee for the time
but I do remain very concerned
about the health.
Of this fund.
we keep.
You know cutting the goose that
lays golden eggs you know maybe
not maybe not chopping off the
head but not just by thousand
cuts is a real thing thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative.
See I see no
Further speakers I did want to
ask a question I'm sorry
Representative Scott and before
it we go to Representative
started Representative Scott was
thinking about making a motion I
would like to
Raise the issue of letting this
out of committee normally we're
concerned about impacts on the
general fund and that's that's
been our policy and our our
tabling policy this is not
impact on our general fund and
so regardless of your position
on the particular bill at can we
agree that this is not subject
to the temporary table policy
that we normally employment and
I see my ranking member and
colleague shaking his head yes
so that that's great thank you
very much Representative Harper
now going you Representative
Scott.
Thank you madam chair
representative I completely
agree.
The our small businesses are
still hurting still need some
assistance but thanks to hi also
share their concerns
Representative Harper that yes.
Risk.
I believe we will be living with
COVID.
In some form or fashion
basically it out for it.
This program runs the risk of
becoming permanent and.
The point that was made with
respect to.
The lost opportunity and come
together with the actual cost of
the program which according to
the FIR was wronged in the so
for about.
Fourteen million dollars it's
significant.
As a severance tax fund is not
particularly healthy.
And we need to take a really
hard look before we start.
And continue rather to Nicholas
call support this all support to
space legislation well with
reservations.
So if it's going to try to move
forward beyond this exploration
thank you madam chair and thank
Representative.
Thank you Representative Scott
I don't see any other hands
raise so I'm happy to entertain
a motion.
Thank you past there's a do
passed motion by Representative
Romero a second by leader
Martinez.
Right.
I second the motion.
For our bill manager.
Wise man Representative the
leader.
Kimberly we to call the roll
please.
Madam check.
Representative.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Yes
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Yes.
Representative my aspect yes.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler.
Vice chair.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Chairman.
Yes.
We have a tender about.
All right thank you
Representative for your
presentation and you have a do
pass out of our committee.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you I'm so glad that market was
able to get on it too.
Wrecked my I need paperwork with
me so thank you so much
sorry to just run that I know I
thought I was for actually
Representative so.
One thing that I sure of course
next I'd like to go to the
Senate bill one thirty four New
Mexico housing trust fund
Senator Rodriguez and
representative of that
Representative small I believe
Representative small is in the
attendees.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the council yes hello
Senator.
Good morning Senator and madam
chair Chandler the committee is
so nice to see you I really miss
seeing you in person that this
is great Hey we have this
opportunity thank you very much
Madam chairman members of the
committee I have is the
Hernandez here in the MFA and
Rebecca he's the CEO and
director of the New Mexico
mortgage finance authority and
also Rebecca Millar added the
senior planner in debt director
for the for planning and
development at the mortgage
finance authority so there my
attendees we need to go to them
Madam chairman members of the
committee must of you and all of
us I would date are familiar
with the lack of affordable
housing in New Mexico and the
housing crisis that we're facing
it continues to be exacerbated
not only by the pandemic that it
was their way before we just let
it go on too long without
providing the adequate funding
that we need to R. two million
right the problems
it away we were thanking during
the summer and working on LFC
and everywhere else thinking how
do we have a sustainable form of
funding for the affordable
housing trust fund that we
established in two thousand
five.
Yes two thousand five we've been
putting in funding very meager
here there for the support we
have the trust fund that is
administered by the mortgage
finance authority the I have
received a total believe it or
not since two thousand five a
total of twenty six twenty seven
million and yet they generate
twenty nine to one in return
it's a no brainer that we
continue to inject dollars
bought dollars that are
sustainable recurring money that
they can depend on to continue
to build affordable housing
provide weatherization program
and provide for the compliance
with the American disabilities
act and so on
this bill here I have an
opportunity finally to be able
to have every New Mexican be
able to have a home a home that
we all were granted many times
this is for eligible low to
moderate income New Mexicans
that just can't afford a home we
have two hundred and seventeen
thousand people right now in New
Mexico that are cost burdened
many of those more than half
have to pay more than fifty
percent of their income toward
their mortgage payment they
can't afford it it doesn't leave
a Andrew anything left to
provide for their needs for
their families so we look for a
way to do something sustainable
and affordable and we came up
with this scenario and it has
received an enormous amount of
support I really appreciate your
committee putting those on your
agenda
it would take to want to have
percent just a little over half
of the percentage that Cologne
yes and the tip take from the
severance tax bonding capacity
the impact to legislators or
there are capital outlay or in
any other infrastructure is
menaced.
You in fact we have economists
look at it and it they had a
hard time even finding a number
because it's going to be so
small R. and so the one thing to
remember is that we're not
taking funding from capital
outlay in fact you just going to
go back into every area of the
state it would generate
including our districts but in
the form of affordable housing
to provide for affordable
housing needs of all varieties
and so the way it is right now
is if it takes twenty two point
five percent of this bonding
capacity that it would generate
an average of twenty five
million per year and then get
leverage twenty nine to one so
it would bring again maybe seven
hundred fifty million per year
for the cope report will have
needs weatherization for the
poor and disabled the fixed
income and and for compliance
with ADA this would also free up
some of the funding that's
available for rental assistance.
It is a bill that would truly go
far it's a transformational bill
and that we're finally putting
putting sustainable recurring
funding into this fund it is not
a good idea Madam chairman
members of the committee for us
to be putting in a million here
one year and then zero the next
year I made in the next year.
They can not continue to provide
affordable housing with that
uncertainty right now they
sit on seventy million dollars
they're shallow projects
projects shovel ready projects
and they don't have the funding
to start and this year would
kick in in two thousand twenty
twenty four X. fiscal year
twenty four I'm sorry and and it
would basically be a
transformational
proposal so I appreciate your
support madam chairman and it is
the what is your best bet to say
if you were.
Representative Senator Rodriguez
we are here from Representative
small and maybe we could go your
experts is that okay with you
have absolutely I'm happy he's
here I didn't hear you mention
he was there that's wonderful
thank you he's been a great
great help on thank you.
Thank you Representative small.
Good morning madam chair and
committee it is just a real
honor for me to be here along
side vice chairwoman Rodriguez
Senator Rodriguez madam chair
committee this bill will be
transformative for our state
helping folks find housing in
all corners of our state at
providing the stable modest yet
incredibly leverage source of
revenue that senator Rodriguez
outlined madam chair there are
clear safeguards in the bill to
make sure that we take this
wisely but after we've proven
again and again madam chair and
our state that housing is one of
our top needs that the cost
burdens for New Mexican for
stable safe housing are
stretching them in many cases
beyond their limits this is a
key step that we can take this
year thanks and very much due to
Senator Rodriguez is
Incredible advocacy for housing
across our state in a very
financially responsible yet a
incredibly transformative way so
I'm very grateful to be the co
sponsor for this and appreciate
you allowing me to say a few
words thank you very much madam
chair.
Thank you Representative
Senator Rodriguez we're happy to
know here from your experts
would you like to hear from Mr
Hernandez first.
Yes madam chairman thank you
thank you Representative small
yes thank you to.
You madam chair I good morning
and thank you to the committee
members for the opportunity to
allow us to speak to you a
little bit today with regard to
Senate bill one thirty four do
want to thank Senator Rodriguez
and Representative small for up
for sponsoring this bill is a
very important bill with the
great potential of having long
lasting positive economic and
and social impacts Rebecca is
available to answer your
questions as they come up a
little bit later on I'm gonna
take two or three minutes here
to highlight a couple of things
at a very high level but
definitely we can not if you
have any questions we can go a
little bit deeper into those.
For those of you that may not
know MFA very well we are New
Mexico's housing agency we are
statewide agency we have
oversight from aboard the and
the legislative oversight
committee we have thirty plus
programs.
That raise a full spectrum of
affordable housing from
homelessness all the way up to
home ownership and everything in
between.
The key to our success is that
we have a network of over two
hundred partners across the
state to help us deliver housing
and housing services at the
local level.
As you I'm sure have read into
for an is Senator Rodriguez
highlighted there's a great need
for affordable housing.
There's been increased cost as
we've all heard over the last
couple years cost burden
families
need for we have across the
state a shortage of single and
multi family shortage are you
listening it is estimated that
it would take billions just to
address a fraction of the need
out there.
With regard to the success of
the housing trust fund the the
again go back to the partners
that we have that it helps
distribute those funds across
the state we received twenty
seven million dollars since two
thousand five we've been able to
leverage over seven hundred or
close to seven hundred million
dollars the leveraged with very
is over the last five years
between twenty five and thirty
one to one ratio we've been able
to create over forty five
hundred housing units across the
state in sixty five different
developments.
As you all know key to our a key
force in economic development is
housing.
And in addition to the seven
hundred million dollars that
have been leverage there's also
been five hundred and eighty
million dollars and economic
impact
and there's many social impact
that you are aware of the just a
couple of highlights from the
bill Senator already mentioned
dollars one thing I do want to
highlight is the safeguards that
are in the bill that the money's
would revert within three years
if they're not that fully
encumbered or utilized and
secondly I we run the program is
a revolving loan fund and so
there's a priority in the bill
that we use in the program
income that's the principal and
interest payments before we
using any money.
This is a would be provided a
much needed inconsistent funding
to help us improve and increase
the housing problem needs across
the state now will conclude
madam chair with just saying
that housing is the foundation
for strong families and tribal
communities and we respectfully
request that your support on
this bill thank you very much
thank you Mr Hernandez miss our
day.
Sanchez said Mr menace covered
everything but I am available
for questions great thank you so
much all right let's now go to
the audience on those members of
the attendees who wish to our.
speak in favor please raise your
hands.
I see Hank Hughes.
Mr Hughes.
Yeah can you hear me yes thank
you hi I won't add a lot I just
want to say that I
Representative New Mexico
coalition to end homelessness as
well as Santa Fe County where I
serve as a county commissioner
and both groups strongly support
this bill and just yesterday I I
wanted to give an example I was
in a meeting where we learned
that there's thirteen people
with disabilities who have
federal housing vouchers and
Santa Fe who simply can't find
units to rent so this so give us
a steady stream of new
affordable housing and thank you
so much.
Thank you Mr.
So I want.
Mr Chris Herbert.
Mr Herbert.
Yes ma'am can you hear me yes.
My name is for server and
executive director of the
eastern regional Housing
Authority based in ras Mexico
we work with the mortgage
finance authority on a regular
basis developing projects in
within our region
and if we have successfully use
the the housing trust fund
numerous times in the past and
it would be of great ages should
be able to have recurring funds
for this or respond we support
Senate bill one thirty four and
we thank the sponsors and we
think Moores finance story
programs for thank you all thank
you Terry Dunbar.
Kerry Dunbar.
Yes can you hear me yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak my name is
Terry Dunbar I'm retired high
school science and math teacher
and UNM professor.
I like to testify in favor of SB
one thirty four and I want to
talk this morning about the
effect of homelessness on
education I'm confident we all
would agree that improving
educational outcomes in New
Mexico is important.
Homelessness in near
homelessness have serious
negative social emotional
effects on students housing
insecurity disrupts sleep
patterns the ability to make and
keep friends in and out of
school is inhibited self esteem
suffers because students know
that they don't have the stable
social life from routines that
other students have.
Academic performance suffers to
research has shown that academic
outcomes are well below that of
students who are house.
Frequent absences lack of study
spaces Senator mean that many
students have trouble keeping up
with class works class work.
When homeless families to Mr
Dunbar thank you for that your
time is up.
Thank you for your opportunity
to speak thank you Mr curry.
Jeff curry.
Hi this is Jeff curry I'm the
executive director of the
development department at the
jail great company we are a for
profit developer we have about
five thousand units of
affordable housing around the
state I wanted to speak in
support of S. B. one thirty four
I can't think of a better group
that MFA to get our regular
allocation of funds to go
towards the New Mexico housing
trust fund I get calls weekly
from small communities desperate
for housing that I cannot help
because of a lack of funds.
I I urge you to support this
going forward and to not table
this bill thank you so much.
Thank you Linda bridge.
Misprision.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Linda bridge and the executive
director of Albuquerque Health
or E. to further emphasized the
need for these funds
public housing authorities
across the state own and operate
public health medicine much
needed preservation speaking
just to Albuquerque Los crucis
in Espanola there is the need of
over forty million dollars to
preserve units in those three
locations and are more units
across the state.
We also hear in Albuquerque have
hundreds about shareholders that
are out right now they have
rental assistance and can't find
units to rent.
I the other point I want to
emphasize is every dollar that
goes into housing is economic
development it creates jobs take
those into creation of jobs
Senator contracts and helps our
economy overall I urge your
support of this bill thank.
Thank you I just want to let you
know you have about four and a
half minutes left on the on this
section of public comment so you
may want to modify your.
as many people can participate
as possible Rachel Biggs.
You madam chair and members of
the committee my name is Rachel
bags with Albuquerque health
care for the homeless comment
brought crashing harm to
thousands of families in New
Mexico and those with low
incomes have been
disproportionately impacted many
have struggled to remain state
played stable a house due in
large part to our significant
shortage of affordable homes for
people with low incomes long
before the pandemic began
housing instability too often
results in the brutality of
homelessness it's devastating
right now to have a voucher and
hand for families and have to
tell them they're going to stand
up to ninety days or more living
in their car until we can find
affordable housing for them this
is a smart solution to really
complex problem and we urge your
support for SB one thirty four
thank you thank you Dorothy
Seton.
Sure thank.
Yeah here we go.
You madam chair and members of
the committee I'm Dorothy C. and
I'm a retired military veteran I
live in Santa Fe I'm speaking
today for the veterans and
military families caucus we
support this legislation
after many years of volunteer
work with veterans and their
families I have learned that
after traveling the world in
military service veterans
treasurer home of their own this
bill would help veterans and
their families put down roots in
New Mexico and have the security
of all of their own home.
It addresses many housing
problems in a sustainable bit
way and we thank the sponsors
for bringing this bill
please pass this bill so many
Mexicans depend on it thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Jack Miller larch
sorry if I mispronounce your
name Jack yes good morning the
subject of our time with New
Mexico home builders association
we've talked about the shortage
of housing it is extreme from
all ends up and down the
spectrum and it's clear that
those of us those of you who
watch all of the bills know that
we need to efficiently
consistent and coordinated
approach to the housing needs of
New Mexico I would bring up one
thing that hasn't been mentioned
MFA has done a good job of
protecting our existing
neighborhoods protecting the
value of our neighborhoods and
that's where our affordable
housing is today it's almost
impossible for the new home
builders to build anything
anymore that's anywhere near for
table the NMFA does a good job
of this may have for many years
and we would urge your support
thank you.
Thank you Randy trainer.
Thank you madam chair committee
members Randy trainer
representing in a IOP in the
apartment association of New
Mexico the pandemic has revealed
the long time problem of housing
affordability and availability
the need is huge MFA was created
many years ago during an
interest rate crisis they have
helped thousands of New Mexicans
with a variety of housing needs
now more than now more than ever
it is crucial to support all
purpose of providing housing The
New Mexico having trust fund is
one of those a proven and
successful program in a good
year is easy to support MFA this
year it is crucial to support
MFA and the housing trust fund
thank you very much thank you
Myles Conaway.
Hello this is miles Conway and
executive officer for the Santa
Fe area home builders
association there's not much
left to say but I want to echo
what has been said previously as
a as this developers and small
builders we represent four
hundred members and and the
seven northern counties of New
Mexico it is increasingly
difficult for the private sector
on their own to build affordable
housing and at the same time
feed their own families so we
will absolutely find essential
these programs so we're in and
she urged support of SP one
thirty four and also echo R.
Sanchez Senator Rodriguez opera
it's about predictability thank
you for your so madam chair
members of the committee sponsor
Rodriguez for bringing this bill
forward we stand in strong
support thank you Alexandria
lad.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you so
much for this opportunity my
name is Alexander lad I am the
director for the city of Santa
fe's Office of affordable
housing and I can vouch from
firsthand experience that
creating a recurring reliable
source of funding for the New
Mexico for rural housing trust
fund will be truly
transformative as Senator
Rodriguez said we had in Santa
Fe we went from having a sort of
episodic unreliable source to a
commitment from our city council
and mayor to a reliable source
of funding and this is where we
can address the gaps in our
systems and actually make change
and the the leverage potential
for this funding is real it's
not wishful thinking I can give
you all those numbers but I have
sent some emails so thank you
very much and please support
this bill.
Thank you we have time for one
more Allison Janney Care.
Prior.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee ups hi can you
hear me yes thank you madam
chair members of the committee I
millisecond guy are a resident
of Santa Fe a former state
representative and former chair
of housing in the organ house
testifying in strong support for
Senate bill one thirty four
thanks to my nomination by
speaker egolf I serve on New
Mexico's housing trust fund for
in reviewing housing proposals I
am so impressed with the strong
due diligence by MFA staff and
my fellow volunteer advisory
board members from across the
state however the housing trust
fund has very few funds to meet
the tremendous housing need well
every state has its own needs
and solutions I respectfully
offer my experiences from Oregon
which like New Mexico has
suffered from rising housing
costs to increase housing supply
strong bipartisan support
enabled organ to steadily
increase annual housing
allocations from approximately
fifty million providing them to
seven hundred fifty million per
biennium in twenty twenty one we
also triple the steady income
from thirty to ninety million
the request today for recurring
funds through SB one thirty four
is modest and I urge you to pass
the bill.
Thank you with that will
conclude are
Participation of those who are
in favor of those who oppose
please raise your hand.
Those wishing to speak in
opposition.
Is raise your hand.
I see one hand raise Maria
Griego are you speaking in
opposition to this bill.
No okay let's start again anyone
wishing to speak in opposition
please raise your hand I just
wanna make sure I don't miss
anyone.
All right I don't see anyone in
opposition I see many hands up
in our committee so let me see
Representative.
Got.
Now on their second third.
Technical in order.
Madam chair Senator up and
careers.
Trying to try to follow the
path.
And and have just a couple of
questions here.
How much money is in the fund
now.
Mr chair that chairman and
representative Scott the bonding
capacity currently is six
hundred and ninety one million
dollars after it has already
taken into consideration the
earmarks of the the water
project fund and the colonias
and the tribal infrastructure
fund so the net capacity of six
hundred eighty one million
dollars currently that's what
we're working on this year but
would not affect this it's for
the for fiscal year twenty four.
Thank you for that cancer center
I don't care how much money is
Mexico housing trust fund
currently miss madam chairman
Representative Scott they have
approximately three million
seven dollars right now but it's
already it's already committed
and it's just a matter of time
in a couple of months MFA is
indicated they will be
completely with zero that that
money has already been committed
to projects.
Okay.
And I'm curious about.
Madam chair Senator I'm curious
about.
Is very high leverage iterations
on the order of thirty to one so
three million dollars yes I
believe it's been
Representative.
Ninety eight million dollars.
Total capital deployment is that
accurate.
Madam chairman Representative F.
I you asking me if it was going
it is going to take nine million
dollars from the severance tax
bonding capacity is that I don't
hear understand a question can
you repeat that Chairman
representative.
Insurance.
Additional I'm curious about.
very hard leverage coming out of
the New Mexico housing trust
fund.
And thirty to one ratio three
million dollars that's in there
now.
What leverage ninety billion
dollars of total capital
deployment is that accurate
madam chairman Representative
Scott no because the three
million dollars has already been
leveraged as part of the amount
prior to that the legislature
good and we've put in five
million dollars last year but
it's all been severance tax on
funds which are non recurring
every bit of the funding that we
put into this fund is non
nonrecurring so the balance of
that has already been leveraged
and now they have three million
dollars left that have already
been committed that will be
distributed within the next two
or three months.
Okay madam chair Senator up.
Thank we're still lost quite on
the same page how much.
Actual.
Capital deployment on the ground
will be a consequence of the
three million dollars that is
currently in the housing trust
fund how much money is going to
go in the house as a consequence
of this three million dollars
that's in there now thank you
madam chairman thank you
Representative Scott and I will
bring is the and to explain it
better I think you can do a
better job and I can on that so
is the madam chair making you
have him
Elevated to respond to that
question.
Is elevated Senator thank you.
Madam chair Senator Rodriguez
and representative Scott that.
It's not that that three million
dollars as currently in the
funds actually I think about
three point nine million dollars
was recently out was it the last
legislative session and we just
recently signed contract for DFA
we do have our applications are
currently being underwritten so
we can deploy those funds are
short answer to your question is
that we generally make about a
million dollar loan so that
would probably make out three to
four loans that would go to
apartment complexes so one
example would be we have in Lee
County west bearing that you
maybe are familiar with I
believe it's in Hobbs so we
would make a one million dollar
potentially if it gets approved
by our board actually this is
the last year allocation so we
would make a one million dollar
allocation or long to that by a
property they are leveraging
other federal sources tax
credits another I.
Financing from banks that total
project could be in the ballpark
of about a twenty million dollar
project so in this case we're
making a loan of up say a
million dollars to bring in you
know fifteen to twenty million
dollars from other sources so
that's how the leveraging works
it does vary from project to
project so out it's not always
started one in some cases it'll
be a little bit lower than that
but that.
Representative Scott I hope that
addresses your question and that
we bring other sources in to go
along with the housing trust
fund we are gap financing that
helps bring the total project
together.
Thank you madam chair Mister
Hernandez that's exactly answer
my question so just to fund.
These loans are repaid does the
fund generate any revenue coming
back to it from projects that
are already complete and now.
Peter.
Revenue will retain all.
Madam chairman I will and for
the second time I'm going to
have is the in response yes they
can you explain it that this is
a revolving fund thank you.
Here Representative Scott that
you are correct we have what we
call program income these
programs are are loaned out so
we received principal and
interest that come back into the
housing trust fund that is part
of what has helped us I believe
over the years with the twenty
seven million dollars that we've
received with the program income
it's increased to about seventy
million dollars and then it's
been leveraged at the seven
hundred million dollar range
there there is a provision in
the current bill thanks to a
Senator Rodriguez that that we
would prioritize the use of that
program income if you will
before we using you money's
coming from the severance tax
one.
Okay.
Madam chair Mister Hernandez
sent you to since the.
The program started I believe I
heard.
Testimony to total capital
deployed in all round was
somewhere on the order of seven
hundred million dollars is
roughly accurate.
How is the again for the sake of
time thank you madam chair a
Representative Scott that that
is correct so the twenty seven
million dollars allocated by the
state legislature for
appropriated has grown with
programming come to about
seventy million and the total
leveraged amount that comes up
to the.
Twenty six twenty nine to one
leverage ratio is about to just
under seven hundred million
dollars that is correct.
Madam chair Senator Mister and I
have this how many units.
For that seven hundred million
dollar expenditure.
Madam chair Senator Rodriguez if
I may add a little over forty
five hundred units across the
state Representative Scott.
So madam chair Senator western
man displease.
Last year sixty one thousand
dollars for
Housing unit is that.
Should I came up with actor.
Chairman what you can allow is
needed on.
Madam chair representative Scott
I'm doing some quick math it'll
probably just match yours but
that does seem out fairly close.
To what the cost would be if you
divide the seven hundred million
by the forty five thirty two
units I believe it's real close
but a hundred fifty five hundred
fifty five thousand per unit
doubt Representative Scott.
So.
Madam chair.
Senator Lester Hernandez how do
we.
How do we square that was low
income.
Madam chairman if they can
respond to the area median
income and how that works yes.
Madam chair and representative
Scott that MFA has programs that
range from low to moderate
income the so the low income or
the moderateincome I'd really
varies by county I can give you
some indications about those
are limits are on in line Lea
County in is it as an example
out hundred twenty percent of
the area median income would be
about US seventy nine thousand
dollars the lowincome somebody
at thirty percent of the area
median income is about that a
little under twenty thousand
dollars and that'll vary from
county to county with this the
Los Alamos and Santa Fe being on
the on the high end.
So we do provide across the full
spectrum housing.
And it is you know the cost of
housing has really gone up the
hundred and fifty five thousand
dollars per unit average really
will vary by in some cases it
may be lower in some cases a
little bit higher but that we
ensure that it is affordable for
these are households and that
are up being housed in these are
units across the state does that
address your question
Representative.
Okay madam chair Mister grant
does it actually did very.
Very thoroughly and these days
would generally go on to
individuals homeowner projects
but rather to developers of the
apartment complexes and and.
Division would that be an
accurate statement.
Chairman what is the for the
sake of time thank you is Madam
chair representative Scott that
will tell you that the vast
majority of the funds the twenty
seven million have gone to a
developer for multi family
properties we've had a a small
percentage going to single
family development which I
actually at the end I are a
single family homeowners with
the if this bill gets passed
that with your support that we
would open it up to more
activities that would allow us
to do things one example that
all again you eyes potentially
having a an elderly couple
living in the home they want to
age in place versus moving to a
nursing home we would out re
have their home maybe some
accessibility modifications to
their house that reoccurring
funds would allow us to do these
things.
so that would be an instance
where it would be a homeowner at
being able to use some of these
funds to to support them up and
their housing choice.
Thank you madam chair
yes for that answer.
Getting close to the end of
your.
And.
I'm sure.
Representative Harper's
concerns.
With respect to nibbling away to
severance tax permanent fund and
I guess madam chair senator this
question would be for you and
that is
Why would this program.
Have difficulty competing for
appropriation she every year is.
To be a problem in the past.
Madam chairman thank you for
that question Representative
Scott this is the very reason
you hit the nail on the head
this is the reason why we're
here today because history has
shown us that since two thousand
five fund was established only
meager funding has gone into it
here and there are not every
year and when it goes then it's
always nonrecurring for one year
and so the small amounts that go
and sometimes one million
dollars what we approve
sometimes two million sometimes
zero most of the time it's been
zero because the twenty seven
year I'm sorry seventeen years
we've all we've put in twenty
seven million.
I would think that I'm in the
library with the chair that the
MFA leverages this money are
very high return otherwise would
be even worse state so right now
it would it would take billions
of dollars to be able to conquer
all of the problems with the
housing needs in New Mexico and
so I have this recurring funding
will ameliorate that and have a
very very significant and
profound impact in our housing
needs in a positive way.
So madam chair and senator was
there any request.
This year given what we are.
Literally floating on the ocean
of money was there any request
here for a general appropriation
into this trust fund thank you
for that question madam chairman
representatives cost yes the
request has been there I have a
billion for seventy million
dollars the general fund
appropriation but there's no
funding in it that's what I'm
talking about is that we have to
have some form of recurring
sustainable funding the bill is
available for passage of course
they there's no funding in an in
house bill two down there.
And so you know the there is a
gap that's pretty huge in there
even if this bill passes we need
to do everything we can this
year to continue to provide that
are there some funding and
severance tax bond capacity
again nonrecurring right total
of nine million if that get the
best non recurring money and
again for the time being until
two thousand
for fiscal year twenty twenty
four thank you you thank you
madam chair thank you senator
I believe I answered all my
questions and I will look for
more
The question we committee thank
you thank you Representative
leader Martinez thank you madam
chair thank you Senator
Rodriguez and and Representative
small one real quick question a
couple comments why are we
funding this of S. C. B. why are
we not funding this two general
fund.
Madam chairman and
Representative Martinez because
it would be a recurring amount
you know they that would be
coming out of the general fund
every year and with the
fluctuations and someone who
knows what can happen we we seem
to have some funding this year
but history has shown that we we
just moved in every direction
and so this year because it's
brand for structure to build
homes and so on and apartments
and portable housing it would
fit in within the.
Yes to be passed either way it
will court good work but it
hasn't happened in the past so
it seems like the best approach
thank you madam chair thank you
senator how much general fund
money goes into this fund
currently.
Madam chairman Representative I
don't think we had any I think
of what I take it back I think
there's been two million dollars
that I can recall that was
general fund a few years ago
that's it in the full time since
two thousand five.
Thank you madam chair thank
Richard thank you senator
do we have an idea and I don't I
don't need to put your sense on
the spot here if you don't have
it that's fine but do we have
any idea of how much the
legislature appropriates for
housing through its different
sources any given year yes Madam
chairman and Representative
Martinez the amount that I'm
giving you which would be
approximately last year we we
spent I did find you which is
pretty the higher amount that we
had in the past and the total I
you know with homelessness
programs for the homeless and so
on for the whole state I would
have a total amount for you but
I'll tell you what
the the amount total for the
housing trust fund in twenty
seven years if we in seventeen
years are if we added up rapper
get out you know it's twenty
seven million for affordable
housing but the homeless the
programs for the homeless are
separate to different areas the
lady just program for example
with the HST Department you know
if we get all those an
extrapolate affordable housing
I couldn't do that because we
find a little even for programs
for the homeless for
infrastructure that sorry.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator
I I appreciate this work very
much I think we all know that we
have
not only a crisis in terms of
people experiencing homelessness
but beyond that we do have
distant but that a housing
correction it we're all feeling
it whether it's pool purchases
or rental or whatnot
out of the of the work that this
legislature continues to do and
grateful for the work that you.
Madam chair instead of the S.
have been doing for a long time
on this issue you know that this
summer there is a there is an
election in in Albuquerque
or I guess he was in the fall it
was for a bond for a sports
stadium downtown Albuquerque
which is in the district that I
represent and a big part of the
reason why that bond failed was
because there is this perception
that government doesn't do
enough to to.
To provide for housing
opportunities
and you know I had several
meetings with with many many
advocates on the issue and it's
not that clear cut
I think government does step up
I think institutions like the
MFA have been stepping up for a
long time
but the housing.
Issue is is very complex and
then when when we're dealing
with the issue of homelessness
it's even more complex because
you're dealing with behavioral
health issues such as use orders
and etcetera etcetera so I'm
very proud that this legislature
stepping up I'm I'm I'm grateful
for your bills
I do think
that.
Your point is well taken the
general fund can can fluctuate
in this represents sort of a
stable funding source.
But even beyond this bill I
would challenge us as the
legislature especially right now
when times so you know vality if
you will to step up and and
really Fund the city's critical
needs in the community
and I would argue for another
twenty five million for the from
the general fund to go along
with this funding source and
maybe sunset over the course of
the next few years but
you know we we've got to step up
we've got the money it's not
like we don't have the money
we're working on a four hundred
million dollar tax each for
crying out loud so the money's
there it's a matter of wanting
to do it so hopefully hopefully
this this particular piece of
legislation and and you know
through the good work of the MFA
over the intro can really told
us into action because we do
need to fund more housing stock
we've got to insure that our
families experiencing
homelessness can put a roof over
their heads um and it's going to
be up to us it's it's it's not
gonna be sold to the private
market that's going to solve
this crisis is going to take all
of us thank you for your work
madam chair and senator I
appreciate you very much thank
you.
Thank you Representative
Martinez Representative Harper
and just a heads up
Representative just got your
hand is still up which
ultimately might confuse us.
Thank you madam chair and
Senator Rodriguez it's so
wonderful to see you this
morning I I'm really happy to
see you yeah I wish we were in
person but yes thank you for
being here I hope you're doing
well
president of a small also thank
you.
Many of my.
Questions have already been
answered by
response to Representative Scott
and.
Your Martinez so I I appreciate
that I.
I'd like to have just a brief
comment and then and perhaps a
very serious proposal that I'd
like you to consider madam chair
and senator.
so so first I'm I think all of
us understand there is currently
a strange housing bubble.
Real estate bubble right now
that
I think is being caused by
simply a lack of inventory and
and great demand.
and and I understand how.
Increasing inventory could
allow for perhaps some of that
pressure to come down.
I had a great conversation with
our.
But Mister Hernandez earlier
this week and and I appreciate
the time that he spent speaking
with me about that as well I'm I
guess my my first comment is I'm
I'm not really sure how this
helps was almost this.
the vast majority vast vast vast
majority of homeless.
Individuals are those who need
treatment for mental health
disorders for substance abuse
these are not.
People who are trying to find a
an apartment and just can't find
one that that that's that's not
a problem we're we're trying to
address here
so I just wanted to make a
statement and madam chair and
senator please correct me if I'm
wrong.
Thank you madam chairman and
good to see you too
Representative Harper know your
question is right on because
that is the reason that MFA has
this coordination going with the
with the health and Human
Services department because we
have the link you just program
and that Fund or that line item
there in the Human Services
Department is always under
funded also so we need we really
need to get some comprehensive
whole year on the issue because
this is how they work with HSD
they they they HSD issue
vouchers for example out for
people to help with the system
for rental in whatever maybe for
housing but they only have
enough funding for three hundred
vouchers we're trying to
increase that they can work on
issues together addressing
mental health issues behavioral
health issues substance abuse
issues and and so on we know
that there's a huge link between
a lack of housing and these
issues that we're talking about
I really think we're gonna say a
lot of money in the future by
helping people in this
comprehensive behavioral health
system thank god chair and
senator yes thank you I I
completely agree with you on
that and I understand housing
vouchers issue I appreciate you
bring it up but I mean that that
the very recent example is the
the small houses homeless
that was that.
Just open up in Albuquerque
I can remember how many units
there are something like around
twenty but only two of them are
occupied the other the rest of
them are not and and the reason
is they these folks have to
agree to be clean from substance
abuse to be there and so
to me that says if if the main
goal here is to help
homelessness this is not the
solution but chair Mister
Rodriguez
I understand that that is not
the main purpose of this
legislation so I'd like to move
on to them to make the main
purpose I just want to make that
that point
chair and senator so.
So again our bodies questions
right answer already so this
fund has been in place this
And this what is working on this
since since two thousand five.
Over those years we've had about
twenty seven million dollars
total.
Go into the fund
the FIR we've had a little bit
go in the last couple years.
looks like.
five million for FY twenty two
one point two million for FY
twenty one two million for FY
twenty but that nothing for FY
nineteen or nothing for FY
eighteen right so it's I can
understand that it's challenging
right we don't have these
funding streams coming and.
So.
So I want to talk just a little
bit about the severance tax how
it's distributed and then why I
think we might.
I'd like to propose that we
consider doing something
slightly different here thank
you your thoughts on it.
So severance taxes you know
those those.
Just just so folks are aware
when we sever minerals you know
not just I guess many minerals
from public land there's a
severance tax.
It comes out and we bonded
against that tax every year.
And then.
That bonding amount consider
that to be a pie.
have set up is I believe it's
fifty five percent of those
dollars go to public school
capital outlay so I'm you know
the the SUNY.
lawsuit and settlement the state
pays a substantial part of
public school buildings and and
that you know K. to twelfth so
we have this public school
capital outlay takes more than
half that right off the bat.
And we have these other
earmarked as well we have nine
percent of the money that goes
to water projects four point
five percent goes to tribal
projects four point five percent
goes to colonias projects.
And then a certain percentage
goes to the severance tax
permanent fund
and in the leftovers are what we
use as capital outlay the
executive and legislative
capital outlay.
And so what we're talking about
here.
Is putting a an additional two
point five year mark on that and
when you look at how that pie is
set up.
What that means is that it will
decrease the amount of
legislative.
N. executive capital outlay
projects every year.
And it's not just by two point
five percent because it's two
point five percent of the peice
so when you look at the decrease
in our projects.
you know this is twenty five
million dollars essentially here
you so that you know
you know thirty thirty third
you're looking at you know
roughly a Tanisha percent
decrease in everyone's capital
out so I just wanna make sure
folks understand that's the
mechanism how this works and now
hi there Madam Martin center
Rodriguez is that your
understanding of how this works
as well thank you madam no I'm
Representative and thank you for
your information as you.
But that is not the case if I
may with all due respect because
this Monday the two and a half
percent that would come out of
the of the bonding capacity
would not be taken from your
capital specifically or for
infrastructure it would go back
to each community and make a
much bigger difference with job
growth receipts tax and
development economic development
and so on whether relation
programs and so on because it
will be earmarked specifically
for housing needs all over the
state and so again because the
word infrastructure is where we
are we're not changing that
we're just making a commitment
we're saying we recognize the
problem we have to have
sustainable funding for
infrastructure development and
this is where it's that might
think madam chairman
Representative just briefly for
the sake of time
you may have voted last year
Representative Harper from my
bill Senate bill twenty seven
passed I'm pretty sure
unanimously in the Senate and
the house that built actually
allowed we have the affordable
housing trust fund to be used
for weatherization not only
building homes and apartments an
affordable housing but it allows
it for to provide for assistance
with that the American
disabilities act and it would be
pursuant to the rules of the
fund and so it is going to
continue separately for housing
needs and infrastructure so I
wanted just to make that point
and one last thing Madam
chairman maybe up Representative
Harper I think some crucial in
this bill is that if I might put
a provision in there that if the
funds are not encumbered within
a three year period this is to
ensure that it goes into a
portable housing this quickly as
possible that they would revert
back this is different than the
colonias attempt and the water
project funds this has district
provision in there that they
would revert back into the
severance tax.
Insurers thank you.
madam chair and Senator thank
you that that's actually segue
perfectly into what I was
wanting to ask next I just wanna
say I'm you and I are saying the
same thing
the way this bill is structured
in the way the the severance tax
permanent funds are distributed
through this pie it does
decrease the legislative and
executive capital outlay
projects by roughly ten percent
but.
Blake you state
these projects are just
essentially shifted to be
affordable housing projects
throughout the state and and you
know I'm I would hope that
they're pretty much evenly
distributed so that you know
we're we're you know I don't
know maybe they be a little bit
more urban than rural but
Madam chair and senator that's.
That's understand how how the
how the math works thank.
Gap so so here sure those my I'd
like you to really and and the
committee really just think
about this proposal and why and
I'll tell you why this is
important so.
You mentioned madam chair and
senator that this has I think a
very interesting provision that
says if.
To dollars do not getting cover
within three years they revert
back.
And and I think that's that's a
great provision pressure put on
on my I'm many more of our
earmarks.
But I think there's a difference
here when you look at the water.
Projects in the tribal colonias.
Those funds are not a revolving
fund.
Right it's not a it's not a loan
project those are grants.
Yes my understanding is is a
loan revolving loan fund.
I'm and so in this case you
almost want to see the balance
grow.
and and that way it becomes kind
of more self sufficient and it
has an ability to fund more
projects.
And so.
I think that's that's a big
difference and so madam chair
center address is I'm I really
love your thoughts the committee
spots on this what I think is
probably a better way to execute
this bill.
I'm I would suggest that we
strike that reversion language
And and allow the ODS Authority
to
you know if it can cover all
that money immediately that's
okay because it's revolving fund
it'll get out there and what it
build up that's okay it's not
like this graph Representative
structure of the others your
marks.
I'm.
Change for that.
Let's look at perhaps a a ten
years seven or ten year phase
out of the or at least a
reevaluation.
So we can see do they have
enough money now that they're
able to I mean eventually
they're gonna have enough money
in there that they can fund all
the projects orders get you
putting more morning money in
there right I mean I'd like to
have an option for the
legislature to come back and re
evaluate and and say okay we've
put in you know two hundred
million
and yet we still need more
what's what's extended you know
I seven years or you know
they're in a great place now
let's let's face this out.
chair and senator what what are
your what your thoughts are
madam chairman thank you
Representative Harper always
have that good idea and a lot of
the things were thought out and
and discussed but there are
several legislators and that
felt that we need to have some
provisions then there with
housing prices the way it is we
need to have the assurance that
within three years we are going
to see a pretty profound impact
positive impact on housing in
the MFA actually suggested which
I think is admirable to imposed
on
three year three year limit
because they feel that the very
reasonable time for them to be
able to deploy these funds based
on their experience and so
we like to keep that in there we
can always as the legislature as
we don't come back look at in
the future but I think that we
need to having started this now
Madam chair representative I
believe we need to leave the
bill as it is a striking any
provision right now would really
sabotage the bill because we
only have six days left isn't
with today or seven grabber it
is and this trouble hearing
Senator Rodriguez or thank you
okay can thank you can you hear
me now madam can you hear me
Madam chairman I will speak
louder can you hear me.
Well I guess we.
Can you hear me Madam chairman I
would I don't know what happened
your first Senator I'm not sure
I don't think it's on here and I
think it's on the hearing and
because you're perfectly.
Loud and clear to myself I I
don't know anybody else having
trouble hearing you gonna.
One
we can hear fine thank you very
much you're more I thought we
had crashed right in the middle
so and just briefly we have a
little bit of a of a discrepancy
here the ten percent we had our
economists look at the impact it
would have an individual capital
outlay and it was so minuscule
that you would be ten percent it
would be basically and again
because it's in fiscal year
twenty four we don't know what
the bonding capacity is that
based on history and the
forecast they do it could be
fifty thousand dollars
Seventy five thousand dollars of
an impact that's pretty
minuscule when you think of how
how far this whole bill would go
in getting affordable housing
weatherization for the low to
mid and so sorry to interrupt
you
I just wanted to let you know
that Representative Chandler got
the doctor's name and she'll be
right shell be insurance all
thank thank you thank you for
that yeah we'll we'll wait here
a second no prior.
One hear me here.
I can hear you just fine Senator
and thank you for and that.
All again just keep are are a
regular Mason's real format
speaking through the chair here
I will wait for her to get back
but
chair and senator
So I.
The masses not that challenging
right if it's twenty five
million dollars a year that
would be coming out of.
The leftovers which is what the
legislative and executive can
cap what we have you take twenty
five million divided by three.
That's eight point three
million.
So Sir for the governor service
Senator for the house gonna be
eight point three million last
for the house to divide that by
seventy members that's a hundred
twenty thousand dollars less per
member.
And and if we.
And the House usually get about
one million.
one point five million that's
you know roughly ten fifteen
percent less so that's that's
the that's the simple math.
I'm not worried about that I'm
not saying Hey I need that extra
money that's not that's not the
argument here right I'm just
making sure people understand
that's the impact.
Senator I I appreciate your
saying about not wanting to make
changes to the bill I mean this
is this last topic because the
for next and we have plenty of
time for concurrence in the in
the Senate so we can make
changes.
and I also understand you'd like
to keep that three year
reversion in there I think and I
think that we should do that on
other things so I'm I'm not
gonna push hard to to to take
that out I I mean I'm I would
even say maybe give them five
years I know how long it takes
for projects started.
but I I do really think we
should look seriously at putting
I stand Senator seven or ten
years on this
if over the last almost twenty
years they've gotten twenty
seven million and now we're
talking about giving them twenty
five million year after year
after year after year.
I don't know if they can deploy
all that
And.
And.
So I I really think I'm and and
Representative for their
Martinez mention this as well I
really think we should look at.
You know a generous you know
Senator ten years is very
generous but looking at
a sunset on this and madam chair
and senator I'd love to hear
thoughts about that thank you
madam chairman and
representative thank you for
that we thought about that too
the funds that really already in
the bill pretty much Clyde the
three year limitation that we're
giving mortgage finance already
already is even stricter
limitations they themselves are
agree they've requested the time
frames that they can show how
much they can do their very calm
they can deploy this money
within that time madam chairman
let me just briefly and that
with that that the very purpose
of the bill is to limit the were
due to take out some of those
strict limitations that have
been in place by not having
recurring funding and so to put
a sunset clause is to go
backwards and inhibit their
ability to proceed we need to
make sure they know they have
this funding to continue to
build as as as necessary so
that's I would have to I can't
support the any amendment
representative madam chairman
thank you very much for your
recommendation but we will look
at it and I think we need to
continue to add more funding in
the future general fund or other
forms of funding thank you.
Well then hearing center I.
I I understand I appreciate
where you're coming from so I I
you're you're you're.
No no no argument there
I I do just really.
This like these earmarks we keep
making on the severance tax
revenues and and here adding
another one.
and and I.
Even though I support the
concept and and and would love
to to have the.
They have this revenue stream
and I just.
You know what's without without
some.
Assurance that that.
this won't last for ever that we
can just get the fund in a great
place
and then and then well those
service tax dollars to to flow
back to other projects or or
even back to the fund I just
have a hard time supporting this
but I really appreciate the time
and your efforts and budget
again great to see you.
Senator Rodriguez thank you
madam chairman thank you
Representative Harper.
Hello thank you Representative
Harper I am hearing through my
assistant's computer what we try
to get correct what's going on
with mine so thank you for that
Representative Carol Lujan.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members are.
A really big thank you to
Sanchez Representative small and
usually tear Senator Rodriguez
for all your work that you've
done on this.
Thank you Jim I I I was on the
oversight committee for MFA
during in terms this is.
Why thank you.
Can you hear me I'm sorry to
hear some background noise and I
just you know saw the formation
of this and I know Senator
Rodriguez is work in this so.
This capacity in which is
reporting yes I do remember your
legislation Senator last year
the revisions that you're right
and I thank you for that as well
I think this piece of
legislation is very responsible
I think it's thorough I think
it's compassionate in issuing
the compassionate leadership
that we are tasked to.
To do and be legislative leaders
As far as what you know we are
incurring right now it would
take as mentioned and and
correct me if I'm wrong madam
chair Senator did you say was
the billions of dollars to
correct what we or to help with
that the issue at hand with the
with housing.
Madam chairman Representative
Lujan thank you good to see you
yes very much so as a matter of
fact even just whether eyes the
homes for low income right now
would be one point six billion
defer whether Ivey Soto building
homes would be even more it's it
would cost approximately it's
just your to improve just two
point five percent of sub
standard an older homes it would
cost a hundred thirty six
million so there's a great need
out there that we're trying to
to me.
Thank you madam madam chair and
senator and how would this or
does this prioritize what we
need to do with with capital
projects in our communities
based on this need Madam
chairman and Representative
Lujan it would more it would
have an impact on on how you
prioritize all your other
infrastructure capital outlay
this year would prioritized and
and I guess allocated but I'm
trying to find allocate the
specific funding that would go
for housing so we don't we would
have to allocate that in the
future it's a it would be
recurring every year basing on
based on the bonding capacity.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for that response and I know
myself in the capital projects
that I have wanted and look at
really a bait and even my junior
signing are really based on on
those needs of our community and
I know in my community and
across our state this is been
one of the top issues if not
what at the top issue right now
we know that we have also
increase and then you homeless
population due to this pandemic
and so thank you for really
structuring this piece of
legislation where you have
My last question really goes to
the Economic Development points
how do you how do you receive
this through the question that
we had as this is the economic
development and really
mitigating the the the risk that
is involved with the certainty
of of development in contracts
and workforce madam chair
Senator thank you.
Thank you Representative Lujan.
Having development you know is
is that there's a great need for
that too in New Mexico from
economic development is here now
we would get back not only jobs
more jobs that are still needed
in New Mexico but we would also
have more gross receipts taxes
at the same time because there's
builders building and and so on
and then of course everything
that they all been done is is
pursuant to all our prevailing
wages the loss we having
prevailing wages to ensure the
adequate and fair treatment of
employees and workers and and so
on
it is that answer your question
or maybe have the help is that
answer it the president
Representative madam chair
Senator and less I wanted to ask
something about you that the
amount of taxes that this would
increase if you have any numbers
that would be appreciated but I
don't know if you already had I
was late to this competition
presentation but I just I just
want to say that you know this
this also has at the time the
time frame already within the
structure of of the bill as well
so I really think that this is
a.
Legislation and that we move
forward with it's it's just so
full circle and I it's past time
as mentioned before past time
that we really work on these
real solutions that integrate
and incorporate all of these
elements that you have put
inside this piece of west
legislation and I can't speak
highly enough of the MFA and the
work in the the the way that
they mitigate risk with their
proven record that they've had
for our state so I have every
confidence that they are going
to do what it takes and have
take on the fiscal
responsibility as board and I
really support this thank you
madam chair thank you senator
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
Representative Rod Montoya.
I thank you madam chair and
thank you senator and Senator.
The mention a couple of times
that I've got to say really
appreciate the work that you've
done within the in FY FAA
oversight committee and the the
passion you have for this it is.
Shaded on the side of the aisle
your thoughtfulness on the
subjects concerning housing
issues
But madam chair and and and
And Senator it it's been
mentioned a couple of times
homelessness.
And you know that.
I I believe Representative
Harper you know made it fairly
clear this really is not about
the homeless.
Problem but this is really
specifically about the current
housing problem and affordable
for us but we can say worker
housing might be a good term I I
know what I've traveled around
to tell us and some of smaller
communities Red River angel fire
some of those small resort
communities are having a hard
time with the housing for for
people who are working in those
communities where the
property valuation Judas just
skyrocketing.
And the here in Santa Fe the the
homes.
Some homes here in silence in
Santa Fe are going for.
Six hundred dollars plus a
square foot which is driving at
the market.
Very high.
And that and madam chair and
senator that's really what I
want to focus discussion on is
is what the current housing
market.
How that is actually contributed
to the.
Shortage of affordable housing
the rental market
and what's going on there
And what I I believe as a
realtor.
what I see potentially coming
and so
Senator.
The currently what's happening
in in even in Farmington where
we lost.
You know it's a short period of
time we lost six thousand
people.
and in a very short period of
time just a couple years ago
right now every home sold a home
is occupied.
whatever we lost we've came back
and but what we see happening
is.
With the.
The homes that we we considered
affordable housing in the past
on the secondary market you know
or what on the resale market not
brand new homes.
They're going now for.
Ten fifteen percent over what
they were selling for.
Three years ago two three years
ago and it's just increase that
much so the affordability factor
is is been.
Dramatic and a lot of a lot of
of the investors buying up that
property which means they're
paying that much more than
that's they're charging that
much more in rents
and.
But as we've discussed in in MFA
oversight committee even this
year concern I I really have is
is a is a bubble.
I have a concern that
when.
Of this you know the the this
the intervention that government
has had with a rent with the
rental market.
I'm very concerned that in just
a couple years that and and is a
and I have had this conversation
that just a couple years
There could be a lot of of of
those homes on the market again.
So.
I I look at this as a kind of a
short term problem so I.
I actually I actually like the
three year.
provision that you have in there
because I think this is a
specific housing shortage.
Right now and with there being a
reversion.
A provision in here
I I think this I think that's
actually really good for the
specific problem that MFA is
trying to address and I actually
think that.
All the by the third year we may
be in a position where
development will slow because of
that the correction the market
will take place in the housing
market.
And if not surely for years that
are five years out we'll see a
correction so the idea of there
being a revision
Moment to this I I I do like
that I think it may answer.
Problem the the sunset problem
in a different manner than what
Representative Harper was was
talking about and I agree with
Representative Harper I think it
should be a lot more of the
bills that we see come through
here.
any thoughts on on that Senator
on the housing market and what
we think may be happening in two
years three years out thank you
madam chairman thank you
Representative Montoya thanks
for serving on the MFA for
hearing the needs throughout the
the interim is a can you respond
to that for the sake of time
please thank you.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Rodriguez and Center are
mentally Act thank you for your
question I you know we are
obviously we we took a very
close look at the bill we feel
very comfortable with the
reversion language.
And I I hope you are correct I I
will tell you that that the the
bubble that you're mentioning
here with regard to maybe not
building enough homes out there
in the increased prices that's
one not one factor here the
other factors that that maybe
that doesn't addresses the if
you.
We saw in the for the fiscal
impact reports that there's also
many homes that are sub standard
don't have enough plumbing or
full kitchens so there's a lot
of we have needs out there so
this money could help address
some of that as well and mention
an example earlier we and we all
know that we have an aging
population in New Mexico so even
we have on their homes to do
some modifications are I think
there's a vast need out there
one example that one of the
presenters mentioned a little
earlier or commenters was on the
public housing side and just
with three agencies responding
to the R. to the R. to the
survey that was done there's
about forty million dollars in
projects that funds that are
needed to bring some of the
homes up to standards that that
doesn't take into account the
other twenty plus that.
Accounting agencies that are out
there so I I do think there's a
great need I don't know that
three years I will say help us
solve everything but I can
assure you that MFA will not do
its best to deploy these funds.
And if we need to reverse some
funds at the end of the three
years if they're not encumbered
we would be happy to do that
that we do not want to be
sitting on a lot of fun.
The going usually want to make
sure that to put to use and we
we believe that that three year
reversion clause in there and
the use of the program income
first is that just a great way
to maybe address some of the
concerns of the legislators have
so hope that addresses your
question Senator I
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr Nando's
I.
As far as as this
Madam chair and senator as far
as this.
cutting into what it would
actually cut into our capital
outlay dollars and the
governor's capital outlay
dollars it I I I I see that
argument but I do know right
now.
I'm being in this industry the
housing the the affordable
housing is it is critical all
across the state right now so
from a infrastructure
standpoint.
And from a.
Critical needs standpoint
currently this is a very big
need much bigger than it's been
in the past.
In COVID exacerbated that I
think
people moving from other states
to New Mexico has has it also
because this this problem to be
a real problem right now
The they as I mentioned earlier
the resort towns are growing
like crazy with people who are
moving here from from other
states to live in our mountains
near our resorts and
Unfortunately what happened it's
it's priced.
Well who work there and provide
the services in each of these
communities is price them out of
the market
so I I don't have a I actually
like the idea if of investing in
the infrastructure or in the
issue that is currently at hand
and I and if this were gonna be
addition.
To
on top of.
What.
We get in capital outlay dollars
if this would be out of the
severance tax on I I have I
could support this at all.
so the way this is being
handled.
I prefer the way this is being
handled but the.
Is budget but we talked earlier
I I think.
The the amount of dollars that
you that MFA leverages.
you know the up you know
operative all in FY twenty seven
twenty seven one and that's just
dramatic and so anything that we
can do it through MFA is.
It's just though the work that
you guys I wish everything else
that we did and government have
that type of return
but it's so I I don't have any
problems with this whatsoever I
don't have a problem with where
how the this bill has been.
Put together but I'm not gonna
be able to support and I will.
The against I'm not gonna be
able support seeing how the
company that I work for will
likely be.
Rackley working with MSA on
projects around the state to
address this issue and.
But
World that we live in today I
even though this would be
specifically just to help the
company that I work for it would
help the company I work for and
I just.
I'm reluctant to put myself in a
position where criticism can
come just because I support
something I thought was a good
idea whether or not it.
that is a company that I that I
work for but I I I like the way
this bill as written I would
like to see Senator and and
everyone on this committee I
would love to see us going
forward see a provision with the
revision.
Component to it as
Representative as a
Representative Harper suggested
so Senator Rodriguez good luck
with this bill
I A. M. unfortunately just not
going to be able to vote one way
or the other on this.
Thank you thank you madam
chairman thank you.
Madam chair your muted I got it
I'm Representative Cadena.
Yes madam chair thank yet
realize that was next I
certainly walked into this
morning's presentations filling
support for this legislation and
over the course of this
conversation.
Have had a few more insights
listening to this debate that I
wanted to share.
Impart madam chair.
And committee members Senator.
One of the things that we begin
to consider is the impact on the
S. TV dollars and certainly I
understood that implication I
understood that before we
started this morning's
conversation and for me.
This actually rings to some of
the equity questions I've had
about our capital outlay process
over many years now and what
remains significant and true for
me is that in the body of a
seventy members we each so far
getting equal split of those
dollars once their both
collected by the state and then
put into this this bucket of of
resources for us to share and as
someone that represents a fairly
Consolidated we're urban
district I can make those
dollars go much further and
that's even just being in Los
crucis New Mexico's second
biggest city but when I look at
my colleagues to the west of
where I exist they are covering
huge stances of of geography
with the same amount of dollars
so one of the things that's
become intriguing to me this
morning madam chair is that idea
of that by.
Putting these funds into a
different pot basically so that
there could be a statewide plan
led by and resource by experts
you trust like the New Mexico
finance authority that there
might actually be as been argued
a different impact that not only
addresses what the underlying
and foundational housing states
are that our family space but
also potentially could get into
this this frustration that I've
always had that real New Mexico
frankly deserves more of these
dollars that they're getting
well folks like me are certainly
my colleagues in Albuquerque
have the same amount of dollars
and and can use them very
differently also madam chair
Senator I I didn't I was in a
different committee when you
started this presentation but if
you might speak to some of your
insight and and share how you
think in particular we could
have an equity lens when it came
to showing up for rural New
Mexico should remove these
dollars towards these efforts.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you Representative have and not
for your work out in your
passion always for these issues
yes I think one of the greatest
problems that we have is is
trying to meet the need in rural
communities that's always been a
problem now because we have not
had enough funding that
sustainable and that we can
count on it's been difficult to
grow the the the work that's
been done in New Mexico even
about the MFA leverages twenty
nine to one of return for every
dollar we but in they get twenty
nine dollars back you know it's
been difficult to do that if we
put the sustainable recurring
funding in there that they'll be
able to count on to continue to
build and I know that one of the
greatest priority is focusing on
rural areas also because there's
a great need there so maybe an
answer your question madam
chairman Representative Bakrie
is the answer to our and Rebecca
from the MFA to talk to you can
say more about it.
Madam chairman Representative is
that answer your question if not
is this with.
Appreciate hearing a little bit
more and just even specifically
For instance I would want to I
could potentially imagine myself
supporting a preference towards
rural New Mexico or just even
like different considerations
when the dollars were actually
allocated out.
Thank you thank you is the can
you respond to that Madam chair
and Representative got enough
thank you very much for the
question MFA is a statewide
housing agency are we provide
our funds and we have thirty
plus programs and we it does a
range and the are being used
across the full state that not
just in the metro areas I'll
just give you one example from
up this last year that we just
concluded we were able to
provide loans or programs in
thirty one of the thirty three
counties the two counties that
were not assisted was quite a
little bay and Harding I believe
obviously with very small
populations and will live try
to.
See how we can assist them with
regard to the housing trust fund
we brought up X. been able to
use all funds across the state
sixteen different counties for
those counties are you MSAs this
year Albuquerque Dona Ana Santa
Fe a bigger counties but the the
other
Twelve counties have been all
rural county so there's
definitely a big emphasis that
and there's a need across the
state and we make sure that the
funds that go across the state
and not we've done a very good
track or to use in in the rural
areas as well as in the metro
areas I hope that addresses your
question.
It does madam chair and senator
an expert I guess I'm just also
also trying to take a it's my
sense although in New Mexico.
Always be under resource and and
not have enough dollars to meet
the immense and gigantic needs
of our families particularly
those that are housing unstable
but it it is real that more
urban environments have
different resources and can use
dollars to stretch differently
so I I'm just trying to
articulate that I'd actually
think I'd like this even more if
there was a preference in
priority given to rural
communities that are struggling
in different ways but I'll move
on for now just wanted to make
that point clear in particular
because it if it's a shift from
dollars we might otherwise
expand in our capital outlay
allocations then I I would be
more so comfortable doing that
should there be a focus on real
New Mexico I just wanted to also
came in for a second I have some
experts from down home and in
district thirty three that have
certainly let led the way and in
positioning New Mexico as a
model state when we're thinking
creatively and and moving
investments and innovations to
care for our families that our
housing and stable so I am proud
today that we have on our zoom
Nicole Martinez executive
director of Community of Hope
and so I've certainly been
hearing from experts like nickel
and others who work on housing
and homelessness every day one
of the examples I wanted to
raise is that of course we've
heard over the course of this
conversation that this is in
fact not about homelessness I
would argue that it absolutely
is homelessness exists in great
part because of our lack of
affordable housing
another piece an example I'd
like to sign up from home we.
Students desert hope apartments
moving forward a project like
this could absolutely have used
NM trust funds for gap funds
through the desert hope program
they were able to end
homelessness for forty people in
two months
when we talk about the
permanency and possibilities in
this fund of course as tax
principles I I certainly support
the considerations we make.
review through sunset process
but I also just want to say out
loud that housing needs are not
going to go away from the data
that we have with MFA that sides
we would need over one billion
dollars just to accommodate the
growth in the next five years we
think particularly about
reducing that housing costs and
housing burdens for folks at
lower incomes we're looking at
over nine hundred million
dollars annually so I certainly
think the resource would be well
spent but also want to name that
I I think it's important that we
continue to consider the ways
that we make these policy
decisions as folks that take
these votes and and making sure
we give our self review and
justification so that we can
continue to use state dollars to
to their highest impact I think
that's it for me now
Madam chair but really
appreciate the conversation and
again want to make sure that
we're centering the I heart it
harder to reach folks in rural
communities as we move this
project forward should not
happen today.
Thank you thank you madam
chairman and thank you
Representative because then I'll
just briefly because I know time
is getting short of the MFA
through their rule for the
housing of the affordable
housing trust fund rules and so
on are they can make sure that
as they do now but we can assure
you as they come back to present
to the LFC for accountability
every summer you know we can
stay on top of that to make sure
that we get reports on where the
funding is being in the in that
deployed to and why and they're
very good about generating those
records were very happy to get
with you on that to ensure I
come from a rural community
where we have nothing truly I'm
absolutely and so I fully agree
that a lot of this funding I
need to be on focus towards
those areas that need it the
most that don't have other
opportunities that you've got my
support on that to continue to
work on on that and ensure thank
you.
Thank you.
Representative Lente.
Thank you madam chairwoman R.
good morning Senator good
morning in a small because you
both.
I've been listening into the
conversations and R. morning
and.
Find a very fascinating and who
can argue with our wanted to
help the homeless population of
those that don't have access to
the house which I think many of
us thank you madam Senator
Rodriguez in your beginning take
for granted and so but my
question is related to those
that I represent largely in the
native American communities how
much of this money goes to help
those in need right American
communities given their unique
land status thank you madam
chairman Representative good
morning is it can you respond to
that.
Thank you.
Yes Madam chair representative
but Lente day.
MFA through the housing trust
fund has allocated some funds on
on tribal lands I don't have
those numbers right exactly in
front of me right now but I can
get him for you.
We've done some stuff in Santo
Domingo we do a lot of stuff in
son family pay
we've done our staff in San Juan
County planning.
Ranges that the fiscal.
The state if you were out so I
can definitely get some exact
numbers for you here
Representative Wednesday night
and send them your way.
Mr speaker so.
Okay but Madam chairwoman and
and and senator thank you for.
That information that that's
going to.
Make a whole lot of difference
regards to how I approach to
support this type of initiative.
The sentiments from
Representative Cadena related to
equity I want to make sure that
that we are making sure that we
are sharing the fruits of of of
of of everyone's labor equally a
around the state regardless of
that there colonias or middle of
Albuquerque or tribal lands
because at the end of the day I
want to make sure that that we
can feel so proud there were
affecting everybody equally and
I think this goes a long way
when we talk about people being
homeless and people.
Being with without a home page
NET make might be the same thing
but when I think about
homelessness I think a lot about
those folks that are within the
tribal communities that.
Don't have access to affordable
housing I don't have access to
housing because they tried a
Pueblo nation can't invest in
the infrastructure necessary to
build housing are
establishments and then it goes
to the issue of one that just
domino effects the one that I
think most recently we all
witnessed are publicly and that
is the COVID epidemic where many
of our.
Our tribal members are living in
multi generational households of
sometimes by choice sometimes
just because of the necessity
and that created a whole lot of
issue will not being able to
isolate or not being able to to
protect themselves because the
all in one household to get it
so this is a huge issue in
tribal our areas across the
state and so I would not want to
see
our tribal nations are forgotten
when we think of of homelessness
is more of an urban issue so
with that being said Senator
thank you Representative small
thank you madam chair will.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you representative Lente and and
be assured that that that tribal
communities would always be at
the forefront we will be hearing
from the MFA if we always do
reporting back on this during
the interim so we will ask all
those tough questions and that
we stand behind you and
supporting.
There needs be sure that thank
you.
Thank you senator sent thank you
Representative chairman Monday
Representative and share Romero.
Thank you madam chair I just
want to thank the sponsors and
for everyone for sticking with
us through this really awesome
debate and I just want to thank
my colleagues for their
thoughtfulness on really betting
through this potential bill
but many my colleagues know that
housing is been one of my
focuses through this pandemic
knowing that we've had a housing
crisis and I just feel compelled
to be able to just say that what
we're asking for in this and I
know there's the consideration
of a sunset is that we have
billions of dollars in need of
building projects across the
state right now and with the I
don't know if anybody really
touched on the FIR but we're
talking about one hundred and
seventeen thousand households
that are cost burdened right now
and we talk about the equity of
where we see this fund going and
thankfully I said on the NMFA's
interim committee so I do get to
see these quite a bit is that
the need is so great across the
state for affordable housing
that we really need to
invest as much as we can so that
the tiny proportion that we're
asking for this is going to have
such a massive impact for our
state considering that we
haven't made a significant
investment in housing as a state
even understanding that there's
a twenty one twenty nine to one
return on investment right now
I'm I think it's an excellent
investment no we've touched on
of the possibility of having a
sunset I'd love to hear from the
the
experts as well on this is that
when we think about how much
we're asking for in the twenty
five million and the billions of
dollars that are required for
these projects and the tiny
amount of folks who are capable
and and interested in trying to
develop these projects being
yeah sure it's to be able to
have that development at a
certain spot on the subsidy to
be able to look at that
development so for even thinking
of.
About ten years out or something
beyond I think it's important
for us to understand that the
need is now and probably for the
next twenty five years minimum
for what we need to develop out
into and so I'd love to hear
from the from the Sanchez
experts on on you know why no
sunset and what was why was that
decision made I think it's
important for us to to to
understand why it's so important
to not have that at this time
thank you madam chairman thank
you Representative Andrea Romero
you've been around key player in
all of this thank you for
serving on the MFA yes we the
the purpose for not having a
something just because we
already have a year limitation
there they have the funding the
funds in there will come back to
the severance tax bond fund
after three years if in fact
they're not encumbered for
projects and so the purpose the
main purpose of the bills to
give them a sustainable form
that they can count on and if we
start putting limitations on it
that is back to nonrecurring
basically which is what we have
now and so we have to give them
at least three years at a time
to be able to use the funds to
ensure that the funds are being
deployed and actually as I said
earlier the MFA requested to
have that restriction they want
to show that they can deploy the
funds within three years and so
we already have it in there and
put a sunset clause would really
you know would really take away
the true intent of this whole
effort because the legislature
can come back any time anyway
and look at this for getting
reports the NMFA reports to the
LFC and to the legislature
direct during the year several
times that we can look at it
every half to three years in
there that thank you.
What is.
You know know that I I I think
that's version nine and again
the debates going long so you
don't want to take a more time I
think this is a huge opportunity
for our legislature to do this
for New Mexico right now we've
been waiting and I'm just
grateful for for Senator
Rodriguez is a due diligence to
this process and and
Representative small for for for
really thoughtfully looking at
how we can expand this
opportunity being that we've
asked for many many many years
to expand this this this Fund
and truly with with what we have
available today this is the time
to do it and the hundreds of
thousands of families that are
in great need really are asking
us to do this as well so I'm I
highly support this I hope
everyone else gets the
opportunity to to see that too
thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank I'm sorry Representative
Cadena Madam chair on that point
yes please.
Thank you madam chair I'm a bit
hesitant to weigh in here
because I think we're completing
a couple of conversations that
mix up how strongly we believe
in and support a program like
this and as well as the
fundamental underlying
principles of what a sense that
is so I'm both getting text
messages and hearing and debate
here that we wouldn't need a
sunset because the money would
be spent otherwise would be
reverted that is not the purpose
of a sunset the purpose of the
funds that when we think about
tax policy in this committee is
that we as policy makers and
I've certainly been lectured on
this this year and and had of my
reminders pointed at me that the
part purpose of the sunset madam
chair and Sanchez is actually so
that we can capture and and and
retain and demonstrate data and
information so that together we
can review and study whether or
not this tax policy that the
intended purpose and in turn
should either be extended or
continued so this this this
statement that if the money is
not used it will be reverted
does not actually guarantee that
that money was used to its best
impact or whether or not it met
the merits of this legislation
that I strongly support so again
madam chair I'm hesitant to say
this because I strongly support
this legislation I absolutely
believe in trust that there has
been a longstanding housing
crisis in New Mexico Mexico
decades and generations and and
in getting us to where we are
today and that these communities
and experts are deserving of
this money but I just don't want
to complete the two
conversations and say because of
that know sunset is required
frankly because it would be
inconsistent with the other ways
that we've moved legislation
conversations through this
committee I would also feel
confident if we did presented on
this that I do trust in these
experts that sure enough in
seven eight years from now they
would have log in log logs and
of.
Demonstrated as evidence that
frankly they probably would land
much farther than we even could
imagine today and that an
extension of of the funds that
are making this permanent would
be justified at this point so
I'm likely to Representative
ready to support this
legislation in either direction
but I do think I wanted to
clarify what it is that we use
the sunset provisions for in
this committee because I think
it's important to have that set
up thank you madam chair
Representative thank you thank
you Representative.
Thank you madam chair and
slide he has with us about this
and said.
it that I'd like to share cease
time late at this point in the
debate
my my concern is that if we had
a sense that here we will be
actually bringing in consistency
into the legislature's approach
to STV set aside so we have the
tribal infrastructure fund
that in my first year to speaker
I along with.
Representative Lente and Lewis
and Johnson fought very hard to
defend
Make sure it stayed in place we
have the colonias infrastructure
fund which is another S. TV set
aside and we have the funding
that goes to the water
transport.
None of those setasides I have a
sense.
And if we were to apply one year
it would be the first.
S. T. be set aside with a sunset
I thank you so I think you we
comparing SLO provided sent to a
tax expenditure where we want to
have is a sense that is a little
bit apples and oranges you know
we talk sunsets in this
committee is usually with
reference to the gross receipts
tax exemption or deduction or
it's in relation to
some other.
Yes.
Economic development.
Incentivizing tax policy
so it's it's a little apples and
oranges.
Second point I would make madam
chair is that the housing
development itself to the actual
construction of these projects
of course is not done by the
state it's done by
private developers always has
been with the MFA always will be
and we don't have the a team of
state employees who are in the
business of.
Instructing oral house so we
have to work with private
sector.
The NMFA does not provide us.
We're.
There's there's.
The.
Four global housing development
whether it's single family units
or apartments or.
Thank.
There is a private finding.
Operate on anything from eight
to two and eight year schedule
so you would get your.
Ruvo from the county commission
you get you just called title
that's that's where you go to
the commission and the approve
your master plan they approved
all of the things that go into
housing development or into an
affordable housing
Project like an apartment or
town houses we've done that here
in Santa Fe because the leg
raise most recent example
and it takes a year or two to
get all the approvals all the
water right sorted out all of
the things that go into these
developments put in place.
During that time the developers
madam chair are working with the
private side of the financing to
get everything lined up so that
they can hire contractors are
the subs do the land where do
all the utility installations
that they need to make a
development happen.
So you're three years into a
project that might be a third of
the way done.
Any that phase two and three or
maybe have faced two three four
five six.
If we have a sense that it's
going to I fear make it.
It would make this legislation
almost useless.
Unless we were to go and sit
down with the private side of
this equation and find out what
sort of sense that would work
for the banks and other
financial institutions that
participate in these
developments.
If we pick a number three years
six years nine years twelve
years we have a very very high
likelihood of getting it wrong.
Were in limiting it to only one.
Project potentially because of a
shorter time frame that would
fit within the sunset and no
bank no financial institution is
going to participate in any of
these projects if there is any
risk.
Of the state's ability to
participate ending before the
project is complete.
I I that that is an absolute
certainty so.
It I would urge the committee
not to do that one so that we
are consistent with other just
to be setasides.
To because we're very likely if
we pick a sense that we are very
very likely to.
Take the wrong number of years
with the whole thing we're
trying to accomplish here at
risk
in thirty L. just a well those
are right I'm on the point of
the sense that so I will I don't
see my third point is that those
are my thoughts about the sunset
Madam.
Representative Harper did you
wish to speak on that point.
Yes chair thank you for that and
And I understand that the
speaker's comments she was not
present so when we made the
recommendation and provided the
reasons why recommendation was
made for a sunset and so I just
want to clarify I mean this the
speaker is correct if if we were
trying to treat this as a
typical tax expenditure should
be correct this will not be
appropriate for us sunset is
also correct in saying that
We would be treating this
different than other your marks.
Currently in the severance tax
bond
statutes but this is different
and and this is why we
recommended the water
infrastructure the trouble in
the colonias infrastructure
projects are grant projects they
receive distributions and those
monies and dollars go out there
spent.
This.
It is not a grant project this
is a revolving loan project.
And very much like the bill that
we had last night where we
authorized projects for MFA.
we do that bill every year right
authorize people to apply.
We as a legislature have the
option review this list of
projects in the C. house things
are going.
And and so really I think the
the.
The genesis the the reason for
suggesting a sunset is that as
this fund continues to develop
more and more of a balance which
it should be a healthy and
healthy
revolving loan fund we should
have options to say.
Is there enough or doesn't need
more or is this doing what we
intended to do are these
projects those that we think
they should be much like how the
NMFA revolving loan fund is
currently structured.
That those were the reasons
madam chair and and that's why I
feel like that we are being
consistent thanks for the time.
Thank you Representative.
Is there anyone else besides me
with any questions.
Okay.
Senator and Representative this
bill will go through any interim
committee.
Madam chairman and now and there
was a reason for that because
during the time when we were in
our the legislation time going
fast and pandemic everything
getting we were right there with
the bill but we had to make some
minor changes on the provisions
to the Legislative Council
services on so we were not truly
or completely finalized with the
language of that time to make it
to bring an end to the
to the LFC in the intern during
the summer we didn't have but in
any other committee we did bring
it in the NMAA remember here
we brought it in but it is the
if they can respond to that to
see if we had it in them in
other committees I have
committee bills moving into
different areas can you respond
to that please.
Madam chair and Senator
Rodriguez that you are correct
that this bill that we did
discuss it in our interim
committee the legislative
oversight committee however we
did not have the bill in front
of us the in final form guys so
that it would get endorsed we
did up presented a also in
concept to the legislative
finance committee when we
presented in front of them but
it did not get endorsed by LOC
just because it was not in final
form at that point.
So
as I understand that senator and
Mr Hernandez what you're saying
is the concept was presented but
you didn't have the actual bill
in hand to enable an endorsement
is that right thank you madam
carriers that are perfectly
better than I do but the exactly
what happened that we got we
have any notes on it with our
support.
Okay and and Senator was there
any discussion of a sunset at
that time madam chairman no
there was no discussion.
For the purpose that the reason
for the bill is to let the MFA
continue to have the funding
and ongoing without the sense
that yes.
Russian.
Senator do you envision any
opportunity for us to be able to
evaluate the
I don't know if you want to call
it success of the program and or
whether or not the funds are
are.
Whether or not an opera at
sunset is appropriate thank you
madam chair for asking that
question absolutely in fact the
MFA has to appear before the LFC
in the summer and then also at
the to the interim and also
before the mortgage finance
authority which we the
legislature the oversight of
that so we will be hearing from
them throughout the summer to
evaluate what they're doing.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you
I do not see any other hands up
is correct me members if I'm
wrong happy to entertain a
motion.
Would you pass madam chair.
I'm sure.
We have a due pass from speaker
egolf a second from.
Is an F. lu Han of Kimberly
would you call the roll please.
Representative.
Yes.
Speaker you go.
Yes.
Representative Harper.
No.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative let no.
That wasn't and develop is that
someone else does stand and that
was Hernandez.
Representative Hernandez are you
no.
Representative Hernandez.
Let's move on to representative
Lente Representative Lente
Representative Lente doubles
yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative mess.
Yes.
Yes.
Madam chairman stating from the
spoke.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative Strickler.
Yes.
Going back to Representative
Hernandez a on the line.
Madam chair.
Yeah we're real quick on the
Representative Hernandez she's
picture did show up when so he
came online whenever there is
yes just prior to learn today
Representative yes
Representative Lente so I know
how you would handle that we he
came on and I'm not sure I've
I've been having connectivity
issues I had to shut all the way
down and come back on literally
just.
Representative Hernandez again.
Representative what is it about
this hear me yes.
Sorry no thank you for waiting
for me I my I. pad disconnected
as I'm trying to vote they
understand Representative a
number of us including needs
have been having similar
problems today so thank you yes
Senator Representative you have
a do pass on your bill thank you
madam chairman members of the
committee.
Okay we are now on house bill
one ninety four.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee can you hear me
OK.
Yes okay great thank you so much
I'm one ninety four changes a
percentage distribution of the
alcohol excise tax
depended upon population size of
each county to supplement
alcohol programming in alcohol
and behavior health programming
this money will be distributed
to each county and it will be
administered by each county
however it also creates a fund
through DFA
that will also be managing
distributed through the help
that Human Services Department
also to supplement alcohol and
beer behavioral health
programming I have an expert on
madam chair Dan weeks I just
wanna make sure that he's here
and then we also have an
amendment.
Is Mr weeks elevated Kimberly I
just promoted him to panelists
very good thank you.
Right while we're waiting for
that perhaps we can I can move
the amendment I can talk about
the amendment for movie please I
move the amendment for
discussion purposes thank you
the two oh two number just to be
sure is two two two five five
nine point one.
And basically what this does
madam chair is for the funding
that's created DFA the first
iteration of this draft actually
had the local government
division of DFA being on to
administer that fund and instead
the amendment changes that to
the Human Services Department.
And this was done upon advice
that we had that we had been
given from analysts and I
believe that
the department themselves.
Thank you for that did you wish
to have your expert weigh in at
this point Representative sure
madam chair he's on.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Dan
weeks Representative Mexico
Hospital association have
Bernalillo county in this
regard.
this is an earmarked tax it's a.
Has been
Out fifty percent used for the
purpose for which it is
collected.
And
We are asking the two remaining
fifty percent be used again for
what the intended purpose of the
of the tax actually is there are
some significant opportunities
to get some additional dollars
into the county governments to
address the issue of substance
and alcohol abuse.
throughout the state the second
part of this would.
Create a fund that would be
matched through Medicaid.
And through some new Sanchez
matching funds for the purpose
of again addressing the issue of
substance and alcohol abuse
the beauty of the second fund
would be there will be matched
at approximately eight point
eighty five percent.
So the twelve million dollars
that you're looking at putting
into that particular fund.
Will be
Arbitrage to.
A great extent provide much more
resources to go out in the form
of grants to providers in two
counties throughout the state so
with that we stand for questions
I think this is a excellent way
to get more services out into
the communities statewide for
this purpose.
And if I may just add madam
chair real real quick and that
was the impetus of the the
amendment is to make sure that
we get those funds to the Human
Services division so they can
make sure to maximize the
leverage of Medicaid funds and
historically throughout the
state we have had a really hard
time getting Medicaid match for
alcohol abuse programming so
this is a great way to be able
to solve that problem throughout
the state with that stand for
questions.
Thank you will now go to the
audience.
Wishing to speak in favor please
raise your hand.
Brian Moore.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on Brian Moore
with New Mexico counties we
think house bill ninety one
ninety four is a logical and
worthwhile use of liquor excise
tax revenues as we all know
folks with substance abuse
problems make up a large scale
share of jail and prison
populations we can use this
money yes it was intended to
help with this problem it can
only help counties the state and
our constituents thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Mr more
Hutch Miller.
Good morning members are
disorder share my name is
touching the intergovernmental
coordinator for Santa Fe county
and I just want to share the
Santa Fe county commissions
supporter of this piece of
legislation thank you.
Thank you Dorothy Seton.
Thank you madam chair in the
thank you the sponsor this bill
for bringing it I'm I'm speaking
now as.
As a retired drug and alcohol
counselor
thirteen years of that career
was spent in prison counseling
inmates.
In a pre release program
anything that would address the
induction problems in our
communities is helpful and so I
would like to support this bill
thank you.
Thank you.
I see no other hands raised and
support are there any members of
the attendee list to wish to
speak in opposition.
I see none let's go back to the
committee.
Representative Parker.
Thank you madam chair I I think
first I'd like to to move that
we adopt the amendment.
Is there a second thank you.
We're now on the amendment is
there any discussion of the
amendment.
I'm assuming your hands not
raised to discuss any further
all right
is there any opposition to the
amendment.
I see no opposition the
amendment is adopted you now
have an amended bill
Representative thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Mr Representative
Harper do you wish to speak to
the public health Ms yes madam
chair and representative thank
you all again I'll be very brief
I just want to say this is a all
are wonderful piece of
legislation
when I first started here ten
years ago.
I'm the tax committee there was
some legislation brought before
us to raise the liquor excise
tax.
in my very first session and it
was fascinating the industry
came and opposed it saying that.
We supported the first
imposition of the litter excise
tax because we were told you
would be used for
basically that those that are
potentially caused by that
industry D. W. I. treatment
prevention
drug court those kinds of
things.
But
sadly the legislature went back
on that promise and at that
time.
Almost all of the money from the
directors tax just went straight
to the general fund.
and so that really rubbed me and
Representative Carl for you at
the time you know Representative
this raw that that that was not
right.
And so Representative Trujillo
kind of carried the but the the
the on there and was able to get
through the house bill started
shifting those dollars back to
the counties and and other folks
for these treatment programs
with us through the house but
track seven Senate and Senate
finance they put a five year
sunset on it.
yeah yeah I mean you know how
these things work but
But over the last ten years we
have actually no move the needle
and now as you see current law
about half of that money now
goes to where it's intended.
And so and we've included in New
House before twelve you know
many of our big tax reform bills
we've included that all this
money should go toward was
promised because clearly we
haven't solved our our D. W. Y.
problem in the state right so to
following we can say well you
know good to start saying that
money to other states so I just
want to say Madam chair
representative thank you so much
for bringing this forward
obviously has a big fiscal
impact so I mean you know that
the fall of the committees
policy but as we are looking at
the tax package I really would
ask our our committee to
strongly consider whether a
portion of this for all of this
legislation could make it into
that
tax package we really need to.
We need to keep the promises
that were made to the industry
who came and supported this tax.
And then also as was mentioned
by at Mr weeks there's there's
leveraging of dollars here so
this that it's kind of a win win
so thank you madam chair and
representative for the time very
much appreciate your bring this
legislation for.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative
Hernandez.
Thank you madam chair I think
it's also one of my strong
support for this feel like and
so the state actually takes
substance abuse serious.
there's not really going to be a
movement of that needle Act
you're like this is the
beginning to make you the the
need to move so I appreciate
that.
I appreciate this legislation I
will be able.
Thank you are there other you
members who wish to speak or ask
questions.
Well this bill does have a
significant fiscal impact so it
is the policy of our committee
to temporary table we will look
at it
as a possibility for a package
but at this point in time I
think given our consistent
policy I'm happy to entertain a
motion for a for a temporary
table.
Madam chair although the gentle
temporary table of.
House bill one ninety four it is
and I will second that judges
table madam chair.
Thank you the move by
Representative Harper temporary
tables seconded by
Representative Hernandez.
Is there any opposition to the
temporary table.
I see none the bill will be
temporary table and madam chair
if I may just provide a quick
response.
The edification of the committee
there is a companion bill moving
through the Senate and we do
understand that this late of
time in the process we were
expecting in tabling but undergo
associations are still ongoing
if we can find some room
somewhere up for this we would
very very very grateful so thank
you thanks to the committee and
thank you madam chair yes thank
you very much Representative
Hochman Vigil we're on to our
next item.
Which is.
C..
House bill one eighty three.
That right motor vehicle tax
distributions.
I'm reading my agenda correctly
and Representative Rod Montoya.
Thank you madam chair yes
Okay just a up on the right now.
Thank you yes thanks for joining
us again Representative Montoya.
Actually I lost I lost the
committee again for time this
same time I've had a recent
visit to go back on and get the
link going again
yes madam chair house bill one
eighty three
is really more of a discussion
bill I don't expect this to be
able to be dealt with today but
I am hoping that we can have a
discussion today and we would
continue the discussion to the
interim and so madam chair it's
a kind of a formal request that
that I ask you to see if we can
make sure that revenue
stabilization tax policy I can
talk about this going forward
and the madam chair and members
what what one eighty three does
it's very simple it up it takes
the.
Fifty nine percent or nearly
sixty percent of the vehicle
excise tax that goes to the
general fund and puts it back
into the roads and.
Madam madam chair I have this
divided up fifty five percent of
the state road fund.
Just under nineteen percent to
the transportation project fund
and twenty just under just over
twenty six percent to the local
government road fund
I don't necessarily believe.
Madam chair that that is the
exact the proportion
of percentage that should go to
each one of these funds which
are all active funds
but.
Just like the other discussions
we've had today there are there
is a lot of federal dollars that
can be leveraged.
For a particular state highways
or I'm sorry US highways and
and the the interstate roads
that go through in New Mexico
and
we do not have.
And not money set aside for the
needs.
That's for transportation needs
for our roads
There is currently.
Let me see there's currently
the.
Eighteen presenter ninety
percent that goes to the
transportation project on which
is local road projects and there
is currently twenty one percent
twenty.
Twenty one just over twenty one
percent that goes to the state
road fund but nearly sixty
percent of this vehicle excise
tax just goes to the general
fund and and I think madam chair
I at today we've heard a theme
which is dollars not going to
where they were intended or
dollars not going to the logical
place for these tax dollars
going to the logical place where
they should be going and in
reality I would just say
this has to do with the fact
that
Each legislature likes to be
able to have as much.
Flexibility to spend money how
we so choose each session and
that's why so many dollars go to
the general fund is it's just
that.
The fact that we like to
determine what our priorities
are each session each year and
the problem with that is is a
roads have and in those who
travel state roads in particular
especially local roads
I think it's been this should
probably obvious to everyone who
travels to committee meeting
news across the state that we've
not had the commitment to the
road infrastructure that maybe
we should have so all this bill
is meant to do and I would love
to have a bit of a discussion
today on how we are can get a
steady stream of income going to
state highways and local roads
and with that the madam chair I
and the I'd like to answer a few
questions the committee has.
I think first it's appropriate
for me to go to the attendee
list to see if there are any
attendees who wish to speak on
this point I see hand raised on
this is in favor of the bill
that right Mr Silva.
And so the.
Madam chair can you hear me yes
I can okay thank you madam chair
and the thank you committee
members for you for your service
And I thank you for the sponsors
of this bill I appreciate you
doing this this bill is the best
I believe tax policy change that
that I believe is in the best
interest of the department of
transportation to becoming self
sufficient self funded
enterprise fund which is what it
should be and that means that
all transportation related
revenues should go to the
enterprise fund every year
department of transportation is
millions of dollars under funded
our current projects projects
that were funded two or three
years ago or probably the the.
Underfunded because of the
inflation that we're going
through now and the most of the
time we we tend to under fund
projects and that's the reason
for that is because of lack of
revenues many
have been critical of of bonding
that was done in the mid
nineties and the reason for that
barring that took place in the
nineties was because the vehicle
excise tax was diverted from the
department of transportation to
the general fund twenty five or
thirty years prior to that so
this is a very important issue
and I'm but I really appreciate
that the committee is taking
time to to listen to this issue
thank you for.
Looking at it and the that is to
have a transportation related
revenues to go to the department
of transportation enterprise
fund will not have to depend on
the general fund.
Thank you Mr Silva I think
you're over your time limit so
thank you for your remarks is
there anyone else.
Wishes to speak in favor.
Anyone wishing to speak in
opposition.
Okay Act to the committee.
Discussion let's see.
Representative Harper I'm
surprised.
Madam chair your very kind I'd
appreciate it thank you.
Again being cognizant of the
time but.
I I really think this this bill
and the last one.
We're are so important for us to
just spend all time here
discussing and and really focus
on during the intro.
and I made some comments in
transportation but.
All I'll just keep them short
here but there is I did get a
copy there is wonderful three
page history of the motor
vehicle excise tax it I mean it
is wonderful to read is really
really fun to read and it
started back in nineteen fifty
five and it was a one percent
tax.
And it is slowly going up over
the years but it's gone back and
forth between funding to the
general fund verses funding to
the road fund.
And in general when.
Read also say that you know it
was a really good year
when it came to general fund
revenues and that's why it was
decided to move back to the road
fund an annual read that was a
really rough year on the general
fund was moved back to our rough
you're on general fund revenues
and so the motor vehicle excise
taxes diverted to the general
fund.
So I mean it.
There's lots of history we've
done this many times and I I do
think we are experiencing a
great surplus right now so make
sense to move some of that money
over but just just a couple
thoughts.
And and then maybe a challenge
to a this committee and Russ
that as well.
so.
Z. if you look at the history of
the gasoline tax.
We really over the last decade.
Have not seen an increase like
we had the past in the amount of
revenue coming in from the
gasoline tax the last fifteen
years when you go back further
in it in its tracks like
inflation or population growth.
But we haven't seen the last ten
fifteen years and a big reason
for that is cars are now much
more fuel efficient.
and and are using less gasoline.
and so even though we've had
inflation and population growth
there's just less dollars going
into
Now the other side of that coin
no is the faster roads are
substantially gone up the cost
of materials especially waivers
gonna you know situation but
materials House materials grown
much quicker than a cost
inflation.
So I'm you know I I said I try
to be intellectually honest
consistent that our tax code
should be an out wire on the low
end or the high end and right
now our gasoline tax is a bit
low it needs to really come up
about six cents to be average
with our neighbors and so I'm.
I'm supportive of raising that
that tax and knowing that it
goes to roads I think that's
that's a good thing.
Same thing with our motor
vehicle excise tax on it was
three percent for very long time
and that's an out wire on the
low end our neighbors it really
should be closer to five or six
percent.
And if we are Devereaux's you
know that's something that I
could support to.
But as we just look further out
to
Like electric vehicles and and I
I really believe that and in one
maybe two decades.
We'll have more electric
vehicles on the roads and we
have combustion vehicles.
I'm.
And right now they don't
contribute anything to our road
I.
And in several states have
looked at other ways to generate
revenue for road fund and I just
would like to challenge this
committee and I are very
challenging from a
transportation need to what's
what's stop talking about it
must be serious.
About looking at restructuring
how we fund our roads.
Whether that means we include a
weight based feed in our yearly
registration that would account
for essentially what we were
paid in gasoline tax.
I think that's a great idea.
we can also look at some other
states have implemented a.
Kind of a monitoring how many
miles you've traveled and then
there's a fee based on how many
miles your vehicles travel.
Are there some chap issues with
that one is privacy but another
is not I don't but my car not
every mileage drivers in New
Mexico.
So you know how do you have your
portion that property but I
think it's if you're on the bush
talk about this for some years
in a row I think the time is
right and I would just ask madam
chair that we
as part of the rest out yeah we
we give a good you know half day
maybe even more to talking about
our our funding streams for for
roads and put together a
proposal that we endorse that is
forward thinking instead of
playing catch up.
those are my comments chair
representative if you have
anything you'd like to add.
Yes thank you madam chair
representative Harper.
Yes I think
if we can just as much as
possible tie the fees that we
pay.
For at for the privilege of
being able to drive on roads to
the maintenance of those roads
that that makes the most sense.
when we talk about to the we're
we're talking about them.
Alcohol tax.
Previously and having that go
for treatment treatment makes
the most sense if we're gonna be
whatever whatever.
Damage or whatever
Use
that there is out there it it
would make the most sense to to
connect the two but madam chair
and representative of Harper I'm
glad you brought up that the
fuel efficiency of vehicles that
are out there and what is coming
online and the eventual
transition to more and more
electric vehicles
hi I just recently bought a
truck that is a.
It's called a power boost
instead of the ego boost that
that the that that
Ford is making in that that
vehicle has a generator on it
and it has it runs on
electricity about a quarter of
the time has been affected I was
looking my daughter yesterday
and of the eighty four hundred
miles or so that I've driven
about fifteen hundred or more
than fifteen hundred of those
miles were electricity alone and
so as that fuel economy is
coming on with the with either
vehicles that are partially gas
and impartially electric or
fully electric
if we're relying on is in the in
the gas tax that is not going to
help take care of our roads on
top of that Madam.
Chair and and members
The older vehicles that will be
paying the gas tax more and more
are going to be
I would say a poor folks are not
able to buy a new vehicle cannot
by the new technology are not
gonna be able to buy the most
efficient vehicles and so the
burden once again as we talk
about
fairness I I think it's going to
be transferred over to people
have older vehicles maybe are
not able to by the the newest
technology so I I think it it's
I just think it's worth a
discussion and that is why I
introduce this I didn't I.
Appropriations is the bill as
all long gone it's already
getting its final revisions on
the Senate side side and I know
this is way too big to put in to
the tax some of this bill that
would be getting to so I just
want to make sure that we
highlight this as a growing
concern.
And I would really like to see
us.
It go through the interim and
hopefully in the next sixty days
session come back with at eight
as as Representative Harper said
a serious proposal to address
our our roads and infrastructure
needs thank you madam chair
thank you I'm happy to entertain
a motion for temporary table.
You're so moved.
Is there a second.
All right.
Anyone in opposition.
I see no hands raised the bill
is temporary table.
I'd like to finish up our
meeting today with house bill
one twenty five and then we'll
look back to the floor Kimberly
has asked that you will be
excused from the floor session
so no need to be concerned
Representative Ortiz.
Good to see and share thank you
I thank you members of the
committee I'm on also on another
committee at this moment so I'm
not I'm watching to make sure
that I'm not having to vote at
this time so I I will be as as
quick as I possibly can madam
chair members of the committee I
do also have a an expert witness
his name is Steve Hale not sure
if he's over.
On the side yet.
I just provided him to panelist
thank you so much madam chair
and I have an amendment would
you like that to to number yes
please and we'll move it for
discussion purposes.
Thank you madam chair to two to
four oh six point four.
Okay.
You may discuss your amendment
if you think that's appropriate
at this time Representative
thank you madam chair so that
what the amendment does it
corrects that statutory citation
for the solar market development
tax credit as it stands
currently the at the citation is
incorrect so this amendment
makes the correct citation
because that solar market
development tax credit was
updated as I understand so
that's what the amendment that's
an chair.
Okay.
So you've explained your bill
have and you have explained your
amendment will let's go to the
audience and see if that who who
wishes to speak in favor of this
bill as a.
We smart in this.
We.
We just Martinez can you hear me
now yes.
Okay I'm sorry madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Louise Martinez with the
energy minerals and natural
resources department our
department is responsible for
implementing the sustainable
building tax credit program and
we support this amendment.
As this tax credit encourages
private sector investment for
the construction of energy
efficient and sustainable
buildings in New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you JD Bullington.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is JD
Bullington the register lobbyist
for the American institute of
architects The New Mexico
chapter and a IDA supports the
amendment and supports this
legislation as amendment and we
appreciate the sponsor for
bringing it forward thank you.
Thank you Richard Mason.
Mason.
Yes.
Members of the committee my name
is Dick Mason I'm sure the
action committee of the league
of women voters of New Mexico
the league supports policies
incentives that reduce
greenhouse gas emissions by
developing clean renewable
energy sources I H. B. one
twenty five does just that so
the extension from support
registered to pass.
Thank you Randy trainer.
Thank you madam chair committee
members Randy trainer registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico home
builders association this is
stable billing tax credit has
provided valuable industry
training as our building codes
become more and more complex
contractors subcontractors
material suppliers and
manufacturers all benefit from
this program as does the public
with more energy efficient homes
house bill one twenty five this
intended to maintain the
momentum has been established
with the industry as we pursue
even greater efficiency energy
efficiency please support house
bill one twenty five thank you
thank you Kathleen Burke I think
is the person's name.
Kathleen.
Kathleen are you there.
Currently she is not air.
Yes madam chair yes yes.
great.
Good morning madam chair thank
you and thank you to members of
the committee my name is
Kathleen Burke I also represent
the league of women voters of
New Mexico we support house bill
one twenty five the league
supports policies and incentives
that reduce greenhouse gas
emissions by promoting greater
energy efficiency.
impact reports states that the
sustainable building tax credit
program has been very well
received by the public as well
as the construction industry
this this program to encourage
sustainable building is good
news for the state's ability to
meet the twenty thirty
greenhouse gas reduction goal.
Please encourage investment and
sustainable buildings by giving
it to pass to HB one twenty five
thank you ladies and gentleman.
Thank you I see no one else
wishing to speak in favor anyone
wish to speak in opposition.
I don't see anyone in opposition
so we'll go back the committee.
Madam chair I'm.
Yes Representative or K. did you
want to add something madam
chair I I didn't actually
explain the bill I think the
amendment just very very quickly
we adopted H. B. fifteen last
year which which changes
sustainable buildings tax credit
and after we adopted that we had
conversations with the weeds and
others at at EMNRD and the
funding for the we learned that
the funding for the twenty
fifteen program which existed
previously what will run out
pretty soon March or April of
twenty twenty two so what this
bill does one twenty five is it
it changes the date for the
availability of the funds for
the twenty twenty one program
which we passed last year so it
closes that closes the gap of
funding and I'm happy at you I'm
happy for Steve Hale to make any
comments on that or answer any
questions of the committee my
have madam chair thank you thank
you Representative Mr Hale do
wish to add anything fully.
Yes yes I would like to stop
talk briefly about this bill and
I know there's been some concern
about the F. I. R. but I would
like to quote something at the
New Mexico energy and minerals
department website and this is
the very beginning of the
sustainable building tax credit
it's three sentences it says
please note the twenty fifteen
sustainable tax credit has
reached its legislative cap
through the twenty twenty three.
Projects will be processed until
the tax credit for twenty twenty
four is free from that point
forward application submitted
for a tax credit certificate
will need to meet the
eligibility requirements
specified in the new twenty
twenty one S. B. T. C. rural.
So energy and metals cell has.
Looked at this overlap and
determine how they broke will
proceed in other words they
would use up to twenty fifteen
funding for the current program.
And then projects must
immediately qualify for the
higher standards of the twenty
twenty one rule so this
statement is somewhat.
Click with the FIR it says they
don't have the rules in place
well they do have the rules in
place and should be ready to
proceed and I'm happy to answer
any other questions you might
have.
Thank you Mr Hale is there
discussion among the committee
members.
Representative Lujan.
Thank you I just want to say my
strength reported the cause no
and and.
Very simple clear what we're
trying to do here and time thank
you thank you Representative
Harper.
Thank you madam chair
So and and thank you
Representative bring this
forward so I'm just I'm I'm
dusting off the cobwebs from
last session what we did last
session was we.
The existing credit were
essentially letting it phased
out.
And then we have a new credit
that was passed that we we all
passed out of here as part of
this committee's tax package.
I was not a huge fan of it but
you know supported the committee
process we had a couple of those
that we like to get out so we
support this one as well.
And.
And I guess I'm just try to
understand madam chair.
But it's not like we have is
also phasing in and phasing out
all all squared away.
I would agree to the the caps
and we agreed that we were going
to increase the capital that
because every year we got close
to that I millions in order to
go to seven point one five
million of the new in the new
one.
So but now we're seeing that.
Well because we're gonna close
that I we're gonna head that I
made our cap we want to
accelerate this new one.
and I understanding this
correctly.
Madam chair Representative
Harper
I think you are I I also want to
point out here that we had the
date the start date for the
twenty twenty one tax credit at
January twenty twenty two.
In the house version went at it
popped over to the Senate and it
changed so I mean that's sort of
what we're what we're dealing
with as well madam chair
Representative Harper okay I'm
happy to let Mr Hale.
Right.
Madam chair
if I may the up and committee
members if I may the the
legislation did allocate funding
starting in twenty twenty one.
However it didn't allow.
People would qualify for that
funding until April of twenty
twenty three so the funding is
put in place but that one little
bit of the day change that was
enacted in the Senate didn't
allow new construction to go for
and also it's important to note
that the increase and funding
was because of there was a lot
of remodeling or updating of
existing homes up and commercial
buildings added to that bill so
that's the main reason the
funding was increased I think
the funding for new construction
specifically.
Was decreased a little bit.
Over the twenty fifteen
Representative thank.
Thank you madam chair
representative Mr Hale thank you
that helps me understand where
this came from because I was
surprised at how we we took care
of that so that that helps me
understand a little better.
So I guess my really my my last
question and.
Help me understand this right so
because we're accelerating this
there is essentially about a
year and a half maybe maybe a
year and several months where
folks.
We're both of these credits are
available.
it is that correct Mr speaker
I'm madam madam chair and
representative.
Madam chair representative
Harper but you're correct but
you can only apply to one of
them.
Yes so so madam chair and
representative I I appreciate
that very much your title one of
that's that's that's good tax
policy
I guess my only concern here you
know.
Knowing that we've already
passed this legislation and and
in such my only concern is that
because we've accelerated just a
year that means that there is
going to be just add up to seven
million dollar general fund
impact.
that we did not break into the
budget so.
you know again just being
consistent I I'm we're we're
gonna need to temporarily table
this and and see if this could
be something that's included in
our and the tax package
Just wanted to understand why
it's it's not that we're not
support I mean I was able to
this last time so thank you
madam chair.
Are there any other up before we
go any further there's a motion
we need to have a motion to
adopt the amendment I think
let's try to clean up the record
here so with someone please
moved for adoption of the
amendment madam chair I'd like
to move adoption of the
amendment.
Thank you Sir so second.
And second and answer any
opposition to the motion to
adopt the amendment no there is
not so you now have an amended
bill Representative Ortiz.
Madam chair.
Are there any other members of
the committee who wish to speak
this point.
Well this bill does have a
fiscal impact and I I I have not
heard government reason any
reason why we should not
temporary table at this point.
I'm happy to hear such a motion.
So madam chair to move to gently
temporarily.
Very good.
I'm.
I see no is there opposition the
temporary table.
I don't see any opposition to
the temporary table so
We will be getting back to
Representative Ortez and thank
you for waiting for are very
lengthy attended today
You very much and I think we are
going to roll a final bill and
will now during the meeting and
were available to go down to the
floor thank you thank you thank
you madam chair for the gentle
placement sure of course.
Thank you madam chair great job
today.
