Representative Henry.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Montoya.
Represented Parajun here.
Representative Silva.
Representative Terazas.
Madam Vice Chair.
Representative Lente.
of
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
Is home in San Pueblo today, so
I'll be chairing the meeting.
As a matter of our announcements
here, our sponsor representative
Cha Garcia has just asked to
roll HP 3:30 till Monday, so we
won't be hearing HP 3:30 today.
So otherwise, depending on
sponsor availability, we'll go
in the order of the agenda,
we'll start with HB 19, moved to
HB 295 and finish which with HB
326 as amended.
Um
Representative Lindstrom, uh,
begin with HB 19, please.
Madam chair, I'd move that.
We take up
Else
Committe substitute for House
Bill 19 for discussion.
Um,
one second. Thank you. Uh, we're
going to the house tax and Rev
Committee substitute for HB 19,
um, representative, please
explain your committee.
Alrighty, thank you, um.
I feel a little bit like the
movie Groundhog Day.
Here I am again, but anyway,
Madam Chair, thank you for
hearing us again this morning,
um.
What this committee substitute
is is a technical fix to what we
didn't do on Wednesday.
When uh the general
appropriation Act includes
funding for a bill, what we have
to do is we have to strip.
We have to strip the funding and
the appropriation.
And then so the bill, the
authorization language can move
along because the money is
someplace else.
So this is what this committee
substitute does for House Bill
19.
Um, what it does is basically
remove section 12 of the
original bill which laid out the
distribution of proceeds
basically where the money is
coming from.
So with that, um, Madam Charro,
it's time for any questions.
Thank you, we're not going back
to public comment today since
we've um done that already.
So we'll go to committee with
any questions.
Uh, represented Monte.
So it's a due pass on the house
taxation and revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill 19.
Seeing any opposition.
You have a do pass. Thank you.
Thank you.
HB 295, do we have chairs small?
Do we have
Representative Gonzalez on HB
295.
If these are your bills, get
your people in the room.
Good morning. We're ready for HB
295. Thank you very much, Madam
Vice Chair.
Uh
Menvier House Bill 225 and ple
pleased to have Miss uh Lynn
Moss Hitler.
295, sorry. Um
From the renewable energy
transmission Authority.
Makes goodness.
Makes clear that um
The development of
Energy by entities who work with
Rita.
Owned land and projects is
exempt from property taxation.
Or the original intent of the
statute.
In the way that the statute has
been applied.
And in a way that successfully
uh supports thousands of New
Mexico jobs and a great deal of
build out all across our state,
um, Madam Chair, I don't have
too much more to add. I would go
over to uh
The Lynn just emphasizing that
this is a technical fix.
Affirming the legislature's
intent when renewable energy
transmission Authority was first
established.
And um thank you for having us
here today.
Uh, good morning, uh, vice chair
and members of the committee. I
appreciate this opportunity. I'm
here today as Rita's executive
director to speak in favor of HB
295, a technical fix to readers
enabling act for our project
initiatives.
These incentives are based on
the constitutional provision and
interpretation that exempt Rita
owned property from property
taxes.
The Rita Act was passed to
incentivize private investment
in transmission lines to unlock
renewable energy projects.
Reed has incredibly has been
incredibly successful and other
Western states seek our advice
as they design their own rita
type programs.
Rita serves as a key part of
putting together a comprehensive
public-private structure to
enable tens of millions of
dollars in renewable energy
investments in New Mexico.
Along with the jobs and local
groceryceipts tax that come from
these projects.
Rita is a state entity, has
tax-exempt status established in
the New Mexico Constitution.
Reed is able to leverage this
status with developers to lower
the cost of transmission
operations through an
acquisition leaseback structure.
This structure allows.
Tax exemption just for Rita
owned property, including the
transmission lines and related
structures, not for the wind
farms that use the transmission.
The industrial revenue bonds and
pilt programs, counties
negotiate with the wind
programs.
Or separate from what we look
at, we're looking at with HB 295
with passage of this bill,
nothing would change how the
wind projects negotiate public
financing with those counties.
I should note that the wind
farms are much more expensive to
build and transmission lines and
are much more valuable in terms
of payments to the counties.
When developers are putting
together projects, they're
looking at the total package of
taxes, payments to counties, and
all costs of the project as
package they make up the total
project costs.
Readers incentivizing
transmission development has
proven to be a successful key
component in unlocking to.
Total project development.
For New Mexico. This means
hundreds of millions of dollars
in pill payments, thousands of
construction jobs, hundreds of
millions of dollars in gross
receipts, taxes, and hundreds of
ongoing operations jobs.
Recently, a private entity
working with Rita on a project
was engaging in their own due
diligence as they conducted a
thorough analysis with fresh
eyes on the statutes and
constitutional framework, they
realized that this section
7-36-4 is confusing and
inconsistent with the
constitutional exemption for
state entities, and the intent
of the reader Act.
They shared this reading of the
statue with Rita and with other
developers, these concerns
resulted in HB 295, which
clarifies our laws to match both
intent and practice.
Passing this bill will not
change how we have worked with
private developers or how
counties have negotiated with
developers, not passing this
bill, however, has the risk of
having a chilling effect on new
investment, we are bringing this
forward to avoid these
consequences.
In the worst case scenario,
without this clarification, a
look back could undermine some
complete agreements between Rita
and its private partners and see
the levying of taxes that were
not anticipated.
This would be devastating to our
future investment in New Mexico.
In the prior committee hearing
on this bill, we received
questions on the
constitutionality of it.
Concerns is that the legislation
cannot create property tax
exemption.
It can, however, enact laws that
clarify an existing
constitutional exemption.
Uh, creating a property tax
exemption.
Rita has such a constitutional
exemption for Rita owned real
property and improvements.
IRBs have a similar statutory
clarification of the same
constitutionally based property
tax exemption.
If the IRB structure is
constitutional, then so too is
this clarification in HB 295.
Again passing this bill will not
change anything in terms of what
all parties, including counties
have expected to happen with
these projects, what the bill
will, what the bill will do is
remove ambiguity that may
discourage future use of reader
programs for private development
and allow New Mexico to continue
to.
lead the Western states in
renewable energy development.
Thank you and I'll stand for
questions.
We'll go to the public now if
you're on Zoom and would like to
speak and support our opposition
to HB 295, please raise your
hands.
None
Jordan Varilla.
OK, we'll start with Jordan.
Pardon? You'll have one minute
My name is Jordan Brow, and I'm
the Torrance County. I wanted to
speak here today in support of
HB 295. New Mexico has become a
leader in renewable energy
development in recent years due
to the state's national natural
geography, uh, a desire to
encourage renewable energy
development and a regulatory
environment that incentive
devices private investment. Uh,
in addition, small rural
counties with limited economic
activity and limited tax bases
have benefited tremendously from
our partnerships with renewable
energy.
developers in Torrance County
specifically, the county has
been able to work with several
developers on the execution of
pilgrims that resulted in new
revenue sources for the county,
which are greatly needed for
public service and
infrastructure projects,
particularly in communities with
limited economic resources. We
believe that failing to enact HB
25 may result in a reduction in
private investment in the
renewable energy market across
the state. This would not only
be a step in the wrong direction
for renewable energy production
in the state generally, but we
will also result in the
reduction.
of economic development and
private investment in small
rural communities where that
investment is needed the most.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Michael, you're next.
One minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Mike D'Antonio
with Xcel Energy, this bill does
not affect the utilities. We
think it's so important to
emphasize how important it is to
have new transmission
opportunities in Mexico to help
spur with the economic
development of our state, so we
currently support this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. We'll go to the
public comment in person. Uh,
we'll start with support if
you'd like to support HB 295,
please line up and you'll have
one minute. Thank you.
Thank you, Vice Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Jake Sarno, and I work
for Pattern Energy as a
construction manager for Sunsi
Transmission.
I am here to support HB 295 and
give a picture of what the value
of Rita projects are for New
Mexico.
I was born and raised in New
Mexico. My family has been here
since before New Mexico was New
Mexico. My son Lane also works
in the wind industry as a wind
technician for GE on Western
Spirit.
I can tell you firsthand that
the more more than 2000 people
working to build these projects
are having a positive impact in
the local communities around the
project. Every day I see both
the project and individuals
working individual workers
spending money and boosting
local economies. In Torrance
County, total gross receipts are
up over 600 million in the 1st
11 months of 2024 and taxable
grocery receipts are up 136% of
2023 levels for the town of
Corona groce receipts are up
399% for these communities that
don't have oil and gas revenue.
This economic investment
provides an additional lifeline
to local businesses and
families.
Please I'm sure Rita can
continue to invest in New Mexico
by clarifying the intent of the
tax code with HB 295. I'm taking
time out of away from
construction on Sunsi today to
be here to, to, uh, in support
of the important legislation.
Thank you, Madam Chairman and
members of the committee.
My name is Chase Taylor. I'm the
senior manager of environmental
compliance and strategy at
Pattern Energy. I'm a lifelong
New Mexican and I'm proud to
work on projects like Sunsia
Transmission that are improving
the lives of our residents and
making the environment a top
priority as well. I get to
witness every day how the
creation of an expanded
renewable energy industry in our
state is creating positive
economic impacts for our
communities and our towns. My
responsibility specifically is
to lead the team who is
redefining the gold standard for
how large infrastructure
projects in the built
environment.
coexists with our natural
environment and local New
Mexicans. You heard from my
colleagues on the increased tax
revenues that are being seen
from our project construction,
and I can tell you we're making
substantial investments in the
environment as well. For
example, we purchased a 1200
acre farm with senior water
rights that will be transferred
to the US Fish and Wildlife
Service, along with a budget to
maintain that property for years
to come, which will provide new
and necessary avian habitat to
protect the mini crane and other
migratory waterfowl species they
call our Rio Grande Valley home.
These types of innov
programs and investments are
only possible because of our
partnership with Rita.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Randy Valverde, and I'm
a registered lobbyist for Inner
West Energy Alliance. We are the
regional um association for some
of the largest wind, solar,
geothermal, and transmission
companies. Uh, we represent
about 40 of those companies, and
we strongly support this effort
to keep investments going in New
Mexico. Thank you.
And Madam Chair, John Ryan's,
uh, executive director of
Southwestern Power Group. We
were, we were the first
developer of the Suns project
and it was more than just
Sunsia, it was Sunzia, it was
real soul, it was generation. We
got generation in 4 different
counties. We got transmission
lines in 7 different counties.
I, I can walk you through each
of those counties and, and where
we gave them community benefit
agreements, uh, we got, we got
generation, we, we got employees
uh in the thousands building
these transmission lines.
And, and there's a lot of other
projects that still need to be
done. We want to connect into uh
the east side of the state. We
want to go up and down and make
sure that anywhere that we have
generation, whether it be solar,
wind, uh, gas, any of that
generation has the opportunity
to get on these transmission
lines. It's in rural areas, and
if we don't get the, the
generation to the communities
that need it, um, we haven't
done our part. Um, lastly, uh,
it's an economic development.
Situation with regard to all the
hyperscalers, the data centers,
uh, the advanced manufacturing,
they need huge power, huge
power. Thank you, ma'am.
Representative Mon
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, we did hear this, uh, in the
last committee.
That I serve on energy.
And uh
Couple of different
Uh
Uh, the resistance came probably
in two different areas.
One being
That
We
are getting in between.
Local governments
And their ability to negotiate.
Uh, for IRBs, industrial revenue
bonds.
And the other being
constitutionality.
Um, I, I think these are both
big, big issues. Mm.
If you note on your
Any of the analysis that we get.
Representative McQueen, the the
only lawyer on that committee.
Believed it had major
constitutional problems, and
there was a recent ruling.
That, uh, expressly prohibited.
Um
This, uh
Intervention on taxes.
Um
Can you maybe spend a little bit
more time on that. I heard
briefly you
Your summary, but
A little bit more time on that.
Thank you Madam Chair. I'll turn
it over to in Representative
Montoya. I'll turn over to Lynn,
but Madam Chair, representative
Montoya, um, we see this as a
clarification. There are other
similar sorts of clarifications
applying to other entities that
have crossed over to this
chamber, um.
So I think uh Madam Chair
Representative, um, that helps
show us that uh we're
to stay in very well within the
bounds. I'll turn over to Lynn
for more technical.
Uh, sure, thank you, uh, uh,
Madam Chair and Representative
Montoya, um.
If you recall, Chairman Queen
asked if I was familiar with
that case in the last committee
hearing, and I wasn't, I since
then have studied it.
That case interprets a
different.
Constitutional exemption
interprets the charitable
exemption.
And different uh uh statutory
exemption as well, that case did
not find that statutory
exemption to be on its face
unconstitutional. What it found
was that.
It could not be applied to the
taxpayer in that case because
that taxpayer um was a sort of
exclusive high end uh uh
assisted living facility that
did not cater to, um, the public
at large and therefore was not a
sufficient public benefit to fit
within the constitutional
exemption.
And so
That really doesn't apply or
prevent.
Um, uh, the legislature from
clarifying in our case, the
state.
Property tax exemption.
And, and UNM has had a similar
uh bill, which was also
mentioned in energy that um has
has been passed through both
committees on the Senate and the
the uh uh Senate chamber itself
in that constitutionality issue
has been uh resolved there.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Small, Chairman
Small. I think the concern
And I don't know that that.
We're we're talking about here
is
Clarifying a law, but I'm not
sure we can clarify.
Madam Chair, um.
small
Whether or not a private entity
That is that
Rita is leasing
From
would be considered that we
could eliminate their taxes.
We're not, this is not
eliminating taxes on Rita. This
is eliminating taxes.
On a private entity.
Uh, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Montoya, I, I,
what you just said is not
correct, we own the land and the
infrastructure and we lease it
to the private entity, we don't
lease it from them. OK, I'm
sorry, I got that backwards
that, but that was the that was
the concern. That was the that
was the heart of the issue. I
understand that some folks have.
Framed it as a tax exemption for
the leasee, but you need to
understand that.
As a starting point, fractional
interests are generally not.
Afforded
Or not assessed property tax.
If you've leased an apartment.
Ever in your life I have. Have
you ever been assessed property
tax? Um, madam, I'm sorry, Madam
Chair, Montoya, um, and we'll,
we'll make sure to go through
the chair, uh, Madam Chair
Representative Montoya, I think
that sort of the
Real strong understanding and
thing to clarify is that these
are uh a tax-exempt entity Rita
owned properties.
That are being leased and then
it's for specific purposes for
the transmission and storage.
So, Madam Chair, Representative
Chairman Small.
I, I happen to be a realtor.
And yes
Uh, those are pass through
costs.
They, they can be. They're not
always, but they can be. It's
all part of the lease.
So, um, Madam Chair,
And Chairman Small, that is, I
guess that's really why I'm
I believe that this is murkier
than is being presented here.
Because, uh
They, uh, anybody who's leased
property.
Uh, and, or does it as part of
their business model, you try
and negotiate that out. That is
generally.
pass-through cost.
Um, so it, it more
Leases them not actually have.
The
Lei
paying the property tax. So that
is why
That's one of the reasons why I
have trouble with this, because
that is
Generally been something that
Every other business.
Has to comply with.
So, um, Madam Chair, uh,
Chairman Small
The other uh issue with this
that I have and I had with our
uh we initially um
Had a bill to support.
Uh, these projects.
We were told at that point,
The argument was a little
different. The argument is let
the counties do these IRBs.
On
Renewable energy projects.
And the argument that we had,
those of us who are concerned.
Uh, that local communities
Uh, generally, when you give an
IRB,
It's, it's generally for
Uh, the, the revenue that is
generated after the project is
completed.
But Madam Chair and uh Chairman
Small.
The, the reality is with
With transmission lines.
Or even
Uh, the the
Uh, solar or wind farms.
The only thing that really is
left, there's not, there's not a
lot of jobs left.
Once those projects are
completed, basically the only
once once the uh
Jobs that are in construction.
are complete
Then
Uh
The
The only thing that remains for
the community to have any
revenue from.
is from
The taxes generated from
From the property and the
equipment and everything that's
there. So I know that some of
that has been negotiated, but
this would be a big chunk that I
believe we would be.
Interrupting this uh IRB
process.
Which once again was advocated
for.
Uh, by the advocates.
A number of years ago. So I, I,
I'm just confused a little bit,
Madam Chair. Not really a
question.
But more just of a statement
that I'm, I wasn't in favor of
of of granting that before
because I think we got in the
way.
Of
Local
Uh, communities
Ability to maximize what
remains, and that is
Taxing the structures and taxing
the property, so.
Um
And, and Madam Chair, and, and,
and Chairman Small in this case.
And in this project,
We would actually be maybe doing
a smaller, another carve out for
And New Mexican subsidizing what
The end user in California.
would be getting the benefit of
that. So I'm, I'm, I'm just
having a hard time with this
altogether. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Um, next we'll go to
Representative Parajun.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, um.
German small and um presenter.
Um, I, this is an, an a.
Nearer concept to me, so I'm
gonna ask a few other questions
and um when I saw this bill, I
was really excited by it because
I know the importance of the
transmission lines, the
transmission lines for our green
future and for me as a young
person, I want to ensure that we
do have an off-ramp to oil and
gas. Um, and that we are still
able to uh fund a lot of the
services that we have here in
the state. So I wanted to ask
first how the deal is
structured, so.
um, Rita has gone around and
made these deals with uh uh both
public private partnerships. How
does that deal um work like what
what are the
Conditions that happen in a deal
like that, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair and, uh,
Representative Paharon, um, as I
mentioned briefly, we, they
acquisition co-development
leaseback agreements.
Um, they're negotiated, uh, we
have several sort of preliminary
steps in supporting a project
and a fairly long on ramp of due
diligence to make sure that when
we make a deal, we are working
with a uh a a strong company
with sufficient capital to
really get the project done.
Um, we then have a, we negotiate
acquisition, co-development
leaseback agreement those
usually occur during the
development period
pre-construction.
And we have a um.
process through which Rita is a
true co-developer.
Um, and then once the project is
construction is uh into
construction uh read it by that
time has acquired all of the
right of way and as the
improvements are built, Rita
acquires those and leases
everything back to the private
company to own and operate the
line because Reed is a small
authority that does not have
the.
Um, expertise or uh uh.
Workforce to be able to do that.
And how much does the the and
and as I understand you've been
making these negotiations and
deals with the assumption that
there would be property tax
exemption.
So what does that play into the
negotiation. Is that a big
selling point for us, for these
companies to come and run those
lines.
Uh,
Uh, uh, Karina and, uh,
Representative Potterhone, um.
Yes, it's, it's the assumed or
the understood property tax
exemption through the
Constitution is one of the uh
economic development tools that
Rita has in its tool kit,
including several others such as
uh gross receipts tax deduction,
uh, assistance with sighting,
some regulatory relief, um, but
it's a package that Rita can
offer to attract development.
Of transmission which then
enables the development of the
generation and those it's the
generation projects, and those
are the ones that have the IRBs
and again this legislation would
not touch.
Counties using the IR, their IRB
economic development tool to
track the generation.
So again, these lines attract
generation which brings.
Um
Larger uh
Pay of tax payments and um.
Larger workforce and
um Madam Chair, how long does a
deal like that take to close,
and then how long does it take
to build one of these.
Medicare and representative, um,
my name is Jeremy Turner. I'm
director of New Mexican pattern
Energy. Um, we are Rita's
largest private partner right
now to date, um, average time to
build a single transmission line
in the West is 12 years back
east it's 22. So in our
agreements we've been in
partnership with Rita for a
number of years now, almost a
decade, on these projects by the
time we were done building
Sunzia transmission, it will
have taken 19 years from
initial con uh to actual build
out our partnership with Rita
and Lynn mentioned, this is what
enables the windd to get built.
We are paying $303 million in
payment of taxes over the next
30 years to the local counties
and the school districts, we
have 3 counties. There's a
number of districts in each
county they're receiving those
funds. This is an $11 billion
financing over 80% of that cost
is in the wind farm itself and
without
the incentives and the
partnerships that we have with
Rita, we are unable to build
those wind farms and New Mexico
loses out on those revenues,
Madam Chair, and um Mr. Chairman
is
So who, when, when the line is
built.
Does Rita own it, um, and if, if
Rita owns it, does that mean
that the state owns it?
Madam Chair represented Paon,
uh, yes, um, Rita continues to
unless we sell it and we're
allowed to do that and if we
sold it to a non-exempt entity,
then it would be subject to
property tax.
Um, and we did that with our
Western Spirit project.
Um
The currently the rest of the
projects in the pipeline, the
plan current plan is for reader
to continue to own it once it
moves into operation, uh, the
right of way and the
improvements.
And that we have gotten uh tax
and ropes confirmation that we
are uh state entities uh that
fits within the uh state
property tax exemption in the
Constitution.
So, um,
Madam Chair and uh expert.
The
If the state owns the
infrastructure but is leasing
portions of it out.
To a private owner such as
pattern, a private company.
Um
It's my understanding that.
They do pay property taxes still
on the um on the infrastructure,
but are there other?
But you're saying that um.
Constitutionally, it would be
allowed to exempt, um, private
entities from
paying that property tax, Madam
Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Pajeon.
We believe our constitutional
exemption is broad enough to
include the exemption on the
least interest and so they uh
they would not and that's how we
negotiate our deals with that
understanding what we're asking
for today in this committee is
that we clarify uh 7-36-4 to be
in line with that constitutional
amendment and our the
understanding we had when we
negotiated these deals so that
we are able to keep our
commitments, Madam Chair, and
expert. So are there other, uh,
entities?
that own the infrastructure, but
lease out the infrastructure,
uh, to other private companies
and those private companies do
not pay property tax because
they're utilizing state owned
facilities, Madam Chair, and
Madam Chair and uh
Representative Paharon, I am not
aware of examples like what I do
know is what readers uh policy
uh as stated in its act and the
Constitution as an economic
development, uh, catalyst, um,
it's how we believe this.
would work and how we needed to
work uh for our private partners
now and going forward.
Madam Chair and expert, I do see
that in the bill and and this
section, um, I've spent some
time in it over the, for a
couple hours, um, last night
because there is a lot in this,
um, section of the law, and I do
see that improvements on page 2,
line 11, that there are some
exemptions such as property in
connection with mineral
property, potash mineral
property, property used in
connection with uranium mineral
property.
Also dwellings occupied by a low
income resident in a housing
project.
Um, property interests described
in the previous section, Section
3. So it does seem that we have
quite a bit of exemptions
already in the tax code, would
you say that's true, Madam
Chair, and um.
And expert
And uh Mr. Chairman,
Madam Chair Representative
Parajan.
And, uh, these, these exemptions
of Mr. Chairman, uh, Madam Chair
and Mr. Chairman.
Or were these added because of a
good that they provide for our
state, or do you know why these
improvements were, were added.
Um, Madam Chair and
Mr. Chairman
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, um, I have a lot
of lawyers looking at this and
that is not something that we've
looked at, so I don't know the
answer to that.
But I'll add, Madam Chair,
representative, I think it
clearly.
Uh, can be seen to reflect the
values that at that time were
important to the state.
And fell under this exemption.
So in
So
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman, so
would you would say this is a
public benefit that is being
derived from these transmission
lines.
Um, Madam Chen and.
Madam Madam chair Pahon
absolutely the public benefit is
extremely high, as well as the
economic benefit in the
counties, and Madam Chair,
representative Parajon we heard
uh county leadership.
And workers who stated quite
clearly that these transmission
lines and associated
infrastructure is essential for
them to build the very large and
very expensive multi-billion
dollar wind farms.
We also heard Madam Chair
Representative, that's
generating like a 399% increase
in the corona GRT receipts.
Without the transmission which
Rita is the essential link in
than that other infrastructure
doesn't get built.
Madam chair and um represent so
that leads me to my last two
questions, um, does, so when
this infrastructure or
improvement is put on the land
is the valuation of that
property go up.
Madam She Representative.
Uh
Um, I'll turn over to Lynn and
Jeremy, but Madam Chair
Representative, I think the
value, the, the value in the
county.
In this case, maybe in some
cases municipalities for the
wind farms.
Is
Is the sort of the foundation
for not only the public good of
more transmission and more clean
energy, but also the economic
benefit to those counties and
without the
public
Benefit of a publicly owned
property Rita owned transmission
property that other can't
develop.
I don't know if they experts
have anything to add, Madam
Chair Representative Patron, no,
I don't have anything to add to
that answer. OK, um, Madam
Chairwoman and Mister Chairman,
so these projects, they're still
subject to GRT. Is that correct?
Uh, um.
Uh, Madam Chair, and, uh,
Representative Paharon, if Reed
is involved, there is a for the
um goods and services to build
the infrastructure, um, there's
a a GRT deduction in another
part of the code and that's not
an issue today.
The, the GRT uh uh increases
that have been discussed today
have to do with, uh, right now
there's 2000 construction
workers in the field, uh
building Sunzia and those are
pumping in enormous um economic
development dollars into those
local communities that result in
JRT and uh revenue increases
during construction.
Got it.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
um Mr. Chairman.
Um
That really answers a lot of my
questions, I think the the
question of constitutionality
from what I can read in the
Constitution, it doesn't seem
like it is prohibitive, um,
especially given that we already
have uh a bunch of improvements
now I wouldn't say that property
using in connection with uranium
mineral property aligns with my
values, um, but definitely
increasing our renewable
energies does align with my
values.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um
and chairman.
Next we have Representative
Terasas.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much, uh, Emery Small
and experts, and, you know,
well, I'm listening to this and
I, I.
Uh
First, my first question is,
You've had, uh, I heard you say
we got a lot of attorneys
looking at this.
And
I, my understanding is they have
conflicting.
Opinions on this.
Can you help explain that to me
a little bit, please, Madam
Chair.
Represented or very small.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Taratas, um.
I wish I could explain that to
you, um, there, that is the
confusion that we are trying to
clarify with the amendment.
There is conflicting case law
through the years on this
particular provision that I've
got some very smart attorneys
looking at and they can't
reconcile it, and I think that
is borne out by.
Um
The materials that are in the
FIR, uh, you know, Texan Rev had
their opinion, state Land Office
attorneys have their opinion,
um.
It's a I I if I are on the uh
UNM Bill SB 112 characterizes
this provision as the most
confusing. We're not talking
about the other one. Thank you,
get back to this one.
Uh
To, to the, the case law, it is,
it is, it has been, um.
Framed as the most confusing,
uh, most misunderstood provision
in the tax code.
Thank you.
And Madam chair, uh, uh,
Chairman Small.
Expert and, and that's
My problem is, I mean, I did
exactly that. I started reading
and I'm going.
Uh, I'm a businessman, yeah, but
I'm an undertaker. I'm not an
attorney.
And this is a very confusing
when you go through the FIRs
and, and each one and they have
different opinions as you keep
reading, the more you read, you
go, it's one says it's gonna
constitutional, one says, you
know, it's questionable either
way. It keeps flip-flopping for
me for what what I read.
He, um
Um, that, that the, uh,
When I looked at the FIR here
for
Here
Those technical issues here from
Uh
From different sources, but it
was like you said from tax OC
from uh.
Emred, all of them had like
different.
a different opinions and it, it
kind of just.
It stifles me on on
understanding this and so, um,
That's, that's, that's what,
what causes. I wish we had a
Better opinion
For us to really stand on.
Altogether
Um
To give us a better direction
and that's, that's kind of one
of my, one of my questions.
And uh yes sir, Madam Chair,
And uh yes sir, Madam Chairas,
um, very fair points and Madam
Chair, representrasas think that
sort of to me is reinforces the
need for us to clarify this
statute.
Do we have something that is
important to the state, Madam
Chairrasas, and to me the answer
is yes, we see the development
that's going on, the thousands
of jobs that are ongoing in the
state and the successful
implementation of this uh
approach where the renewable
energy transmission authority,
um,
Control, you know, owns.
Uh, the transmission in the
land.
Uh, develops owns the land,
develops that transmission. We
see that now the largest wind
farms being developed.
Madam Chair Representative
Tarasa, so.
You know, amidst the different.
Sort of confusing parts that
apply to a bunch of different
things that were not applying
that we're not discussing here
today. This bill clarifies and
solidifies this approach for a
very important um economic
function in our state, Madam
Chair.
Madam chair, um, chairman Small,
that, you know, on the surface,
you know, the idea that I'm just
kind of reading my notes that I
was writing, you know, the state
renting back to another private
entity or whatever on the on the
surface looks.
Exactly that it should be, it's
a state on um.
property and so forth, it should
be exempt. And then you read the
unconstitution, maybe
unconstitutional stuff that just
starts throwing me off. Um,
But Madam Chair, um, Chairman
Small, who actually um finances
and pays for those projects.
30.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Tarais, um, so
for the transmission lines,
which is what this address is,
those are um uh just uh uh first
of all, through the development
phase, it's the private company
that puts up that money and for
this size project, it runs in
the 100 hundreds of millions of
dollars.
Uh, construction financing for
both Western spirit and Sunzia
was just normal uh private bank
financing.
Uh, for the wind farms though
that these transmission lines
enable.
Uh, I believe in
Most cases and and I'll I'll ask
uh uh Jeremy Turner to to give
the specific specifics on that
because read is not really
involved.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
we as pattern as a private
company, we actually go out and
borrow that funding. So we
borrowed $11 billion in the
private markets, um, from
various lending institutions
that took almost all of that was
covered not only the
transmission line that is owned
by Rita, but it also covered the
wind farm, which are all issued
under the Industrial revenue
bond.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you, and just, I'm, I
mean, I'm just gonna go back to,
uh, the analysis that I'm
reading, uh.
He from
L C
Um
It kind of threw me, threw me
off also. It says, uh, Rita, a
government entity owns most of
the real property.
They didn't say all of it, so it
just kind of you see where it
gets confusing for, for me, so.
I, I'm just gonna listen to the
debate. I'm I'm a little
confused on, on, on the
constitutionality when I started
reading this, it, it confused me
quite a bit.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you, next we have
Representative Lindstrom.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, presenters, um.
I think I was around actually
when Rita was created, and I
know for.
I know it's sad to say but true,
um, and I know we often.
Have trouble trying to find
resources to keep it up and
running. I remember that we had
uh a lot of trouble keeping.
Budget for Rita going and.
And what have you, but I, I've
got to try to get my head around
this bill, um, I chair and
presenters.
I wanted to ask the uh experts.
Um
I'm talking specifically about
the transmission lines.
Which we desperately need in the
state of New Mexico. I, I
understand that.
So the transmission lines.
Are paid for the development and
construction are paid for by the
private sector.
Company
And then transferred over to
Rita, is that correct?
Uh
Uh, Cercadina and Representative
Lindstrom, that is absolutely
correct.
So once they're transferred
over.
That means that the uh
transmission line in that
company as the property tax
exemption, is that correct?
Uh
Uh, ercadina and Representative
Lindstrom, that is how we
believe that that the the
structure has was supposed to
work, yes, correct.
OK.
That's the part I'm a little um
concerned about because so
during the construction phase.
And as the
Sections of the transmission
line are being built out.
There's grocery receipts, tax
paid and.
About personal income tax paid
with the employees and all and
all that type of business,
correct?
Uh, uh, chair and
representative, yes, that's
correct. OK.
All right, and then with the
wind farm situation or the wind
farms then.
Uh, exempt from paying property
taxes under, are they
considered?
A reader project.
Uh
chair and Representative
Lindstrom, No, Rita is not
permitted to do generation under
its statute. OK. All right.
So, um
I'm looking at the FIR on page
2.
And we talk about.
Auxiliary equipment.
Can you give me an example of
what that is.
And does that stay?
Exempt from property taxes in
perpetuity.
Um, chair and representative, it
means the poles and wires for
the transmission line, and it
would stay tax exempt as long as
Rita owned it.
Or another exempt entity owned
it, um.
The example we so Western
Spirit, we sold to P&M as soon
as it was built.
Um, I think there's a
possibility some of our other
projects might go that way, um,
Sunzia, we're gonna continue to
own but as long as Rita holds it
in the current structure of our
agreements, it would be exempt.
Madam Chair expert, is there uh
any other equipment that would
be tied to this.
When it comes to transmission
lines.
Madam Chair and representative,
the, it's just the transmission
line itself. It's the poles and
wires, the underlying real
estate that Rita holds title to.
Um, there are no additional
accessory structures there are,
however, things like fiber
optics that we use on the
transmission lines that allow
for operations, so that is
considered part of the
transmission line itself,
but those are you then in these
in the projects that you've been
building, Madam Chair, are you
using any state broadband funds
toward this.
When it comes to fiber optics,
uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, the answer to
that is no. All right, so in the
right of way process.
When you're setting up the right
of way for the transmission
lines. Is that the only utility
that is used in that order.
Madam Chair Representative,
that's correct. That's and the.
Especially in Western Spirit and
Sunzia, the only infrastructure
that's allowed in that right
away, is that transmission line
itself.
OK, madam chair, does Rita
receive any contributions as a
nonprofit.
Of any kind by the private
sector participants.
Um
Madam Chair and Representative
Lindstrom, uh.
Received contributions, but we
are not set up as a nonprofit,
we're a state authority. And so,
um.
And I don't know that it would
be contributions across the
board, we receive um.
Uh
Uh, lease payments under leases
once the project is completed
and we also receive development
uh reimbursement expenses during
the development period.
So, Madam Chair, the do the what
do the lease payments equate to?
Do you actually have
responsibility for maintenance.
In operation
Uh, Madam Chair and, uh,
Representative Lindstrom, uh,
no, we do not.
So, Madam Chair, what are the
lease payments for?
Uh, Madam Chair, and, uh,
Representative Lindstrom under
Rita's statute we were to become
self-sufficient, self funded,
and with the um uh.
Western Spirit Project, uh.
Uh, getting into commercial
operations, those lease payments
have enabled us to become.
Uh, a financially
self-sufficient like.
Several other authorities in the
state.
Madam Chair
How are the lease payment
amounts derived.
Madam Chair Representative, the
lease of payments are negotiated
based on Rita's ownership of
that structure, uh, the way the
agreements are set up is it is
developed with the joint
development committee. There are
half of the members of that
community, uh, committee sit
from Rita, half or from the
private party and in the
negotiation and development of
the lease arrangement. We work
as co-developers on the project
and then we once the project is.
actually constructed and up and
running. We pay annual payments
to Rita for the lease back of
those assets.
All right, so I again to try to
get my head around this.
The private company builds a
transmission lines.
It reverts back to Rita.
They don't have to pay property
tax then, but there's a lease
agreement between Rita and the
private company.
And those leaseback payments
then pay for your
co-development.
What about recommendations on
operation and and who's gonna
buy this electricity, who is the
marketer for the product?
Madam Chair and Representative,
so the once readers retains
ownership, it is leased back to
pattern Energy. We work with the
markets on the operational
authority. That is not something
that Rita, uh, nor pattern
traditionally do, we do operate
pattern as a private company,
several transmission lines in
Sun Zia's case, we've actually
because that power is being sold
to the California markets where
we get the jobs in the economic
development of California pays
for it.
The California Independent
System operator will actually
operate that transmission line
and we'll be responsible for
that ongoing operation and
maintenance of the project while
we are sending power down it
from the wind farms.
All the transmission line is
paid for is off of the revenues
they receive by pattern energy
sending power from our wind
farms down that wire to the
markets. That's how they are
actually paid for.
All right, so, um,
Madam Chair, my final question,
have you ever had any accessory
yet tried to assess a property
tax on your project.
Madam Chair and Representative
Lindstrom, we have had a couple
of counties uh because Rita
takes the substation land in fee
and that shows up in the
property tax rolls, uh, send us
bills and we've explained that
Rita is an exempt entity and
they have.
Um, agreed with us and taken
that property off the rolls.
So they have taken it off the
rolls.
In those instances, yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you Madam Chair. I'm sorry
I missed a lot of this uh
representative.
Was, was there something that,
that
Happened or spurred this on
right now. I, I, I probably
missed it, you probably
explained it, and I apologize.
I'm gone. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Duncan. Um, what happened is
that the developments have been
going well, Madam Chair
Representative Duncan, what, uh,
Lynn testified to earlier is
that a new project developer and
rereading the statute, uh, who
is not, I understand I guess
developed here. Uh,
Read that there could
potentially be some ambiguity.
And so the way that we've done
this for a very long time, a new
developer looked and said, I'm
not exactly sure the way you're
doing it is fully
Comes out to me in the statute
as it stands there and so that's
why we're coming in to clarify
in a non. OK. Thank you.
Madam Chair and thank you
Representative, um.
Would this not be covered in an
IRB.
What we're talking about here
today, or is it?
Am I missing something? Yes.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, Duncan, um, none of Rita's
projects are under IRBs.
Um, so no, it would not. The
IRBs that we've referenced are
for the generation and those
have a different separate
exemption and that this would
not disrupt.
OK, thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair Representative.
Um, tell me.
List let's go briefly to the
lease back payments. Are those
current market rate or they
discounted rate?
Um
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Duncan, they're
they're substantially
discounted.
And you know, we don't collect a
lot it's our, our formula is
based on a length of the line
and the capacity of the line and
it's a modest amount to
basically keep reader operations
going. But.
Me and representative we are
Who's the final
Beneficiary of this.
Can you tell me where's this,
where's this electricity going
to?
And Gerald, uh, I guess, yeah,
and uh Jeremy and Madam chair
representative the development
and the economic benefit is in
New Mexico, much of the power
right now goes west either to
Arizona or to California.
Mr. Turner can add.
Madam Chair and representative,
that's absolutely right. Just
like New Mexico exports the
majority of our goods and
services out of the state, our
electricity is no different.
This is an opportunity where we
have substantial renewable
resources and opportunities
we're able to create those jobs
and economic development here
and put New Mexicans to work
here while California in this
case, pays for it. We do have a
portion of our contract from our
Western Spiritin and another
project where we were selling
power to Los.
Almost. They've since got out of
that contract, but that was
through their request as a power
marketer. So we do have the
ability to sell power in state,
and we would love to do that if
the utilities and if we, if they
are interested, then we would be
happy to sell it here, but at
this point in time, all of this
power that we're generating from
Suni in particular along with
Western Spirit is being sent
west because they have the need
in the market and they're
willing to pay for it.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
representative.
Project in the pipeline, the Rio
Soo project.
Um
Is gonna get interconnected into
New Mexico and the likelihood
that power will be sold here is
quite high.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Representative. So,
We're giving you, we're giving a
Deeply discounted.
Mark, um, rate.
A lease rate
Um, and are you giving them a
deeply discounted rate to the
citizens of Arizona or
California or New Mexico for
that matter, when you're selling
that electricity, uh, Madam
Chair and Representative there
so this bill in particular is
talking specifically on the
transmission line itself and
those lease payments that we
referenced were for Rita for the
transmission line itself on the
wind farms, what we have done is
we've issued industrial revenue
bonds. We've had requested from
the counties to issue industrial
revenue bonds.
The building of those wind
farms. What we've done is
negotiated payment low taxes
with the three counties for
those IRBs and what we are doing
is in addition to the jobs that
will be in the area. There's not
a lot. We have 100 full-time
jobs that are starting salary
for when technicians is 59,000,
which is about 1.5 times the
median household income of the
communities in which we're
building, so they are
substantially higher and what we
do is we.
Through those payment and lower
taxes and those negotiated
amounts. We were paying $303
million in payment low taxes to
the counties and the school
districts for Sunsi alone for
Western Spirit, it's 88.3
million over the 30 years and in
addition to that, while we are
in the area and our workers are
in the area, that's where those
increased levels of gross
receipts and compensation.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Following up on that then.
So if, if built, if you uh
didn't have a pill and you were
paying full, can you tell me
what that would be as far as the
taxes.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
I apologize. I do not have that
answer. Um, those are those
negotiated amounts though where
the counties are negotiating and
they negotiate quite heavily to
ensure that they are made whole.
And so that is, but I don't have
a specific answer. I apologize.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
representative and and experts,
um, as a former county
commissioner, we did several of
these and, and.
Even to this day, I still don't
like IRBs.
Um
We're picking winners.
There's no losers except for the
county.
We, we always made sure that our
school districts were made
whole, our colleges made whole,
our hospitals were made whole.
it
There's that other portion there
and.
That's what we gave up. And
sometimes that was substantial.
And uh so
That's one of my concerns there,
um.
Were there any
As you were doing that, were
there any counties that um
As you negotiated with them or
as.
This is going that did not agree
with this.
Madam Chair Representative on
the IRB's no, uh, the IRBs for
Sunsia are with Lincoln County,
Torrance County and San Miguel,
uh, on Western Spirit. It was
Lincoln County.
Hey
I, I, I still have a problem
with this only for the fact that
Uh
Folks that are getting the use
of this are in Arizona and
California.
Not in New Mexico and so we're
asking for a tax break for folks
that don't live in this, in this
state.
We're using taxpayer money from
this state to fund this.
And they're getting the benefit
of it.
A
Hard time with that.
resolving what somebody else
trying to resolve as well in my
mind and I'm
Just not sure yet.
shake out. So thank you for your
time. Thank you for your
question or the response to the
question.
Thank you, ma'am. Sure. Speaker
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair and and presenters, thanks
for the time and um like uh my
colleagues said Duncan.
Um, I, I hope I'm not asking
anything that you've already
answered, although I probably
will just because I wasn't here
at the beginning.
Um, but
Um, I
Rita as, as, as I understand it,
uh, Madam Chair, presenters.
It's, it's uh
It's an extension of the state.
Is that fair to say, Madam
Chair, Mr. Speaker, and can you
elaborate as to how
It is
comprise how it is made up
Martinez, uh, yes, um, we are a
statutorily created state
authority.
And we
a governing board that uh is
made up of 3 appointees by the
governor that are confirmed by
the Senate
Speaker of the House, you have
an appointee,
uh, Senator has an appointee.
The treasurer sits.
uh,
and, uh, the, um, sorry, uh.
Oh, I'm screwing up, I forgot
the Latin, um, the treasure, uh,
is a, is a voting member and the
Secretary of Enert is a
non-voting member.
And Madam Chair presenters, you
said it's a statutorily created,
so we, we created it at some
point.
I, uh, Madam Chair
Representative Martinez, yes,
that's correct, in 2007. And for
what purpose was it created?
Uh, Madam Chair, and, uh,
Representative Martinez, it was
created as an economic
development tool to plan
finance, acquire, and lease uh
uh transmission and energy
storage projects to spur on the
development of the renewable
energy industry in New Mexico.
Um, all of our projects have to
uh either transmit or store at
least 30% renewables. Most of
our projects are 100%, but I
wanted to make it clear to the
committee that um.
The energy source on our lines
is agnostic, so this is a
transmission tool that is not
just for you uh uh renewables
and that it's uh we badly need
more energy and more
transmission to meet the growing
demand.
So in other words, Madam Chair
and and presenters, this is not
like an overnight legal fiction
we created for the purposes of.
Right now building.
Sunia Western sky. This was
created with a vision almost 20
years ago.
To uh find creative ways to
leverage our
Abundance of wind for better or
for worse, allergy season
probably for worse.
Uh
While also ensuring that local
communities through which these
projects are built.
can receive the benefit as well.
And, and it seems to me that
Rita.
Is that creative.
Um
concept that has allowed for
some of these projects to take
shape, Madam Chair and
presenters, would you agree with
that?
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker. Now,
um, tell me a little bit, um,
About, I heard a couple of
times, um.
The phrase payments in lieu of
taxes.
Local communities.
And, and you, you expand a
little bit on that, uh, but I
would like you to expand a
little bit more. What does that
look like in some of these
counties and and and and and
local communities through which
these lands are built.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Mr.
Speaker, uh, yes, the way that
the wind farms are constructed
is we work hand in hand with the
counties we request that the
counties issue the industrial
revenue bonds, uh, as they issue
those industrial revenue bonds
pattern as the private party
does cover all of the expenses
associated with that if they
have outside legal counsel or
advisors, we cover all of those
expenses on behalf of the
county. Once the IRBs are
issued, uh, we do issue
public debt for the financing of
the overall project in this case
on Sunsia alone, it was $11
billion about 9 billion of that
is for the wind farm development
itself and what we have done is
we have negotiated those payment
of tax amounts, uh, to the tune
of 2800 megawatt for every
megawatt installed in the
county's land holdings or in the
boundary, we actually pay them
on a per megawatt payment for
everything.
installed there. We also did the
county's negotiated a increase a
2.5% increase every 5 years in
that amount. So it does escalate
over time as well. And those
payments are made directly to
the counties and So, um, and,
and this is done through,
through agreements that you have
with these local county
commissions, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, that's
correct. And I think I heard you
say earlier that um,
Every county through which you
build through has
Endorsed, voted for, supported
these these buildouts and these
payments and include taxes.
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, that's
correct. Each has approved and
they go through, there is a
first uh bond ordinance and
hearing on that. And then once
there is a waiting period
because it is a public hearing,
there is a waiting period and
then it is adopted later on at
the next county commission and,
and Representative Duncan knows
this, um, probably better than I
do.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and
presenters and um I would assume
as you're building out through
these counties, I think you said
Lincoln and you said um uh
Torrance, Guadalupe, what else?
Where else? Uh, Madam Chair, Mr.
Speaker, uh, San Miguel County
San Miguel. So as you're
building, um, I'm assuming
you're
You end up building on probably
private land too, is that, is
that correct?
Um, Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker,
that's correct, on Sunsia, we
have 528,000 acres of private
and state trust land leased of
that 528, 171,000 is New Mexico
State Trust land where they are
receiving those payments
directly as well.
So state trust land which is all
of us taxpayers and then there
are individual landowners that
lease land to you all to build
out these projects.
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, that's
correct. OK.
Um, I won't ask you how much
those folks are are are are
being paid or making because uh
that may not be um
Public information, but I, I'm
excited for those landowners,
uh, because some of that land
I'm sure is is quite valuable
now.
Um, in terms of, um,
So, well, let me back up. It
seems like
As these projects have been
built over the last several
years.
There's been a great deal of
community, local community
consultation, Madam Chair and
presenters. Um, it seems to me,
Madam Chair, that
They
uh that there is generally a lot
of support for this in the
communities where it's happening
because of the economic impact,
the positive economic impact in
those communities, um, and I
would argue that it's
Um, exemplified by the support
of those local governing bodies,
right, because those folks
ultimately are responsible to
their constituents, to the
voters, to the taxpayers of
their county.
Um, and as these folks vote to
endorse or support these
projects.
Um, it seems to me that, uh, if
the local community doesn't want
it, they're probably not gonna
re-elect you or even elect you
in the first place.
Um, but let, let me, let me move
on, so, um, as I read.
As I read the bill and as, as I,
as I read the summary.
The fiscal impact report.
Um, page 2, the first sentence
says House Bill 295.
And then the word that kind of
jumps at me as confirms.
That real property including
transmission lines owned by
Rita.
Which is, which is an
instrumentality of the state.
is property tax exempt pursuant
to
Relevant statute.
Why do we need this confirmation
in this bill.
Uh, madam chair, uh, Martinez,
um.
because of how confusing 736-4
is.
Um,
It appears to create an
ambiguity as to our uh
constitutional exemption. And so
what we're asking is
confirmation and clarification
that that.
Uh, statute.
Um
It's within our constitutional
exemption rather than clouds it.
And Madam Chair, presenter, that
is because you are an
instrumentality to the state.
You are created by the state,
you are uh governed by the state
as you mentioned earlier by
appointments made by this
legislature and by the
executive, is that right?
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Speaker
Martinez, that is correct. OK.
Um
Madam Chair, I, I see this, um,
I don't see these folks as
coming in and asking for
Um, yet another.
Incentive, yet another taxpayer
funded.
Um, you know, pot of money.
To help
Build out their economic
development project. And you
know, this legislature we we
that's a constant tension and,
and it's a fair tension, right?
As, as we look for ways to
incentivize our economy.
To build
Uh, employment opportunities and
jobs, particularly in rural
communities where we know folks
are struggling.
Um
This build is not is not asking
for anything out of whack. It's
not even asking for anything
new.
You're just here to have us
confirm that in fact.
This state created authority.
Walls within that property tax
exemption.
Um, and I think that's important
to know.
Because have you guys been here
asking for yet something else. I
think it's a different
conversation, including for
myself.
Um
Which I appreciate very much
because uh as you can imagine,
uh, this legislature and and and
this committee in particular, we
are always under tremendous
pressure.
Either to
Uh, you know, build another tax
package to incentivize some new
project coming in.
With all the promises that are
generally made.
Or to extend something that's
about to sunset, because if we
don't, the sky is gonna fall.
And by golly, that industry
that's been here for 20 years
will leave, right? And that's
the tension that this committee
and, you know, I know our vice
chair and our chairman for sure
feel that pressure probably more
than most of us because you all
are overseeing a lot of this
work.
Um, but you're not in that boat,
at least not today.
You are just asking to clarify
something that I think.
Uh, you know, generally would be
understood now.
As is the case with the law,
it's always up to
interpretation, and I think in
this case you are asking us to
Tie it up a little bit to make
sure that in fact,
You are operating well within
the bound, which I can
appreciate.
Um, the last thing I want to
mention, Madam Chair.
Is
You know, the other, the other
point of tension in this
legislature.
Is this binary.
In my mind, fictional.
Struggle
Between renewable energy in the
oil and gas industry.
And I'm a firm believer.
That we can have both, and we
can have both operating robust
ways.
to
Not only continue.
To, to improve the livelihoods
of of of all New Mexicans.
But as we look into the future,
I'm very proud of the fact.
That New Mexico.
Has some of the best.
Oil, um, I would say in the
world, and I'm not an oil and
gas expert, but
In talking to a lot of those
experts on that side of the
bench and and and others.
Uh, in the audience, I am, I've
come to understand that we are
blessed with that incredible
resource, and we should
continue.
who invest in ways to
To extract that resource in the
cleanest way possible, because
that's the other piece, right?
You don't do it here, Russia
will do it.
Violating everybody's human
rights.
And every environmental
protection imaginable.
Uh, at the same time,
We have the largest wind
generation project.
In North America, maybe in the
western hemisphere.
Right here in Little Lincoln
County, right here in tiny
little Guadalupe County.
I mean, that is something to be
incredibly proud of.
We can do both.
And we can do both in the best
of ways.
So I will be supporting this
bill. Uh, you're not asking for
anything new, anything out of
whack, you're asking us to
confirm what in fact has been
I would argue common knowledge
for 20 years.
Um, and
Thank you for bringing the bill
forward. I know it's very
complicated. My eyes gloss over,
uh, no offense, but when you
guys started getting technical,
eyes gloss over a little bit,
uh, but this is something we
should all be proud of and I'm
happy to support it. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative that
asks for the 2nd time.
Thank you, Madam Chair. OK, I
just want to make sure I got
this right.
So when we're building this,
Madam Chair.
German.
One of your first building the
project, you're getting you're
probably getting your right
away.
Right of way to go through the
property.
You're creating a lease to with
a.
Landowner.
That you will probably pay
monthly or however you pay it.
Taxpayers
Well, the bond will pay
technically for the
improvements.
We're borrowing for
Chair my so far on my on on
board.
Uh, that I'm sure representative
process, there's not bond
funding for the transmission
line, it's.
private financing.
Your throat,
but indirectly the taxpayers who
will pay for that. Is that true,
Madam Chair representative?
Uh
taxpayer does not.
A to build the improvements to
private company does
and then through their revenues
and they pay it back.
Rita.
Madam Chair, Representative
Traci, they we acquire it, we
don't pay for it. They, they.
The
Basically give it to us, they
assign it to us and we lease it
back. Then you lease it back.
Yes, OK, ma'am, sure, so then
the only other question that I
had is,
Does the property for the from
the owners that are that are
leasing that.
Right away.
From you.
Do their taxes go up, their
property taxes go up.
Um, because they're making
revenue off of that.
And does that in turn
Do they get any more local tax
revenue.
As far as proper property taxes?
Sure
Madam Chair and Representative,
no, so the way the underlying
property is still taxed. What is
not happening here is that
So the only time that their
property taxes would increase as
if the county assessor goes in
and assesses a higher based on
that property tax. What Rita is
with the exemption that Rita
has, is that easement and the
underlying improvements on that
easement are what's tax exempt.
So the underlying property owner
does not bear the brunt of that.
That's what I wanted to
understand. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. I have a couple of
questions.
Um, to begin with, I was um.
Able to be part of the water and
natural resources committee
meeting held.
Um, I believe you were an expert
at the time, um, in in in mescal
little this summer. And of
course Chair McQueen was
chairing that committee and I
didn't imagine that I would come
back to some of those same
questions because those are not
questions or conversation we had
there that are contemplated in
this bill. But I've heard
information today that is
different than what we
understood previously or what I
understood at least when I
walked out of the water natural
resources. So I understand that
Rita.
was enabled by statute.
I do have some questions about
where the funding for Rita has
come from.
In particular, as I understand
it, you are a public private
partnership and what seemed to
be established this summer is
that
Beyond the lease fees that your
budget was upheld over several
years by contributions from
industry, I see a nod from yes,
but that is not what we heard
shared today, so I'd like first
to clarify that point.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, sorry for
the confusion, and I will try to
clarify that answer, so there's
a, a historical arc and Riader
was created, it had a
appropriation, I think of a
million dollars in 2007, 2008
period, um, it, uh, maybe had a
few other uh appropriations
along the way that I don't have
the details on as I sit here
today.
Early on, they did a bond
financing because it is able to
do that, hasn't since then for
high lones and Mesa is a small
transmission line about 30
miles, uh $500 million bond, no
sorry, $50 million bond and Rita
collected a.
Uh
$500,000 fee related to that
transaction, and that was able
to fund Rita for a period of
years.
Uh, around the
2000
15 2016 time period, uh.
We, as has been noted, it takes
a very, very long time to build
these transmission projects.
Um
The appropriations were passed
through both houses and line
item vetoed by Governor
Martinez.
Um, region nearly went out of
business during, uh, I think it
was if I I beginning of FY 2016,
um, Clean Line Energy who at
that time owned the Western
Spirit Project, stepped in, and
we are permitted under our act
to receive contributions, and
they um were able to keep
reading in business, uh, a very
skeleton, no staff, um.
I think the the first
contribution was $40,000 to get
through that fiscal year, there
were a couple of more years
where uh um clean line and then
pattern made modest
contributions to keep reading in
business, um, we had uh
developed uh policies that are
our board past to make it clear
that once those contributions
were received by Rita that um we
had absolute 100% control on how
they were spent.
Um, to preserve independence.
Um, then, um.
In 2021, the end of 2021,
Western spirit went into
commercial operation and under
our lease agreements, we began
receiving those lease payments,
and since then we have not
received um.
Those kinds of contributions,
but we, we we start to receive
contributions from developers at
very early stages in development
to reimburse Rita for its legal
and other consulting fees and
its staff time.
Thank you. Um, and again, that's
not contemplated in this
legislation, but because
something else was said out loud
in regards to the lease payments
as the only way the industry was
putting in. It's really
important for me that we are
quite clear on how this
authority operates and where
it's funding sources have been.
I know for myself and others, we
are quite open to public private
partnerships, we know those kind
of partnerships can advance New
Mexico's economic development
and bring in innovation that we
need, but we also need to be
very transport.
Transparent about what's
happening. Um, and certainly as
I heard it during water natural
resources, and I'm hearing again
today, there was a period of
years that this authority that
we're also saying is, as a, and
we know is statutorily enabled
was also financed and kept
alive, kept going by private
industry that we are now again
discussing here today. Um, but
that's just to get that out.
Um, in the last couple of days,
there's many of you all in the
room today that have led with
your advocacy and lobbying about
how important the passage of HB
295 is.
And what has felt, um, a little
bit problematic for me and I was
told this as recently as
yesterday. We want to make good
on the deals we promised to
partners.
I was not in the legislature in
2007.
We often debate what legislative
intent is.
I don't know where their intent
was or wasn't.
But when I look back to 2007, I
have lots of questions about the
deals that were being made.
Some of those deals in that era
sent people to prison.
So for me, sitting here today is
the vice chair of tax. I was
hoping and expecting we'd have a
more vigorous conversation about
what this ask is and that we
would be asked to consider
whether this was the right
policy for New Mexico.
We haven't talked at all about
what fractional interest even
means.
That's the center of this
debate.
Instead, we're saying that our
state, somebody else on this
diet, almost 20 years ago, made
some promises, and we have to
hold up those deals.
So for a few more minutes, I'd
like to talk about what's
actually in this bill because I
have openness to this, but I
also have questions.
Um
So to start with, uh, I want us
to take a different look at the
FIR, so we've talked, we all
know that the we are the tax and
rev committee.
The TRD analysis says pretty
strongly that there's grounds
that this may be
unconstitutional.
I've read some of the other
agency.
Analysis
And those sounds like they're
talking points for renewable
industries. I've taken those
votes. I've supported those
priorities. I know my New
Mexican values want to make sure
we're moving in that direction,
but they're not an analysis
that's actually looking at
what's in this bill.
When I look at the FAR on page
2.
No, I'm sorry, page 3.
Under significant issues. I
appreciate for all of us here
that New Mexico Attorney General
provides a simplified
description of the actions of
this bill.
And in the second paragraph,
they say, under 736-41B.
When a non-exempt entity owns a
fractional interest in the real
property for an exempt entity,
the fractional interest is
exempt from property taxation,
except for improvements that are
owned or leased.
by a non-exempt entity.
So when we say this isn't very
clear.
It looks pretty clear to me. It
says owned or leased by a
non-exempt entity.
Again, we can have this debate
here.
If, if we should, in fact, move
on to the next paragraph, which
encapsulates your proposal. You
propose to add language to
identify one situation where a
non-exempt fractional ownership
and an improvement to land owned
by Rita is exempt from property
taxation, and that would be by
lease.
So, I want to start with that.
What is a, I, I can read the
definition here on page one. But
what's the commonly held
understanding of a fractional
interest.
Uh, Madam Che I'll try on that a
fractional interest means
something less than the full
interest in the property, so a
right of way, a lease, a
license.
Um, would it be, say, uh, would
it also be fair to say it's way
of owning a portion of an asset
or if it's an investment
approach in which the cost of an
asset is split.
Um
Uh, urcadina so in in property
law, it's often in law school
talked about as a a bundle of
sticks and
A full interest would be.
Every stick in the bundle,
fractional interest would be
some of those sticks.
So does the state of New Mexico
have the full bundle.
Um, I, I.
Madam Chair, um, it has.
It starts with them.
When it, when it acquires the
right
way and the improvements and
then it leases the fractional
interest.
To be developed so.
We, we, we are the, the lessor
under the lease agreement, so
that's a certain number of
bundle in the sticks were the
owner of the interest that's a
certain other number of sticks
in the bundle and then the least
piece of it would transfer some
of those sticks in the bundle to
the private entity.
So that's the fraction of the.
Less than a whole bundle of
sticks. Yes, and for me the key
word here is the transfer.
Do you like to add something
else?
Adam Chair, if I might, what is
leased back to pattern energy in
this case is the ability to use
the wire. So Rita owns, they
continue to own the underlying
real estate as well as the
improvements. What pattern has a
right to do is to use those
lines to send power from the
wind farms down those wires, how
it is paid is from the charges
and fees that the wind farm pays
to use that transmission line
once we get off of Sun Z in this
case, read his portion.
And we
Touch another utility, we pay
that utility to use their
transmission lines and so on and
so on until we can get that
product to market.
Mhm
Uh, so I appreciate that. So
going back to who holds the
interest in these properties and
then in turn the question where
the tax obligations are.
Um, Mr. Sponsor, can you explain
to me again, not on the deals or
promises we made back then.
What are you seeking to
establish with the proposal
that's in front of us today in
2025 and why?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I'm
seeking to continue development
of transmission.
Or then development of
generation of clean energy uh
across our state, especially on
sort of the eastern and central
parts of our state from sort of
the northeast to the southeast.
room, madam Chair, um.
Really all parts of the state.
So Madam Chair, my interest is
squarely in us moving forward,
continuing to develop
transmission. Hopefully, Madam
Chair, develop it more quickly.
Uh, if we're taking 15 to 18
years for projects like Senzia,
Madam Chair, I hope that for
real soul and others that will
touch uh some of our South
Central communities sell power
to uh our utilities, including
El Paso Electric.
That we can shrink that time
frame, hopefully to, you know,
10 years and Madam Chair that we
can continue.
And uh appropriate way shrinking
that time so that we can build
more transmission and therefore
get more generation relatively
quickly.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
One of the other questions I
have looking at the FIR.
Oddly enough, we haven't talked
about the FIR naming that this.
estimate
Or the fiscal implications are
recurring, but also
Indeterminate but minimal.
Are you all sitting at the
table? What do you think the
cost is to you?
Should you not have this bill
move through, Madam Chair, we've
been trying to work through
those numbers. We estimated
around $150 million over a
30-year period.
So $150 million.
Saying Mr. Chair, $150 million
that otherwise would be going
where?
Madam Chair, those payments, if
it were paid through property
taxes would be flowing to the
counties.
So Mr. Chair, um, Mr. Chair and
sponsor, uh.
What's interesting to me is
we've talked a lot about the
IRBs, and I understand them as a
separate and distinct process,
and I, I believe it was Chair
Chandler that brought us some of
those proposals most recently,
proposals that in fact we
supported and put into the tax
package, so again,
I understand and it puts support
behind things like the RBs and
understand, uh, the pills that
go along with that.
We've we've somehow brought
those into today's conversation,
but this to be clear, is a
separate $150 million. That is
not connected to the IRBs that
is not connected to the payments
in lieu of taxes that you all
are making to counties on the
ground today.
Madam Chair, that's correct.
They are those payments are
separate, but without the
transmission, we cannot build
the wind farms, and that is
where the
Cruxt of this bill is and where
Rita was established, I used to
run Rita. I was the executive
director for a number of years
there before it was defunded.
Rita was intended to be an
economic development tool, very
much like LEDA, the LEDA Act, it
was intended to promote
development. That's what it's
been able to do is because of
the partnerships which are a
first of their kind public
private partnerships that ever
existed for transmission in the
US because of those
partnerships, it has.
resulted in our ability to build
wind farms without the
transmission, we are unable to
do those on the
On your prior point, the 150
million, you're absolutely
correct, those payments were
generally if paid under property
taxes go to the counties, but in
the absence of that, what we've
done is entered into separate
community benefit agreements
with all 7 counties that we
cross and that we pay them
$20,000 a mile for every mile
that goes through their county
in a form of payment.
Madam Chair, if I might add, um,
again, and appreciate your focus
on sort of looking for and very
much looking forward, Madam
Chair, looking forward, I think
we're in a far different federal
climate as it relates to
development of clean energy
resources.
You know
And without sort of assigning
judgment to that.
I do substantially fear that in
the different ways that the
federal climate has been made
much more difficult, financing
may become more difficult that
uh.
Were we not to sort of keep this
our sort of New Mexico-centric
approach continuing in this way
that transmission could
absolutely stall, and Madam
Chair, we've talked about
without the transmission, there
is no way to build any of the
generation and so that'll extend
for another.
Indeterminate period, but
potentially 5, 10 plus years,
you know, a school kiddo could
go through school without any of
the money from that generation
that is tied to our bill with
the transmission, helping their
school.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, but
moving to that point, you and I
both represent districts in
southern New Mexico and I've.
Grateful uh that I've made it
home several times during this
legislative session, and I'm
blown away by the incredible
work that I see from one week to
the next on this project with
lines crossing 25 with the
helicopters stringing something
along from pole to pole from the
massive buildout. Um, it's
actually quite impressive that
so much has happened so quickly,
um, but it does, uh, Mr. Chair,
uh, representative and experts.
It has brought questions for me
about now some of what I've
heard that I I haven't seen the
documentation for, and I, I, I
do want to get to the, the tax,
the TRD analysis in a second,
because they're raising
questions as they're raising
their constitutional arguments
about public benefit. But I
actually hear you all talking
about.
Despite or alongside the the.
You're offering about what
you're paying to the counties
for.
Public benefit every 20,000 per
mile, separate of that, this
case, at least what TRD is
putting in front of us seems to
argue that there needs to be a
demonstrated public benefit. I
hear you all talking about
economic development and those
to me are distinct things until
we connect them back together.
Um, but to start with when I've,
when I've seen those lines going
up, I thought, is it really New
Mexicans flying those
helicopters because I've never
seen those helicopters like
where how would New Mexicans
jump into a project?
Like this overnight like what
data and documentation do you
have? So I, I appreciate that we
heard from two New Mexicans here
today. What do those crews look
like? Where is that labor coming
from? It seems to be highly
specific and highly technical.
Madam Chair, thank you for the
question and you're absolutely
right. We've got about 2500
workers and this goes into
Arizona as well, Sunsia
Transmission is about 535 or 553
miles long, um, about 300 miles
of that.
in the state of New Mexico. So
some of these numbers uh do
include our workers working on
that piece, although they're
pretty minor to the tune of
about 300, we've got about 2500
workers working on this project,
building the transmission line
as well as the wind farm. A good
portion of the transmission line
is actually being built by union
labor, um, and then as far as
the wind farm, we have tried to
employ New Mexicans. We do not
have a lot of them because we do
not have that skilled labor and
so that is a roll-on effect that
we
have been working with the
community colleges and high
schools on as well is because we
do not have that kind of skilled
labor in the state. So we do are
employing New Mexicans, um, what
we are also doing is once the
project is constructed, we have
a heavy focus on trying to hire
and retain New Mexicans to
operate the facility. The main
reason why is we can't keep
workers. They are not accustomed
to the remote nature of living
in rural New Mexico. And so we
have a significant
going on by myself and some
other individuals as well as our
turbine manufacturers to focus
on our high school students to
drive them into these careers as
I stated earlier, uh, starting
salary for the wind technicians
around 59,000 and the median
household income in these
communities is about 38.5 and so
that's what we're pushing if you
could just um
Make that concise for me. Where
are you bringing workers from
and what is that breakdown today
of your workforce, like how many
are New Mexicans? What
percentage are you bringing in
from somewhere else? Madam
Chair, I don't have an exact
percentage. We are from the
union side though, if we, if
they are available labors and
they're willing to work on the
project, we are working on them,
using them on the transmission
side on the wind farm. We do
have workers, but there's not
that many on the high voltage
direct current station. We have
out of 300.
ers there's probably only 20 New
Mexicans, because those are the
skilled laborers that we've been
able to find and so with that
said though, we also have the
subcontractors in the form of
the concrete deliveries and
aggregate, and I don't have an
accurate number on that. I
apologize. I can get it though.
Thank you. I, I would appreciate
hearing that because from my
understanding or even what you
shared today right now, the
majority of the workers out
there doing a a great and looks
like dangerous job to me are
coming from somewhere else.
But I'm sure, that's correct.
And again, this comes down to
the availability of qualified
workers and Madam Chair, if I
could briefly add.
You know, this is the first big
pri it is a very large project.
It's the first one after, you
know, almost 2 decades, Madam
Chair again forward looking if
we have a consistent way to
build these out.
And then leverage what this
legislature has done recently on
career technical education and
new investments that are not
part of this bill but are very
much part of what we've done and
are doing in the last.
It
I
no
Uh, sorry, ma'am I'm sure. I, it
just to um
Mm
The project we see on I-25 is
the first one after a very long
time.
Keeping a consistent approach
that is development friendly.
Combined with our investments
that we're making for New Mexico
workforce.
I am very confident will lead
more New Mexicans into this
field and um
Sort of the converse is true. If
we stall or if we're unable to
continue development, then.
Our ability to develop that
workforce here for projects here
will necessarily be stalled.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I, I
think I, I'm getting ready to
wrap up, um, my questions, but
This, this thread does ring a
bit to me like that kind of
scare tactic that we hear,
whether it's from oil and gas
if, if we raise another taxes, I
believe you have a bill to do
that, right? That we're gonna
shut down. The Permian's not
going anywhere and neither is
our wind.
And when I see like lines like
that going in and I see the
whole package of
Tax mechanisms that we put in
place to.
Bolster bolster investment to
bolster innovation to bolster
our workforce as we should.
It, it, I, I haven't quite, um,
that thread is not continual for
me that this piece of tax policy
either breaks or ends or moves
investment to like pick up and
carry somewhere else because
we've got the wind we have. We,
we've got the other, um, from
the governor's leadership to
your chair small, we've got the
commitments down to make sure
that renewable is part of our
energy infrastructure. Um, but
lastly, I do wanna look closer
at the tax.
and rev analysis because
fundamentally.
They've made a position clear,
um, your experts, Mr. Chair,
have said that they're now
familiar with the case that that
both the the tax department is
referencing as well as Chair
McQueen, who's who's been pretty
vocal on this issue can you
speak to why.
Why they're wrong, if, if that's
what you're saying.
Uh, erina.
They, they cite the case and the
language from the case
correctly, where I think that
they're not complete, um, and
just to be clear, we're looking
at.
Opinion number 2017, New Mexico
Supreme Court, 26, the El
Castillo retirement residences
case.
Uh, yes, that is correct and so
what that case is looking at is
a different cons constitutional
exemption. It's the charitable
organization exemption, and that
is where they're also pulling,
uh, and I think this is
debatable as to whether it's
correct to pull it is the public
benefit issue, a charitable
organization is required to, um
provide a broad public benefit
to fit within that
constitutional exemption. Our
constitutional exemption as a
state.
ity is based on ownership, while
we do believe that our lines
really bring great public
benefit to New Mexico on the
weekend.
Demonstrate that I don't believe
that it's required for the
ownership exemption.
Have you approached Thaksin Rev
about this analysis or this
distinction in which
constitutional exemption you're
falling under.
Uh, uh, Madam Chair, not that
particular point. I have not
discussed that particular point
with anyone at Texan rep.
I have generally discussed our
bill.
But the um they uh analysis came
out prior to uh me having a
detailed conversation with the
analyst. I've not talked with
the analyst at all.
Thank you and just for.
The awareness of those listening
online or those in the room,
agencies do have an opportunity
to update their analysis. They
do it with frequency.
Um, so
You got out of
The house Energy Committee, you
came here as far as I'm aware,
Thaksin Rev has not updated
their analysis. So it stands.
But the analysis we are reading
is the analysis that came out on
Valentine's Day on February
14th.
Is there anything you want to
offer about your conversations
with the agency.
And they're, they're not here as
far as I can tell, they're not
here today.
I would only say, Madam Chair,
um, we'll, we'll, uh, you know,
As we move through this process,
we'll check in with them. It's a
great suggestion and uh lens.
I think concise and clear.
Uh, summary very much makes the
case that they are interpreting
this wrong and that we're
focused on a different
foundation. So we'll, we'll
check in with them. Thank you
for that. And certainly if that
foundation shifts, then yes,
we're having a different
conversation or what it means
for a public private partnership
that we've enabled in statute to
have the same potential benefit
as a state agency or as an
executive agency, cuz again,
there's this is.
This was held up by private
investment and we're turning
around and saying we also want
to claim the state benefit as a,
as an, as an agency. Um, I'm
gonna go for the second time to
wrap Lustrom, oh, and rep
Martinez.
Oh
Uh man, I'm sure on that point,
um, given that we do have an
outdated potentially.
Agency analysis.
And it doesn't seem like the
conversation has actually
happened with the agency to
clarify some of the the great
questions you brought up.
I would suggest that we send
these folks to go talk to TRD
for the rest of the day and
weekend, and then bring this
back on Monday to see if there's
an updated.
analysis that we can consider as
we as we take our vote.
Right, uh, Lanston. Thank you,
Madam Chair, just to another
quick comment that to think
about since this is a state
entity, reader's estate entity.
My question is, is are the
leaseback agreements available
for public review. Madam Chair
and Representative Lindstrom,
uh, parts of them are, we, we,
it puts us at a disadvantage
when we're negotiating uh
private uh agreements at arm's
length to.
Um
Disclose the pricing
information, but we have made a
significant portions of those
lease agreements public through
uh.
For example, PRC.
Um
Let me ask you then, um, Madam
Chair, uh, expert, um, who
actually negotiates these lease.
You have a law firm or or you
madam chair and Representative
Lindstrom, um,
The, uh
We have a law firm, yes, uh, the
current one is set in the Brown,
um.
As legal support but the uh it's
the client who negotiates, so a
combination of board and staff
members, negotiate those
agreements.
Oh.
OK, so, Madam Chair, you, how
many staff are there, Madam
Chair, uh, Representative
Lindstrom, uh, 5, including
myself.
So I'm clear on this, uh, Madam
Chair, leaseback agreements are
negotiated.
Um, primarily with, with you, I
assume, and your legal.
Contract support.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Lindstrom, uh, I've been in this
executive.
Director position since.
July and so I was point.
Or one of those agreements prior
to that.
And then, uh, prior to entering
into those agreements, the board
reviews them and votes on them,
the full board.
Alrighty, uh
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Mhm
Representative Gallegos, thank
you. um.
So I, I
Madam Chair and and
representative, I'm sorry I
missed a big portion of your
presentation, I had another
presentation, um, but.
So with the shift of the
distribution.
A property taxes. Doesn't this
put the burden on people versus
the businesses.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, some guy
goes, no, this is sort of the
way it's been operating now,
which is why there's
So, no, madam Chair,
representative, um.
OK.
Um
I, I guess
You know, and I heard the the
speaker's recommendation to get
more information from uh tax and
rev, I think I'd feel more
comfortable getting that
information, um, I also.
You know, I, I, I feel
uncomfortable with the in in all
the analysis in in all the that
we received. I keep seeing the
unconstitutional piece to that,
and so I think uh I'd like to
hear maybe when you come back.
How it is constitutional and it,
it feels like when the pieces
that I did here, it was a shift
of all, that was that um law
that was, but I want to hear it
directly for this before I would
be comfortable voting for this,
so on that, uh, Madam Chair,
I'll, I'll end my question.
Would you like anything to say
before we go to the committee?
Uh, Madam Chair, I, I think it's
a great suggestion. I'd love to
go back, get some updated
analysis. I know we've had a
good discussion here. Appreciate
the time and the care and we'll,
we'd love to come back.
Thank you.
Great, thank you.
On the agenda.
That
He's really
Last on the agenda for today, we
have HB 326 as amended.
Representative Gonzalez.
Just an update in case folks
went on when we started, HB 330
as amended, land grant me said
and Nase infrastructure is being
rolled at the request of the
sponsor. So this will be our
last bill for the day.
Go ahead, Representative
Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee. Um, I do want to
make note that an amendment was
submitted, so.
That is the will of the
committee to how it's presented.
Thank you. If you'll just give
us a second, we'll get the
amendment passed out.
OK, uh, if you'll start with the
202 number and um share on your
We'll see if the committee wants
to move the amendment for
discussion.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, the
202 number at the bottom is
231-404.2.
Thank you.
Um, and then if you'd like to
present the bill and tell us
what the amendment does or or
we'll leave it to you to decide
how to.
Make sure we know what you're
trying to do here. Thank you.
um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Essentially, the only thing the
amendment does is just clarify
some language, just clarifying,
um.
30, at least 30%. Some of the
numbers, some of the language
just to add better definition,
to make it a cleaner, cleaner
sounding bill.
Um, but essentially House Bill
326.
Just essentially would give a
$5000 tax credit to small
businesses, assuming that they
have been located in area
declared by the governors a
disaster, and the taxable year
for which the credit is claimed,
they would have had to have been
in operation for at least 22
consecutive taxable years, um,
they would need to demonstrate
that it would have sustained a
30% decline in gross revenue.
Um, and they would have an
annual gross revenue of less
than $2 million so, um, the
background on this bill is my
county, Torrance and Miguel, you
know, we are still recovering.
We are year 3 post disaster, um,
and I can tell you long term
benefits and our small
businesses have been
substantial, um, you know, you
have immediate relief.
Some may have had insurance,
some have FEMA claims, uh, but
even now that those have come
and gone, still waiting on some
claims um within the past year
alone we've had
Past few months, at least 4
businesses closed, um, just
ultra long term effects, um,
granted our area has been
increasingly hit with multiple
disasters, um, but this last
year in particular, there was a
lot of communities our state
around our state that had the
similar disasters.
If we talk about the amendment
as opposed to the bill.
Or did that pass and I missed
it, Madam Chair, I said because
this amendment was striking some
words and changing the emergency
proclamation that she could
explain the bill and then we'd
have a better understanding of
what the applications of the
amendment were. I just gave it a
quick look and saw it's uh an
emergency proclamation.
Thank you. Please proceed. Thank
you for that. Um, yes, really
the amendment, it just clarified
and again the decline of 30%
revenue, just the language in
the amendment was saying at
least a 30% decline. So again,
if they had additional, um, and
one additional thing that the
amendment did do was that, um,
it allowed the credit to be
claimed up to one year post the
Declaration, um, assuming in a
calendar year, say a disaster
would hit in December, for
instance, um, it would allow the
claimant to have
the, the next year to be able to
claim that and actually show
that loss of revenue.
Um, so with that, um, I would
also like to introduce my expert
witness here with me to help
with any clarifying.
Um, questions you may have
regarding the credit itself.
And introduce yourself?
Pam Stokes was the Legislative
council service. I'm here for
technical assistance only. I'm
not here uh in support of or in
opposition of the matter before
you.
Thank you for questions. Thank
you. I'd like to say that we're
going to public comment first,
and then we will come back and
if the committee chooses to take
action on the amendment, we'll
do that before we go to the rest
of the bill.
Um, we'll start with Zoom. Is
there anyone online that would
like to speak in support or
opposition.
To
I'll spill 326. Please raise
your hand.
Go ahead, Glenn, you have one
minute. Walters.
Walters on the uh director of
operations for the small
business development centers.
are not allowed to say in favor
or opposing. Let me just tell
you our small businesses, uh,
have suffered many disasters and
assistance that can be provided
could be helpful to them. Thank
you.
Anyone else like?
We go to public comment in the
room if you'd like to speak in
support or opposition to HB 4
326, please line up now.
Go ahead. You have one minute.
Um
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Joaquin Romero. I'm a 21 year
old uh from Mora, so as you
know, our community and our
sister community in Las Vegas
were severely impacted by the
Hermit's Peak Caf Canyon fire.
Uh, we have seen, uh, the
effects this has had on not only
our private citizens but also
our local businesses, uh, a few
of the businesses just in old
town in Las Vegas alone that I
used to frequent uh cafe, uh,
vinyl record store and uh
Bookstore just there uh have
closed down and, you know, I
want these small businesses to
thrive, not only because they
could uh generate interest for
young people such as myself, but
also because they are very near
and dear to our hearts, uh, in
Mora, we had our one of our
local restaurants, Hatcha is
owned by a local family. Uh,
they're providing free meals all
throughout the entire wild, um,
not wild, it's the forest fire
period, um, and, you know, this,
this tax.
Credit would be a, you know,
it's a drop in the bucket in
some ways, but it would be a a
definite start for uh helping
our small businesses. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, anything else to
add before we go to the
committee?
Um, no, just, you know, just
some clarifying one last movie,
yes, just one last clarifying
question. Um, you know, this,
this credit was created with the
intention to be fiscally
prudent, you know, not knowing.
The future of disasters in our
state, um.
As mentioned in some of the
analysis, you know, there is, we
could have gone much bigger with
this credit because small
businesses have seen a lot more
impact than $5000. But again,
coming in.
timing of the session, myself
being a freshman legislator. Um,
this was a fiscally prudent
decision that I worked with uh
multiple ways and how to run
this credit, um, and it was
intentional as it was designed
to really give some
straightforward assistance to
our small businesses.
I think you will go to
committee.
Representative and I'm sure I
moved to adopt the amendment.
Um, a question on the amendment,
Representative, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Question I have a representative
on #2, what is it now?
Uh, we're when we're asking.
Uh, no later than one year from
the date on which the governor's
state of emergency is what, what
is it currently?
Um, in the current bill, it did
not give that extension of the
extra year, so the.
Given one year to claim the
credit from the time of the
disaster just takes into
consideration that, you know, a
taxable filing year usually
happens in the spring of the
year and should a disaster say
occur late in the previous year,
say November, December, um, it
would just give time to show
that 30% decline in revenue.
So then, uh, from your expert,
well.
Does that mean that, um, you'd
have to, the taxpayer would ask
for an extension then in order
to get this.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
this requires the taxpayer to
apply for the tax credit to to
apply for cer certification of
the tax credit within one year
of the declaration from the
governor.
OK, if it's past the time we
file.
They can still do that and and
they don't have to ask for an
extension.
No. OK, thank you.
Any other discussion on the
amendment.
OK.
Any opposition to the amendment?
OK, to the bill.
discussion on the bill.
I'm over a do pass
As amended, excuse me.
Committee, this bill has a.
This bill has expenditures.
Yeah
So
So representative um
I'll share. Clearly there's
enthusiasm and support for this
idea, um, but as the practice
goes in the tax committee, if
there is um an expenditure costs
motion to table, Madam Chair. We
table these bills and then
they're held in consideration if
the tax, if, if they
appropriators and and the
leadership of tax committees
realized that there's capacity
to build a tax package that
this would be considered um for
that package. So yes. I don't
understand that if the credit's
already in law and they can
apply for it now.
And all she's asking for
basically is an extension I
don't understand what the
expense would be.
I'm, I'm just asking because I'm
new to the committee.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
this is not an existing tax
credit right now.
No, this is not an existing
credit tax credit. There is no
existing tax credit for small
business tax relief. Um, there's
been similar credits, say, post
COVID, post other things, um,
but this is specifically um
addressing the governor's
emergency declaration of an area
affected by a natural disaster,
a state natural disaster.
Thank you. So, um, any
opposition to the tabling
motion.
Thank you.
And this meeting is adjourned.
