Mr.
Long term as an attendee rental
can.
Thank you.
Representative Mart√≠nez.
Good afternoon present.
Representative Montoya.
Representative amap.
Representative.
Representative Strickler.
I'm here thank you.
It was that Representative
rement yes it was I apologize.
Representative Strickler.
Mr Herndon.
German chancellor.
Right well I called the meeting
to order in the the first item
first I just want to thank all
of you for make time on Saturday
there's tons of stuff going on
at the roundhouse its it's very
busy time so I very much
appreciate your making yourself
available in present and
participating I did confer with
our ranking member
Representative Harper I am aware
that there are a few members
such as Representative Herndon
and a few other of the minority
members.
Who are in energy and
environment but we decided just
to move forward that these bills
are relatively straightforward
and as I'm sure all of at least
a tax members now these are
these will likely be temporary
tabled and so we we just decided
to proceed and if the other
members become available they
can they can join us then all
right so we are now on house
bill seventeen it's expand rural
health practitioner tax credit
Representative Miguel Garcia.
Thank you madam chair namely one
estimate is that in the office
too all of you.
Madam chair before I start my
presentation on house bill
seventeen if we could bring my
experts over to the panelists
list and they are Dr Richard
Larson.
L. A. R. S. O. N..
I think her
they'll Tinker TI and K. E. R.
and Karen wedlock W. I. T. L. O.
C. K. right.
We'll do that Representative.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair members of the
committee house bill seventeen.
Adds a certain pharmacist
registered nurses social
workers.
Behavior health counselors and
therapists and physical
therapists to the rural health
care practitioner tax credit.
And.
Madam chair
This is my seventh year.
Seven straight year of caring
this legislation.
And fortunately
two years ago this committee was
gracious enough to move this
bill out.
Senator the floor of which it
passed fifty four zero.
fortunately it passed one Senate
committee and.
And at a bar in Senate finance
where
it didn't kind of move from
there madam chair I want to give
you the scope of the
legislation.
currently.
under the rural health care
practitioner tax credit act we
have two tiers of credits.
We have the five thousand dollar
credit and the three thousand
dollar credit.
Under the five thousand dollar
credit.
In the original legislation
we have physicians osteopathic
doctors then yes but
psychologist and but I interest.
Currently in statute would under
the three thousand dollar credit
we have dental hygienist
physician assistants.
Certified nurse midwives
certified registered nurses.
And this this certified nurse
practitioners and certified
nurse specialist.
Under house bill seventeen.
We are adding.
Pharmacists.
Registered nurses.
Think of social workers.
Independent social workers.
Professional mental health
counselors.
Professional clinical mental
health counselors.
Family therapist.
SO are there this.
Drug abuse counselors and
physical therapist.
Finder.
Representative the provisions of
this section and madam chair
There's been some additions
since the the my last
legislation.
In that we've added the physical
therapist.
And we've also
Elaborated on the
the counselors and therapists.
and the reason that we did that
is because
The New Mexico
Health care.
Workforce committee.
Has made recommendations in
terms of which.
Rural health care practitioners
should be brought into the
product.
And they had a physical
therapist on their list last
couple years of which I
overlooked.
Because my bill basically tracks
with the recommendations of the
New Mexico health care workforce
committee recommendations.
And also madam chair past years
I've had constructs come up to
me and say again you know how
come your I'm a community
including us
I said you know I'm pretty sure
that we've kind of captured all
the counselors and therapists.
So what I did this summer madam
chair as I sat down with doctor
Larson.
Questions were of New Mexico of
the university Mexico health
sciences center and also is the
chairman of the New Mexico
health care workforce committee.
And Dr Larson intervene.
with the taxation and with the
role with the regulation
licensing department and asked
them to give them a list of
outcomes first and L.
therapists.
And so that's why we've added
even though we did have some in
our prior legislation of years
past now basically what this
bill we're we're capturing all
behavior health counselor there
is.
And
and madam chair
The rural health care
practitioner tax credit act was
established in two thousand and
seven.
To kind of reduce or short or
shortages in our rural areas.
And also to kind of retain
current practitioners.
And.
One of the legislative intent
back then was also to enhance
economic development in rural
areas thanks for example these
health care practitioners moving
into these rural communities
purchasing a home engaging in
our economic activity within
their community shopping
etcetera etcetera.
Madam we might ask
Why pharmacists and why social
workers.
And why behavioral health
counselor and therapist and wind
physical therapist and why
registered nurses.
And madam chair.
The New Mexico.
Health care workforce committee.
In their last seven annual
reports.
As recommended.
The pharmacist social workers a
real concern therapist.
And visible to their best for
the tax credit.
my legislation madam chair has
always been based.
On these recommendations.
By the New Mexico health care
workforce committee.
And not by recommendations of
paid lobbyist.
And madam chair.
The New Mexico healthcare
workforce committee is
comprised.
Of.
Very qualified and competent.
medical professionals.
From medical boards and medical
associations throughout the
state.
and from diverse it's a twenty
four member board and also this
board is also comprised of.
Diverse community groups.
Thank the N. double ACP.
The New Mexico Hispanic Medical
Society.
In the US Indian health
services.
Madam chair.
The New Mexico health care
workforce committee As You
science to determine where to
best address.
Health practitioner shortages
and repayment in rural New
Mexico.
The science leads them and us to
believe that the biggest bang
for our tax credit dollars lies
in expanding their own
healthcare practice practitioner
tax credit act to include.
Pharmacists social workers
behavioral health counselors.
at the end therapist physical
therapist and registered nurses.
And madam chair.
There is one.
Profession that is not in the
recommendations.
But I am committed to work with
Dr Richard Larson.
And the New Mexico workforce.
New Mexico after workforce
committee.
This coming year.
And.
Urge them to add.
Registered nurses.
To the recommendations.
And why registered nurses madam
chair.
Answer simple.
The nursing industry has been
impacted.
Representative fully.
By comment.
And we're seen dire shortages
we're seeing some registered
nurses going on the on the
travel nurse to our even our
communities and
and there is a shortage and as
you can see by this legislature
that were putting money into
the greater attainment and
greater development of of more
nurses in our communities.
So registered nurses merit
position in terms of a
recommendation for the tax
credit.
Madam chair the data shows.
Especially from the New Mexico
health care.
Workforce committee.
In their twenty twenty report.
Shows that there is fifteen
thousand five hundred eighty
eight practicing our aunts and
certified nurse specialist CNN's
CMS's.
Ninety percent.
Of the fifteen thousand and so
are and of these twenty three
percent are in rural areas.
The US.
Three thousand two hundred
thirty nine RN's would be
eligible for the credit.
Even my manager.
Twenty percent of these our
aunts our rural areas New Mexico
yes sixty five percent rural.
Madam chair there are nine
thousand for thirty one
according to the.
The twenty twenty report that
the mental health care workforce
committee does and they do an
annual report.
They show nine thousand front
thirty one behavioral health.
Ladders.
Twenty percent practice in rural
areas.
The US.
So one thousand six hundred
seventy four of these behavior
health providers will be
eligible for the credit under
our bill.
In the money.
Mexico is sixty five percent
rural.
Madam chair.
The report also states that
seventeen hundred pharmacists.
And
in our state.
Of these twenty six percent our
rural New Mexico.
Or four hundred forty
pharmacists that would benefit
from the credit.
Also there's fifteen hundred
according to the report fifteen
hundred forty seven this call
therapist our state.
Right practice.
Is this the data that I shared
with you are are practicing
practitioners.
Under one thousand one four some
physical therapist twenty five
percent are in rural areas.
The US.
That totals out to three hundred
eighty seven.
Yes that would be eligible for
the credit and then total.
Our bill would encompass.
But the owner forty health care
practitioners in total that
would be eligible for the credit
under house bill seventeen.
Madam chair
I have a cell and I'm sending
our experts that I would like to
you at this moment and the first
is a Dr Richard Larson like to
Chester of the.
UNM health sciences center and
also the chair of the
illustrious Mexico healthcare
workforce committee.
Thank you very much
Representative thank you madam
chair.
I am as Representative Garcia
mentioned the chair of the New
Mexico workforce analysis
committee this committee was
formed by the state legislature
in two thousand fourteen I what
was tasked with was collecting
up all the reddit lot registered
license your data altering the
renewal licensure data surveys
so that we as a state could
track our entire health care
professionals throughout the
state.
Figure out where they practiced
how they practiced and how many
there were this was actually.
We were the first state to do
this there's now about a half
dozen states who done this and
so we can feel really proud of
that we actually leave the
nation in our ability to track
our health care workforce
throughout our state each year
the committee mmhm analyzes the
data in the system in the state
throughout every County and what
you would not be surprised we're
short we're severely short all
health care professionals we
have a tax credit that's two
standards is a three thousand
dollar tax credit a five
thousand dollar tax credit
depend on the health care
professional.
And in our analysis of that we
noticed that although there's a
lengthy list of health care
professionals under each
category Senator health care
professions were not included
and so for the last several
years to health care committee
has recommended that those
groups be included it we do
believe that it will help retain
and attract health care
professionals particularly to
the rural areas of New Mexico
where the health care
professionals are needed the
most.
And so we strongly support
representative Garcia and his
efforts to get tax credits for
all the health care
professionals thank you madam
chair.
Sure I'll now to dealtaker.
L..
I just asked me to.
Okay I think I'm and I and get
it now.
Your own brother okay.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative Garcia I I would
I want to say thank you to
representative Garcia for his
finishes efforts on behalf of
professions that have not been
included in the in a tax credit
over the years.
at will our pharmacist missed
out on regulate the the tax
credit passed in two thousand
seven and we have been working
since that time off and on but
not nearly as determined as
representative Garcia has been.
as he as he stated there are
a little over seventeen hundred
pharmacists licensed in New
Mexico have those twenty six
percent better practicing in
rural New Mexico I'm in a state
where sixty five percent that's
sixty five percent rural we
definitely need to be moving
pharmacists out of Albuquerque
Santa Fe area and and to
practice and more rural New
Mexico as you all know
pharmacists have been providing
the COVID vaccinations primarily
now providing about seventy
little over seventy percent of
the vaccines in the state of New
Mexico but that means in rural
New Mexico is much harder if you
live in a rural area where
there's a pharmacy you'll find
that they limit
appointments where people can
come together COVID vaccine.
These days
Really believe that a tax credit
would encourage pharmacists some
pharmacists
As a benefit of their employment
to relocate to rural New Mexico
again thank you.
Representative Garcia and I want
to thank workforce committee to
for the great work that they do.
Thank you very much.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Dale and Leslie and my witness
list is Karen wedlock.
Karen go for it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee command Karen Witt
lock with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter and we too
want to thank the sponsor for
his long commitment to this to
this effort and I just wanted to
say that in several New Mexico
counties we have no social
workers no one to provide
wraparound services no one to
provide I get behavior health
counseling those are very
important services that are
lacking in some of our rural
areas we kind of taken and all
of all of the above approach to
this effort and this is one of
the other of many tools in our
toolbox for using to keep social
workers and attract social
workers to rural areas
and with that I'll take any
question you have thank you.
Thank you madam chair with that
we stand for questions.
Thank you very much
Representative let's look we
look the attendees and see if we
have any public comment.
Anyone who wishes to speak in
favor of the bill please raise
your hands those in favor.
Okay
Sanchez.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is yes such as with oil futures
which is a statewide
reproductive justice
organization led by and for
black indigenous women and
people of color we have done
significant work over the years
with licensed midwives and
expanding access to midwifery
services and rural and frontier
New Mexico and what we
appreciate Representative
Garcia's Doggett efforts to
bring a tax credit for medical
providers for several years now
we would love to see the
expansion to add licensed
midwives to the list currently
the tax credit is already
offered to certified nurse
midwives but does not include
licensed midwives who often have
a lower income and are more
likely to work in rural and
frontier areas we know this and
other similar tax credit bills
have been gently and lovingly
tables in this committee not for
their lack of Wirth New Mexicans
however we continue to raise
awareness of the impact of tax
credit would have on these vital
providers across the state we
support this bill with them with
an amendment to add licensed
midwives thank you.
Michael Adam email address that
starts with Dr.
Hello my name is.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Michael
program and I'm a chiropractic
physician in Albuquerque I
represent the American
chiropractic association and I
chair the New Mexico overdose
prevention and pain management
Advisory Councils integrative
treatment committee.
I treat patients in private
practice at the U. N. M.
department of neurosurgery in
Spain Department in a First
Nations community health source
which is a federally qualified
health center.
Federally qualified health
centers survey under pop
underserved population of New
Mexico throughout the state and
the two bills that you're
considering today will help
retain and attract providers and
support these two pieces of
legislation I humbly ask the
workforce analysis committee to
publish the data chiropractic
physicians in their next report
and I appreciate the opportunity
to speak on behalf of the
chronic pain patient community
in New Mexico thank you.
Thank you Linda Siegel.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Linda Siegel for
the New Mexico nurses
association and we are
exceedingly grateful that nurses
have been added into this bill
thank you Representative our
state excuse me
as you all know there is a huge
nursing crisis according to the
work force report that Russian
gas the others we have about
sixty two hundred and R. ram
shortage and we have been
working on a number of
initiatives to increase the
schools of nursing so that they
can start educating more nurses
because we know when you educate
someone in the community
especially in nurse they usually
stay there and so this will be a
good benefit for our rural.
Particularly hospital nurses to
help them stay in the community
throughout our state a number of
closures have occurred and in
hospitals particularly in the
rural areas and those are
because we don't have enough
nurses staffing so we strongly
support additional thank you.
Thank you Linda Sherri Dotson.
Sherri Dotson I couldn't get it
to I'm sorry madam chairman and
members of the committee I had
about four times.
my name mystery dots and and I
am a volunteer advocate for a a
RP New Mexico and we feel that
our house bill seventeen will
increase access to health care
for our over fifty population
that we serve and help them
receive quality care near their
own homes as a retired
registered nurse myself married
to a retired pharmacist we're
really happy to see them those
professions included in your tax
bill we would like to thank
representative Garcia for
sponsoring this bill and we urge
you to pass it thank you.
Thank you Dorothy cedar.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Dorothy seat number retired army
major I'm speaking today for the
veterans and military families
caucus.
veterans military families exist
all over the statement
particularly rural areas they
don't have enough access to
health care professionals I'm
not just doctors but all of the
many other professions that
Representative Garcia is
including in this bill I myself
grew up poor in rural and I I
understand personally the impact
of not having health care
accessible in in rural
communities so I I asked that
the members vote in favour of
the bill thank you thank you
Dorothy Karen lose Cerro.
Hello my name is Karen C. Cerro
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee or
allow me to speak for this
This bill we want to thank
our representative Garcia for
carrying it I'm with the
American physical therapy
association of the New Mexico
chapter and we are strongly in
support of this bill and are
very appreciative to be added as
one of the providers of the
health care workforce report
does include just now and shows
that there are only four
counties in New Mexico have
reached the benchmark
recommended for number of
therapist the recommended number
is nine point five for ten
thousand of the population and
most counties are way under that
and I work with children who
have developmental disabilities
and I find the families have to
drive into Albuquerque or Santa
Fe to be able to find a
therapist to serve them or
receive services only by
telehealth.
So there's a severe need in all
areas of physical therapy it
also is one way that we can
address the need for the opioid
crisis cause physical therapist
can really be helpful in
addressing pain control.
So we thank you for your
attention to this bill and we
appreciate you considering it
thank you thank you Karen.
I don't see any other hands in
favor are there any attendees in
opposition.
I see no hands raised in
opposition so act to the
committee.
did you want to offer any
concluding remarks
Representative before we get to
the committee.
No madam chair I think we've
been real thorough in our
presentation and also the
testimony from the experts and I
appreciated the also the
feedback and input from the
attendees as well thank you
Representative let me see.
Annalise.
Representative Harper.
All.
That thank you madam chair and
chairman RC it's a great to see
you here again.
Tax your quite a warrior
persistent
and and and I do remember it was
I I think was two years ago
right Madam chairman that we had
the capacity and we were able to
let this bill out
and it's it's unfortunate that
it got bogged down in the Senate
but
we all know we don't have much
control over what happens over
there.
so I a couple a couple of
comments and then a couple
questions
madam chair.
Chairman or CEO.
So
I guess first.
We know that our health care
taxation in the state is is a
complete Hodge podge.
A checker board I mean is it is
really inconsistent and we
actually had a great
presentation a couple years ago
by Frank prashad our he kind of
went in detail on all these
different ways that we are very
inconsistent and how we we tax
the health care industry it's a
it's a real mess.
and we did take a positive step
a couple years ago to start
treating hospitals
more more more the same right we
have we have private hospitals
we have non for profit hospitals
we have government hospitals
they were all taxed differently.
And so we made a small step in
the right direction there but.
Anyway I want to understand why
you know we're seeing those
Lexus and why this bill comes
forward as
when you look at the
inconsistencies and and and then
how that affects our health care
industry in one simple issues
I'm not gonna.
go over Frank's whole speech
here it was a you know as a good
hour to hour long presentation
but.
When you look at a doctor but
let's see a like a podiatrist
you know I'm who
can structure has business
either as a private business
your private practice or he can
set up to be part of associated
with that not for profit
hospital.
or or he can
Yeah I mean I'm so I'm those are
the two examples I use here he's
taxed very differently this is
associate was nonprofit hospital
versus a a private practice your
sheet the the doctor.
And that's just not right
because they're doing the exact
same work.
Good tax code policy is that it
is neutral treats taxpayers who
are doing the same thing the
same way.
so I I I completely understand
why we're we're singles Lexus.
And then
madam chair chairman or CEO in
this committee we try to make
sure that
tax credits exemptions
deductions
have two things one is a
reporting requirement.
And the other is a sunset
clause.
And madam chair and ensure
Garcia you have a reporting
requirement this bill is that
correct.
That's correct Madam chair
representative.
Yeah that's that's great tax
policy right for for going to
provide a benefit to some group.
it just makes sense that that
group of providers information
so that we can track how much
this is actually costing the
state and revenue is that cost
worst the benefit.
And so you know I look at the
tax expenditure report we have
great numbers on it already but
making sure it's clear in the
statute.
Care that to Reports require
that's that's excellent I I
commend you for having that in
there.
And then
Madam chairman Garcia this does
not have a sunset is that
correct.
That's correct the madam chair
and representative we're just
gonna tracking with sign
language of the original bill
which does not have a sensor as
well yeah and madam chair and
chairman or CEO
I actually agree with that
and then I'll allow shares
Committee why I I know in the FY
are two of the tax revenue
department suggests adding a
sunset to yes that's good that's
good tax policy.
But the reason we had sun sets
is in general when we are
providing some benefits to a
business.
You know that we're looking for
economic development we're
looking for bringing in new
industries in
you know we want to see I'm kind
of forced the legislature to
come back in seven or ten years
and look and see did we get the
benefit we were promised.
But in this case
we're.
This is a.
You know we don't have like a
sunset on the exemption of
salary from gross receipts tax
rate I mean
do we all want to turn every
single person in New Mexico who
who has a job into us here just
filer every month that they've
got to put in you know well
here's what I made my salary and
it's deductibles on active gross
receipts tax I mean there are
certain things that we just
decide are good policy knots
were trying to spur or something
and so in this case I think it's
right we don't have a sunset
because if we pass this on it's
really the.
The good policy decision that
this body makes that we should
be taxing these things so so I
agree in this particular case
was not having a sunset.
So one thing that I I learned
Madam chairman of this year and
and maybe I just missed it over
the years but
I find this fascinating so your
thoughts on this on page four of
the F. I. R..
HSD mentions.
That provider taxes are
considered as part of the
compact you calculation when
determining Medicaid
reimbursement rates.
So by reducing removing tax
obligations this could
potentially result in slightly
lower Medicaid payments.
I don't think that's a
showstopper I just think this is
interesting I didn't realize
this right some of the
unintended consequences of good
legislation right we're we're
trying to help people move out
into the rural areas but we
might actually be slightly
lowering our Medicaid payments
Madam chair Garcia read were you
aware of that in the in the
past.
Madam chair representative
no I wasn't and I I I still.
Can't put my arms around that
analysis regarding what you just
stated
I I can go beyond what's in the
bill.
And not implications in terms of
of of something else I mean but
the but it's a good point that
you are raising that and
I I guess as as a responsible
legislator I want to kind of.
Further intelligent terms of
understanding that impact to its
fullest and see if
You know if we can have a more
favorable announces you know
from here on out.
Yeah and and gentleman I I I
respect that answer
I'm I'm not sure how significant
that reduction would be in the
Medicaid reimbursement rate I I.
I I knew that those Medicaid
reimbursement rates work we're
tied to
you know something dollar wise
but I don't understand was also
tied to tax
and so.
I just found it interesting
something either new and that
encourage you to all that's
right a little bit more and and
and settle more deeply thought
that.
okay so Madam insurers yet you
you're familiar very familiar
with how this this committee
works that we don't want to be a
sub committee to appropriations
and so what we end up doing is
very kindly and lovingly and
gently as one of the attendees
mentioned we table the bill.
And then when we hear about for
appropriations what our total
capacity is for for these things
with the committee get together
we review all the the bills and
we circle the ones that we think
are are after most merit and
then we are we will pass those
out quickly.
So they can make it through the
Senate and
and so that that'll be what we
what we do here but obviously we
let this go out once before so
it'll be strongly considered
when that time comes my my last
question
Madam chair and ensuring Arsia.
I was looking at the tax
expenditure report for two
thousand twenty one on this bill
are on this on this credit.
And mentioned
that was COVID nineteen you know
kind of what
There's kind of a boon and and
telemedicine.
And and how that may help with
some of our concerns out in
rural New Mexico.
I know in some cases
telemedicine doesn't help right
I mean if you can be in front of
a doctor and they can kind of
perceive things that are easier
you know maybe not as easy to
perceive on a screen that's a
good thing.
But I just maybe thank and all
of your thoughts Madam chairman
Garcia.
You know I'm certain that when a
doctor or a nurse or you know
health care provider is trying
to decide where to live and
we're set up shop I'm certain.
Financial
Finance is part of the calculus
that they make.
I guess my.
And I'm just I'm just gonna ask
the question how do you.
Do we really.
Think that over the course of an
entire year a three thousand
dollar or a five thousand dollar
credit is that gonna be.
The piece.
That a doctor or nurse says okay
I'm gonna go rural.
or is it or is there something
else that we can be doing
because I mean.
Maybe this helps a little bit
but I'm just thinking this
probably isn't the the he's
really state okay I'm gonna get
five thousand dollars so I'm
good at not to urban to rural.
What I'd love your thoughts.
Madam chair and representative
I'd like to have doctor Larsen
chime in on this.
I think he's got a better handle
on.
What you're trying to get at.
I am a doctor of Larson a.
You can respond to the
representatives question.
Thank you very much
Representative Harper for the
question and Representative
guard to see and madam chair
this will be you are correct
that for health care provider to
decide to practice in a rural
area it's it's not a single.
Think that tips over whether
they decide to do or not it's
typically a combination of
things that we the person
decides to do it and more
important than the initial
recruitment is actually the
retention.
And if you look at tax credits
nationally the tax credits
actually help most with the
retention.
Helping the individual pay back
their loans helping the
individual or couple
Integrate into the community
those things help get them their
initially tax credits help keep
them there.
That's not a hundred percent and
all the different ways somewhere
your technical background
Representative Harper but that's
it helps and in New Mexico the
shortages are so great and so
severe that I think the approach
we've always taken as we need to
do what we can to help with the
shortages are most severe in the
rural areas and this is one
Erro in your quiver that will
help with those shortages.
Thank you doctor.
Representative.
Yeah madam chair chairman or CEO
and Dr Larson thank you for that
answer and it's a it's great to
see you here today
it's a.
Hard to imagine it's been.
Seventeen years since you and I
work together.
but I hope things are still
going well at UNM.
and I appreciate your answer I
think you're right it there
there's not a silver bullet many
of these problems are multi
faceted and and if.
We can add up enough little
sayings.
You know maybe that's enough to
tip the scale.
I'm.
And.
And I and I think that I saw was
worth asking the question is is
still worse.
Pondering a considering
because if there are better ways
I'm more effective ways that we
can recruit and retain.
I mean to me this not just
honestly to me this this feels
like a good gesture a gesture of
good will that we're providing
right that you know that the
legislature state acts as we're
grateful that you're serving in
rural New Mexico so we're gonna
give you five thousand two
thousand dollars after income
taxes.
But if there's something more
meaningful like paying off
helping to pay off some portion
of their their debt if they
remain rural for five years or
something like that.
I think we should consider
strongly consider those things
that might might be a bit
heavier Erro in in the quiver if
if you understand what I'm
trying to say.
Madam chair representative I I
appreciate that response but I
think when we've looked as a
committee and other groups have
nationally there is no magic
bullet or single bullet this is
that this is an area that really
requires a multifaceted approach
and
I think we.
Really need to do what we can
when we can to help out the
situation so I I wouldn't and I
think one of the advocates said
said it I probably more
eloquently than I'm saying it
now it's not just a single thing
that's going to solve this
issue.
Putting all your eggs in one
basket isn't going to solve this
issue but doing what we can when
we can in a situation like this
every little bit will help.
And I believe that this is
actually a substantial
legislation this is not just a
little bit of the help it will
be very helpful for those who
practice in those communities.
And Dr Larson thank you for that
and yes I I completely agree
with you and I'm I'm not hope
I'm I'm I'm being clear here I'm
not saying we should at
throughout these eggs I'm I'm
just saying perhaps there are
some other.
Thanks bigger eggs that might
make a bigger impact we should
also add those to the basket.
and that and so I I very much
appreciate the the the the
conversation and and again
chairman Garcia yeah you being
that the champion warrior on
this for for so many years
my hat's off to you and with
that that madam chair thank you
for the time.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
You madam chair.
Representative Maestas.
Thank you madam chair
representative Garcia we want to
ask a how old.
Hello all the Representative
Harper was seventeen years ago
that's great.
Great great memories and great
work through the years madam
chair observers this one up just
have a short conversation I know
it's a Saturday want to thank
folks for joining us on the.
The zoom
because we do do everything
because it is good will
Maybe only good will but I think
it's good policy we we did we
need a kitchen sink approach to.
To health you know health
services in the rural
communities and it could take a
lot of different shapes or sizes
one of them is to.
You know with all the money we
have to to directly there could
be a state fund to offset
insurance costs you know.
We have huge huge payouts for a
tiny tiny tiny percent of folks
at the.
At the insurance expense of of
of all health of many health
care provider statewide that we
need to.
Reexamined next year but anyway
Madam chair representative
Garcia.
Refresh your memory what.
What is the role what's the
definition rural in in in the
bill that doesn't change I don't
believe but what are who would
benefit and who wouldn't
benefit.
Mr Chairman representative are.
By Senator if we go through a
page six
line fourteen it has a
definition of rural.
And and for purposes of our bill
it means an area or location
identified by the department of
health as falling outside of an
urban area.
Thank you madam chair
representative Garcia that's
actually normally we don't do
for the executive for rulemaking
but that's actually a good rule
that the for example madam chair
you know there are film tax
credit is sixty miles from
Santa Fe or Bernalillo county so
it's kind of weird the way it
shaped this one I think is more
fact specific and and and is
good public policy because now
granted up.
I don't know this for a fact but
I think if you're a pharmacist
for Walgreens and.
In Vegas or pharmacist for war
with Albuquerque pry get paid
the same if Europe.
Professional in the small town
you're you're living large
general
So that everyone enjoys it once
they're there it's just a
question of getting them there
you know and and keeping them
they're given all the choices
they have up.
At their disposal given their.
You know the good work in their
professional licenses and stuff
so I think up I think we should
hopefully consider this if not
then the tax package this year
for next year but we definitely
need to show some love to our
friends in rural communities I
think it's.
Lastly madam chair
representative Garcia at the
Is there any way to predict
movie I.
Like we look at
tax cuts for veterans tax cuts
for social security recipients
it tax cuts for retirees it
hasn't really incentivized
economic growth necessarily but
just gives a.
Somewhat of a giveaway to
existing qualifiers even though
that may be the case here I
still supported
I even though I may not but but
I think on the margin it would
help folks in the rural areas do
we know statistically.
What it would do to protect
professionals moving to the
rural areas health care
providers Madam chair
representative messed us up
again I would like to yield to.
The doctor Larson to kind of
time in on on that
Representative.
Thank you very much madam chair
representative Garcia
Representative more my Estes
we we do track the movement of
all health care professionals in
and out of each county in New
Mexico each year and we do
actually get information on
whether or not they are planning
on retiring or ending their
practice within the upcoming
year.
it is our.
Fairly clear that
people move for salary.
And that a tax credit will help
retain people in a location.
Because they do better in that
location with the tax credit
than moving somewhere where they
don't get the tax credit.
So we do know that.
And
The profession that moves the
most within the state is
actually the emergency medicine
technicians the EMTs.
Mentalities in the state
actually.
Change their salaries quite
readily even during the year and
EMTs are very very Google or
other health care professions
don't really move in and and
among counties I think if they
do move they tend to leave the
state so that's why this is
actually important to keep
people in the state.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Garcia thank you
Mr Garcia and the at so I agree
even if it doesn't
And you know it isn't the
deciding factor in the move it
it's definitely a factor and
more important I think it would
help retain those folks that are
currently in those areas so we
don't continue to lose those.
Those folks because ultimately
affects health outcomes for
people in in the rural areas
thank you madam chair thank you
rose ever super.
We should to expand this and and
and hopefully we can get it done
soon thank you.
Senator.
Thank you Representative Maestas
Representative Lara Cadena.
Thank you madam chair good
afternoon representative Garcia
I as usual appreciate the energy
and and what you bring to the
conversation Representative I'm
Representative Allison a I know
you're already my comments
really are
The real hot health provider
credit more generally so I'll
say what I think now and and
Representative about that all
will carry that over will carry
with them over I absolutely
believe in the way both of you
have thoughtfully and impressive
focused manner going out to eat
and and consider and wait the
the gap in what currently exists
in the credit and really need
now and find and identify
providers that have so far never
been able to have the positive
benefits from the intention of
this legislation but I would
really I feel like a bit like
Representative Harper well my
thunder or maybe and this for
you for so many years having the
conversation even before the
elected on on the committee on
that for me I appreciate the
responsive representative Garcia
and and drive less than what I
really want to continue thinking
about how we can okay the impact
on the happening here on for me
one of the examples given in
previous years if we have for
example and and the providers
that coming in potentially at
three hundred or three fifty or
four hundred thousand dollars
for a job that they do and
they're certainly well qualified
for and then we have somebody
like a licensed midwives
Representative Allison for
including like by the bill.
Right
forty five fifty fifty five
thousand a year these affect
your credit I going to feel very
differently on their financial
feasibility under financial
outcome and and that decision
making that provider maybe
making about there.
Potential to stay rooted in
rural communities committee that
they were potentially right down
are you from or or wanted to
hold that commitment to so I
generally feel like it's one of
the credit absolutely there
disparities and thank god that
gap based on who's on the list.
The state allowed before
for me it you can look at this
list and and frankly the like it
it probably depends on who
you're lobbyist was and whether
or not you're healthcare
providers hi actually made it to
the credit and so I continue to
say if we're going to spend this
amount of money we are all the
right questions to make sure
that we are targeting dollars
okay that we really need them
when it comes back to just
bringing the building back to
themselves I love going to the
county when they've made that
commitment to practice in rural
New Mexico so yes this I support
your efforts to fill in the gaps
and get more provided thank but
I still believe we need to we
need a much more significant
conversation about how we target
the one of the casual examples
that I continue to think of like
maybe if the we we consider like
the spectrum of providers that
get on.
But maybe in income maybe it's a
credit provider that are
bringing in less than seventy
five thousand a year instead of
having to use spectrum where we
have some folks on this list.
Making you know maybe fifty
fifty thousand another hundred
thousand because the the number
on that credit doesn't reflect
that huge
Gail of income that people are
actually bringing and so I just
really want to appreciate you
all are trying to fill the gap
in the admitted but like
Representative Harper I.
Wow what we want to keep
opportunities and options on the
table I continue to believe for
years that this is something
that we should be much more
strategic about investment.
The COVID I appreciate
Representative prepared okay not
piece about HSD reimbursement
rates I also have a pretty
significant concern on that
front in particular because of
course our HSD dollars are
wrapped into the to the policy
that the federal level for how
we bring down what Medicaid and
Medicare but also those
decisions should be made to the
policy about where the health
care needs are what the costs
are delivering those different
kinds of care and not on the
individual income and what they
might be bringing home when
they're thirty folks in our
community but the follow up with
you representative Garcia not
thank you madam chair in my
comments very today thank you
Representative Representative
all of them or listening and and
doing this important work.
Madam chair I believe a lot I
am.
Representative Lujan please.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Sponsored this bill and also
Sponsor the next bill to it.
Representative Allison I think
you want to echo those cases
that I'm trying to get some
clarification madam chair on on
the Medicaid at HSD aspect of
what it what these dollar store
quite what they are doing and
and the reimbursement.
Concern if there is that there
is that concern there
By Representative part right now
by Representative Cadena can I
get some clarification on that I
what what are we talking about
their exactly madam chair thank
you.
I I don't know if doctor Larson
might be able to help us
Representative.
Representative madam chair that
was raised by HSD who's involved
in setting chair again right
sorry.
That so I think the question
would be best reacted to HSD.
Yes.
My recollection
Representative Lujan is the
analysis was that it may have an
impact but it's if there is an
impact is minimal if I remember
the concluding sentence in that
in that description that was
essentially what it said we can
try to get more information
about that
as we go forward and and maybe
we can reach out to
the department that wrote that
F. I R. but that's it was if I
remember correctly
it was vague and almost
speculative actually
Representative in a sense.
I appreciate that response
manager I mean.
Representative Cadena could you
add to it seems like you had it
a bit of a grasp and
understanding the difference
between the rate it's going to
go into the those that are
getting to the.
The incentive of versus to maybe
reimbursement for HSD.
Is that possible to.
If you're still on with us
Representative Cadena.
Madam chair.
Representative.
I mean what what I what they FIR
says is
however lower payments could be
offset by higher service
utilization among Medicaid
individuals as providers are
recruited and retained in parts
of the state with limited access
especially during the COVID
pandemic therefore the net
change in fiscal impact must be
listed as uncertain but small
instead thank you madam chair
thank you understood I I think
there are some there are some
questions I just wanna make sure
I'm understanding it as if there
is an understanding that
hello
How this is going into effect
and I want to again commend our
sponsors that are are moving
forward with this and agree also
with the Representative Harper
that there there need not be a
sunset on this we're doing
corrective working inclusive
working and and
I guess my next question is.
are we looking at both of these
bills together we looking for
any kind of amendment as as far
as like
Bringing or harmonizing these
bills together chair.
So this is what I would propose
after we consider at
representatives of Garcia's bill
which of course will be the
object of the temporary table
motion I would propose the
indulgence of Representative
Trujillo and then we we here
Representative Allison is bill
because I think it would be good
to have them discussed in close
proximity we can have a sense of
of what similar and so on and so
that's what I would suggest but
we just remember both are going
to be subject to a temporary
table they both have fiscal
impacts that we need to assess
one when we have better
understand what our our capacity
is so that's what I would
suggest I would also agree with
you Representative Lujan that it
would probably be great good for
the two sponsors to talk to one
another after this meeting and
see you whether or not some sort
of
There may be opportunity for
merging the bills are somehow
adjusting the bill so that
they're you know with their
accounted for but that's up to
the sponsors of course but you
know that's that's how I would
approach it if I were the two
Sanchez I'd be looking for
allies in wanting to see what we
can agree on and maybe moving
forward in that way so so let's
complete our discussion on this
bill and
let's see any I don't see anyone
else with questions.
Representative Fogarty eight
scarcity and you wanna make a
comment or two.
Four we entertain shin no madam
chair I I just appreciated the
debate and the a and the
feedback from the committee and
also the attendees so.
Great thank you.
I believe Representative Harper
did you raise your hand to make
a motion.
I was given that the chairman of
thumbs up but I'm.
Really happy to make a a gentle
kind leveling temporary table
motion madam chair.
Okay it's been moved and
seconded that we kindly and
gently and lovingly.
Temporary table this bill it's a
great bill and any opposition to
the temporary table.
I see none so the bill is
temporary table now let's go to
Representative Allison is built.
Which is house bill thirty
eight.
It's been.
We're having trouble hearing you
Representative so maybe your
vote your speakers are a little
off.
Okay madam chair how do you hear
me now.
Very well perfect so floor is
yours Representative Allison.
You have any experts that need
to be let in.
madam chair my experts just
finished her graveyard shift at
the hospital and unfortunately
she's not be able to assist her.
But most of my expert witnesses
are healthcare saving lives so
yeah well Sir and we're so lucky
to have people like her who are
willing to work so hard.
Thank you.
I really don't like this your
plug because it makes me it to
me it sounds like I'm echoing.
So just bear with me.
in my freshman year twenty
nineteen I introduce this
legislation and it started with
just the.
A registered nurse is being
added to receiving a three
thousand dollar credit.
And after it was published in
the media I got calls from all
over the state with various
people want to be added to our
legislation.
One of the first people that we
added to our amended legislation
back then was license mid wives.
And then a few months after that
we talked.
Or received call from
chiropractors wanting to be
added to this list so we added
chiropractors.
And then of I'm gonna skip
twenty twenty one for just a
second.
to bring you up to speed on what
happened in the past week.
On.
Last week Monday on the twenty
fourth we presented our first so
we had our first presentation to
the health and Human Services
and at that time we listen to
the people to make sure that we
included everybody I don't want
to share with you some of the
new at the admissions so we
considered at that time so of I
guess before I get any further
madam chair is that I should
tell you what I'm presenting to
you today is the house taxation
and revenue committee substitute
for house bill thirty eight.
Yeah.
Sure.
Move the at the committee
substitute for discussion.
Thank you Representative Harper
you may discuss the subject to
Representative.
Okay so as I said.
From our meeting from last week
Monday what we have added to our
regional of legislation was so.
A professional I've already
mentioned the licensed midwives
and then the registered nurses
what we added with a
chiropractor position license
percent to the chiropractor
physician practice act.
Number four was a professional
mental health counselor a
professional clinical mental
health counselor marriage and
therapists family therapists and
associate marriage and family
therapist.
Or an alcohol or drug abuse
counselor license pursuant to
the provision of counseling and
therapy practice I
the fifth recommendation was a
board certified behavior analyst
a board certified autism
technician at a board certified
registered behavior technician.
Another addition was the.
An occupational therapist
license pursuant to the third
occupational therapy act the
seventh recommendation was a
physical therapist's license
pursuant to the physical therapy
act.
We also added a licensed social
worker licensed pursuant to the
social work practice act and
also we added a speech language
pathologist licensed pursuant to
this lesson.
Speech language pathology
audiology and hearing aid
dispensing practice secretary.
And then number two was an
osteopathic physician assistant.
Number eleven was a physical
therapist assistant and finally
before I go into the number
twelve is and the twenty twenty
one way experience the COVID
nineteen pandemic.
And that was one of my original
addition to the originals of.
Legislation is that an emergency
medical services first responder
and essential health care worker
who provided assistance to other
healthcare practitioners
eligible for the rural health
practitioner tax credit during
the Corona virus disease of
twenty nineteen pandemic.
I think that a lot of us for all
of us we talk about how much we
appreciate.
Essential care workers but so
far I believe that it has just
been lip service I think with my
bill we are going to put our
money where our mouth is and do
some credit for them I believe
that they are very deserving.
These credits and.
When I talk but the central care
workers I'd like to.
What really is
And essential care worker I'm
not just talking about the
license people that are already
making very good money but what
I'm talking about the central
care workers I'm talking about
the people that clean up after
the doctor's the people that
clean up after the verses the
people that moppet sweet the
floors for these activities have
taken place.
The security people that screen
the people before they go into
the clinics those are are
essential health care workers
and we should not forget them we
should not just be given them
lip service we should be given
on.
Real real service and I think
that's what my health my
legislation will do.
And I believe that there are
going to be other people on the
call supporting what I have to
share it with you so with that
madam chair.
That describes my mic bill.
Thank you very much
Representative Allison let's go
to the attendees and let's see I
see
Individuals in favor please
raise your hand.
I'm Linda Siegel.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I won't repeat
what I said but I want sank
Representative Allison for
adding the occupational
therapist because I represent
both all the nursing groups and
occupational therapy and
chiropractic so we're grateful
for the addition of them all.
I I see.
I go through these bills with
you all every single year for
years as Representative Garcia
said we've been adding or trying
to act for providers and I think
the bottom line is something
Representative Harper was also
getting to is that we really
need to look at equity.
Adding licensed midwives is
absolutely necessary because a
certified nurse midwives are
there to.
We need to look at all providers
honestly we don't have in the
area and where we don't have
lacked providers all over the
state somewhere we don't have
enough of anybody PTA's of the
speech therapist nurses doctors
whatever we need to be looking
at the whole picture of.
Health care.
Tax credits so that we can
retain providers I think that is
a big part of that it's not just
you're not going to want to move
to a rural areas Dr Larson said
for tax credit but you may stay
there and you might move to a
rural area for longer and we
need to look at the whole
picture of health care providers
at this stage and try.
Develop solutions and tax
credits are part thank you.
Thank thank you Linda.
US AC Moore.
J. C. more thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Tracy Moore I'm the vice
president of the New Mexico
chiropractic Association and
maintain a private private
practice in Albuquerque
I do like to think
Representative Allison for
bringing presenting this piece
of legislation currently as
mentioned before chiropractic
physicians are not included in
the HSD work health care
workforce reports
There's not a concrete numbers
on this but I can speak
anecdotally having being very
involved in the chiropractic
community I've seen a number of
my colleagues over the past few
years.
Leave their clinics and our
rural communities to move to
urban areas to move out of state
or to leave the profession
altogether I believe that this
piece of legislation although
not the answer as mentioned
before can be part of the
solution to keep our providers
there and I thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
Karen Witt lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen what lock with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we want to thank
representative Allison for
adding social workers into his
bill hi want to focus really
quickly on the fact that we as
as was discussed by Linda Segal
and I discussed and under the
last bill that we take in all of
the above approach to
recruiting and retaining many
social workers to rural areas as
I mentioned before also we have
several counties they don't have
any rural social workers and
their services are desperately
needed along with all these
other.
qualified professionals that we
are looking to to increase their
presence in rural areas and
I think I I think that once
again this is an all of the
above approach we need a lot of
different things in order to
create to retain and attract of
these providers to rural areas
and thanks again to the sponsor
for his his efforts on this.
Thank you.
Cat Sanchez.
Committee members once again my
name is Ted Sanchez with both
futures in support of H. B.
thirty eight and we appreciated
thank representative Allison for
bringing this role tax credit to
your committee and in this bill
sponsor has seen to it that the
language is inclusive of all
midwives licensed by the
department of health and is
there for more inclusive to
those individuals who provide
such a vital service catching
babies in our communities and
once again we know that this
will be met with the gentlest of
temporary tabling by this
committee will continue to voice
our support for an incentive
that many necessary medical
providers including licensed
midwives could take advantage of
as they work in New Mexico's
vibrant rural communities and
it's our hope that as
Representative Harper noted
earlier more it could be found
in this and in Garcia's bill and
a circling of these bills could
happen later in the process
thank you.
Thank you apparently Serra.
Madam chair.
And members of the committee my
name is Karen the Cerro I'm with
the legislative committee of the
American physical therapy
association The New Mexico
chapter and I want to thank
Representative Allison for
adding physical therapists and
physical therapy assistance to
this bill I think you really has
attempted to cover all areas of
health practice and we commend
him for that I agree with others
who have said this is only one
thing that can help attract
providers to rural areas
the physical therapy association
has supported of physical
therapy compact to make it
easier for people to apply for a
license to move into the state
and also
loan repayment programs are
vital the physical therapists
have the highest debt to income
ratio based on having to go
through seven years of school so
with that different disciplines
we have a higher that so I think
that that would that this is
they should be considered very
strongly and thank you very much
for hearing it.
Thank you Karen Jean Marc.
In.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm G. ng hammer
following chair advocate with a
a RP New Mexico like what H. B.
seventeen a a RP believes that
HB thirty eight will improve the
lives of the fifty plus
population in rural New Mexico
which we serve by helping them
receive quality health care near
their homes we want to thank
Representative Allison for
bringing the bill and we urge
you to pass HB thirty eight
thank you.
Thank you Jean Michel pritom.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Michael
pritom and the stated before I
represent the American
chiropractic association and
ensure the integrative medicine
committee of the New Mexico
overdose prevention and pain
management Advisory Council.
I'm so thankful for
representative Allison bringing
including chiropractic
physicians and other professions
who have often been overlooked.
If medicine brings together all
health care workers for the
benefit of the patient.
Patient centered care is the new
model that we strive towards as
you speak with your colleagues
in appropriations it also adds
to be equitable and inclusive to
help improve the management
option the state.
Medicine.
The that truck with the in other
providers such as do records.
I appreciate Representative
Harper and fellow Cibola high
school our local we're hearing
that the issue of Medicaid
reimbursement and after that.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr pritom any
opposition to L..
I see none I'd like to get back
to this many substitute and talk
a little bit about procedure do
we need to table the original
bill and then discussed the the
substitute is that the
appropriate procedure.
For it if I may madam chair.
I believe we moved it for I know
that is I think we move the
substitute for discussion and I
just simply move the substitute.
Okay all right I will be the
document on the record that.
That we're not.
Making motions on thank you
veteran chair for the assistance
I really appreciate it okay
Representative Martinez.
By veteran you don't mean old
right well no.
yes thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative Allison
for for this bill that we've
seen a variation of it before
I'm a big fan of it I I do share
the concerns expressed earlier
in the previous bill it seems
like we're.
It seems like we as a
legislature have created a
process through which the
representative government said
it best like whoever has the
best lobby is going to get
there.
Line item in there and and it
sort of happened over time.
but I think that you and your
persistence.
And specifically.
What apologists bankers and
government can.
Going a little crazy but
You understand.
From your experience in your
community that health care
workers are not jest medical
doctors are not just the nurses
it's the people cleaning the
room after your discharge is a
people cleaning the bathrooms
and the floors it's the people
changing your bed sheets and and
washing those and that's really
what you know I'm I'm sort of
like into spaces like as a tax
policy person like all of you
I'm like man this we're just
building more putting in more
holes.
But that is a human being on
right time lead they we make
such a big deal of getting
doctors to rural communities
which we should and then we
leave out.
A whole host of other
professions and the one that
really I think gets to me is is
is is that janitor.
Who is also help.
And they're making maybe twelve
Bucks an hour and they're
struggling to make ends meet
themselves and those are the
folks that you know I don't see
in the means when we think
health care workers and we thank
them for their efforts during
this call to make those are the
folks that are not heralded by
the White House and Congress or
or even us by legislatures.
So I I want to work with you and
I want to work with the chair
and I want to work with our
committee to figure out how to
make how to get this done I
mean.
You know I I I'm I was looking
at the fiscal impact that was I
was communicating with one of
our analysts back and forth
about.
Understand what the real impact
will be
there's gotta be a way to do
this particularly for those
folks that have been putting in
the long I think Miss dangerous
hours during this call in
pandemic and that's especially
true in your community because
our community is one of those
communities that was hardest hit
for awhile
and very scary things are
happening in in that part of the
world not too long ago so even
though these will be separate
tabled I I will I will work with
you and I'll work with our chair
in our work with Representative
Harper and all workers everybody
in this committee to figure out
a way to get some of this done
we we have to put our money
where our mouth is as you so
eloquently stated Representative
Nelson I'll leave it at that
then chair thank you very much I
appreciate the time.
thank you leader up I'd I'd like
to echo those well it was listed
as when I was listening to the
comments in the two bills you
know at the same thing resonated
with me we have kind of a
piecemeal approach to how we're
addressing
you know tax credits and so on
in the middle and in the medical
profession and why some and not
the others why these particular
group of people and not these
other kind groups of people and
I do think it's something that
we should be considering in a
global way when we move forward
on our tax reform that is going
to be you know coming forth you
know and hopefully next year
will be looking at some things I
think we should try to reconcile
the the bills that we heard
today so that they're you know
they're cohesive and they make
sense and they're not you know
that.
There's some harmony there there
there is generally harmony but
there's not a hundred percent
harmony I think we need to come
to some conclusion with that and
I'm happy also to work with the
leader in the two Sanchez to try
to see if we can come up with
something that makes sense
before we bring it back because.
You know these are important
things very important things and
we want to get it right and we
want to show our value the value
that we have for all these
people are doing you know caring
fun for us and in this time of
need I did have one question I
was a little confused
He who provided assistance
during the COVID I think that's
one of the
providers that was identified in
the the question I had was.
Do does that mean if you were an
EMT who provided assistance
during the COVID you would for
ever more be eligible for this
credit you know every year
whether or not there's a comment
crisis or not do do see what the
question I'm asking was a little
confused about what the intent
was there.
Madam chair yes yes there is yes
okay and as you well know the
substitute on page one.
we started section eight with
the sunset clause because we're
optimistic that there's gonna be
a sunset on this comment
pandemic.
Okay.
Yes.
I am optimistic cautiously
optimistic.
Feels like it's going on and on.
I really want to see you guys
live next year.
Okay let me see if there are any
others I I didn't mean
introducing okay.
Good I'm happy to entertain a
motion.
Yes Representative I'm sorry to
interrupt you go head here
before we say that of I believe
that all as we do about the tax
credit we're not losing any
money.
Each dollar of that tax credit
is going to be reinvested into
the rural communities so nothing
will leave the state because the
people that are in the rural
areas are there for good because
one of the goals that we have is
recruiting and retaining and we
believe that these credits will
do that and if it does that the
credits will be reinvested into
the local community.
Thank you thank you very much I
I couldn't agree with you more
on Representative and thank you
for
yes your support for these
really important health care
providers thank you I'm happy to
entertain a motion and.
To the top the substitute that
monitor all of the first adopt
the house tax and revenue
commissions to prosper thirty
eight.
Second.
Any opposition.
I see none.
All right I'm ready for a second
motion.
Madam chair all our.
Representative Lujan did you
want to do this.
I know Jared
move that we we gently table the
substitute for
house bill thirty eight.
That's correct motion.
Yes Representative.
Great okay any opposition.
I see no opposition.
We have temporary tables your
Representative and thank you for
coming forth with it and see it
today.
Thank you madam chair thank you
to the board committee members.
All right we're on our last bill
of the day house bill thirty two
Eminem hygiene products receipts
and are
wonderful Representative
Christine Trujillo is here.
Good afternoon everyone you can
hear me clearly.
Because I can never hear myself.
Thank you so much for allowing
me to present the first bill
I've had in a tax and
Representative I try to avoid
more money yes that's as much as
possible does kidding anyway.
I am bringing to you house bill
thirty two which is the of bills
related to taxation providing
gross receipts tax and
governmental gross receipts tax
deductions for feminine hygiene
products
clothes hygiene products getting
food
They would include.
We see.
I have it right.
But I'm so nervous and excited.
Okay the the products that would
be exempted would be tampons
menstrual pads sanitary napkins
panty liners menstrual sponges
and menstrual cups and the
reason that we're trying to do
that madam chair is that
What the course of my time as a
labor activist and as legislator
and that's a teacher and coming
from a huge family in northern
New Mexico just knowing a lot of
the families of the New Mexico
that were really poor one of the
issues of concern was not being
able to find them and hygiene
products
this particular bills does they
provide these products for free
we recognize that that house the
probably to produce what I'm
trying to do now is simply ask
Miss that committee and
hopefully the house of
representatives to exempt of
these products from taxation
it's my understanding right now
madam chair that there are
several states in the United
States seventeen eighteen states
that exempt these taxes for
these feminine hygiene products
and what I'd like to do is make
this the nineteenth.
And hopefully start a revolution
around the country because these
are not luxury items and I think
if you're a woman if you're
married to a woman if you have.
Children that are females if you
have moms you know that these
are not three items these are
needed and sometimes I mean
we're really fortunate I think
that we can afford to have
access to them there are many
many people that can't afford to
have access to these items much
less pay a tax what I'm asking
this committee to do is
considered my request by
exempting these items that I
noted.
From a tax in the state and my
understanding from the.
From LFC and the and fiscal
analyst that it would only cost
New Mexico eight about eight
hundred thirty two thousand
dollars in revenue are to exempt
these women and twenty twenty
two in part.
And I stand for questions madam
chair.
Thank you Representative let's
go to the attendees and
Anyone in favor please raise
their hands.
I guess the grammar is his or
her hand.
It
is he she her is.
Okay Jessica Serrano.
Good afternoon madam chair up
actually can everybody hear me
I'd just okay.
Yeah I know that it got to madam
chair and members of the
committee my name is Jessica
Serrano and I'm speaking to you
on behalf of the southwest
women's law center where I
service the staff attorney we
stand in favor of the feminine
hygiene tax deduction each B.
thirty two.
The subsidies like groceries are
not taxing Mexico lessons to the
repressive nature of state taxes
and a lot of easy to follow low
income households spend a larger
portion of their income on those
goods and therefore there is an
inherent equity in taxing SSDs.
In an article by the AP news are
they interviewed a mother with
two daughters administrating H.
and they cost of period products
per month in that household was
up to fifty dollars due to the
varying cycle needs a study
published in twenty nineteen by
the American college of
obstetricians and gynecologists
found that two out of three low
income women in the US couldn't
afford menstrual products at
least once a year and nearly
half of them struggle to buy
food immense for hygiene
products over the last year.
The inability to obtain
menstrual hygiene products also
led to many girls missing school
during their cycle economic
research based on the consumer
data after new Jersey's tampon
tax was repealed in two thousand
five show that by eliminating
the tax it actually made the
products cheaper and more
accessible to low income people.
Instead of thinking about this
tax deduction as like losing
revenue for the state we should
look at it as benefiting.
And number one we should see it
as a social program for
administrative people and two of
re investment program allowing
menstruating people to invest
that money to save money from
the tax deduction into other
parts of the state's economy.
For those reasons we ask the
committee to vote yes on house
bill thirty two thank you.
Thank you Sebastian hearing.
Good afternoon madam chair and
committee members my name is
Sebastian hearing I am a nurse a
UNM student part of Planned
Parenthood generation action
chapter on my campus
wider access to menstrual
products means the house this
women I work with and my peers
most of whom are unemployed or
work low income jobs will have
easier access to the supplies I
urge you to support HB thirty
two thank you.
Thank you Susan Loubet.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Susan Loubet a with the New
Mexico women's agenda we support
this legislation and we think
the sponsor for bringing up
fourth thank you thank you
heather Smith.
Hi can you hear me yes thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is heather
Smith and I'm a policy fellow
level teachers New Mexico both
uses a reproductive rights
organization run by and for
black indigenous women and
people of color we support this
piece of legislation Meshel
drugs are necessary and
essential items for anyone who
menstruate and access to these
items should be considered basic
health care still many low
income New Mexicans struggle to
afford menstrual products like
people indigenous people and
people of color face the most
barriers to menstrual hygiene
and often have to go without
these drugs when men Streeter's
resort to unhygienic
alternatives there are
vulnerable to harmful physical
and mental outcomes by reducing
the cost of these products
Mexicans will have greater
access to the crucial care they
need this is a great step in the
right direction and we like to
think Representative Trujillo
for sponsoring the bill please
vote yes on H. B. thirty two
thank you thank you.
Coto Waterson.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dakota
Water sent on the community
engagement specialist at the
ACLU of New Mexico I'm here
today in support of H. B. thirty
two getting a period is not a
luxury it's a normal part of
reproductive health care mention
hygiene products can be out of
reach for many New Mexico.
New Mexico in twenty.
Seven other states in the
country still have a hygiene tax
anyone with a remonstrated knows
the hygiene products are
necessity it's time New Mexico
remains this tech without
constant access to sufficient
mantra drugs people who
menstruate may alternately
lacked the ability to
participate fully in effect
decidi the ability to afford
clean hygiene products needs to
be accessible for all New
Mexicans for the reasons asked
me to pass it to be very to the
feminine hygiene products gross
receipts tax thank you.
Thank you any attendees in
opposition please raise your
hands.
Let's go back to the committee.
Representative Lujan I think
your hands up.
Yes my hand is that I actually
sent on to this bill.
Okay great.
And I just want to voice my
support for the bill and.
And
and just say that
the need is here for for us to
do to move forward and to create
this exemption Tax Court Tax
Code sanitary napkins next
menstrual cups another product
products which serve the basic
menstrual cycle constitute on
avoidable necessities for women
and should be classified
alongside other unavoidable tax
exempts necessities such as
progress reasonable tax we have
in New Mexico so I encourage.
the passing of this yeah we're
gonna gently table this but for
us to provide
in our discussion as we're
looking looking ahead that we
include this
when we are when we are making
the decisions for state to make
this exemption thank you madam
chair thank you for.
Of course thank you
Representative Lujan
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair I just
want to shout out to the sponsor
Representative Trujillo who's
been so consistent and
supporting this effort across
the board when we brought a bill
to provide access to
folks then trading in schools
you know she's been there for
that and then also doing this I
was shocked by the FIR that over
four million dollars goes into
our our budget from just
menstrual hygiene products alone
so this as a regressive tax from
up everything that remove we
remove from food and otherwise
it you know once a month every
you know person who then straits
has to suffer this taxes it's so
regressive impact to have our
population I was I was shocked
that you know filling the budget
with the things that we have
that this is still one of those
taxes that is in there when
we've been sort of trying to
remove those very specific ones
that that are in that category
so I just want to shout out to
you for for bringing this for
you in the Sanchez and
for trying to figure out how we
can can get that S. removed for
those that are burdened by it
and I support this I just wish
we could have figured this out
sooner and I'm also interested
to see how it plays out with
providing these products as it
as as something that is free we
distributed rather than have to
look at having to pay for types
of things that are just create
better Health for our state
overall so I just appreciate you
and and hope we can find it in
the budget thank you madam chair
thank you Representative Romero
Representative Parker.
Thank you madam chair and.
Rep Christine Trujillo so good
to see you and I want to say
thank you for your patience I've
noticed that you've been
patiently listening to all of us
geek out on taxes walk so thank
you for your for being patient
with us.
So I want to I'm I'm very
cognizant of the time and I'm
not going to go along but I just
wanted to kind of zoom out a
little bit and just talk about
tax policy for just a minute.
so.
Chair and representative.
Trujillo we've we heard today
some of the folks in the
attendee list and even some of
our members on the on the
committee talked about food.
And I just wanna very briefly
talk about the food tax as I
think it feeds into what we
should be thinking policy wise
in the regression this bill.
So
when we remove with the
legislature removed the food tax
in early two thousand years two
thousand two the average gross
receipts tax rate across the
state was five and a half
percent.
And once you remove that tax on
the food what happened was all
the tax immediately jumped up.
And you look now the average is
about eight maybe even a little
bit more than eight percent and
that is directly attributable to
losing the tax on food because
what happens when the government
removes a tax on something they
don't decrease spending to match
what they do is they increase
taxes on other things because
spending keeps going up and up
and up.
and it's kind of I hate to say
it was kind of a shell game.
And.
What the people would actually
hurt the most remove the food
tax report.
And that's because those who are
on food stamps or snap now.
They are not taxed on those who
purchases when they use their
benefit.
So they already weren't paying
tax on food.
But their tax you're paying on
everything else diapers car
repairs close feminine hygiene
products went up from five and a
half percent to eight percent.
And and and you can't argue with
was that mass and in fact the
legislature a few years later
realized this and actually
passed Representative steel.
Of that food tax but.
Governor Richard sin he had
originally.
Not is a yes you would sign up
it's and she
some folks got to any doctor or
not pressure and he vetoed that
bill.
So.
it I think really the but those
who benefit the most from the
food tax repeal are your upper
and upper middle class upper
class folks who are at you know
whole foods buying fancy cheese
and wine not paying tax while
you're low income folks at
McDonald's are are paying gross
receipts hi receipts on their on
their food now than they were
before.
So.
That all that said
looking at the yes we are madam
chair and
Representative Trujillo it looks
like.
we're looking at it's roughly a.
One point one one point four
million dollar cost to the
general fund and then roughly a
eight hundred.
Forty two hundred fifty thousand
costs to local governments and
my my reading that right
are those the numbers you see
manager Chris okay
cool so so now it seems to keep
in mind there when we remove a
tax on something is just not
just at the state level it's
actually at the local level that
we have impacts to.
And another example the food tax
removing that very stable base
has really really hurt our rural
cities relied on that revenue
and they're very much hurting
now.
so I just thought there in the
the last thought madam chair and
representative Trujillo.
Just general tax policy you know
I heard someone in the
attendee list say well this
isn't a luxury.
Right.
Okay so.
So what's the sites that we we
should not tax things that are
vital for for life right okay so
we don't tax food we don't tax
prescription drugs now.
Okay well then we should not tax
utilities
right now we tax water we tax.
Electricity we we tax forecasts.
Well what's what's not tax your
first vehicle right I mean if
it's almost a nexus necessity to
have a car in New Mexico so is
not taxed your repairs is not
tax refers vehicle what about
what about a cell phone or a
computer how on earth can you
you know get a job without
applying online right I mean.
and and what about what about
your razors or soap or I mean I
mean the.
The list goes on and on and
eventually you get to the point
where all you have left to tax
our folks.
That would be great if we could
put a one billion percent tax on
boats and not touch anything
else and and then have enough
money to to fund government but
we all know that silly that no
one would buy boats New Mexico
they go next door by boat and we
have no money.
And so.
When you look at.
The good principles of taxation.
The best thing is the tax
everything tax everything but at
a lower rate.
We call that you know we we say
we want a broad base and a low
rate.
And and we sound evil because
then that means we want to tax
food we want you know tax these
necessities of life what ends up
doing is making sure that we
don't have these weird
unintended consequences we have
folks paying a lot more for
diapers then they should.
And and I'll just I'll just
finish by saying you know I have
a wife that I love daughter who
I love dearly my mom she
actually as part of this group
women of worst where they
actually sell and make feminine
hygiene packages that they sent
overseas to waste so it can get
jobs and how these things you
know so so I totally get it.
and I and I'm grateful to see
here and I I understand the cost
but I think.
We just need to be careful about
continuing to erode our base
because eventually get to the
point where you're only taxing
some things at a high enough
rate.
The people say see a rate of the
somewhere else and then we've
just destroyed our revenue and
our stability of our revenue
sources so.
That is.
All manager I'd love it if you
have any comments Christine
Representative Trujillo I'd love
to hear them
But those are my thoughts.
Madam chair.
I'm it.
We talked about the.
You have to go in and not tax
prescription drugs and so on and
so forth and and standpoint.
But right now taxes are very
very unfair the wealthy have
their way of dealing with things
that have to worry about wearing
rags you know during their
monthly cycle they don't have to
worry about all those things.
And frankly you know I have a
discussion with Representative
Martinez the other day well then
that's tax by it's a
prescription drug right now but
it.
And don't pay taxes on it that
would be fair if we're gonna do
this and right now we're not
being fair so if we're gonna go
with your
Committee and your and your.
Reasoning then let's bring it
all on the table and that's
really really reform taxes but
we're not going to do that okay
because we know how things work
you have been
champion.
Ability to make me cry.
The end of this tax reform for
for many many years the issue
for me is.
And you know you have a wife and
daughters and a mom like you set
but I I have gotten to see many
many many people or women young
girls as the many of the.
Other folks stated that will
will not go to school because
they don't it's not even just
the access for paying taxes it's
access in general and and if
you've ever been for and if
you've never been able to afford
up.
Mexico tech sort funds and you
have to skip school L. R. you're
being made fun of or you lied to
your clothes then that you stop
and think very carefully it has
nothing to do my argument has
nothing to do with the fact that
you're trying to do.
Very good thing broad based
right now your your issue
however is not addressing the
very concerns of the poor and
that that's why I'm asking you
rethink what you're saying and
vote for this bill thank you.
I I know Representative Maestas
as a stand up.
Did not get a different bill
this the tax deduction bill in
my missing something we've been
talking about it as though it
were an exemption and I just
want to clarify unless I am
looking at the wrong bill and I
didn't see some substitutes
somewhere my understanding is
this is a gross receipts tax
deduction bill just wanted to
clarify that for everyone.
It okay and I'm gonna yield to I
I'll I'll call on Representative
my assistant I do have a point
to make about that
Representative Maestas.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative duo finished up
point madam chair because I I
was in a touch on it but it's so
important thank you oh okay well
my concern about the tax
deduction piece is it's
complicated.
Because people have to if I
understand the way it is it's
going to work and help me
understand this Representative
Trujillo.
you know I go to the grocery
store and I'm bye bye and my
product my hygiene products do I
have to save the receipt and
asked for it it how does that
work in I I'm trying to
understand the mechanics of how
that would work it strikes me as
a as a little complicated and
people won't use that if you
have to somehow include it.
you get where I'm going with I'm
very confused so can somebody
help the annex of the how that
would work based on my knowledge
of the food food tax that
Representative the the.
Policy on account of bills the
stated that we have to report
our savings I think it was our
our in terms of that the taxes
that we didn't pay and then if
you look on page two of the
fiscal quarter very bottom
performance issue it's dates
that we would have to report it
The cost reductions the revenue
stabilization tax policy
legislative finance.
Miti I think that we're doing
that now with the state and this
is such a pittance madam chair
thank you.
And madam chair I think I can
answer that that question for
you okay.
Yeah I'm not sure you you would
be correct if if you're if you
recall the onus of our gross
receipts tax seller the dollar
your be correct if it was on the
provider rate our our food tax
instruction this way to the the
the brochure the the retailer
has to keep track of their
receipts and the docked.
from those receipts the food and
so this would this work in the
in the same way so it rate on
the store but one the individual
would pay the tax at the store
but the store would have to keep
track of that sale in the docs
out from there gross receipts
okay and is
for clarifying purposes is that
the way they do it was food as
well.
Right okay thank you yeah I
learned something today that was
very helpful thank you all
you're very welcome and I'll
just I'll just finish madam
chair
I'll be the the first to say we
should start paying taxes on
****.
Call it tax reform bills which I
know we're we're super popular
we we didn't put in the tax back
on pharmaceuticals because I I'm
I'm just trying to be
intellectually honest here when
I say we should tax everything
but at a lower rate yes I know
you're an equal opportunity tax
Farber.
Thank you madam chair all right
over I'm sorry Representative
appliances.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Trujillo I know
the time is short but this is a
great.
Tax policy conversation that is
one.
To share a few thoughts and ask
a couple questions and and get
and give a shout out.
Enjoying Representative in that
role metal and giving a shout
out to Representative to heal
because it's.
Such an impactful impactful of
struggle that she is waged as an
advocate now as chair of Ellis
L. E. S. C. that you don't have
to bang on folks store use up to
send an email.
And hopefully you have sent that
email to have
of feminine hygiene products
available to all high school
students in the state and and
then we need to do the same for
all.
of you know hygiene products
consumers at the college level
you know they should be free
products not just a tax break
but the actual products free
every single high school and
available and every single
college campus so so hopefully
you've sent that email because
Because I think that would that
would do it the.
With regards to tax policy if I
could wave a magic wand madam
chair is you know Representative
hell every single commodity
would be taxed the same.
with the exception of maybe a
luxury tax that that
Representative Harper and is
both.
But every commodity should be
talked tax the exact same.
Because that's good tax policy
and our town center on our
counties suffered immeasurably.
during that the Great Recession
because of the lack of economic
growth and and and no tax pledge
by bye bye the executive powers
that be then and it just.
We're almost a failed state
because of the low tax base we
had in in the lean years also so
it's it's not a question of
being principled.
No more holes in the Swiss
cheese or like holy smoke what a
great bill even though it
creates another hole in the
Swiss cheese so that's that's
just kind of intellectual
struggle we're dealing with
Madam chair of nerve to you and
I appreciate you indulging us in
that in that conversation but
just a couple of just a couple
math problems the sale product
is is twenty dollars.
And that this taxes eight eight
percent so the the price of the
product would be twenty one
sixty.
Once your bill goes into effect
what is to stop.
The seller of.
From selling I go the next day
to buy the product.
What is to stop the the seller
from selling it to me at say
twenty one fifty.
Goodwill's would have a question
is would it change the I mean
the the the it would change the
dynamic and Mr Chairman.
I wish I had out of.
The answer for you I don't.
I don't know.
I think LA's that spoke from the
law Senator said that it didn't
do that but it it distracts me
that it it could and might.
I would be a shame if it did and
then
I just think that women Mr
chairman I would hope that women
would raise arms together and
raise hell bottom line.
Absolutely absolutely I think we
could make it easier.
If we.
If we simply provided the drugs
as as as part of government as
part of public health.
like if I once again I go with a
wave a magic wand madam chair
representative to help I would
tax it as well as tax everything
else and then simply find those
products put that what you know
the one points for whatever that
that that the government would
be losing what is just spend
that in the form of the products
the key is that is that is that
is the products and just one
last notice
if in fact we were to tax
everything and the G. R. T. word
of drop simply one percent.
Someone who makes twenty
thousand dollars a year would
get a one percent raise because
you know there's there's no
there's no savings and they did
get that get a two hour raise
annually if someone were to
spend a thousand dollars a year
on hygiene products with this
bill they would they would save
eighty eighty dollars.
You know also just Justin doing
them out so anyway that's kind
of the stuff that we're rolling
around on on on on the tax
policy side during the summer
revenue stabilization tax policy
like how do we get to that point
I think we're almost there I
think next sixty day session
we're going to get to that point
where we can lower taxes across
the board increase people's
incomes across the board and
then do things like your
Martinez is doing are a leader
Martinez and others with regards
to the family
family tax credits and things
like that so that we make the
entire system progressive.
Instead of judging each
individual tax and the tax code
as progressive or regressive but
the entire system is progressive
and that these needed these
necessary drugs they're not it's
not a choice market works when
there's a choice there is no
choice you have to have these
products and half of the
population doesn't doesn't need
them for themselves so we got up
we got to be cognizant of that
and and and make these products
free across the board in our
public health care system.
If we cannot do it in our tax
system thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Maestas very good
points I agree with a lot of
them thank you Representative
Trujillo did you want to offer
any closing comments before we
gently kindly and lovingly
temporary tape for your help.
I would like to thank all of you
for listening to me I know
people think I'm crazy sometimes
or all the time but the reality
is that this is an unfair tax
and you heard from the from the
folks on the line and.
All the way up tell you why it's
an unfair tax and I would love
to see what's what
Representative Maestas
Representative Harper are you
pushing forward for
For a balance in our tax system
but right now the need is here
and now and I'm hoping that with
your gently tabled might just be
tabled the bill that we can move
forward and we think how we can
help these young women and
babies to.
To stay healthy and I really
appreciate this was fun thank
you.
Thank you and it's always great
to see you Representative thanks
for coming to our committee
thank you at the.
Entertain a motion.
Very gentle table for rector
here's bill.
Madam chair thank you.
By Representative Romero and
seconded by Representative Lujan
and the old temporary table any
opposition to the temporary
table.
I see none.
So you your bill will be
temporary tables will be getting
back to you Representative thank
you.
Any other items
on the adult that members want
to raise any questions.
We will be meeting Monday there
about no for maybe five or so
bills on the agenda and
hopefully we'll have a
productive discussion Monday
just as we did today I I thought
it was a very good conversation
about the number of kind of
broad policy implications of how
we do things in the state
setting the stage for the big
question twenty twenty three
okay well seeing no further
comment the meeting is adjourned
thank you thank you madam chair.
I am sure.
Here have a good weekend.
