And after I had.
Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative Ortez here
Representative fact.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Townsend.
I just checked it then I'm.
Chair.
It.
Where we have a quorum good
morning folks of a few
housekeeping things we will be
rolling over.
C. will be rolling over house
Bill four thirty six.
They do have the committee to
see that wasn't presented on
times what we will do that as
well as
House bill four thirty nine that
had the same issue with the
reserves to that was it
Submitted time to respect for
our rural that being said we
will continue this morning and
we'll start with that Senate
bill three eighty one what's the
housing trust fund bonding
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I have is the
Hernandez who is the CEO of the
director for the mortgage
finance authority here with me
and of course Robin the policy
director just briefly Mr
chairman members of the
committee what this bill does is
merely move date on a bill we
passed last year we passed a
bill that was quite meaningful
and significant for affordable
housing in New Mexico thank you
for the first time ever
recurring dollars not to be put
towards affordable housing and
administered through the MFA
into the affordable housing
trust fund that means that we
made it affected in twenty
twenty four truly it needs to be
effective this year the funding
is there there's no reason why
we have to wait to build homes
and affordable housing and other
here with the need to separate
all I'm doing is moving the date
from twenty four to twenty three
that's all it does Mr chair
Senator in that.
We expect Mr chairman not at
this point we're just here to
answer any questions that you
may have perfect thank you so
much let's go to then though the
odds in support of Senate bill
twenty six these right you have
those in the room and online I
see one of the really yes Sir.
Mr chairman members of the
committee any trader with the
Mexico rose Association of the
action of provided you with.
Very significant very important
and we'd like to see this a
little of get resolved and so
they can do the work thank you
very much very good thank you
and also the room it's not
online because we have several.
Yes this is good morning you
with this.
The best.
Okay she's still a good morning.
Is there you are muted.
The morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I sent a strong
support of Senate bill three
eighty one I am of the trust
fund member and we have been
working in the field of health
and about nineteen ninety seven
going on is a great for this
program around state sentenced
on four thank you for the
opportunity thank you for
joining us next.
Rebecca well are they good
morning.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Rebecca
Miller I am with the director of
development for palindrome
communities and affordable
housing here a developer here in
New Mexico I stand in strong
support and SP three eighty one
hi to.
The date forward for the New
Mexico housing trust fund
bonding program there's a huge
shortage of affordable housing
in New Mexico is a dire need and
moving this forward.
MFA to do what they do best to
provide financing to developers
to build affordable rental units
thank you thank you next.
Bobbie good morning.
My name is Bobby Griffith I'm
one of the owners of jail gray
we're a management company and a
developer of affordable housing
in the state of New Mexico we
have been working with Mexico
mortgage finance authority
since.
Nineteen eighty four we really
do support this bill It is able
to us to put a lot of low income
housing affordable housing on
the ground we would like to see
this bill passed thank you this
next.
Chapter.
That morning.
Committee members chair good
morning this check mark I'm with
New Mexico home builders
association we're hoping you
agree with us that the mortgage
finance authority's been good
stewards of the opportunities
afforded them and that they're
of very important part of our
housing delivery community and
we ask you to support this
legislation thank you thank you
Jack.
Chris Chris good morning.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr server I am the
executive director of the
eastern regional Housing
Authority we have also utilized
the housing trust fund in the
development of affordable
housing in our region in the
eastern part of the state and
the MFA has been instrumental in
assisting us and in game that
financing but we urge you to
support SB three eighty one
today and thank you very much
thank you Chris.
Okay about all those in
opposition of how Senate Bill
excuse me.
Twenty six in the room with
online.
I want
to talk about the.
In opposition.
In the room not one.
Okay thank you that being said
let's come back to the committee
questions or comments on Senate
bill three eighty one.
Okay what's the committee would
you pass.
How did you have questions first
okay that's that's a put up in
that and we'll go to
Representative just got.
Question.
In.
Mr yes Mister chairman Senator
Representative Scott this is not
specific this bill doesn't
specifically do that that bill
that you're talking about passed
last year and so this bill let
me explain a little bit shorter
last year's bill didn't take
effect until this coming here on
the twenty twenty twenty four
and it generates approximately
forty million a year it will
generate passed approximately
forty million the year leverage
twenty nine to want to return
approximately seven hundred to
eight hundred million per year
for affordable housing so my
bill here today merely makes it
possible for all that to happen
this year is that a wait until
next year that's all it does
changes the date one year back.
H. correct.
It was leveraged you said oh yes
is the leverage effect oh sure
thank you very much omitted
deferred is a poor great detail
on this as to how it becomes
leveraged for affordable housing
and I know it comes from various
sources but this particular the
body of the bill that passed
last year is severance tax
dollars as we know two and a
half percent of the state's
bonding capacity and and then it
goes you're more specifically to
affordable housing but as I said
that bill has already passed
since last year so
Representative Scott has a
question as to how you leveraged
Mr chairman and Representative
gotta thank you for the question
so what we do at the NFA is we
take the housing trust fund
monies and we loan them out in
this case I'll give you an
example of how we leverage that
with other sources we leverage
with that one example would be
with members with low income
housing tax credit so we may
loan out a million dollars from
the housing trust fund to a
development that's a thirty
million dollar development they
get tax credits in the amount of
let's say twenty one million
dollars to get some bank
financing for another say seven
or eight million dollars and
then one million dollars in the
housing trust and so that's one
example of how the funds are
leveraged.
Okay answers your question and
definitely can give more details
if you'd like.
Thank you for your interest
thank you stop we do have a
motion on the table
Representative by Representative
Ortez that was given.
Bye bye Representative Duncan
the total six.
Representative bariga.
Representative Castellano is.
Representative Chandler yes
Representative Duncan yes
Representative diet coke.
Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative speaker Martinez.
Representative Ortez.
Senator Scott.
Representative Serrato yes.
Representative Townsend.
Thank you.
This.
Representative vice chair
condemned yes.
Yes.
By a vote of a line that to you
have a do pass thank you Mr
chairman members of the.
Okay.
We do have Representative Garcia
in the room this morning I will
levels will switch spots will
let you go first and then
Representative last of Senate
bill twenty six.
Representative Garcia good
morning coming up this morning
and joining us less in this with
you Graeser.
My vote.
We need to scratch.
Okay.
We're not members of the
committee Public.
Four thirty three.
A couple of lessons.
How do forty three reject the
taxation removing the sense it
eight for income taxes
extension for our service
retired people Mr chairman Bill
of one sixty three passed last
year it was in by the governor.
March eighth
it passed fifty nine and nine
and and on the house floor.
what I'm trying to do Mr
chairman you just we will assign
to date on the bill nothing else
changes the the.
The exemption part of veterans
money stays the same.
if it doesn't pass Mr chairman
of of.
You know New Mexico there are
not benefit from this bill
because the centers to shore up
near sunset which due to expire
twenty twenty six what I'm
trying to do just get the sense
that off of that Mr Chairman
Thank you all know is that I
think about a hundred forty
thousand veterans in New Mexico
and not all retired the very few
are retired what I'm trying to
do here Mr Chairman committee
members need.
Well more people to New Mexico.
The longer we do we have four
bases in the state of New Mexico
one about our veterans retire
here we're trying to keep them
here because they there's all
kinds of Mr chairman of benefits
you know there of doctors.
Mechanics of program review
being in the military is there
and we laughed and we train
these people of the to stay in
the state of New Mexico with
that Mr chairman of simple
questions thank you so
Representative let's go to the
audience for all those in favor
of house bill four thirty three
in the room that also online
please visit at yes through the
back.
Good morning this is JD willing
to speaking on the operator of
the chamber of commerce the
chamber supported last year's
work to create a tax exemption
for military retirement pay and
just to put this please not
support.
Also to spend that tax benefits
it definitely our military
retirees have spent two decades
or more honing a variety of
skills they also bring spouses
with them who often have similar
professional backgrounds of
their own and most importantly
they're used to being Google
they will continue to be mobile
if the retirement they can
stretch a little further in
than other states so taxes which
we have on the books as an
expiration date and we should
correct that to hold on to this
valuable human resource thank
you thank you Katie and also the
route anybody a lot.
Richard warning.
I guess he's.
Let's go down about a year muted
still.
I was trying to say anything
okay.
All right well thanks for
joining us anyway.
The store think.
Mr chair Mr Stewart who seek
number retired.
military veteran of the army in
the National Guard and the state
three others.
I'm speaking today for the
veterans and military families
caucus.
We support this bill we support
the bill last year that
Representative Garcia described
to you
what this will do for the
retirees is to take away the
risk of an uncertain future in
our budgets and we certainly
appreciate your support thank
you for allowing me to speak.
Thanks for joining us.
Richard will be spared okay
Richard your back.
You just muted circuits.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
also Richard moody I'm also a
member of the New Mexico
veterans military families
caucus my wife is a lady
retirement twenty nine years we
selected New Mexico is our
retirement home because the
opportunities it provides in as
previous supporters of sat
military retirees bring a wealth
of experience and skill sets to
New Mexico we strongly support
passage of this bill to remove
the sunset to keep military
retirees and their families here
in New Mexico thank you for your
time Sir.
Thank you Richard.
Terry call well good morning.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee.
The board last year's work to
intend for military retirement
pay and we're pleased to support
the bills also extend that tax
benefit indefinitely our
military retirees are patriotic
law abiding citizens who have
spent two decades or more
Harper how many have arrived
it's still there in the near
medical professionals data
scientists and engineers and
leaders many times they also
bring spouses with him you often
have professional backgrounds of
their own they feel strongly
about their communities but
they're very often don't run is
the there additional operating
and moving and they absolutely
well if their retirement pay
construction little further in
another state right tax
exemption we have on the books
has an expiration date we should
correct that hold on the thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you Terry anyone else.
Okay he wanted opposition.
House bill four thirty three in
the movie online.
See note it's going to committee
questions comments from the
committee Representative Harper
of Zendesk.
I
think chairman thank you
Representative
it's good to see this morning.
So I want to just sure maybe a
couple thoughts
So.
It's interesting you know this
committee we table things with
the fiscal impact and then we
will match the tax package.
And you know Representative is
realize that and they get
creative and all these things
like.
Would like to see two years out
we like so my bill doesn't
affect this fiscal years you can
pass it right right.
Now I'm sorry that's very
creative you know where to table
it and we will consider whether
we put in the package right.
and then
You know so so if you know this
case we don't see a fiscal
impact for several years so I
just want to say you know we
should.
You know make sure you don't
fall into that trap.
Right.
And then the second one which is
you know the reason we put
sunset on
things like this we're trying to
encourage an activity.
Is so that we can see the data
and see if it actually worked or
not right now.
The chairman and representative
we enacted this was it last year
this bill is passed and signed
into law.
Yes Sir which rural.
Yeah so Representative do we
have any data yet on on how this
is work so far
Mr chairman of Representative
Harper normal it just started
last year and my concern were.
A three year sentence is not
very long but that may come into
effect you are lost a year so we
have like to have two years of
law.
Kind of make you wish you were
works out and it could go the
way at the end of the three
years well we have two years
left on it I don't think we
could achieve what we're trying
to achieve to help anybody in
the state of New Mexico hope
that a jeep which that so.
So Chairman representative yes
thank you a dozen to my
questions so we passed the last
year.
It looks like we delayed it to
go into effect starting in
twenty four so we won't have any
data for this year.
Or really even next year.
So I I do understand the
argument that.
Three years might be too short
of a time to understand what's
going on.
But I'm just trying to stand why
then are we not here to push out
the sunset a couple years
instead of removing it
altogether.
Well Mr chairman of
Representative Harper.
I am a veteran and not to be.
The.
What will be the difference on
extending that.
Permanently then extended for
another three four years you
know
Of the three or four years I
probably will be here.
You know I'm a little bit older
than most people are and and I
want to make sure that we take
care of it earns.
Like I said I am a veteran and
I'm pushing really hard for
veterans issues as you all and I
would like to for it to happen
in my time because we don't have
another veteran I push to the
issue that this Bobby will with
and you know at the end of the
day Mr chairman on I think that
the student Mexico one of the
might not be making this.
Permanently and I I know there's
Financial aspect would put.
Yeah so it's a German
Representative thank you and I
and I appreciate we're we're
touch on that and and all the
state I think.
Even if you leave it even if I
leave I think there will be
folks who.
to push for veterans and and
folks will continue to try to
make sure to the rising with
regards tax policy.
I just think this hasn't even
started yet and were for you try
to move to sunset I don't see I
can support that but we wanted
to extend it so that out a
couple years so there's I used
to look at it I would support
that I think typically this
committee we do a five to seven
year sunset and I think if I
remember right this is the
Senate
amendments but a three year
sunset on it and I'm sure if
they realized it was.
A three years the projects at
five years from now without
realizing that it doesn't start
till twenty twenty four.
so I guess Chairman
representative would you.
Be supportive if we.
Committed to pushing out a
couple years or not.
Mr chairman and Representative
Harper I think the
Representative still Philip
Anderson with this and so on.
Asked house bill one sixty
three.
But I would.
Rather not.
Of go another three or four
years I would rather try to
pull.
The.
The part.
your reserve I I appreciate that
State
is the art of what's possible.
I'm I'm not sure if this will
make it out of here today and
its current form but I would I
would.
Just say I would consider that
we extend the sunset is more
time to more data so I think at
that point will be a state that
was like this is good and I
think you make a permanent.
by the very strange of us to
just say we passed with the
sunset last year in which can
take it off this year.
Mr Miller review our press we
respect your with your thoughts.
We do but.
You know I've been
Representative for years now and
it'll have been done better and.
That I have seen and you know
and I'm trying to.
Chairman is
a plus you
it's we're not thank you yeah.
Thank you Representative thank
you can Representative Harper
the representative Dick.
Thank you Mr.
As a true freshman Mr chair and
representative I've seen a lot
of bills come through and.
And we and these are good a lot
of these are good bills my
family my father served in the
military my brother served in
the military have the greatest
respect.
For those who served up but my
question is this when is a stop.
Somebody pays for this for every
tax break we get for every when
when we say we're going to give
a tax break for property taxes
somebody else in the county pays
for that property taxes so.
There is nothing three somebody
assume that that or will pay
that for everybody and so
I I just the.
I worry about.
Covering everybody might my
second question Mr Chairman
representative.
or my question would be
What we what we do on to that
family that makes seventy five
thousand dollars a year.
What what kind of rigs so we've
given that.
Because that's were some of this
impact is going to be felt with
that family there and so I.
I hesitate
Hesitate to continue to put a
burden on some other part of New
Mexicans for that.
Thank you Mr the talks
Representative that's good well
speaker Martinez thank you Mr
speaker and Representative could
see you this morning
thank you for bringing the bill
forward I think that.
These particular.
Tax policy as a result of
probably some of this bipartisan
work I've seen in the middle
floor debate.
Thanks to you and and former
representative Phelps Anderson.
I think that.
when it comes to.
Supporting
two forty not only the folks
served us.
But beyond that we ensuring that
tax policy when it comes to how
we treat retirement is
Is done in a balanced way and I
think one of this is I've
learned this as one of those
that was posted is supposed to
the social security.
Income tax exemption that this
last year
probably will lot of Regis from
a policy perspective didn't
didn't jive with me
but I think that when we have
Especially when we have.
The revenues that we have if we
can make some inroads in helping
support those communities as
populations I think that's a
good thing
especially when it comes to you
with regard to that bringing
people and and attracting
folks to move to New Mexico and
I learned a great lot a great
deal of I'm not a veteran my I'm
not from a family the parents
I learned a great deal from all
the veterans yourself included
It will be when he was here
Representative certainly on the
Martinez to send number of them
with the cap really taught us a
lot.
I'm not so crazy about some of
the other ones are moving but I
think this one is is is a sound
idea
specially given that arbitrary
since that we put on there which
was part of a compromise at the
end of the.
so.
thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative for bringing to
the fore.
Thank you speaker anyone else
question cops for example to go.
Thank you representative Garcia
Mr chairman
We would not be sitting here
today we didn't if it were not
for our veterans and you know
how many of them gave their
lives many of them came back
injured we have a lot of
veterans that are homeless on
the street.
And you know there's two areas
in my mind and I always think of
when I think about our
allocations
Our children and our veterans
those are the two important
areas in my mind I do come from
a family of veterans I had a
father that was in World War two
and six of his brothers at the
same time they were all in
either.
Either that or or the next war
and we just not too long ago Mr
chair and representative Garcia
that two years ago we were up in
angel fire we thought the little
bricks and we did a whole
ceremonial thing for them just
to honor them because they're
all dead now
but.
You know we give tax breaks to
oil and gas we give tax breaks
to electric cars we give tax
breaks to
all sorts of things in this
legislature.
First and foremost our veterans
are the reason that we're here
today and I just you know I I
will do everything in my power
to help veterans and to ensure
that they are taking care of
because.
Being a representative from
Bernalillo county and seeing
what I saw
on second street in the freeway
of where we had to we had a home
here those people you know we're
either addicted for down on
their luck for veterans that
we're not taking care of that
just you know had came home with
PTSD or or bipolar or whatever
addiction or whatever the case
may be but I just think that
veterans deserve every possible
assistance in every possible
respect we can give thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you representative
Representative up anybody else
Representative is to please Mr
Chairman.
The questions or comments the.
What it will stated you know I
come from a long line of the
veterans that was a World War
two navy to really force Vietnam
one million army Vietnam less
often require Vietnam to
daughters in army one army one
airforce you Mr chairman.
I'm not trying to do one
extension.
to what other people get breaks
on taxes that nothing to do with
the.
My.
I is to help veterans in the
basin.
Thank.
And and and the sponsor you know
I I think there's no question
that that everybody in this room
today and in this body respects
and appreciates all that that
the veterans have done for for
not only just the state for our
country but I think in terms of
of global respect we respect you
with without a doubt and and it
always brings up.
The special sense of pride to me
when my father was also a marine
veteran state to have as you of
being a veteran guy and when you
guys look at each other you can
say semper fi and how powerful
that is that I'll never in my
wildest dreams probably ever be
able to understand how awesome
how tough or strong you guys
were during that time and
operated was created what I for
free of that and so I don't
think there's any if there's any
sense that that you're trying to
do anything mysterious here
that's outside because you want
to and I think it's also
important that well we
understand that our time here we
all have a shelf life as as
representatives or senators
right and that that's that's the
that's the honest truth.
That you can't believe what you
had you would hope for the best
but you prepare for the worst in
regards to the issues that are
extremely important to you like
that's it's better right and I
appreciate you always standing
up for the Belgian because
everyone needs an ambassador
here that of somebody that that
you hope somebody will be able
to carry that torch you in the
end but for you to have it here
and now and try to push for it I
respect that up completely so
long story short what I'm trying
to say is you know the process
you've been here before right
and so anything that would have
a fist with respect and that and
other stuff the temporary table
tier with that dissipation on
how it may or may not fit into
the tax package so what did you
explain that to you do you fully
so at this point I appreciate
your presentation here and and
so at this point I just like how
you know you serve on probation
we would have people this and
then we will see how and if it
fits into a tax package when
that time comes so I hope you
understand that it's it's it's
not it's not the no disrespect
but at this point that's where
that's where we come to okay
Mister chairman no I understand
but well how words and all I can
expect is the best and whatever
comes out of the this committee
will respect.
One and I really appreciate the
time and
Pri to questions and look
forward to working with you all
thank you before you got that.
Motion made their second.
Second by Representative don't
get any opposition to that
motion.
Seeing that thank you
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Of this bill twenty six I will
be presenting this on behalf of
Senator Gonzales so
by Roman.
This is the.
Anyways.
Good morning Terry ready on
Senate bill twenty six as
amended is meant by here we are
the Senate bill twenty six at
ended this bill as a result of a
year long study by the LFC and
the revenue stabilization and
tax policy committee
oil and gas revenues were point
six billion dollars in FY twenty
sixteen.
In FY twenty two they were one
point three billion dollars are
only expected to more than
double to two point eight
billion dollars in fiscal year
twenty four yet oil and gas
production will peak in less
than one in ten years our
current revenues are high but we
know that revenues will once
again decline in the future.
This bill does not affect the
early childhood trust fund nor
the budget process and solve two
problems first it makes the
budget less result reliant on
oil and gas and secondly.
The state for the eventual
decline of oil and gas starting
in twenty twenty five is
billable captured only new
windfall from oil and gas in the
severance tax permanent but and
this will help allowed to grow
revenue the more sustainable and
stable weight.
Doing so this bill prevent
General Fund Representative
declining in future years
despite declining oil and gas
production due to the interest
earned on deposits to the
permanent but
with that manage chairwoman
Stephanie questions.
We'll go first to finance will
first ask for people here that
would like to speak in support
of Senate bill twenty six is
amended if there's anyone in the
room or over soon that would
like to speak in support please
raise your hands now you're in
the room we'll go to you first.
Thank you.
Mexico.
Can
if you have any.
Able to the program.
Thank you anyone else in the
room that would like to speak in
support.
What about on.
Seeing no hands right so they
will go to those up that might
like to speak in opposition
anyone here in person or over is
assumed that would like to speak
in opposition on SB twenty six
as amended.
On.
over soon we'll go to you Terry.
Madam chairman members of the
committee adhere to speak in
support and then still do that.
Yes go ahead.
Thank you over the last six or
seven years the state why are
pros character excess oil and
gas revenues or to report
Representative to create a true
rainy day fund to better
insulate the state against
future practices and energy
revenue.
Working on growing expansion of
early childhood programs in a
sustainable responsible way
keeping the excess revenue out
of the general fund has also
helps to keep our fiscal
dependence on oil and gas and
chat with a massive new surplus
for experiencing however we need
to do more in this regard and we
agree this should include
capturing and sending still more
oil and gas revenue to the
severance tax permanent fund
this is a smart approach
investing easy access haulers
today will generate a healthier
and more substantial revenue
string in the future and we can
make this change without
affecting the structure intent
of either the tax stabilization
reserve or early childhood fund
which is important to us we have
a greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce we urge your support on
this bill thank you very much.
Thank you Terry Mr chair
anything to add before we go to
committee you know I I think
that I don't think there was a
couple of issues that were
raised earlier this morning
right before committee so if you
would please if we could have a
hearing on this on this piece of
legislation but perhaps
temporarily table
until we get those issues
resolved that that would help me
greatly.
And and also excuse me well we
for that we have an amendment to
this bill.
that is a wordsmith that do we
have to pass up the amendment
cheeks.
Through the committee.
Two seven.
Thank you for the motion and the
second how we are now in the
amendment Mr chair would you
like to present moment so on
page four line twenty three the
it's it's a simple strike by and
insert in lieu thereof.
If.
Come up by.
That's the extent of of the
admin Mr chair when you read the
number on the amendment I'm
sorry yes ma'am point two two
five eight zero three point one
I will go to committee is that
discussion on this amendment.
I'm seeing nods of go over here
thank.
Okay is there any opposition I
do we have a second.
A second from Representative set
up the motion from speaker
Martinez is there any opposition
to that motion.
Mr chair you have an amended
bill.
Now on to our.
Excuse me to a conversation or
discussion about this bill today
committee members.
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair and.
Chair and is a great issue this
morning
I think this is a.
Wonderful bill I remember
talking with sure Chandler over
the interim about ways we could
strengthen the severance tax
permanent fund and one of them
was to make a big infusion to
the fund and we are doing that.
And another was to take some of
the anticipated excess revenue
that we're going to get over the
next several years and make
fusions into that fund and
that's we're looking at right
here.
And they did wonders when we
look at the analysis from yes I
see the state investment council
and LESC analysis districts are
funded by the state when I
started here eleven years ago
this we we have to rate
permanent funds we have the land
part of frontier with the
service tax refund.
The secretary general fund was
dying.
And that's not exaggeration the
money part of the Mardi Carlos
mutilations show that it was
dying because we were putting
anything into it.
Every year we were checking out
four point six percent.
And we were relying on the
market to grow more than four
point six percent every year to
keep it alive.
It's always done we've taken
several small steps to try to
keep it going it's it's.
You know looking a little bit
better but these things.
We're doing this year are the
meaningful ones that'll keep
this find a life for a very long
time.
And when you look at you know
just good.
Tax policy good fiscal policy
right you know on the oil and
gas industry does this.
When it's going well if you
don't spend it all if you save
some of if you invested in
accounted frontier Senator goes
down.
You can.
use that revenue to not have to
sweep K. through twelve schools
right so this was just.
This is just.
Wonderful I'm super glad to see
in front of us we've seen great
benefit the similar mechanisms
had on the early childhood.
Fund I mean I don't think any of
us would imagine that it was at
the level it is right now.
Any person would use that same
mechanism.
to help rural district.
So.
I I really am grateful issue
this in front of us thank you
chairman thank you.
Representative Chandler and
everyone else who who is part of
this the last car I just wanna
make is I just wanna make sure
we we understand there is a
difference between a rainy day
fund and a development fund
right so a rainy day fund is you
know your savings account that
you can easily access and when
things are going bad you can you
know your water heater dies
right you can you can pull it
out and and take care of
emergency so a rainy day fund is
really our reserves.
Right that's thirty whatever
percent
that's really our rainy day fund
when you look at the.
What a land grant permanent fund
and the service tax refund those
are down its funds and the
difference there is you invest.
This corpus that helping this
this money and then you're able
to pull from that.
And it's a it's a constant
revenue stream and that in a few
years ago when oil and gas was
down we actually for the first
time ever receiving more money.
From these investment funds
account funds into our general
fund we did oil and gas tax
revenue.
That's just brilliant right
that's where we want to be when
when that day comes who knows
when when that day comes when
oil and gas is not gangbusters
like it is now because of these
funds we're not going to cut our
state budget by three billion
dollars or whatever it is at the
time so.
That's why state.
thank you and
With that.
I'm sure chairman I yield thank
you Representative
Representative Townsend.
Thank you madam chair
I to.
Right.
Right.
I have.
Even with doing the S..
And saying.
That we the.
R. O. yes Representative.
T.
certain number of years.
We don't have a place.
To address that you.
Six years or ten years or
whatever you want to leave we
don't have a plan that's going
to address that.
And all that we're doing.
Just kind of kicking the can
down the road and we're hoping
some of the state Mark Hughes.
I think we all of our brexit all
gas of that so that in.
Eighteen years or whatever the
but I.
Open the speaker would be here.
As I was going to keep this
little.
We have I've put a memorial out
of that.
Mexico says we are.
We ought to build New Mexico
tech
Science based.
Institutions like Mexico tech in
the state.
In the absence of oil and gas
your twenty thirty what exactly
and what is.
What are are.
Our real.
Opportunities to replace that.
And what we gotta do.
And sent out a real roadmap of
twenty in this as this is how we
can right now we talked about it
in here but we're spending money
like it's going to go on
forever.
And when it but if yet the
advise off like you did in
years.
Under a bridge in the area we've
got.
So I would just I I really think
we need to plan for the future
and I don't.
I think this is a step I think
it's great that but it won't get
us where we need to.
Thank you Representative
Townsend representative but I
go.
Thank you madam chair
Representative so I just wanted
to give you guys a little story
of
when I served on the P. R. eight
point and I served on that board
for eight years and I was
president twice we had a
fourteen billion dollar fund at
that time this was in two
thousand two to two thousand
ten.
In two thousand nine.
When I became president of that
board.
The market crashed and
You know we did expect it we
lost seven billion dollars
overnight.
I mean I should have white here
by now but like it was pretty
thank god that we had a really
good investment manager
and he and I were on the phone a
lot but the reason I bring this
story up is because I think
about this a lot with regard to
madam chair and and and
Representative.
Lente.
And I and thinking about what
Representative Townsend said I
think about this a lot you know
because it was it was.
It was an instance which
basically changed my life
The the financial impact that
that had on our membership are
are who are expecting their
retirement.
I mean.
Course you can imagine people
are calling us at worried and
everybody was just not sure what
was gonna happen.
And the reason I'm bringing this
that manager and and
representative Lente is we were
very well diversified.
Our food was very well
diversified we had and we had
invested in a number of
different buckets.
And we had investments in green
you know.
Green
drugs we had investments in
mortgages we had investments in
and of course the mortgage
industry also hello at that same
time which was a big another
will double whammy
and we did have to fire we had I
think we fired like twenty two
money managers
But the point that I'm trying to
make is that we were able to
rise back up.
It took a few years you know I
mean over the course of probably
about twenty fourteen I think
with the I really started to get
stable again.
And
I bring this up because I think
that when I look at the
investments that we're making
now I think you know yes we are
moving in that direction of
creating more electric and all
those sorts of things solar wind
all of those investments but we
still have oil and gas and we're
trying to get some of the best
players to clean up their act
yes but I think my point is that
we really continue to stay on
that path.
Of having.
Wealth invested portfolio.
Not just for the short term but
for the long term and so when I
think about these bills this is
where I this is the point of
reference madam chair and and
and Representative like ten and
I come from
kind of much like our own
checkbooks in our own savings
accounts which probably most
people don't have these days or
or they're just living on the
edge and so hopefully we do not
put New Mexico living on the
edge we have a real
you know we have a portfolio
that is well invested and
knowing that as we make those
transitions you know we still
have a base.
So thank you madam chair I hope
I made my point and thank you
Representative.
Representative if I may madam
chair I keep going further down
that
he gave me that ultimately into
heavy for the.
I wanted to introduce my ex who
is I think last time I did it
again now that the signing star
Adam as you and and and hometown
hero of of Los crucis as our
chief economist LFC and and
really so we have grown to to do
appreciate his knowledge and
intellect and ability to look at
numbers in ways that blow my
mind but that thank you thank
you for for sitting with me this
morning thank you so Mr chair
seeing that we don't have any
further committee debate for
today in that you've asked us to
come back I would say that we
can roll over your bill and when
you're ready look again at the
need to thank you madam chair
with members.
At this point time books we have
the tax back is just about ready
and so what I will do is I will
get those out will hand deliver
those copies to your office
we're not beating on the floor
this evening but will have those
out to the office by this
afternoon so you cannot have the
we get a look at them and the
plan is to then presented in the
committee in this committee on
Monday morning all right so just
so we can have a a preview of
what was to come and that was to
be expected to be so with that
thank you madam chair the
committee members thank you.
We are.
Thank you.
You.
Right now.
