Representative.
Here.
Thank you Representative Romero.
Elaine I got a text
Representative Romero she is in
another committee.
Thank you.
Representative Scott.
Thank you.
Representative Stansbury has
sent morning good morning thank
you Representative Strickler
here.
Good morning morning.
By your Chandler.
I see her love in.
She she also texted she was in
in in state government
and she'll she'll be with us
shortly okay and chairman
Martinez I am here and I.
I I'm sorry but I'm here Mr
chairman.
You have to put a mark next to
if you go off name please.
My lunch use the liver in hand
delivering lunch to all tax
committee members this afternoon
at eleven thirty.
So.
Make sure he has your current
address on file.
Members today we have a pretty.
Pretty packed agenda
You know why Friday we had a
great hearing beautiful hearing
we had a lot of public comment
it was he was fantastic but I
did do a poor job of managing
the time of the public comment
and and you know unfortunately
we have
with the extra long hearing so
starting today with the lanes
help and and the team back at
the office will be will be
timing our public comment we're
gonna give each individual a
minute thirty seconds to to say
their points that should help us
I think chair time a little bit
better I know that Friday a lot
of you had committees in the
afternoon and you know we ended
up having like a fifteen minute
break between two very long
committee meeting so hopefully
that'll help Madam time a little
better.
I had a good conversation with
the ranking member Harper
yesterday about today's agenda
hi bill thirty six that is the
exemptions for legal actions
against property bill will be
rolled over to Wednesday the
sponsor is working with our
staff and council service to
tie up that language if you
remember we had some some
heartburn about the language and
and the drafting and so they're
working on that and should have
it ready for us to consider on
Wednesday.
We're gonna start today with
Senate bill one this is one of
the you know bicameral priority
bills a COVID relief bills
that's already passed the Senate
is on our side and we have
senator Wirth presenting that
bill will then go to house bill
two fifty five Representative
Maestas celkovo deliveries I
believe there's a number of
amendments that have been
submitted and and should be
ready to go by a number of
members.
After that we'll proceed to
House Bill fifteen and they will
conclude with house bill one
seventy four.
Does that sound fair to all of
you.
Resigned that are to buy
everyone lunch.
Very well very well.
so with that
members let's go to Senate bill
one Senate Majority Leader worth
I see you on the zoom I hope you
can hear us of soul please.
present your bill.
Thank you Mr chair can you hear
me.
Perfect very much appreciate the
opportunity to present Senate
bill one this morning.
This bill is a continuation of
the work that collaborative Lee
we have done
In the house Senate Republicans
Democrats you June and then in
November to put in place
critical comment really
one of the things coming into
the session that is most
important is to.
Provide for our recovery for
those most impacted on my
comment and this bill does that
it does to specific things
first yes provides.
Essential workers making less
than fifteen dollars an hour a
six hundred dollar tax rebate
using the working families tax
credit.
In our November special session
we have a spirited debate in
both chambers
Balch Exencial workers in this
category and well we didn't
agree on a mechanism to do it in
November we certainly agree in
both chambers about the
importance of these essential
workers are grocery store
workers are custodians are those
that have gone to work every day
for us and allowed us to
navigate across and so what
we've done in part a this bill
is providing.
That those workers making less
than thirty one thousand five
hundred dollars a year for
single filers and we're married
families filing jointly making
less than thirty nine thousand
dollars a year thank you at the
six hundred dollar tax rebate
which can be sent out by the tax
department as soon as they find
out their return for the twenty
twenty tax period all those
returns to start being elected
but last Friday February twelfth
the second thing Senate bill one
does.
To provide food and beverages
stab assessments as that term is
defined with a four month gross
receipts deduction also called a
gross receipts holiday from
March through June which will
allow these businesses to keep
the gross receipts that collect
during this period are part of
this has local governments being
child harmless for these gross
proceeds during the four months
which is critical especially
from municipalities were Y. so
happily and gross receipts are
so that's basically what the
bill does into parts about a two
hundred million dollar fiscal
impact on it does use
non recurring general fund up to
pay for this and I can we
believe this is a very important
piece of our recovery package I
know the house has also sent
over to us a leader bill that
Mike Weiss is part of this
recovery package and with that
Mr chair I'm happy stamper
questions I'm not sure of
Secretary Schardin Clark is on
yet but she is the expert
witness and she may want to say
something also just FYI.
Senator Correa Hemphill is a co
sponsor and I think it's going
to jump over we're all jumping
between committee this morning
so she jumps over someone could
let her in and she's also done
work and Senator Candelaria
sends his apologies for not
being able to be here but I do
want to also highlight his work
on the working families tax
credit along with you Mr chair
is the co sponsor on this bill
both of you have elevated the
importance of the working
families tax credit and this is
a a way to use a one time
rebate under this tax credit I
know you and Senator Candelaria
are working on a recurring
increase to that and I really
hope we can do that because it's
been one of the most effective
tools to address those working
at the lower income levels so Mr
chair I'm not serve secretary
Schardin Clark is on yes.
Or Senator right hand bill but
I'm happy to to wing it and then
move forward and again I
appreciate you you all hearing
this as quickly as you have.
Thank you Majority Leader worse
so you can you can link it with
the best of them and you'd be
fine I'm sure but I I do this
Senator charting Clark come the
line good morning secretary
would you like to add anything.
Hi good morning Mister chairman
members of the committee I'm
here for any technical questions
and I don't have anything that I
need to add at this time thank
you.
Great well thank you for joining
us let's go to the audience and
you land this is our made in
reported voyage with our timers
of how we do with this thing.
My
you are
and then I'm ready.
Okay.
Sorry I see for has in support
as a reminder of public comment
will be.
Done.
With a one minute thirty second
limit.
there's a big timer on your
screen I'm sure there's one on
mine I'm assuming you see this
too so I'm gonna call on our
first public comment in support.
Allison Smith.
Yes good morning Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Allison Smith I'm the
registered lobbyists The New
Mexico restaurant association
the mandatory closures of
restaurant dining room so forced
operators to manage cash flow
fiercely while facing little to
no revenue we appreciate the
sponsors of this bill bringing
this bill forward we feel this
bill will give some measure of
relief to our restaurants
impacted by the pandemic and
give them a little bit of
reading when I miss a focus on
staying open and keeping their
team members employed we're
hoping that the recent move to
yellow for parts of the state
allowing restaurants to begin
serving indoors can continue and
possibly improve the greens are
restaurants can make the best
use of the relief provided in
this bill The New Mexico
restaurant association stands in
support of this bill.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you Mr it's going to Jenny
Bollington.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
JD greater a member of Commerce.
All offers deported tax relief
to those who have suffered the
most hardship in New Mexico
during the pandemic including
low income families and
president Sadat's pathology
secretary food service and other
hospitality leisure businesses
across the state are truly
hanging on by a thread there for
these types of forward thinking
regulatory relief measures are
critical we want to thank the
sponsor we appreciate their
effort for bringing this
legislation forward and we urge
the legislature to continue
considering ways to provide
pandemic relief and recovery
struggling businesses statewide
including grant funding
unemployment insurance stability
and stable rates for all
taxpayers thank you.
Thank you Mr Bolton.
Jason Espinoza.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director with the national
federation of independent
business we stand in support of
this legislation and all of and
that their I've second sent.
That's a new record Mr Espinoza.
You give.
Carlos on the.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee on Carla Sonntag
with the New Mexico business
coalition we represent hundreds
of businesses and thousands of
New Mexicans and our goal is
just to find a better way for
them to live and operate
businesses here we appreciate
the work that the sponsors have
done on this bill and we support
their bill and their efforts in
this regard
We would like to point out that
it would be.
Really nice if the legislature
could look to help other
businesses as well there are
some businesses that to date
have not opened since the
original shut down last March
and it would be nice to likewise
give them some consideration but
for the work that you've done we
do support it and we appreciate
it thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Anyone else in support of Senate
bill one.
Anyone in opposition Senate bill
one.
Okay very well that concludes
our public comment let's go to
back to committee committee
members questions.
And actually before I do that I
see I see the other sponsor this
bill Senator Siah Correa
Hemphill welcome Senator I don't
know if you have anything to add
to the presentation of of Senate
bill one please go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
grateful to have this
opportunity to co sponsor Senate
bill one with leader Wirth
Senator Candelaria and
Representative Martinez as we
all know it's been a challenging
year for food and beverage
establishments so this will be
an opportunity for us to help
support them and I know many
owners in my community business
owners
food and beverage establishments
are really really struggling
right now and it's just such an
honor to work on this
legislation to to help support
them so thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you for joining us
Senator.
Representative Arbor.
Thank you Mr chair and the.
For reader it's great to see you
here this morning and and
welcome of
the center for Ben to house tax
and Rev Committee I hope you
feel welcome here.
So I'm I've just a.
A couple questions
On the on the details of the
bill and maybe a couple of
questions on the big picture.
So.
Looking at sea.
Why are I I'm assuming this is
an error chairman and and we are
worse but it looks like the the
front page here.
We've got a table that wasn't
filled out.
The fiscal impact.
but my my analysis was that it
was going to be roughly two
hundred million dollar hit to
the reserves it's about.
Ninety five million for the
gross receipts tax that's a
fifty five million dollars to
the state and then forty million
dollar hold harmless to write
and I read that correctly.
Mr chair I I think you did there
is an updated FIR that I saw
this morning which did increase
a little bit the.
Impact of the working families
rebates are based on
administrative done so the total
package is about two hundred
million but I certainly would
yield to our secretary Schardin
Clark to spell out the
interesting FIR because it is
kind of challenging to follow
that up in exactly how it works
but I think the big pictures
rights but exactly how that's
delineated I think we go to
market your explained.
She looks frozen you Mr
chairman.
There she is.
They are secretary Clark did you
were you able to hear the
question.
I'm sorry that I got kicked off
and came back on and was this
about the fiscal impact table.
Yes yes okay thank you Mr
chairman and members so the
version of the LFC is FIR that
I'm looking at
It shows a ninety five million
dollar impact to the general
fund for the income tax rebate
and then
the G. R. T. restaurant relief
rebate it takes a little bit
more explaining because there's
the direct portion and then
there's a sort of a hold
harmless to local governments to
let me walk you through that the
general fund pays out forty nine
point eight million for the G.
R. T. deduction to restaurants
and then the G. R. and then the
general fund also pays out forty
point five million to to local
governments to hold them
harmless for their portion for a
total of.
About ninety Bucks like ninety
million so that entire bill is
scored at one eighty five point
three million.
Thank you chairman and secretary
that's that's very helpful.
And
And just to make sure this this
whole harmless is a temporary
chairman and leader is that
correct.
Mr chair I appreciate you asking
that question because we are not
going back down the the hold
harmless
how should I describe it maybe I
best not described at one
thirteen that we've been trying
to on line but no this is a one
time D. L. it's a four months
basically.
Area here March to June and the
associate the municipal league I
did testify in support on the
Senate side with some
reservations though because of
the hold harmless experiment
from twenty thirteen that we're
still trying to deal with so I
think it's okay I just it was
very important to me given given
what's happened to our
municipalities because they rely
so heavily G. R. T. in
particular on to make sure there
wasn't a hit for them.
You know help or restaurants and
spend all our cities offer eight
so that's what that's what.
Thank you chairman and and Mr
reader for that
yeah I when I first heard there
is a hold harmless I was very
concerned by ten.
saying that this is temporary I
maybe I've I've also described
as having reservations but not
not super concerned
And then the mechanism that you
mentioned when presenting the
bill Mr leader and chairman the
idea is that folks will still be
charged when they go to a
restaurant the gross receipts
tax.
But the business will not have
to pay that to the state so
socially be an extra.
Seven eight nine percent
that's restaurant receives on
the on the top of the bill might
interpret that correctly.
You are Mr chair this is
actually something that the
Colorado legislature did which
piqued my interest again what
we're trying to do is to get
money into the pockets of both
the working families and the
food and hospitality in New
Mexico are industry as fast as
we can and so well it's like
someone.
Unique way of doing just I
really do think especially with
the news we got last week about
moving you know into the yellow
category this justice one more
boost to try and get those
establishments to the other side
of the challenge were in.
Thank you chairman Mr leader
There was an interesting
proposal made on the Senate
floor.
and I'd like to.
Sure my understanding was and
maybe get your thoughts on why
that was not a friendly.
A change but I guess the
proposal was instead of using
this gross receipts tax
mechanism which this I think we
can all agree is interesting
The proposal was to instead of
committee with the feds have
been doing which is to give a a
payroll deduction
and so we would have to hold
harmless we're one.
not to stress receives tax
mechanism instead would still
find savings to the restaurant
when it came to
Fees and taxes and such on their
payroll.
I'm.
My understanding is that was
defeated you just take a moment
to explain the pros and cons of
why you prefer to go the gross
receipts tax approach.
Yeah I cannot certainly in New
York to the secretary for kind
of one of the biggest challenges
with that approach which is the
implementation our so one of the
things about the restaurant
industry just as you know yes
many workers are making you know
it's tipped wage and so that
presents some challenges that
actually would mean a lot less
money I'm going to the
restaurants then under what we
proposed on number one and then
and so that was certainly a
factor we're trying to get as
big of this we can second thing
is that it would require a
credit being filed so would
created administrative process
not sure exactly what the credit
has proposed was against but
I'll be much more challenging
for the department to implement
and it would and and the big
thing is it wouldn't provide the
immediate release that's really
the key to this is that as I
mentioned business this money
stays right in those restaurants
pockets I think when they and
bars and the other staff
businesses to find when you need
it the most so so it was it was
a very good discussion and
Senator Woods
you know I I really appreciate
it he he let me know kind of
what that amendment was before
it came on so we all had a
chance to have discussions and
it just because of those reasons
we went this direction but a
happy you'll to the secretary
she wants to add anything.
I thank you senator Wirth I'm
happy to to add but I'll mostly
be reiterating the comments of
senator Wirth when we looked at
the estimate of the amendments
the tax relief to restaurants
was less meaningful it was a it
was a much smaller amount and
then administratively at that
the beauty of that the deduction
that is included in in the
current version of the
legislation is that we can we
can put that into place very
quickly and I'll say the same
thing about the the rebate
because the six hundred dollar
rebate is based entirely off the
eligibility criteria that are
included on the twenty twenty
tax return taxed route will not
experience a very very high cost
and will be more most
importantly will be able to get
that money out the door very
quickly and that wasn't going to
be the case that deduction think
of it this way the deduction the
taxpayer claims and they're
going to keep that cash flow
versus a credit they would have
to pay their taxes apply for the
credit and after we reviewed it
we would approve the credit so
there would be a lag and getting
their tax relief.
Thank you chairman Mr layered
and madam secretary for that
explanation I I think that makes
sense to me that.
no for looking at.
Trying to implement it quickly.
The administrative burden of
trying to implement that and
also.
looking at the the dollars
directly to the industry.
So I can understand why you
while you're waiting towards
this approach.
I guess the last question I have
and I just I have a concerns
you're
Is this.
Is it is this mechanism of
giving adoption to the
restaurants but still allowing
them to collect.
Is that even legal slash
constitutional.
Right.
Mr chair Mister leader.
so thank you Mr chair
Representative Harper
certainly it's it's different I
don't think we've done something
quite like this before again.
You know I'm it's it's a it's a
bird defining it is that we're
giving the restaurant's adoption
so there's a there's a mechanism
to do it I don't have any reason
to think that it's you know
unconstitutional
you know with respect to you
know what gallery I I yield to
to the secretary on natural but
again I just point out that this
is you know this was a.
Really applaud partisan concept
that that was done up in
Colorado which which got my
attention just because of the
reasons the policy response but
you know you you ask a good
question and you know ideal
secretary C. she has and she
wants to add as well to the
specifics of the metallic.
Thank you senator Wirth and and
Mr chairman and Representative
Harper we don't have any
concerns with the legality of
this and and one of the
technical corrections that's
been made to this bill along the
way as a temporary provision we
started to think okay so and the
example I was using the staff
was let's say at a restaurant
sales the ten dollar hamburger
and they collect ten dollars and
eighty cents we what wanted to
make sure that there was no
argument where that eighty cents
that they collected was somehow
now taxable gross receipts and
so they
And so when it one of the
technical corrections along the
way has been a temporary
provision that makes clear that
the amount of that that would
have been taxed would have been
collected in the form of tax is
also not taxable gross receipts.
So Mr chair and
securing Mr leader
I'm.
I'm definitely not trying to.
You know set this up to die on
the vine I know our restaurants
really need it but but I do
have.
Some concerns I have some
information I receive that sits
in this this might be
unconstitutional this might how
depending on how it's
implemented it could be against
the law.
And you know I've when I was
reading through the tax code
about six years ago seventy
years ago trying to to work on
on reform.
I'm you know I thought to myself
well you know.
We could be we could quite be a
nice of all Ponzi scheme if you
want to charge your customers
gross receipts tax knowing that
it wasn't required.
But then I go back and file with
the department for a refund on
that taxed and you've got no way
to distribute that back to your
customers to be a great way to
pump up your sales by percent.
did some digging on that it
looks like we have some
protections in place.
That you could not do that that
to
you can't make
help places in in our in our
statutes that prevent that from
happening so so now looking into
this this mechanism more sounds
very similar to what we're doing
here I just wanna make sure that
we're we've given that sought
and that we're gonna cross the
finish line so I would just
encourage you maybe madam
secretary also the Google sees
your direction for you to
consider and if we need to make
some changes we can get on the
floor.
Regarding the the other half of
the bill the six dollar payment.
my reading this correctly Mr
chair Mister here that you're
actually tying eligibility to
the working families tax credit.
Mr chair representative yes.
R. and M. Mr chair and Mr leader
I I like this working families
tax credit since one of our
better credits for for helping
those on the lower end actually
climb out of poverty instead of
encouraging them to stay where
they're at.
there is a good amount of fraud
though with this credit at the
federal level we just take you
back.
on at the state level.
so I'm.
that.
But like all tax policy it's
kind of a mixed bag right so so
I do think it's a good thing to
tie it to it I just wish there
is a way that we could address
some of that.
Fraud that we see.
Okay so so what does the detail
question I just questions I have
are just too big picture.
The questions Mr Chairman and Mr
leader.
And in center have helped so.
We have this is gonna cost
roughly two hundred million
dollars.
And we also have another roughly
two hundred million dollar.
bill that is now over in the
Senate side that has to do with
read a fund's.
And they both do different
things so it's not like the
conflict with each other both
different ways to address the.
The the current pandemic impact
on our economy.
We have those together that's a
four hundred million dollar hit.
Plus there's gonna be a few
other bills coming through the
into our reserves.
Mr.
Chairman Mr for your what are
reserves are a pretty good place
right now about thirty five
percent.
and I think by the time we we
pass all these bills we're gonna
be.
thank you for less than fifteen
percent research.
Which.
I have concerns about
especially knowing that probably
in about a year from now.
We'll see a significant decrease
in our revenues from oil and gas
so so if you just speak to that
that kind of bigger picture what
impact this could potentially
have on our state what
conversations we could be having
a year from now.
chairman Mr we're I can I can I
appreciate the question and I
think one of the strengths that
we have is the recognition thank
goodness we have a twenty five
percent reserves back in June
and I think we took him down to
twelve percent and it's pretty
amazing that there are thirty
five percent right now just in
seven months on the next
extraordinary my understanding
is we got a new revenue estimate
coming out this week which is
going to have another big drop.
Not recurring money who's into
the reserves the LFC framework
had reserves at twenty two
percent and that included eight
hundred million of.
Of nonrecurring general fund
being spent on on a range of
different things you're probably
very familiar with that roads in
the unemployment fund and you're
right this is in addition to
that are and so it's my
understanding though that after
you know after we get this new
revenue estimate we need to see
what it is you know what my
intent years to keep to do
everything we can keep the
reserves hi and I think we're
gonna be able to do it
and so I don't think you know
will be under twenty percent by
any means I think is a very good
chance will be right at where we
were coming out of LFC twenty
two percent even spending this
money which just shows the
amount of dollars in play so you
know there's a policy decision
and and I agree this is one of
the challenging.
Things we face but let me just
that this is a moment all aware
and the work we did in June of
the work we did in November
combined with the federal
stimulus package the cares Act
in March and then the package in
December and you know we'll see
what happens at the federal
level or maybe another I read
this morning there could be a
two billion dollar doll coming
our way in federal money this is
what's allowed us to have a
recovery that I think is Mr
ciliata deputy director LFC
described as a ninety solution
instead of the L. shape that was
really scary in June
and so yes we need to be focused
on the reserves but I also think
that.
Part of us getting out of this
is making sure we don't lose our
all whole string of businesses
and that's the challenge we're
facing in the stimulus is
allowed us to kind of continue
to bridge across and so I I
personally feel strongly that we
should we found the right
balance year to do that but I
appreciate the question because
I think it is something we all
have to continue to focus on and
and and that's that's critical
for for the out years if in fact
you know things are are
unpredictable which they are so
so I I appreciate the question
but I think we can do this and
and actually stimulate the
economy on the other side
is remember the the hundred
million or sell in working
families money that's going out
that's going to be money that's
going to go right into our
economy most likely given it's
the it's workers you know making
less than fifteen dollars an
hour so there will be a stimulus
the fact and so that will
certainly help as well.
Chairman Mr thank you for good
answer and I appreciate this
discussion
I think.
I've only been here for nine
years and I've seen two ugly
downturns where we had to slash
the budget and that that was
really painful
and I think it's not rocket
science to figure out how to
level the excuse curves out
there are being prudent was that
money we have during the good
times
Are are are simple ways to to
make it so we don't have to have
those those point hard times
we're looking at for willing or
or cutting.
so I I appreciate that we're
being sought for here and I will
be very interested in seeing
the.
The revenue forecast.
Osman
coming up this next week.
I just wanna make sure going
into this with our eyes you know
wide open.
One thing that I do appreciate
your is that these are
nonrecurring.
Expenditures how we got into the
problem in the first place these
last two times was there is a
lot of returning.
Spending
and so
I I do feel more comfortable
this is nonrecurring.
but I do worry that we're going
to potentially depleted our
reserves right on the heels of
having a significant decrease in
revenue from extractive
industries so.
Okay then the I guess the the
second big picture.
and that this is perhaps a
little more concerning to me.
I'm.
It's it's interesting to me that
were.
Talking about using with the
funds to help you know with
mortgages and rents and
an hour and I would also talking
about using G. R. T. as a way to
help our small businesses the
restaurant industry especially.
it's we're looking at always
mechanisms to help.
These industry but at the same
time starting in July.
We have an income tax increase
going to affect.
and so it it it it's almost.
It's almost schizophrenic when I
look at different proposals that
are out there and and then what
we're employment.
you know we we know that this
income tax increase I think it's
on those make and three hundred
twenty thousand dollars or more.
what we don't have a lot of rich
people here in New Mexico
most of these are gonna be small
businesses like restaurants.
that pay their their tax to the
income tax the personal income
tax certificate.
And so I'm.
I thank you Sir I'm I'm going
chairman and Mr leader but I'm I
want to talk about you your
thoughts on this and do we need
to be a little more holistic
we're looking at increasing fees
and taxes
What the same time.
Pushing money out to these
industries so they don't die it
just it just seems
contradictory.
To me I'd love to hear thoughts.
So I'm happy to and again again
I you know there's nothing that
from a policy standpoint it's
makes the yet you know more
interested and excited to talk
about the tax policy and it's
something that you could you
certainly been involved in so
couple clarifications though so
this new taxes on the top three
percent of the highest earners
in New Mexico and yet no you and
I will respectfully disagree on
progressivity the income tax I I
personally think that it is the
discussion we need to have as
part of overall comprehensive
tax analysis it doesn't make
sense to me that someone it
makes sixteen thousand dollars
pacing taxes someone to make
sixty million dollars.
Now I do think and and I
understand you're the argument
about the passed through because
you're right New Mexico
businesses the vast majority
are paying using pet
I do have a bill on that shot
also looks at the corporate tax
as an effort to lower the G. R.
T. because that's something
you've championed and and the
problem we've got is as you know
to get the G. R. T. down by a
quarter percent is a hundred and
sixty million dollars and so we
have got to figure out how to do
a comprehensive package that
does a variety of different
things on this particular.
It increased as well as part of
the comprehensive package that
was spearheaded by the chair and
former chair Jim Trujillo in the
house in twenty nineteen which I
would note also included
something that I think thank
goodness we did the internet tax
because if we hands on active in
the pandemic we would you know
be really hurting even more as
that starts to kind of believe
each faced in so I just think
you know you can pick apart
different pieces and there's
gonna be some pieces you like
that I don't like on in vice
versa I I just I do think that
that.
Having a discussion of tax
policy needs to continue and I'm
really you know that's going to
be once we get over this kind of
immediate one time.
Six I think we're gonna ship
years I know you're going to
have that discussion in your
taxed midi we have a new tax
committee in the Senate our and
I think we're gonna similar
discussion and the question
becomes what kind of package can
we put together so that's just
my my thoughts on the overall
topic.
Chairman and and.
We are worse.
I love having this conversation
with you United partners in
crime I'm trying to address a
lot of these tax issues these
last several years and.
And and even though we might.
The on other sides of the
political spectrum I really
believe that good tax policy
transcends the right and left
that it's numbers and sense and
we can come.
To the middle and do good things
for the state.
And and I think you'd be
surprised I've I might even
agree with you on some
progressivity on our our income
tax I just wanna make sure that
were inconsistent and that's
right hand knows with the left
hand is doing.
When it comes to.
Changes we make in our tax code
because it doesn't happen in a
vacuum.
I.
I really am glad to hear that we
have a tax committee in in the
Senate I'm I'm excited to start
having these conversations with
the committee I do think so.
I'm looking at this essentially
ninety five million that we're
we're spending to help.
restaurants and bars and such.
I understand this is
nonrecurring.
But for about a hundred million
dollars recurring.
We can make a huge difference
when it comes to reforming Russ
receipts tax.
Looking at the permitting the
most egregious form of
terminating our business to
business professional services.
When the business goes out and
when a restaurant goes out and
has to hire their accounts to
their taxes that's gross
receipts tax.
As opposed to a bigger business
than as an in house account
doesn't pay gross receipts tax.
When they do the same thing for
legal services for HR payroll
for I. T.
Our temporary service since
these things really are just
what shows a small business.
And to address all those are
gross receipts tax costs about a
hundred million dollars.
that's a that's a bigger chunk
of change maybe we do that you
know over five years twenty
million a year for over five
years but you know things like
that that can really make a huge
difference to so many small
businesses service temporarily
so I'm really hopeful and
excited to partner with you in
the Senate and of course our our
excellent team here in house tax
to start looking at have some
ways we can do that any parting
thoughts
Mr chair I just I I let me just
tell you your right hand
suggestion of the pier mating
and a hundred million will align
with my last left hand
suggestions for how to pay for
it retweet you I agree with you
and we just need to figure out
this is a perfect example but I
will say something that that I
just also concur those are
recurring dollars and that's a
huge difference from this I
would not be presenting this
that this was a recurring that
we create all kinds of
challenges and so with that
distinction is incredibly
important this is a a one time
coach to just continue to help
those that need it most because
of COVID and then you and I need
to get both hands together here
and and with the committee and I
just think continue to work and
I I really hope we can find yeah
the revenues to be able to not
only do that but to lower the G.
R. T. which is one of the most
regressive taxes that we have
and we become waived over
reliance on it so so I
appreciated a bunch and just
just some thoughts.
Read and understood thank you
chairman thank you Mr leader for
the discussion really appreciate
the time.
You thank you.
Thank you representative next on
the list we have Representative
Larry Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr leader.
You want to previous discussion
health care one quick question.
Our.
Restaurants in the state.
Open and able to take advantage
of this G. R. T. holiday.
So Mr chair representative Scott
thanks for the question I think
the answer are I can say is
renewable we've got a
checkerboard of restaurants
doing things in different ways
many have been relying on
takeout but some of been closed
altogether and I think as we as
I mentioned the the news last
week that we do have changes in
some counties but not all
we have restaurants now they're
gonna be able to do twenty five
percent your tiny so we have a
checkerboard and certainly yes
and and and let me point out to
this this applies to ours and we
had Barudin completely shut for
sure and so this just began if
you're totally shut this isn't
gonna help you.
But I think as we transition
it is an additional relief to
help those those businesses you
know move hopefully towards the
other side of this let's all
hope for that.
Mr chairman Mr leader.
We can.
What what restaurants are fully
open.
Able to take advantage of the
cancer center top reporter your
vote or not is that correct you
Mr chair it's it is a
specifically defined it barks
through June and so it's tough
for month window and again
you're right someone's not
opened that are not going to get
the benefit of this it's really
designed as an additional
assistance for those that have
you know been using take out
before they could go but indoor
dining and then each restaurant
have to make a decision I just
hope this is an additional
incentive to assist them and
bringing back you know the staff
and the workers they need to be
able to expand their operations
to the extent they can and the
county that there it.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr leader
the serial a question I have.
Thank you Representative is
there any further debate
Chairman is to Mr Chairman just
a quick comment morning Mr
chairman warning leader
I just want to put the mentioned
there's a couple places in the
FIR for the gross receipts tax
deduction is described as
occurring from March twenty
twenty two June twenty twenty
obviously that's not.
The intent so if there is the if
the FIR fairy is listening to
this that committee debate if we
could update the FY are just
that there is a confusion by the
bill hits the floor because of
course we're talking about March
to June twenty twenty one so.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I see Representative Strickler
is hand up good morning Sir
thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Senator Wirth and I I
just want to.
Just briefly.
Tell you the concerned and it of
those of us in this country with
the federal you know.
Moratorium on on on the leasing
and then on top of that and and
I'm not real certain of this but
you know we we still need to get
apartments drilling permits we
still need to get a ride to
Weiss so we can hook up or wells
and and in the in the source of
things in our.
And I'm not real clear if that's
going to be the case I mean
we're we're getting mixed
signals
from from our industry folks on
the permission right away so I
just want to use Mike that point
this can really affect this net
negatively impact the state's
revenues and you know naturally
of the industry.
Wants to.
Can continue on on their
existing leases and but you need
the party made the drawing
permits and and a lot of ways to
do that so
you know I've heard I've heard
broke both the.
Concerns that that that it you
know the good news is it's it's
excuse is gonna go for with the
permission in the right wise and
and there may be holed up there
so
you know the regulatory folks
with these various companies you
know they they spend all their
time.
Securing these these these
permits a lot of ways and and
just want you to know that I I
know you're aware of it and and
we're going to get some you know
some financial numbers here soon
you know the the history still
going pretty strong especially
in southeast New Mexico so slow
up here and you know prices have
been really soft and that's
that's what you know strong with
the prices although this this
cold snap really is helping
you know we're we're understand
we understand spot prices for
kilowatt hours is is off the
charge so
anyway that's that's all have I
I appreciate the.
Mr chairman and and and Senator
of our restaurants are dying
especially up here we're not
open yet take cast freak it's
pretty cold out there right now
so it's kind of hard to to asked
outdoor dining and we're we just
missed the cut off by one tenth
of one percent so we're hoping
next.
The next week or so that you
know will be back in business at
twenty five percent that that
helps and Mr chairman and and
center it's hard for these
companies to make it running at
a hundred percent so but will
take twenty five percent get get
to get things going so thank you
Mr chairman thank you center
work.
Thank you Representative.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chairman can you
hear me.
Okay great yes Mr chairman and
senator Wirth actually
Looking forward to potentially
supporting this measure the we
sent you a measure last week
that I think has clear.
Institutional problems this it
it appears are some questions
here as well all of dig into
that a little bit further but
but on its face this seems to be
something that I can support
eight I it would be nice
during that time if if if the
governor might abandon the the
red and green just for a bit and
allow businesses to open.
at least a fifty percent that
would be something to be very
helpful for businesses across
the state at as long as
businesses are closed there's.
Not really much we can do to
help them but
What Harper on this one so.
hi I just wanted you to hear for
me it's not I'm not I'm not Dr
no over here so
and now Senator Wirth I I I I
look for this one going over I I
have a lot of hard work to one
that you guys have hi that we
sent over to you but
I just wanted to hear from the
horse's mouth our being here
obviously so thank you
Mr chairman and and senator
Wirth.
Thank you appreciate it thank
you representative I don't see
any any other hands up I'll be
very brief thank you Senators
worth but I Hemphill come that
idea secretary Clark for all of
the work putting this together
we look forward to continued
bipartisan support of this bill
we know that that's how we came
out of the Senate without good
questions obviously I mean we
got of it these things are the
appropriate way but I do look
forward to getting this up to
the governor for his signature
as soon as possible so that we
can deliver this relieve to to
these people who need it most
both working families and also
you know the places that employ
them hopefully or small
businesses restaurants bars X.
address so with that what is the
will of the committee.
Do pass.
We have a motion from speaker
Egolf and the second from
Representative Kevin.
Elaine up please call the roll.
Representative Cadena.
Yes.
Speaker you got.
Yes.
Representative Parker.
Yes.
Representative at this yes.
Representative lu Han.
Representative I just test yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative role metal.
Representative Scott.
Representative Stansbury yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
It's.
Representative lu Han.
Representative Romero.
Representative Scott.
Vice chair Chandler yes.
Chairman Martinez yes.
In the affirmative there are
negatives great thank you
Senator so you have a do passed
unanimous will next stop I
believe it is is the floor if
I'm not mistaken
so we we will continue the
conversation they're and thank
you for joining us this morning.
Thank you Mr chair we appreciate
it.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
next up we have house bill two
fifty five Representative
Maestas are you are you ready to
go.
So we sure are of Mr chairman
thank you.
And I the attendee list is
pretty large but
Please give up.
The liquor director any of us
raises hand within the zoom we
could find an easier.
To bring him into the committee
room if there's any technical
questions regarding his agency.
Okay I believe Mr bios should be
N. are or should be.
On his way through cyberspace
there he is if you see if you
see
Of the four co sponsors the bill
are members of this committee
but if you see a Representative
Hochman Vigil please allow or
into the.
Into the committee room but I'm
I'm up.
When you are Mr chairman okay I
don't see Representative Hochman
be healed but all all have the
getting maybe take a second look
I don't see her here yet and she
may arrive at some point okay
very well.
Go ahead Center Mrs please
present your bill thank you very
much Mr chairman honorable
members this is house bill two
hundred fifty five as amended in
commerce last week and it's a
culmination of of many ideas
many
ways in which we can.
Improve our restaurant industry
and improve our overall economy
particularly in rural New Mexico
I think it's a great segue the
the bill we did just now to this
bill even before COVID we we
have less restaurants in New
Mexico than we did twenty years
ago many of the restaurants of
are dominated by by chain
restaurants it's food services
it's culture it's a.
It's our ability to attract
tourism to boost hospitality
that really gives New Mexico its
vitality and in this sector
needs to be captured as quickly
and as immensely as possible
once COVID lives so we believe
to fifty five does just that it
does three major things and all
and I'll talk about the
the amendments in and commerce
last week as well as the
proposed amendments today but it
is three three primary things
number one.
It allows alcohol delivery of
this legislature was comfortable
with alcohol delivery two years
ago and passed similar
legislation we tried again
during the.
The special session in June but
it's imperative we join the
modern world as it relates to
alcohol delivery and we believe
that this will help the small
mom and pop package liquor
stores throughout the state it
also allows restaurants to
deliver Mr chairman members but
in a limited capacity
restaurants can deliver alcohol
with the purchase of of of a
meal ten dollars or more but is
limited to what one bottle of
wine a six pack of beer wine or
spirits or you know.
Cider cocktails whatever and one
growler so restaurants cannot
get into this occurred.
The package liquor delivery
business but package liquor
store certainly can and and and
in addition we excluded bay big
box stores so big box stores
cannot participate in the liquor
delivery business so that our
state our New Mexico businesses
can have a have a leg up so
that's number one our delivery
of all call number two is we
want to modify the existing
restaurant beer and wine license
currently restaurants if they
under many conditions including
sixty percent
sale of food you have to close
at eleven and things of that
nature restaurants with this
bill can obtain a what we call a
restaurant be license which add
spirits to their beer and wine
license so it'll be regulated
and managed as today's beer and
wine license but with the
addition of spirits and we know
that spirits makes up a very
small portion of of of
restaurants bottom line but it
allows local restaurants to
compete with the Chiles the
Applebee's and those restaurants
that can afford you know distant
dist to Spencer licenses and
things of this nature so that's
number two restaurants can
obtain can modify their beer and
wine license to include spirits
by obtaining a restaurant B.
license and then three and what
we haven't talked about a lot is
it allows our local craft
distilleries we we modify the
language in the distillery Act
The one doors Act and the
brewers Act to allow reciprocity
amongst local homegrown
distilleries wineries and
breweries so they can they can
buy from each other for their
wine tastings distillery tasting
things that nature we tweak the
statute to allow.
Out of state distilleries to
participate in local tasting and
tasting festivals and
competitions things like that
there's also some other tweaks
to the statute one as we expand
airport airport clubs not just
at some point but airport clubs
can now happen throughout the
state to attract tourism and and
and the you know the folks that
land and all these wonderful
roller point we have statewide
there's also an excise tax we
know that alcohol has a high
social cost within reluctant to
tax alcohol recently but we we
have an excise tax which is a
consumer tax which it was passed
directly on to consumers.
There's also tax deductions for
existing license holders let me
talk about existing license
holders any talk about
That the current liquor control
act is bad policy that there's
barriers to entry
that there's because I.
monopolies that is not the fault
of the liquor license holders
that is the fault of me of you
of the legislature the
legislature created the
statutory scheme.
Fifty years ago sixty years ago
and never did it never moved us
into the modern world so the
fact that there's such a high
barrier to entry to opening up
and entertainment venue of a
restaurant just stays open until
two that sell spirits or a bar
is not the fault of the liquor
license holders and so love in
we've been trying to these past
two years in the past two weeks
in particular is listen as
carefully as we can to the
liquor license holders and
ensure that their investments in
their businesses remake of
flourish in this new economy
with their entrepreneurial
skills I'm confident that will
happen they are let me tell you
what's not in the bill what's
not in the bill is any sunset or
any provision that disallows the
sale the transfer or the least
of these licenses these families
these entrepreneurs these
investors have fully way to
lease sell or transfer their
licenses just like before us so
that that does not in this bill
What's also not in this bill is
any expansion of existing
licenses are there was a there's
been about six right liquor
bills this session some of them
had an expansion of package
liquor licenses that is not in
this bill so there is no
expansion of any liquor licenses
there is an expansion however or
of the beer and wine license to
a restaurant be to allow spirits
and that's it and that's it and
so we can talk about any
fluctuations in the market that
may occur but we believe that
the the market value of these
liquor licenses will remain
relatively the same there may be
a for a couple dozen more in the
market if restaurateurs choose
to purchase the restaurant be
from the state and put their
additional I since on the market
but there's such a high demand
and hopefully if our economy
goes back the way we wanted to
go back that demand will even
increase but we must do
everything in our power to to
save our restaurant industry
it's the backbone of our of our
of our culture and tourism
hospitality food services and do
everything we can to boost the
economic vitality of the rural
areas so lastly Mister speaker
Mr chairman members of the
committee with ours there's
gonna be some amendments here
today and the vast majority are
friendly so let me just go
through the amendments.
if I may
Please go ahead Representative
that that would be helpful there
are a number of them members and
I think that for the sake of
clarity what we'll do is we'll
we'll have you go through each
amendment
I think we can move each for
discussion you can explain them
we can decide to either adopt
them or not and then we'll go to
public comment how does that
sound thank you I'd ask the
committee to consider to allow
me to discuss the amendment
number one which is.
Two one nine eight zero five
dash one.
Can you repeat the number again
thank you Mr chairman two one
nine eight zero five dash one.
Okay.
Give a minute
Members this should all be a
unless you have paper copies but
this should all be in your
Citrix
share file.
Representative I see an eight
zero five point three.
Then that must be it that must
be it comes chairman.
That number.
Because I think we we made each
each provision a separate
amendment and I believe that's
what happened.
Okay yeah this one has your name
on it it is just for the
committee members.
It's two one nine eight oh five
point three.
And this goes to the time of
operation is that correct.
Yes Mister chairman the
There's two provisions that I
made a commitment or if you can
move for discussion I could I
can mention it.
I'm of the member for
discussion.
So thank you Representative
Harper go ahead and explain the
amendment Representative Maestas
thank you of this is a
commitment to Representative
Wonda Johnson from Gallup the
also senator Munoz is aware this
as well and what this does is it
it moves the time back on
Sundays to eleven o'clock to
current law the bill as
originally drafted allowed for
seven AM.
sales of the restaurant be spurs
license and this does away with
that move everything back to
eleven AM.
Very well is there discussion on
this first amendment from the
committee.
Is there a motion to adopt the
amendment.
It's been moved by
Representative Harper your
second second.
Seconded by Representative at
nine this.
Is there opposition to adopting
this amendment.
Okay seeing none amendment two
one nine eight oh five point
three to house bill two fifty
five has been.
Adopted.
Representative less as please
proceed.
Thank you Mr chairman honorable
members the of the eight oh
five.
Point one that I mentioned
excluded.
McKinley County.
But I can't.
Find that.
As an individual amendment the
amendment that I have I have the
paper amendments in front of me
the memo that I have was able
five point one.
Which dealt with the McKinley
County car about and the seven
AM
So do we have a sent the
amendment the McKinley County
car about.
We.
Representative we don't I don't
see it on here I think what we
can do there's several
amendments to get through I
think what we can do is we can
have the the staff up loaded I
believe the spirit of the
amendments to exclude a McKinley
County and and this and you can
explain it later but this okay
this is Stewart Cole carved out
that that has been in place in
that particular county it also
before we proceed and I I talked
to ranking member Harper about
this yesterday
should the committee adopt all
of these amendments ensure the
committee move this bill forward
the recommendation is that these
amendments will then be put into
an H. T. R. C. substitute bill
so whatever if we vote on this
bill today to move forward it
will be a vote on a substitute
bill.
Just because there's a lot of
amendments and so we want to
make sure that when this hits
the floor it's as clean as
possible because as you can
imagine there's gonna be a great
deal of debate on the floor so
as these amendments are adopted
my recommendation to this
committee that we vote out a
substitute bill reflecting all
of these amendments are made
today.
So while we wait for that
amendment Representative mais
does do you have other
amendments to to move forward
with yes thank you Mr chairman
honorable members let's look at
amendment two one nine.
Eight three five point one.
Two one nine eight three five
point one okay let's give it a
second to make sure all the
committee members can pull it
up.
What if I may Mister chairman
that last the that point three
version that point three version
that you mentioned it does
include the McKinley County car
about
I was just notified by the bill
drafter of.
Is that what you're seeing on
your point three versions.
Stand by.
I can't wait for that satellite
internet that Representative
Harper keeps promising me
Eight point three eight oh five
point three.
Yes indeed it does indeed it
does Representative indeed it
does so point three the
amendment that was just adopted
also includes the car about okay
fantastic thank you Mr chairman
and that was a commitment to
Representative Johnson so we did
for the folks back keeping score
back home as we excluded the
restaurant be license from
McKinley County and we bump the
time from seven AM back up to
eleven under current law.
And then the next amendment.
Once again eight three five
point one.
Okay.
So this is amendment number.
Two one nine eight three five
point one.
Can you is there a motion to
move the amendment for.
Okay it's been moved for
discussion proceed
Representative Maestas thank you
very much Mr chairman this is
the old checkbook in January
amendment if we strike up on
page twenty five line twenty
four and on page twenty six
lines for we strike twenty
twenty and insert and Lou there
of twenty twenty one so that's
just correcting a drafting
error.
that the we want the year twenty
twenty one in the bill not
twenty twenty.
Okay.
Is there a discussion on this
amendment.
a motion to adopt the minutes.
Okay.
is their second to that motion
second.
Seconded by Representative Lund
this I think it was and removed
by Representative Chandler I
believe.
is there opposition to adopting
this amendment.
Okay see none amendment two one
nine eight three five point one
has been adopted for house bill
two fifty five.
Thank you Mr chairman if if
someone Comeaux for discussion
two one nine.
Eight five two dash two eight
five two.
Dot two.
Okay give us a minute.
Okay is there a motion to move
amendment two one nine eight
five two point two four
discussion.
Some of.
Moved by Representative Harper
explained the amendment
Representative messes.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
honorable members this up this
is a cleanup language dealing
with distillers wineries and
small breweries
the statutes are very old and
convoluted so we're dealing with
the page thirty one lines four
and five.
Page thirty eight lines ten and
eleven.
Page forty line seven.
After one grower or inserting
bear produced and bottled fire
for a small brewer.
Or spiritus liquor produced and
bottled.
buyer for a craft distiller.
and then on page forty seven
changes to lines twenty two and
twenty three.
And page forty nine changes to
line seventeen and nineteen and
essentially we're allowing.
This doesn't really change the
intent of of the original drop
we're cleaning up the language
and making sure that reciprocity
applies to one Torrez distillers
and brewers that they can buy
from each other for wine
tastings and festivals things
like that.
Very well deserved discussion on
this amendment.
Is there a motion to adopt the
amendment.
So move to.
There's some motion to adopt the
amendment from Representative
and non this is their second
second seconded by by your
Chandler is our opposition to
adopting this amendment to house
bill two fifty five.
They see none you've gotten a
we've adopted amendment two one
nine eight five two point two
two house bill two fifty five.
Thank you Mr chairman there's up
there's an amendment I believe
will be proposed by by yourself.
At eight eight seven point one
and there's a I believe in
amendment or to that there's
gonna be proposed by up.
Representative Montoya.
and and Representative added on
this and those.
So I'll let I'll let those folks
talk about that when the time
comes and and those are friendly
as well and those find
more benefits to existing
license holders even though Mr
Chairman closing even though
existing license holders still
have full permission from the
state to do what the license up
provides and they have full of
legal authority to transfer
lease or sell.
This is a still a big shock
considering we haven't changed
this act in so long that we
definitely want to provide any
benefits to these folks as we
can and I think that this bill
does its very best in doing that
there still tremendous anxiety
in the community will hear from
folks now.
but what what I want to
reiterate folks can still sell
lease.
transfer their licenses under
current law that not change and
we believe with the delivery
aspect of it and with these.
tax breaks and waiver of fees
that it's it's in everyone's
interest to
To move forward with the class
the restaurant licenses thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you representative of
before we go to public comment I
would like to entertain the
other amendments as well I think
that just would be more clear
for the audience so
Representative Montoya
represented on this are you
ready with your amendment.
Or limits.
Your meat Representative.
Yes Mr chairman
Let me pull it up real quick.
Okay Mr chairman the
The two oh two number.
Is a back up here trying to work
off of my cell phone.
Is two one nine nine zero two
point one.
I don't see that on my on my
list of amendments here
Representative
Do you have one or do you have
more than one I have one that is
the only one.
Yeah okay I'll tell you what
let's give the this gives staff
a minute to perhaps up loaded or
or maybe email it whatever's
easier said don't have that one
in front of me I can move money
in the mean time and and go
through that while we wait for
years so members on your Citrix
you should see.
Amendment number.
By the way is it still a tool to
number one it starts with two
one nine.
I just realize that.
Just give me a second while it
loads we're one ninety minutes
Mr.
Yeah okay so members you should
have in front of you amendment
number two one nine eight eight
seven point one.
and if somebody would to.
The for discussion I can explain
it so move chair.
Thank you Representative that in
a so this amendment
what it does is it
Provides that license holders
any license that's been
purchased in the last five years
so this is between true any
seventeen and twenty twenty one.
Get a waiver of licensing fees
until twenty thirty one the bill
originally had a five year
waiver in talking to too many
representatives from the
industry over the last few days
this was something that is
considered to to find a softer
landing if you will for for
license holders so that's that's
all the amendment US.
And I would of the three German
this is up from the amendment.
Okay good
Representative Chandler.
Thank you Mr chair a just a
question what approximately is
a.
A licensee you know just how
much money are we talking about
I'm sorry I just needed some
contacts Mr chair that's a great
question and I'm gonna I'm gonna
call on
and director by a poll to to
respond to that.
Yes Mr chair
Representative Chandler
So depends on I haven't seen the
amendment but it depends on what
should I guess we're talking
about dispensing licenses that
have been bought in the past
five years dispensing license
renewal fee is thirteen hundred
dollars.
is there a motion to dismiss.
The native.
Okay is our second.
Representative Harper second.
this is been moved by recently
just seconded Representative
Harper is there any opposition
to adopt in this amendment.
Okay with that amendment number
two one nine eight eight seven
point one has been adopted to
house bill two fifty five now we
are back to Representative
Montoya
let me refresh my page Sir to
see if we have your amendments
can you repeat the number again
please.
Yes Mr chairman it is two one
nine nine zero two point one
okay we got it.
What
is that let me try to refresh my
share please.
We will live for you for sure.
a motion to move the amendment
for discussion and and we'll
wait for others to get a copy of
it for sure.
So moved.
Okay.
So again members the number is
two one nine nine zero two point
one.
Okay thank you Mr chairman
Basically what this does is
there was a Fiedler the fee
schedule in in two fifty five
house bill two fifty five.
Representative well I'm sorry to
interrupt you I'm gonna pause
you for a second I want to make
sure Representative Kevin has a
copy of it is I think.
Thank you Mr okay.
Proceed.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
on page forty four of house bill
two fifty five there's a ski a
fee schedule.
And that fee schedule is for.
For restaurants that are twenty
five seats are less it's twenty
it's five thousand dollars on
currently on on house bill two
fifty five for
restaurants that would be twenty
six to fifty seats is our is ten
thousand dollars.
And.
Correct.
And
For for restaurants that are
between fifty six and a hundred
it is fifteen thousand dollars
and for restaurants with a
hundred and what one seeds for
more is twenty thousand dollars
no.
We're trying to
Make make these licenses more of
more affordable for the mom and
pop operations for the.
especially small towns have been
decimated.
across the state because they
sold their licenses you know you
might have a little watering
hole and.
You know into a roast in New
Mexico or something like that
and and those licenses licenses
have been sold to in many cases
the big box stores big box
restaurants that have come in
and.
But we're hoping to do is to
make this more affordable for
those small towns are for the
downtown areas.
Many of our of our many of our
cities that
we just can't attract business
to the downtown area without
those liquor license so what
this amendment does is it cuts
that the schedule in half so
instead of five thousand dollars
it's twenty five hundred dollars
for twenty five seat restaurant.
down from ten thousand to five
thousand for a fifty seat
restaurant for less and from
fifteen thousand down seventy
five hundred.
And for a hundred C. or less
restaurant in about a hundred
goes from twenty thousand to ten
thousand
and this kind of test for the
purpose of the bill trying to
not.
harms the current license
holders while at the same time
making it accessible
And I'm I say even these numbers
that we that we've introduced
are still substantially higher
than our neighboring states
Colorado Texas and Arizona where
it's it's much easier to get
that liquor license so it's
still.
The higher but it does make it
Potentially more affordable
especially in rural New Mexico
which is just dying which on top
of that Mr Mr chair and members
One I've been a big advocate for
for D. W. Y. committees and one
of the reasons that we see W. D.
WYSIWYG screen and such said
gregis accidents is how far
people are traveling to go and
have a drink with their meal and
then getting back on the road
the small towns literally have
to go to the nearest big town
and act to go have a decent meal
and drink so I think this will
actually cut down on D. W. why
and cut down on some of these
horrific accidents we're seeing
on on the highway so any of
that's what it does.
Mr chair it just drops those
fees down in half.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Montoya the
So there's two schools of
thought the one of the bills had
these new restaurant realizes
that three thousand dollars.
We heard hours and hours of
public comment that that's not a
good idea that so in the course
of a big deal
that there has to be some of.
you know folks have to be
risking little more than three
thousand dollars just to lose
their license you know so that's
why we came up with this scheme
which I think everybody likes
the stair step so currently
it's.
Five ten fifteen and twenty
thousand dollars.
this this amendment is to cut
that in half.
Also there's two schools of
thought one is that these these
lines should be more so that
people take a more serious.
But Representative Montoya gives
a compelling argument that yeah
they're more than the three thou
and the other bills but but they
should be reasonable so.
Representative I is a co sponsor
And this is a friendly
amendment.
Okay very well is there
discussion from the committee on
this amendment.
Mr chair on that point yes.
I appreciate the thoughtfulness
of this amendment Mr chair
representative on they have
Representative make my SS and
especially the ways that we have
to think differently about
solutions that are going to fit
for rural New Mexico I just
wanted to appreciate of this
exciting moment that I wanted to
back up Representative Montoya
was staying in the I also
believe one of the public health
approaches to reducing the
infants and injury and death
that come with driving while
intoxicated can be improved by
having places closer to home
where people can responsibly
consume beverages in moderation
whether it's called the European
model or some other kind of
model I live in a small town and
if I decide to have a drink I
can walk home I can come back
and pick up my car in the
morning I can be responsible in
that way I've often left school
with a little bit he does going
to church on Sunday morning see
that I left my car on the plaza
once a month I hope they would
consider our do Representative
how to drinking she's decided to
responsibly walk home
where my biggest as lighted on
on the ditches but Mr chair
representative in Sanchez I do
want to name that certainly in
the way that I've studied this
issue having accessibility is
key to figuring out the way that
our New Mexicans can more and
more practice what it looks like
to drink in moderation thank you
and I just support this
amendment.
Thank you Representative got
enough.
Is there a motion to adopt the
amendment.
So move.
Mr chair why Representative
Childers seconded by
Representative and I'm this will
give you the second as a
consolation prize Representative
not as good.
Okay Sir opposition to adopting
this amendment.
Okay see none amendment number
two one nine nine zero two point
one has been adopted.
For house bill two fifty five.
Representative Maestas back to
you.
Thank you Mr chairman with that
will stand for questions.
I'm forgiving chairman let one
last thing the the up we don't
get a precise FIR on the excise
tax but
but kind of ballpark is that the
tax breaks for the current
license holders will cost around
three million dollars.
The income on the excise tax
will be up a the ballpark of six
million dollars that will offset
the cost of the tax breaks and
and and put more money into the.
Into the funding to combat D. W.
I. and and also the any any
adjustments we need to make to
our L. D. staff and just I you
staff at state police thank you.
Thank you for pointing that out
Representative Maestas that's an
important point so this bill
ultimately would be revenue
positive
to to the state's fund
so with that I am going to put a
public comment just a reminder
to our participants we have a
one minutes and thirty second.
Look time limit on public
comment I'm going to start with
those in opposition to house
bill two fifty five and for
those of you who provide public
comment you should be able to
see on your screen the timer
please do your best to abide by
the time limit so that we don't
have to cut you off.
With that please raise your
hands you know the drill.
Raise your hand on zoom and all
call on you in the order that I
see you on my screen.
First up in opposition to house
bill two fifty five.
Pat Keane.
Welcome Pat and you are muted we
cannot hear you.
Okay that better we got
and Terry.
Argyl cafes repeats reenlisted
just wanted a quick
clarification is the yearly fee
of ten thousand dollars for
restaurants over a hundred seats
is that is that every year ten
thousand dollars.
Mr king yes that's the annual.
He lives in Representative minus
this you would mention that this
allows a local restaurants to
keep up with chain restaurants.
Now my my position on that is
there are chain restaurants that
plenty money spent ten thousand
or twenty thousand the original
bill want to do and local
restaurants struggle to to make
the thirteen hundred dollars a
year on that we have right now I
think it's a that I appreciate
the amendment having it's still
a lot of money especially for
mom pop all right we can't
compete with apple bees and big
chains like that this doesn't
happen so in addition to taking
our license away now we have to
pay ten thousand dollars a year
instead of thirteen hundred a
year so this is a double whammy
for us.
And
yeah it's just a good just gets
more
It just gets more depressing as
it goes on it seems to me I'm
sorry I know my time to left one
last thing it seems to me that
again of with this house bill
two fifty five you don't need
it.
Any comments.
Supporting at all you get is
comments.
In a post it so that's got to
tell you something as a
committee and representatives of
the city's citizens of
Albuquerque and New Mexico that
maybe this bill needs a little
bit more looking at and we
suggested in the past but you
have a task force aside with all
stakeholders involved from the
state and from the industry they
can make a reasonable.
Proper bill that isn't.
harmful due to so many people
thank you very much for your
consideration thank you very
much next we have Amy Pettus one
minute thirty seconds please do
your best to abide by the limits
thank you.
Amy we cannot hear you are
muted.
I'm sorry good afternoon
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Amy
Pattison together with my
husband Chris and brother in law
Victor we own the Beverly hills
hall and cantina in Los crucis
we strongly oppose this bill we
have been in business since two
thousand six and in two thousand
ten purchased about the license
given the current state of our
country and the pandemic that
continues to ravage small
businesses we cannot afford to
take another hit at the last
meeting it was mentioned towns
are not flourishing because no
one wants to bring businesses.
Into the state because of the
cost of licenses the Stella
spirits is not what drives
people to make the decision to
visit New Mexico for that matter
businesses the state offers the
downline license had a
reasonable fee having more
places available for people to
have hard liquor is going to
create more damage than good it
should be noted that these that.
These that we're not getting
rich off these licenses there
are a lot of costs associated
with having a license and your
way of making us whole by giving
us a fifty thousand tax
deduction over four years do not
account for the small business
owners we don't sell enough
liquor to even see a fifty
thousand tax break over four
years this bill was not drafted
keeping the real interested
parties in mind it was drafted
to benefit future liquor license
holder interests you're taking
from one business owner to give
to another US lawmakers have an
obligation to do right by the
people who trust you to make
fair and equitable decisions the
liquor license owners do not
cause this problem the liquor
license laws receptor your
predecessors as legislators at
your job to make the right
decision and not cause harm to
all those involved we encourage
you to reconsider in favor of
currently for license holders
and thank you for your time and
consideration thank you for
joining us.
More reasonable not.
This.
Right now my good go ahead okay
I think since the each Mr
chairman members of the
committee I sent each of you a
the email showing the types of
license all the restaurant
licenses and the mom and pop
license in the state of New
Mexico and I and I also show
that in Albuquerque there are
two hundred and fifty restaurant
licenses and so those members of
the committee there from
Bernalillo or Albuquerque that's
two hundred fifty new look our
a bars and restaurants and will
be able to serve liquor in Santa
Fe there's over one hundred
restaurant licenses so you're
looking at just at least two of
municipalities and counties up
to two hundred and fifty new up
points of the sale of alcoholic
beverages and I do believe that
if we're truly interested in
under age drinking and D. W. Y.
you're really look at the fact
that you're you're going to be
expanding up to seven hundred
restaurant licenses in the state
of New Mexico the ability to
serve whiskey vodka and all the
hard to kilo and all the hard
liquor products additional
products and I strongly urge you
to oppose and deny this major
however we do agree with the
home delivery that's the only
part of this bill we all most of
us agree on just the home to re
provision and thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee and the Sanchez thank
you thank you Sir we appreciate
your words.
Let's go to Jean I've gone.
Go read it.
I'm good morning my name is
Junie Eric on the line from Las
Vegas New Mexico I'm
representing the Hillcrest
restaurant in trading post
saloon and Dix Lakers I'm and
restaurant that is in our our
downtown area
we've been in business for six
generations and what they hope
crest and Dix Lakers been open
since nineteen forty so we've
been here a very very long time
and and this is going to.
Ravage us is part is what are
businesses are work when our
liquor license is our our our
taken from S. and I I want to
make something clear real quick
you are you took up the sunset
clause but you're still you're
taking away our license we it
will no longer be in our hands
will have to pay the state
these other keys to be able to
sell wine and liquor is is that
is that right.
If I may Mr chair a no ma'am no
ma'am that's incorrect that's
completely one hundred percent
correct nobody is taking
anyone's license away.
no you have permission to do
today whatever you wanna do with
your license no we are merely
adjusting the beer and wine
statute to include spirits to a
beer and wine license if if
those restaurants so choose so
we keep our license and and I
absolutely what apps and there
is no sunset the sunset madam Mr
Chairman settlement sort of on
the sunset was taken away the
sunset said in the future you
can no longer lease sell or
transfer your license that is a
no go that was removed current
law stands nobody's taking away
anybody's license nobody that is
that that is incorrect or
whoever told you that is is is
a.
Was there a fight I was just
clarifying for myself okay let's
move on.
It seems like you all are are
are true I I I listen to the
committee debate this on Friday
and it seems like everybody is
pretty dead set on making this
happen even though there's no
one in favor of this bill has
spoken out at all in the last
four five you know in the last
two sessions our our pride eight
and let's see what happens today
but so I I'm kind of confused
why you guys are are not voting
with your constituents but let's
move on from that I'm wondering
why you're not taking away our
license you are taking away the
value of it and we are one three
it seems that is going to happen
would you consider adding retail
to our licenses
so we could we we have
The and we have the value of our
license and we would be able to
sell it if we we needed to would
that be considered by the
committee Minnesota gone so
just just just to kind of
explain the ground rules I
generally don't allow for a back
and forth between committee
members and public comment it's
just not the space for that if
we were in person in Santa Fe we
would never allow for that I've
been flexible this morning with
a couple of callers who have had
some questions of the sponsor
but I'm not going to allow it
anymore because it's not about
it.
Your your time is about up so I
would please as you wrap up I
want to make very clear how
dangerous health
this is in the community for
safety and wellness of the
people of New Mexico and we're
already number to with you don't
be a liar resting D. B. D. W. Y.
up the Tel Aviv and the entire
country and this is just adding
fuel to the fire thank you very
much and we.
Thank you ma'am we appreciate
you being here today let's go
and I think the clock on on zoom
it looks like it's it's falling
off so I'm gonna time on my
phone one minute thirty seconds
per presenter
Allison block Chavis I think
that's probably most Chavis but
it's Allison blocked I was on my
screen please welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members the committee this is
mo mobile automotive this and I
am here on behalf of the
responsible liquor license
coalition and we respectfully
stand in opposition to this bill
Mr Chairman there are a number
of reasons that I believe have
not been addressed in this bill
which could have the unintended
consequence one look at
insurance cost of insurance for
liquor license you know bar
restaurant is already high
adding delivery on top of that
is extremely expensive so maybe
let's think about putting
minimum insurance limits on that
that could help a second the
cost of administration I know it
looks like this could be a
positive bill in terms of cash
flow but a lot is being asked of
director vitals and state police
in really how we gonna pay for
this let's speak about
appropriation and then lastly
chairman Martinez thank you for
the amendment of five years I'm
sure somewhere the five years
came from could we consider
taking up to ten years of no
fees it every little bit helps
we appreciate that and finally
I'd like to thank Representative
got in after confirming that
allow you that does exist thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr Chavis and just to
clarify the amendment is for ten
years.
That I find you up let's go next
to John Chavis.
Yes this is John Chavis can you
hear me.
Yes Sir.
Yes thank you the chairman
Martinez my name is John Chavis
I'm a CPA but I work of course
any big ski and travel company
and also Santa Fe ski company
your current license holders
I want to say that in the prior
committee that this was ordered
from I gave testimony that the
value of the tax deduction was
worth about sixteen thousand
dollars I would say I would like
to say today say that it's worth
nothing zero that provision is
should not even be considered
and here's why a tax deduction
is for the benefit of the buyer
and not the seller the buyer is
the one who does not pay the tax
the provision assumes that the
seller which should be look at
the license holder would charge
taxed and therefore keep that
taxed as compensation of that
total over four years at fifty
thousand dollars would be about
sixteen thousand dollars
the tax committee I'm glad that
this in front of the tax
committee because of all people
this committee realizes what a
deduction is and who it benefits
and then any other
I would hopefully if there is
some type of compensation that's
supposed to be given to you of
current license holders I would
hope that some other mechanism
could be could be a veil to this
provision is just a false
premise and it's used as a sales
pitch to get the legislation
passed it I I personally would
rather not even be in there
because of its faults falsities
and the fact that even if it was
instituted would reserve the
result in zero compensation to
the left over
with that I respectfully
submit that I'm we are opposed
to this and for the a post the
valuation of almost.
Order five hundred million
dollars worth of investment in
New Mexico I do do we do believe
that the current environment and
the small restaurant should be
helped but this transition is
not well thought thought of our
thought through and that's with
that thank you chairman.
Thank you Mr Chavis next is
Marci Dickerson and I believe
our our timers back up so that
that should help me is Marci
Dickerson welcome.
Can you hear me now we can.
Thank you very much my name is
Marci Dickerson I am a small
restaurant to our I do on three
licenses and Los crucis I'm I
would like to say I do support
the delivery part the the issue
with this bill it causes us
problems that we spoke to many
times is the creation of the
license be for the restaurants I
believe there are better
solutions to this to be explored
that I've not had time to work
their way up and be explored
this year one of my main
concerns is this our license
values are based on supply and
demand if we create the
restaurant be licensed the
demand for the inner dispenser
licenses goes down tremendously
most of these licenses.
As part leveraged against the
bank most of us had to borrow
money to do that what will
happen is the minute that the
bank sends out appraisals on the
current licenses those license
values will be less than what
they are currently appraised at
and with the problem with that
is what will happen is in the
banking industry when you're
asset calls below eighty percent
of the value of what you've
licensed the bank calls the note
which means that the bank will
contact you and give you ninety
days to find.
I cash to the bank to bring your
license the loan back into it
equity the problem with that is
is that because even before
COVID but certainly because of
the shut down the COVID in the
years that we these your that we
have just experienced we do not
have that type of cash so
basically in mind the bank would
call in I would have to produce
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars worth of cash to bring
those licenses and or they will
seize our asset that is a huge
problem the tax credits that you
are offering those are nice but
they're not enough to help us in
that situation I do think that
there is a better option in a
better option has been discussed
and that is that three split of
the license I see my time has
elapsed and so I apologize for
going over thank you all very
much but yes I I as long as with
several others in Los crucis do
stand against this.
Thank you Mr president Chris
Gordon.
Yes Mister chairman thank you
for your time and and committee
members
I have a couple things one just
to give a point of reference
most people in this call
probably paid around three
hundred fifty thousand dollars
for their license.
And how this the civil supply
demand economics
I think we're supplying the
market's going to decrease the
value of this I'm gonna similar
vote both to the last speaker I
got a million dollars of I'll be
used in the ring the value down
about zero thanks will be
calling on the note so what does
the finance ternary poor
position the tax breaks
incentives is John Chapman CPA
just said it's pretty much
worthless if I move out of the
state tax for those nothing or
the deduction or whatever it is
we're trying to chase.
that will destroy about four
hundred five hundred million
dollars of of individual
investor and owner operator
value that's tremendous the
other point is that I really
challenge the fact that there's
been no economic study done on
their.
But we making decisions based on
data there is no hard data I
mean I've heard things like
there's high demand but the last
call their forty speakers not
one spoke out for the bill it
didn't happen there are forty
people spoke against it for
numerous reasons but I don't
know where all these supporters
are lastly the six million
dollars that the member of
Damascus eluded to is
insufficient in back of the
envelope calculations you about
sixty five to eighty five people
for S. ID cities owning half
licenses through ATP is gonna
need more people for processing
right now takes six months to
get a license through
I don't have to could you know
to comment upon the the state
that they make sure they have
problems please wrap it up.
Sure that rents collected in
that all the compliance in the
finger printing all these things
that have happened behind the
scene takes place otherwise this
industry just falls apart very
quickly so thank you for your
time please please consider that
we either defer or that we we
make more time do economic
studies and social impact
analysis because none of that
has been done none of that is
included in the bill thank.
Thank you very much.
Mark Rhodes.
After the.
Go ahead Mr roads.
All right thank you very much I
appreciate the opportunity to
speak and I appreciate the
changes and the thought that's
gone into this legislation.
My concerns are for full number
for wind concerned about its
constitutionality not only in
terms of the taxes that are
being considered also violation
of the anti donation provisions
a number two
I have no problem with the
alcohol delivery and by the way
I represent a series of
licensees of all types of
licenses in the state I went
back and looked.
The biggest problem I have with
the delivery is that it leaves
out the I. L. delights and with
all due respect to Mister my
**** COVID that includes all of
those licensees of the
definitional section of the bill
defines a dispenser licenses
allowing both by the drinking
and non prochan packages and
I'll do license does not allow
on broken packages.
so it needs to have an amendment
or else the people who've been
closed the longest in the state
which I'll the owners and bars
in particular will get
absolutely no relief in terms of
the literary the third item is
is that
this bill creates a cross
pollination and by that I mean
that project.
Users of beer wine and spirits
now get to sell all their
products that right now as we
sit here today they have the
ability have three additional
premises in addition to their
original promise if this bill is
passed they will have there will
be four hundred eleven.
Basic bars with package
privileges and that compares the
only four hundred seven current
I of the licenses thank you Mr
roads I appreciate the
opportunity officiated.
Let's go next to Carol right.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Carol white
I'm the CEO The New Mexico
restaurant association some of
you may know that the restaurant
association is often conflicted
on liquor bills because we have
constituents on every side we
represent restaurants with
dispenser licenses and we
represent restaurants that would
benefit by having more
affordable child choices for
licenses with spirits having
said this we're opposed to this
bill in its current form but we
come to the table with a
solution that solution was
emailed to you this morning my
apologies to the bill Sanchez we
were trying to get a meeting to
review this proposal call prior
to the tax committee are we
really had no idea that this
bill would be scheduled so
quickly my hope is that the.
That the committee will hold
this legislation over what we
work with the sponsors to get it
right as you know restaurants
have been extremely hard hit
during the pandemic many
restaurants are left with only
their liquor license for
collateral to rebuild or sell if
they can't climb out of this
hole if this bill is allowed to
go forward those restaurants
dispensers licenses will lose
value.
And many people's lives are at
stake here we believe that we
have a solution that can be
supported by all parties and
we'd like to have a chance to
work with the sponsors to get
this right before it goes to the
floor.
also specifically for this tax
committee the per drink tax in
this legislation is called an
excise tax I believe these are
mutually exclusive definitions
as a per drink tax is charged at
the retail level and an excise
taxes placed on liquor at the
wholesale level I I I hope we
take some time to understand
that.
Thank you ms right.
Next we'll go to read more.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Roy
Moore and I'm a registered
lobbyist franchisor bush and we
are opposed to one specific
section in house bill two fifty
five and that is a section that
Carol just noted in that is the
alcoholic beverage serving tax
you finance section six page
fifteen of the current bill
and our concern is not that
you're trying to provide relief
to restaurants and it's not that
you're trying to do a liquor
license reform we're concerned
with the tax because the tax
adds a burden to consumers in
taxes in New Mexico on liquor
are already high and you're
adding an additional burden to
consumers we're additionally
concerned that the tax that's
included in the bill is intended
to support a the tax deductions
that would flow out of the state
and we're concerned that those
tax deductions would very much
like the tax credits that the
Supreme Court in Cronus declared
unconstitutional and the
potential there is that you
instituted Tax Court tax
deductions in those deductions
go away you're simply left with
the tax it's an additional
burden on consumers.
We understand that the committee
and the sponsors are dealing
with some very difficult issues
we actually appreciate the work
that they're doing in that area
but we think that the tax that's
included is a burden on
consumers it's just not needed
or appropriate in the current
circumstances thank you very
much Mr chairman I appreciate
the time thank you Mr Moore next
we have Shelly kor teary.
Hello everybody my name is
Shelly where Terry no a
dispensary role license up in
Colfax County.
Economic development
is not what this is going to
bring in our population of New
Mexico which is probably just a
little over two million maybe
three million you can't compare
to Colorado who has twice as
many people in Texas who has
twenty eight million people are
doing what they do and joining
the modern world is Mr Maestas
says is not applicables to the
state and the residents of New
Mexico it's not a cookie cutter
world and all of our law should
not be cookie cutter in compared
to other people you're comparing
apples to oranges.
I am a recovering alcoholic of
eighteen years yes I own a bar
it is great because I can love
on our patrons in actually by
the law not over serve them you
are opening up a big can to with
you can not manage if you do
this the current brewery
licenses in Colfax talent brings
can have three locations I only
have one there's already more
out there than you need.
We don't need any more alcohol
delivery systems I am a
recovering alcoholic I know this
the agency Candelaria I believe
she said earlier.
I understand because you're not
an alcoholic responsible people
don't have a problem with this
it's the I'm responsible once we
need to take care of and our
percentage in the state is huge
to be a responsible with
drinking Mr Montoya if you can
prove to me nobody has left an
Applebee's with a D. W. I..
Maybe maybe I can agree with you
all this is not okay for New
Mexico.
That's all I have to say thank
you ma'am next we have J. R.
Palermo.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee J. R.
Palermo I am Chinese restaurant
lounge in Santa Fe New Mexico.
I've been working for forty
years my grandfather started the
business in nineteen forty seven
my dad and my mom.
Took over after each.
He left
The office of the economic
recovery.
There needs to be economic data
that supports the idea that by
giving.
Slash saturating the hospitality
industry with liquor license
there will be economic recovery.
The economic pie in New Mexico
set two point one million
people.
By leasing more license.
You're not bringing in more.
Terrible mistakes were next at.
Yes Sir.
Sir we're losing you you're
cutting in and out so go right
ahead hopefully hopefully it's
fixed gone I'm I'm sorry let me
move outside that
Hope that you can hear me now
anyway we have a better we have
we have terrible statistics in
our state we rank last in
education we rank last in places
to raise a family but we rank
right up there at the top when
it deals with alcohol related
traffic incidents I thank you
for your time and consideration
I vehemently oppose this bill
have a good day thank you Sir
have a great day next is Nick
colonus.
Go ahead make your muted.
Can you hear me now.
Yes okay.
Before I came over here to talk
to you people.
I took my mother she's ninety
two year old lady and she owns
two liquor license on the aging
of the liquor license if you
don't starting.
Yeah well we first.
What I want to Los.
She had to go with my father.
To borrow money.
In order to obtain the liquor
license and of our you too
it off because of the pandemic
James will twenty five cents
fifteen cents and working in the
buses of sixty years old
gaining.
My.
Thank you everything my father
asked me because you guys are
working better on that you get
PTSD.
Never.
Later in his years.
And it paid off the liquor
license.
More.
So proud thank you owned a
liquor license and of our free
and clear.
We've got some good food make
you laugh a little bit.
And we continue to look at
another New Mexico last.
I have been working in the bar
for forty two years straight.
And I have only one vacation.
Right of our.
People being on the dance floor
they don't know what is how to
dance when it comes to the point
of how to run a bar I've been
doing it for so many years and
other people I still do not do
all the job and I think I'm one
of the the best in the state.
However when you give a liquor
license this restaurants.
Twenty two year old she's.
The body body sees the.
Going away you're gonna be
drinks going out of the back
door six packs every you're not
going to be no control coming
yes I do we need.
News Mr close your your time has
elapsed now for several seconds
please wrap it up.
I totally oppose this bill and I
hope you guys can just
you can hear what you guys do
doing our illustrious thank you
thank you Sir.
That Sierra.
Yes Sir thank you so much.
To bring up the point I know
that you guys a speaker my
master spoke about the value of
our license
there's gonna be no buyers for
licenses in New Mexico if you
approve essentially a full
service license for.
Licensure restaurant masons this
man principal says is no longer
you no longer have a buyer for
license of all restaurants no
longer need to.
allowing one.
Committee understand ours has
been open since part.
If you okay with that okay we
have been able to be open to the
governor's rules you're getting
for one that is still our
customers even having.
That one also the committee you
know from my lender stating that
if the license this doesn't pass
license value will drop and call
the noted our license next let's
you know right now there's no
banks lending to any restaurants
or bars right now do the
pandemic going on thank.
At.
That let us hope you help them.
The ability to maybe these are
licensed to multiple people will
still be able to use our license
but were able to open up and
help you gain more traction at
that's what you're needing the.
Generate activity in businesses
Boston island this happened is
just false I went to the
restaurant association a simple
Google search in two thousand
twelve there's thirty two three
thousand two hundred sixty two
restaurants in twenty twenty
there's three thousand one
hundred sixty eight I just want
to be known the terms being said
this meeting some are not are
not correct thank you for your
time I appreciate everything you
guys are doing for us thank you
Sir thank you for being here
Ruben Baca.
A good morning Mr Chairman can
you hear me yes Sir good
morning.
Damage chairman members the
committee
I will be short and blond I mean
just to the point people have
gone talking talking talking
that's not mine what I do first
of all we're not against when
I'm say we the crime bill that I
have we're gonna disability bill
not at all.
Maybe it's time is come.
The as far as the other
provisions in this bill we do
stand in opposition of a.
We would like to suggest is let
one of one of the other people
suggested that we.
Pass a delivery bill go ahead
and let's have a task for a
meaningful task force of all the
stakeholders to come to the
table and let's get one bill one
bill that everybody can agree
on.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for your time Mr back
up Rick rise.
A good morning.
I am.
Hello good morning Mr chair and
committee members I'm concerned
about the evaluation as well but
the bill also tries to help
mitigate that was some fee
reductions I'd like to committee
to clarify during its
discussions
amendment two one nine eight
eight seven point one regarding
licenses that would be are not
required to pay certain days.
Question has to do with which
license are included I believe
but I can't see it because I
don't have a copy of the
amendment that licenses
purchased within the last five
years were at to be included but
I also heard two thousand
seventeen.
my license was car a required in
two thousand sixteen.
So you can imagine that I was
happy to hear that or the five
year part.
I was I'm happy to hear the two
thousand seventeen I'm not sure
I have not made my sixtieth
payment on at nine and I can
tell you I've got a hundred and
twenty to go or a hundred and
twenty out there
Could could you please clarify
that five years during our
discussion and also be nice if
an I. LD could get back its
package opportunities thank you.
Thank you Sir and for the record
who are you with again Mr Mr
Rees.
I'm a managing member of quench
which holds and I'll do in Los
all thank you very much
appreciate it thanks for being
here.
Let's go to Neil Raul.
Neil you're on the line.
There we go all right I'm here
to help so I was little I.
I'm good I am deal road peppers
Boulevard of here Roswell New
Mexico
one of the things I want to talk
about is the delivery and in
spite of being a good idea it's
really not worth it to many of
us that hold licenses now I have
an I. L. D. license without
package
if spirit you're going to be
given to the restaurant
licensees or the breweries and
wineries for that that matter
again on the next point again on
the evaluation of licenses.
That I believe that will be the
case it's very simple of the new
B. license will be serving
spirits they'll be new at it
somebody just mentioned a lot of
what we young people because I
can get into it for three
thousand now it's maybe five or
ten thousand of they will be
competing against supply demand
situation of our licenses and
the only difference between are
expensive license and this much
less expensive licenses that
might be available is our hours
of operation well most of us
restaurant bar owners closed at
nine general level anyway and
then
the last thing I did not hear
mention today there are private
clutch which do spirits miscible
licenses can also do spirits a
lot of those are in smaller
communities including mine here
Ross well and then of course the
beer wine license Hey you can
serve beer and wine in there
many of those so I really don't
see too many places having the
distance issue were they have
for the drive to get home
again who would want to buy our
licenses they can go get one
now.
Much cheaper from the state of
New Mexico.
That's all I have sorry for
going over by a few seconds but
thank you for letting us give
all this input yes of course
thank you Mr role we appreciate
you all making the time.
Carlos on tech.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee on Carlos Santana
with the New Mexico business
coalition.
You know I just want to say our
position on this bill.
I believe that the liquor
control act needs to be
corrected and updated it's been
a problem for the state and for
operators for a long time but
our concern with this
legislation and the other bills
that have been introduced is
that it is taking action that's
going to be a financial
detriment to current licensees.
I would just ask that you
consider that because the way
this is currently put together
in this bill it will dilute
their interest and I think that
would be financially devastating
to them so I just ask for your
consideration that you make the
changes and updates to the
liquor control act but always
being cognisant of keeping
current owners whole thank you
for your time and consideration.
Thank you for being here the
Landel or laugh.
Can you hear me we can good
morning a good morning thank you
for the time Mr chair on
councils of I live in Santa Fe
New Mexico onerous them for
daily use different restaurants
a hundred your place in finally
I you said what was able to buy
a liquor license but I'm still
paying.
On this it really would kill me.
In.
Personally to the state to open
more places where they would sit
buckle hold is not going to help
the only thing the people that
drink would be more available to
help local hole in every other
corner.
Up to the economy I don't think
that is because the economy of
New Mexico we don't raise them
it's and heard enough of I
really we.
I recommend you and ask you to
please hold these this is not
going to be beneficial for the
individuals that we hold license
for the economy of New Mexico or
anybody the only thing that we
do let somebody just mentioned
before I have a I have a a
credit with the bank than pain
they would request the payment
of debts I have worked with the
restaurant licensed on a roll of
good business and when I was
able to afford the liquid
license I do that.
Through hard work.
And I think that the spread
that's what so many go you know
we know doing one increase
customers I know my time is
getting over of we know one and
they're not going to have more
customers we're not going to
have more revenue the only thing
that we gonna do we gonna help
uncle for the billable for
people that shouldn't call ago
hold.
Thank you for your time and
please I would appreciate your
consideration.
Thank you for being here Sir we
appreciate you.
Pamela Palermo.
Good morning Pamela.
Hello can you hear me we can
good morning K. hello good
morning
So we are the mom and pops and
of course there's a major
anxiety that we have for
generations invested in our
family for generations have
invested in this our local
family business personally I
have more than thirty years of
my life I could have chosen
another career to invest my life
in but I didn't I chose the
local New Mexico family business
this bill will wipe us out this
system currently is not archaic
your predecessors predecessors
put a lot of thought into the
problem regarding D. W. I ended
the quota system I haven't seen
anybody who this would help it
would not help us or anyone else
that's currently in the system
many people from all the
different entities of spoken
against this bill I'm and I
understand you want to make a
difference and you want to make
change everybody wants to do
that but it doesn't mean that
you need to throw boulder into
the pond and flip overall boat
and drowned everybody I'm at
pebble just a little Pueblo I'm
it can cause a ripple effect
that really could help the
economy
And look at the numbers of the
D. W. Y.
Right now they're really bad and
you would be saturating New
Mexico if you look at the
current liquor license holders
plus the restaurant licensees
who would be eligible plus
others who would apply you'd
saturate New Mexico with points
of access to get liquor what's
the problem if there's a problem
in the rural areas they maybe
look at licenses are available
in the state could subsidize the
transfer of some licenses back
to the rural areas of maybe that
five percent consumer tax could
help compensate the current
market value now not after it's
well now it's lower already but
occurring at the market value
that would be fair and equitable
to help.
Compensate the current liquor
license holders
thank you Mr.
Please wrap it up.
Mr Chairman go ahead and wrap it
up.
Okay we'll move on to the next
one Glenn
and I'm sorry I'm going to put
your name I my apologies Glenn
Perkel.
Hello can you hear me yes Sir.
Thank you thank you for your
time today so I bought my
current liquor license about a
year and a half ago for three
hundred twenty five thousand
dollars I spent three hundred
twenty five thousand dollars my
retirement savings as an
investment in my future and my
children's future.
To make an investment I'm a
lessor not a not an operator and
make no mistake about it this
bill will kill the value of my
and everybody else's license
they will not be worth anything
because there will be so many
others available that cost so
much less and this is money that
I've saved for that I've.
A cumulated and it will be gone
and I will have to come up with
new way to support my family and
I don't have that I'm retired so
this bill will hurt a lot of
people and I don't think you're
considering that I think I'm
strongly opposed to this bill
and there are a lot of other
things that have been said that
I agree with
but I want to know that this
bill will hurt a lot of people
thank you.
Thank you for your comments.
Next I have a Marie I don't have
a last name Marie but you you're
on the line go ahead.
Good morning this is sandy kids
along with my wife reach in your
be okay yes Sir we can't and
okay thank you so much for
allowing us the opportunity of
good morning to you chairman
your body right right just
beating by the way and also to
our committee members that are
tuning in today are working
urgently County and others for
the amount of people that we
deal with and and and the
concerns that we deal with our
County we really propose this
this bill
there are many beer and wine
licenses in our area here
they're already operating as
bars with happy hour and the
entertainment and the they do
more with their bar other so
called food a beer and wine bar
than they do with the restaurant
itself so what we operate this
we are what we are opposed the
bill for that for one of those
reasons are we've we've heard so
many things that we really don't
want to re iterate everything
distance of this morning without
to in the interest of time but
another thing that we want to do
as of you know our interest is
to reform we're ready alright
already have the books and it
could be done by simply doing a
food and are doing during one
licenses in the spirit of what
they were originally intended to
do and that has been deviated
because a lot of gray matter in
the area another thing to
regarding the D. W. Y. issues is
confusing for us to see how much
money the state puts them
through money that's generated
through liquor licenses to occur
D. W. I. through the and you eat
and D. W. I. programs and what
have you it's a very confusing
thing on one hand we're doing
everything we can to do M. D. M.
D. W. I. on the other hand were
allowing more places to operate
so thank you so much for your
time and we do oppose the bill.
Thank you for being here this
morning Pat block.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee.
I am Pat Larkin I'm speaking
today on behalf of the Mexico
retail association and Walmart
I'm addressing the delivery
portions of this complex build
touches many aspects the liquor
control act ideally delivery
would have been addressed in
standalone bill but we are where
we are.
Consumers have come to expect
delivery of groceries and other
goods including beer wine and
liquor is part of the purchases
and adding this capability help
to support the original version
of this bill the inclusion of an
arbitrary square footage
restrictions on statements
explaining this changes made to
specifically exclude and
disadvantage certain retailers
means that we oppose this bill
in its current form as it leaves
consumers with limited options.
Sponsor mention that this bill
was intended to move us into the
modern age we agree that
allowing delivery does that
unfortunately excluding
basically every grocery store
their liquor license from being
able to deliver it runs counter
to that goal members are
Association deliver alcoholic
beverages most other states and
this experiences has resulted in
several suggestions to improve
the bill so what to
implementation without altering
the intent one examples with
third party delivery most third
party delivery companies use
independent contractors rather
than employees but the bill
speaks to employees we have
several other instances were
small amendments will help both
the state and license holders
but I won't take up your time of
those today I will reiterate my
request for a meeting with the
German to review the suggestions
and I will close by saying this
bill is not ready for a floor
debate the significant number of
amendments in the first two
committees bear this out we can
and should address the
shortcomings of the bill before
it gets to the house floor so
with that in mind to request of
the committee first strictly
arbitrary square footage
restriction and second call this
the lever to what's more fully
developed we're not even halfway
through the session we have
plenty of time to do it thank
you for your time.
Thank you Mr block Joe ships.
Go ahead go.
We can here you go welcome.
I'm representing myself and the
in on the Alameda and Santa Fe
we have a bar restaurant my
license is probably worth three
twenty five to three fifty
thousand dollars a tax deduction
or even the tax credit is
useless because we're not gonna
have taxes due till twenty
twenty four we have so many loss
carry forwards coming out of
this period that these do me no
good and I think that I think
you need to compensate the
people who overnight will have
lost all their equity in their
values that will affect our
credit borrowings in also just
they're playing a level playing
field the second thing is the
delivery issue my employees and
myself are liable for any one he
gets out of my bar and is she
has had too much to drink and
drive scan on it somebody.
I think that the delivery people
working for uber eats for
instance have to have a training
serving as service service
license like all of my employees
do and carry liability insurance
because someone doesn't know if
the person good delivery to this
one drink away from shooting
their spouse in a huge domestic
fights or jumping in their car
and racing off in a range to
find your girlfriend with
another guy I mean I think that
it's you're responsible to let
anybody with a driver's license
he had alcohol over without any
sense of what's going on in
their inebriation so that's that
thank you very much.
Thank you and last on the list
we have gene welcome.
Yes can you hear me.
Yes okay I need one second we
has been frontier market Carell
us we've been there for forty
four years since nineteen
seventy six we on the full
package liquor license because
that's what's required for a
call sales grocery store she it
seems that this bill would turn
restaurants with beer and wine
only licenses in the full
package licenses with delivery
and this is devastating to the
value of our full package
license
it's not clear to me whether the
delivery option would be open to
us as well perhaps maybe someone
could could of where I at so for
forty four years we've employed
hundreds of Perot systems when
we bought our license that was
serious financial hardship for
us we refinanced our property
depleted our savings and we made
it work.
The license has been good for us
and over that time that we that
we've been able to support many
community causes and
philanthropies now my husband is
eighty three and I'm seventy
four we face health challenges
and it's long past time for us
to retire seven months ago
during the pandemic we were able
to lease our business and our
liquor license to a young couple
who are putting their hearts and
souls into keeping the business
alive it's quite of the
crippling pandemic restrictions
this bill would seriously
develop your license threaten
the livelihood of the family's
leasing from us threaten the
jobs of their employees that
deplete the income my husband I
have counted on for retirement
this bill would undercut all of
us who have sacrificed to owners
of small dispenser Weiss's tweet
to have a alone on it which
could be called if it's the
value too much and I.
Please ask you not to pass this
bill in its current form thank
you.
Thank you Jean
The you were the last comment
was gonna take but there's
another hand up this is the last
one
said he'll STO.
Mr Garcia you're on the line.
Yes good morning can you hear
me.
Yes yes my apologies my family
and I own and operate seasonal
restaurant your Los crucis.
And at this time we all know
that the restaurant business is
pretty much on life support.
The closing and re opening a
restaurant is an expensive loss
one to close an expensive
reopening.
And on top of it all it's very
sad and painful to lay off
employees and once we get the
okay to reopen it's difficult to
find help.
Now you can imagine how
concerning it is for us to see
the future of of our operations.
Now
Now we're we are.
Now we're concerned about losing
the value of our liquor
licenses.
That is one obstacle at this
point that we do not need to be
face.
We do not need this added stress
and so we strongly oppose this
bill.
Thank you.
Thank you for being with us
of members I'm going to go to
committee at this point thank
you for a very thoughtful public
comment process and we always
appreciate in this are you gonna
go to positive comments.
I yes thanks for the reminder
anybody in support of house bill
two fifty five.
Thanks for the reminder
Representative there's several
hands up.
First up in just a.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is that's all I need and I'm the
registered lobbyists for Garcia
Erreway LLC I've students strong
opposition against all the
liquor bill changes the session
my client paid almost one
million five hundred fifty
thousand dollars for liquor
licenses in the last five years
the most recent letter purchase
wise for five hundred ninety
thousand and three hundred
thirty thousand the last one was
just six months ago however the
amendment put forth by the
chairman Martinez has changed
our position we now stand in
support and will be working the
floor votes the message chairman
Martinez's amendment sends to
investors is appropriate and
recognizes investments put forth
in pursuing economic
innovativeness and risk I do
think this is the message the
state New Mexico should be
sending to our economic partners
and investors that New Mexico is
open for business for the
reasons discussed with strong
and sound and strong support I
thank the sponsors for working
with us thank you.
Thank you for being here Skye
devore.
Or yeah I'm sorry just come on
heard her speak of visible you
are on the line.
The board of thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I am the owner of the
craft brewery distillery and
winery New Mexico we have been
in business since nineteen
ninety nine and to date have not
had any citations from the
alcoholic beverage control
department we support the
measures in this bill
surrounding reciprocity for
profit rich manufacturers and
our ability to deliver to people
in their homes during this
pandemic we have a stretch three
drink limit at all of our
locations I would really ask
that you consider this when ever
making your decisions today
thank you.
Thank you for joining us rob
black.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is rob black
in the president and CEO of the
New Mexico chamber of commerce I
would first start with thinking
Representative my Estes and
Billsponsored Representative
Montoya and others for taking
such a collaborative approach to
our incredibly challenging issue
it is something that is being
discussed and debated in New
Mexico for decades and I think
ET almost everyone acknowledges
that the current regulatory
process for New Mexico in liquor
is dysfunctional we have created
value entered in a government
license through a regulated
because I monopoly that is not
helpful for economic development
this bill attempts to try to
balance the economic
consequences of expanding those
licenses to other to new all new
permit holders for license
holders while also focusing on
areas where we can drive more
economic value into the state
economic activity support those
communities especially rural
communities looking for a you
know the growing our outdoor
experience short Connie so it is
a tough balance we think this
bill is getting very close to
that balance so we do support
the approach that is being taken
this C. R. John Chavis earlier
spoke to ensuring that the value
of the of the deductions are
structured way that really
provide value to those existing
love these folders and we hope
that that is it's something that
is that we're sure about because
that would be a key piece for us
and our support thank you.
Thank you Mr black for being
here Elkfork.
Sorry good after good morning Mr
Chairman can you hear me OK yes
good morning good morning Sir
thank you very much I'll park
registered lobbyist on behalf of
the New Mexico brewers guild I
just want to start off by saying
good morning and thank you to
you Mr chairman and Committee
for taking a look at this very
very important piece of
legislation I also want to take
an opportunity and think
chairman my Estes who has
diligently worked for multiple
years on this issue we
appreciate his willingness to
always engage with us on I can
tell you doesn't mean we always
get what we want but we
appreciate his openness in this
willingness to work with us
as you've heard from lots of
people both prone against this
is a very complicated issue but
it's an important issue given
the nature of the hospitality
industry and its importance to
our economic development the
brewers guild stands in strong
support of the delivery portion
as well as the reciprocity
portion these two pieces of the
legislation or really critical
to the success of survivability
of these industries as well as
the opportunity for them to
continue to grow
as this legislature has
regularly routinely supported
the craft brew industry is is
growing and it's expanding and
not just with the New Mexico but
without and to be perfectly
blunt that is in large part due
to the strong support of the
legislature the executive as
well as local governments
with that Mr chairman we do
stand in support of this piece
of legislation thank you thank
you Mr part Jason Weaks.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee
Jason Weaks on behalf of the
distillers guild of New Mexico
distillers guild stands in
support of this legislation in
particular we very much support
the reciprocity provisions in
this bill as well as the home
delivery reciprocity is an
important thing it basically
means that different crafts
beverage license holders can
sell one another's drugs in
what's important about the the
craft beverage industry in New
Mexico is that yeah we have
store fronts were also
manufacturing it so it's
actually a two prong benefit to
the state because we're
manufacturing something that we
sell out of state we also have
store fronts that you know
consumers can come to and enjoy
beverages would like to be able
to have the situation where
somebody can enjoy New Mexico
beer New Mexico line item in New
Mexico just distilled spirits if
they so choose at one location
this is important legislation
especially given the current
circumstance it allows us to
sort of bridge what's happened
with the pandemic so we can get
through it and we can recover on
the back and more more quickly
on the bounces legislation very
good really want to think
Representative minuses for bring
it forward it's thoughtful you
know it's really a difficult
issue to try to resolve in a
holistic way we think that this
legislation make significant
gains and as as a result we
stand support thank you.
Thank you Mr weeks let's go to
committee the at this point and
so far I have one hand up and
that is from a ranking member
Harper Representative Harper you
have the for our.
Thank you chairman
This.
With my toys thank you for
bringing this bill forward
I have just a couple.
Our detail questions and then
maybe a COVID so keep this brief
final that the time is shorter
but.
So help me understand German and
the representatives.
My understanding is that there
is a set number of liquor
licenses.
And that those
we're set many years ago by the
state.
And that they can be transferred
or sold.
and that that
this actually subject to market
forces and currently you're
looking at roughly somewhere
between three hundred and fifty
thousand dollars for a license
to be sold so I have all that
correct.
Mr Chairman representative for
that's correct it's a state
issued license it's as if
there's a finite number of back
in the thirty is it was one for
hot fifteen hundred people I
think it got changed about
twenty years later to one per
two thousand people.
And then it got of codified in
statute in the early sixties
that you can.
Transfer them sell them or
release them so you apply for
permission from the state the
state grants you the permission
and then asks you what license
you gonna use they're all
numbered and so you purchase
your license from someone else
or lease it from someone else.
To fulfill that permission
granted by the state so that
they have become very high
priced commodities to nobody's
fault other than decades of
statutory.
St structure but it is a big
problem it is a big problem to a
barrier to entry and things that
nature we're not addressing that
problem here today.
but we are adjusting the
restaurant beer and wine license
to allow spirits
which which as you just heard
puts tremendous stress on folks
who have existing licenses but
But but the it's just bad public
policy thank you to have a state
issued license to have a
marketable to become a
marketable commodity and that's
something we have to undo in the
next.
The next decade responsibly and
reasonably.
I thank you chairman and the
reason I ask this for for that
answer I think you know identify
the problem very well which is
we I don't say intended to.
Start.
Our.
This kind of commodity type
of a license process right now
is value and and and people
invest in this type of their
livelihoods you know into this I
think the state's intention was
just to make sure that we don't
have
no control over how many first
of.
Of a side street so these are
out there to assault hall so we
can have some some control over
are are are a.
Alcohol abuse problem in the
state I don't know how effective
that's been.
The other just detail question I
have.
In the bill
the my understanding is that
there's a.
I I'm sorry fifty thousand
dollar deduction.
That goes for some sometimes
you.
You just.
Clarify that that detail for me.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative of personal
sections one two and three is
the is the the tax breaks for
current license holders.
And and it does include the
inter inter local but will.
We'll check with eight council
to make sure that.
You know that there's no
confusion that's the way that.
Everyone's interpreting that but
anyway sections one two and
three is the deduction and it
captures everybody it captures
those folks who currently lease
their license or you currently
utilize their license and so
it's the way it's structured is.
Up to one thousand dollar tax
deduction.
Maximum fifty thousand dollars
over.
Over four years so there is of
the bill we just did this
morning and some other.
Of the waivers applied to this
year so we'll definitely get
that language to be matched up
but as written it's prior to
January one twenty twenty six so
it's the years twenty one twenty
two twenty three twenty four and
twenty five C. of I.
It begins I believe in the year
twenty twenty two because as
mentioned folks are don't have a
whole lot to deduct your twenty
twenty one.
So thank you chairman
Representative lasted so.
Just.
Just to remind the committee and
I know now we're all aware of
this.
But thirds are tax credits or
tax deductions and their tax
exemptions.
And those two very different
things there's a reason why you
have each one.
An exemption.
Is something that is just
completely cut out of your tax
base we don't ask people to
report a good example is gross
receipts tax the ways probably
written
wages salary would be taxed by
gross receipts.
We put an exemption to the gross
receipts tax on our wages.
What that means is
you and I all of us who are in
the G. R. T. business.
We don't have to file a monthly
returned with the CRS system to
put in our wages and then the
docks that right it's an
exemption so it's it's just not
even considered right it it
saves.
All the rest of families a ton
of time not having to file gross
receipts tax then ask for it at
auction.
The second is a deduction which
is what's in this bill.
I deduction you report it.
And you take those dollars off
of your tax liability.
And so if you have a tax
liability that's great if you
don't it doesn't help.
and then in the end usually.
It's not a one for one match.
Right so.
A good example like the terrible
donation right if you you have
terrible donations you don't get
to remove one for one off of
your taxes what that value is it
ends up being you know roughly
twenty eight percent or thirty
percent of the shuttle to the
action is the actual dollars
that you get off your your taxes
that you owe.
And I credit.
The credit is actually
a one for one in genesis
specially if it's a refundable
credit
that you can actually if it's
returnable Craig actually get
back dollars that you didn't pay
if you have no liability can get
dollars back.
so just a reminder to the the
committee flick all that right.
So in this case a deduction of
fifty thousand dollars over five
years you could add up and say
well that that sort of fifty
thousand dollars is pretty close
to the value market value.
But in reality for that to work
they have to have.
liability they have to actually
have taxes that are paying
so the water's restaurants much
more losses so it would really
help.
you can't carry it forward but
there's a limit to that and then
the second thing is it's not
always a one for one.
so maybe maybe it's close to
fifteen thousand.
you might be saving it really
doesn't add up to close to the
two fifty thousand so I I just
wanna make sure that people
understand.
The mechanism is chosen and how
the outcome of it.
Are German resumes the state do
you have any comments on that.
No thank you Mr chairman reserve
RP have just don't that's
correct and thank you for for
describing that
We're just trying to do
everything we can to get
creative put our best minds
together to to compensate folks
for any devaluation of their
license we talked about this in
part committees in a perfect
world we need to analyze every
single market value of
everything a license and state
would fully compensate through a
just a straight.
Tax credit the value of that
license that would include them
giving up the license so.
we want them to maintain the
permissions they still have the
permission to run their business
but we want to compensate for
any devaluation is not gonna be
value to zero and this isn't the
end all be all will come back
next year will come back the
following year will come out the
following year we can do some
analysis of some professors at
you whenever looking forward to
doing analysis this summer
so this isn't the end all be all
in terms of compensation for
these tax breaks I think are are
are just and reasonable at this
time.
I think chairman my Estes
Appreciate that so so I guess
just the.
With the comment that the my
lead into a question that in
order.
Share our first then you.
and for some much clearer for
working together and a
bipartisan way to try to address
this problem.
I don't think this is a.
A partisan issue.
are we all of our restaurants
and and we know that a lot of
people put their livelihoods
entities
and so this isn't like a left
versus right saying this really
is a how do we fix the problem
saying and so I really
appreciate that you're all
working together.
On this
It's not a simple promise it was
simple we resolve this ten or
fifteen years ago.
It's complex
and what it's not a simple
problem that means there's not a
simple solution.
and in fact
There's probably not a perfect
solution.
But I do believe there is one
that's better than the status
quo.
and and I know that the solution
is much better than another one
that was proposed earlier.
In the session.
so.
I I I.
I think that we have to look at
solving this problem seriously.
And and I think you guys have
done a great job of taking the
first of several steps in that
direction I appreciate hearing
Mr Chairman representative says
you saying that.
There will be subsequent things
go forward and aside from just
was proposed insured subsequent
sessions.
You know the.
I'm very interested in hearing
what missus.
Whites are solution is and and
whether that's possible the two
big ones I've heard I I like
we're well let's.
What have the state by back all
of these licenses.
that's a lot of money and I'm
not sure.
if we can get around the
automation Clause on that we
have to be we have to be
Creative.
The other one that I've liked is
was just the what's what the
stock.
No it's a safer every license
there are now two and the
restaurants can sell one of
those licenses.
I think that helps unwind the
problem but it doesn't
completely solve it and then
also doubles the amount of
license so.
I know there's lots of
discussions along different
possible solutions I I again I
just want to commend you and
Representative Montoya if
working together to try to find
a good solution.
is my last question is chairman
and representatives.
obviously we we had a lot of
amendments on to this bill here.
we want to have a clean bill
that gets to the floor.
What would be your your
preference
do we do a committee so that in
our our next meeting so close
before clean or do you go
straight to the floor with a
force
And and I would like to hear
that you you work with us just
right so the others to try to
address some of our.
Issues are raised today
chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Harper you're
correct there's a lot of a lot
of amendments a lot of this
stylistic like instead of type a
restaurant licenses just
restaurant a license but some
are substantive to make better
policies what I would prefer is
a
I'm a clean version to leave
this committee so a committee so
that incorporates all of the
amendments that have been
approved thus far now it's
online quicker it's more
transparent and we could make
up.
We could make some changes
between now on the floor or if
you know obviously if it passes
the best place to do that is
that is that Senate referral I
believe it'll prior to Senate
tax do those final moments in
that committee SO anticipate
this going and Representative
Maestas Representative Harper as
I explained at the beginning the
doctor said
so far
my preference is that if this
bill does move out of this
committee today and I've already
contacted the council service
that that the that they would
begin drafting.
A house tax some of the so today
we would be voting on a sub
based on the amendments made
today but I think your question
present Harper at things a
little bit different I think
it's hearing some of the
concerns that we've heard from
some people during public
comment if the sponsor would be
amenable to a subsequent
substitute bill that would be
taken up in this committee later
on
I think that's but the that was
your question.
Yes so so chairman just so I'm
make sure we understand the
largest X. right if we vote this
bill out of committee today the
way it is.
It would not be a committee sob
it would just be this bill is
all the amendments you have to
put a floor sub on that would
incorporate them all.
If we let it out of committee
our right now but we wanted to
house taxes committee stop.
We could do that first thing
Wednesday morning introduced
that substitute here and get it
out.
Mr chairman we had massive in
just on that point we've Mr
Chairman we've we've adopted is
a pretty routine matter of
policy
in the Judiciary Committee yeah
what we'll do is we have a bill
that gets lots of amendments
it's clear that the.
Committee considers.
basically.
The issue as a committee report
of a substitute based on the
bill in the amendment is adopted
during the committee so that we
don't have to come back on
another day do this up so
I think that's Mr chairman I
think that's what you're
referring to is that
this product today's meeting
will result in a committee
report.
to be considered on the floor
tomorrow for the house taxation
and revenue committee substitute
for house bill two fifty five
that will be the original bill
and the amendments all rolled
together to accept that in my
district Mr speaker that is
correct and that is based on my
time as vice chair judiciary
where there's a lot of words
making that happens as you can
imagine that committee this is a
way to keep moving the bill
forward
ensuring that the next copy is
is clean and doesn't have as
many amendments clearly we adopt
a lot today so if the will of
the committees to move this bill
forward to date the way would
look like on the floor it would
be a house taxation and revenue
committee substitute.
With the incorporated amendments
thank you Mr chairman and and
for the benefit of the committee
we've also.
Over the last year adopted a
number of new processes and
procedures for the committee
reports to make sure that
they've got basically triple
checked and triple verified for
accuracy is still with you the
committee secretary council
services to justice wage any
possible concerns that members
might have is
Then a knock on wood because we
haven't had the issues that the
session but we we should be able
to make sure that it's it's done
accurately.
okay chairman and the.
Mr speaker and representatives
so that does.
Make a little more clear what
we're talking about I've never
seen that.
Happen before when attorneys
I've been in so was not familiar
with that that approach
yes normally we move it do not
pass that I do pass the
committee sob so I I I'm I'm not
quite sure what the rule is on
how to make that that motion are
included in the report but.
okay just.
That's the way we're going to.
Forward.
So I guess I'll just finish by
our Mr Chairman representative
so again thank you
But I I would.
Encourage you to please consider
between on the floor.
comments made
you know there's there's always
room for improvement.
I know that they'll be changes
made in the Senate tax committee
I'm sure if that's where it
goes.
What what's what's trying to be
responsive to to that comments
made I I really want to fix this
problem without.
Estimating investments of a lot
of people who put their
livelihoods into this so that we
are my my.
Recommendation of hope going
forward thank you chairman.
Thank you Representative Harper
next on the list and speaker
Egolf.
Thank you Mr chairman.
What offline me
Mr chairman and the chairman is
this.
We need to questions that are in
response to things I heard
public comment that I think
may have been addressed by
changes to the bill
you Mr chairman and and share
Maestas.
If I correct that the original
version.
Of your legislation contemplated
giving package licenses to
restaurants.
In that in that is no longer in
the bill thank you Mr chairman
of speaker got no this this bill
did not that was
House bill six and Senate bill
eight contemplated that but that
would have done two things.
One I would have put more liquor
stores on the market which which
I don't think is a good idea and
then it would also further
devalue.
Of these licenses so that idea
was thwarted in a house commerce
in exchange for the tax
deductions proposals in sections
one two and three Hey so I was
not in this bill it was in
several other bills that have
since been tabled okay so so Mr
chairman those
businesses with a package
license are completely
unaffected by this bill is that
right.
Mr street Mr chairman speaker
eight off of with the exception
of the opportunity to deliver so
they they it enhances their
business model because they can
deliver.
With this bill but you're
correct it does not affect them
negatively no negative impact in
so thank you for that I think
you have the I just heard that
several times and comments
people with package licenses
expressing concerns I think if
they can make sense to but folks
watching
the committees were no that.
Acted to licensees had nothing
to be concerned about this bill
and and and the possibility of
additional business
opportunities are expanding
their business model
To
how do we.
Mr chairman Representative just
to see if you could just tell us
a little bit about what you have
done in terms of thinking about.
What this bill will due to the
value of currently held
your full restaurant licenses.
Yeah I think you know I've heard
I've heard conversation both
between you need a private
conversation also on the
committee where the thought is.
It near the worry these licenses
go to that you know that I use
to zero is.
Very unlikely you too can you
just tell us a little bit you
know what you what your thought
processes on.
With the value of these licenses
will be if the bill is enacted
and you who you've discussed
this with in terms of economists
are folks it might be expert in
the industry
thank you Mr chairman of the
speaker golf no I mean numerous
conversations these past couple
years the way this is crafted as
it just modifies the existing
restaurant beer and wine license
to add spirits and so that begs
the question if you write
current restaurant owner.
With a full dispensers license
what do you do.
You could keep your dispensers
license and have the ability to
stay open until two you have the
ability to have a bar a you know
a physical bar in your
restaurant.
or if you don't have a barn you
Mr you can then get the
restaurant be license and put
your existing license on the
market.
So it's it's even though it's a
scary thing it's it's a win win
if your restaurant currently
closed is Mr chairman speak
Greek up if you're restaurant
currently closed at eleven and
you have this and you're selling
spirits you can get the
restaurant be license your
restaurant remains the same
you're still a pillar of the
committee and you essentially
get.
A new license you view your
existing licenses no longer
needed for your restaurant you
could put that on the market so
that's that's what it comes down
to that market fluctuation we
don't know because the I'll call
division doesn't keep stats on
their these archaic names you
know distillers Lysons retail
license in our in our local
license we don't know how many
restaurants currently use full
dispensary licenses.
And then we don't know how many
of those restaurants will put
those on the market but I
believe that the new the demand
is gonna be so high for
entertainment venues were
Albuquerque is the largest city
in the country that doesn't have
a comedy show comedy club and we
there's so many opportunities in
hopefully bustling economy that
The demand will hopefully keep
up with supply if it does
diminish it will find that out
this summer and fall and we can
make adjustments to the statute
next year.
And lastly Mr chairman and
chairman Restos.
A number of years ago other
changes in New York City with
regard to taxi cab medallions
and I think Mr chairman Madam
Mestis you're familiar with
that.
With the changes there is
tremendous concern that taxicab
medallions which at the time of
valued in excess of a million
dollars per taxi we're being
devalued because of
the expansion of uber and others
changes in the law in New York
City Mr chairman and
Representative Mrs could you
tell the committee a little bit
about how happy with taxicab
medallions and yeah because it
is somewhat similar I think to
this to this concerns in this
years of license holders in New
Mexico
Can you tell us a little bit
about that thank you Mr chairman
speaker got no that's a that's
two completely on point I mean
if we were to create a.
The control what today would not
look like the one it's currently
on the books and so New York had
that problem the medallions
essentially where the permission
to run taxi cab companies.
And they wanted to modernize
that situation to create more
cabs and more you know more
modern.
Aspects of the market and then
the this guy was gonna fall this
guy was gonna fall it took
incredible political will to
undo that decades old system in
the sky did not fall
and so those those companies
were still able to compete and
and had a leg up on a
competitor's.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
I.
I agree that the.
I would just Representative
Harper pointed out Mr chairman
the idea of buying back licences
is probably cost prohibitive.
And I think is also
constitutionally dubious and so
but we also know that we must
on wind
The yeah we we are we must
unwind the system that we're in
And.
I think with the menace or drive
today I think we're you know far
along toward a good solution and
I appreciate the thoughtfulness
of the amendments and look
forward to hearing more
conversation.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Representative
Maestas.
we've got a real life situation
and in our town
a restaurant owner
Invested about one million five
hundred thousand one half
million dollars on their the
restaurant five years ago and
they're going to expand they and
they bought a liquor license.
a year ago for like three
hundred fifty thousand dollars
and with the second shut down
they decided to close up shop
and moved to Florida and start
over they they just a it's just
tragic because is one of the
best sit down restaurants that
we have private restaurants
that we have a and and the
Farmington area so.
you know in this sale a
restaurant now is is very
difficult so you have a one and
a half million dollar investment
they were bullish on our
community a year ago at I
believe the ball at the end of
twenty nineteen just kind of bad
timing.
And
For three hundred fifty thousand
dollars and it's a big family
that you know it hasn't life
with nine kids and the kids the
older kids help on that run the
place and it is just it's just I
just couldn't make it you know
they I mean the second son you
mean take out just wouldn't work
for them so they they made a
management decision and and just
pulled out so.
the the folks out there that
oppose this bill.
There is there is similar but
they've got a three hundred
fifty thousand dollar investment
in it and they're gonna they're
gonna lose and in fact this
particular owner Mr chairman and
and Representative my **** this
picture owner had was
put up is his liquor license
they just bought for sale and
have somebody interested of
course say they they backed off
I'm a the his liquor license
with this bill would would be
you know would be.
You know the value maybe worth
nothing and so I I.
I agree with the speaker that
money back these licenses are
would pay for problematic is for
for for five hundred million
dollars
to to buy everybody back to keep
everybody whole I mean this is
what this is really a tough
situation
and.
I don't know what to do maybe a
two to one split or three one
school that might help on I've
heard that kicked around like a
stock split that that might be a
way to go but I you know the
lady that
Who was eighty three years old
and she seventy four they say
they sold their business to
young couple initial retirement
you know package I mean they
were.
Work division for forty years
and it passed the baton to some
some young kids that that we
want to make a go of it and
in the value of her.
businesses just gone down three
hundred fifty thousand dollars
yeah I don't know what to do
about it
Mr speaker I mean excuse me a Mr
chairman and and Representative
and and I know you're trying you
know you're trying your hardest
to to make something work the
tax you know I I work with the
CPA here to do my taxes and and
I I takeover Mr Chavis said
seriously that the the tax
deduction really that might it's
not it's not enough it's not
enough for a.
To recover the three hundred
fifty thousand dollar average
cost of these licenses so.
I just I just can't support this
at this at this time.
I wish there was a.
A better way to go I understand
the proponents they don't have
any skin the game I think if I
for of it today sweet sweet deal
to to to buy a license to add at
a fraction of the cost so.
Yes.
It's really kind of a statement
or are you have you have any
comments Representative
Of the serious concerns that the
folks have out there.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
represents trick cleared I think
we will we went to that
restaurant if I'm not mistaken
we had these hearings in
Farmington.
Summary for last always great to
get up there but it's
It's a pickle to say the least
every state is has on done their
system to some respect or
another I think some of the.
Best examples are mainly to
Brosque in Arizona.
We have not we have not we tried
we were we are out ahead of the
game we tried to undo this back
in nineteen eighty one and was a
big lawsuit everything kind of
came crumbling down and and the
legislature didn't revisit it
Until here we are forty years
later so I would just leave you
with two points one is is.
You know will this help the
Representative the restaurant
industry yes will this help the
tourism industry just
hospitality industry just will
this help each and every
restaurateur in the state.
You can't say that you know and
that's why these organizations
are remaining neutral because.
They don't represent a future
industry they represent current
membership.
But the arguments against this
bill
If they're persuasive today
they'll rip remain persuasive
till the end of time.
And so I think now in the midst
of this economic crisis it's a.
It's prudent for us to save our
restaurant industry and do and
then do everything we can.
To compensate these folks if if
their license values does
diminish.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative it's just it's
just seems.
With all restaurants being shut
down up here and and and across
the state I know we're opening
up a little bit now
it's just been real hard I made
you could just hear the the pain
and and and these poor folks is
voice
you know I'm gonna loose I'm
gonna lose my three hundred
fifty thousand dollars I'm just
using that as an average and and
I hate to buy a house for three
hundred fifty thousand dollars
and all of a sudden it's worth
that
that would be that would
devastate my family and and you
know my my future retirement and
and and this sort of thing so
maybe the three one split is a
way to go.
but I'd at this time just
talking to my my restaurant for
and the burnt downs
and some others and hops to
their that they're in the same
boat.
They have a sports bar down
there and.
And I think they spent more than
three hundred fifty thousand
dollar for their license and and
it's just a it's just a the
death blow to them so.
cruciatus Mr chairman and and
thank you's all ways my fellow
classmate of two thousand seven.
Thank you representative it just
tells me that the two of you are
getting old hi.
I'm not over.
I I was in elementary school in
two thousand seven let's go to
Representative and on this.
Thank you Mr chair I actually
just have one question
Chairman my S. does it in that
section six we talk about the
excise tax or the alcohol
beverage serving tax can you
tell me what that five percent
excise tax would go to.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative on this no that's
a great question so what we did
which with the exception of the
of the one speaker no one's
really pushing back on the tax.
I think if we're going to pay
for these deductions and
hopefully up.
Compensate these folks we need
to raise the money and who
better to raise the money from
than the than the alcohol
consumer may I might be able to
convince of Mr Chairman
representative it's a user fee
but but it goes to the to the
current pot were the excise tax
is simply raised I would
actually do for if I may Mister
to maybe.
An estimate from your Alice
pooled that can explain
Aware this excise tax would go.
I believe it would go into the
general fund but with the
understanding that the money
raised.
would offset the cost of the tax
breaks I I misspoke earlier Mr
Chairman was invented on this of
earlier when I said the
estimates the estimates
Or actually
Six million twelve million so
would raise twelve million
dollars it would cost six
million dollars but if someone
from the.
If one of the analyst can help
out with the center that be
helpful.
Yeah so then just as we have a
we have build more we have
hammering on here and we also
have Kevin powers so if any of
you three want to jump in.
We have right Lopez to actually
I'm seeing him on here.
What is new language but it does
refer to it as an excise tax I'm
I'm referring to it as a
consumer tax.
Do any of the analyst bill do
you did you do you have
thoughts.
Your muted.
Mr chairman I do not I apologize
I do not have anything
insightful to to say.
Okay cool cool dig analysis for
the committee I'm not sure I
think it was Rep Ben ray but I'm
not sure.
Okay.
Well alright that question will
be analyst get the answer
Representative not this have any
other questions
I mean I have a of a one I mean
I guess I need the analyst in
order to to answer my second
question so we can get that that
would be awesome.
Okay thank thank you Mr.
Sure.
Mr Chairman.
Yes yes I'm the money will go
into the general fund that's
we're all gross receipts tax
money goes unless it
specifically earmarked in the
bill.
So
and then.
You you know it's fungible at
that point it.
It goes wherever general fund
money goes.
Okay.
Districts I am Mr chair.
so my question and and miss
right you might be able to
answer this is what happens if
we take that excise tax from
five percent to two percent.
With my thought is you know the
we are by far the highest
alcohol excise tax of the states
around us actually we're more
than double every other states
around us so so that's my
question is what what would
happen if we took that five
percent to two percent.
I'm sorry Mr chairman
Are you.
Representative Hernandez are you
talking about
I'm talking about what's in the
bill so currently it's at five
percent in section six what if
we took that five percent to put
it down to two percent.
We would just generate less
money I think that
A loss Representative my Estes
had a comment about that and.
That might be useful it it it
since it's not directed
specifically.
It's not your March for anything
specific.
As far as I know
I don't think that
It would be any program that is
impaired this point.
Or any any
Any recipient that would be
impaired.
But
And so that's all I'm really
there's nothing else I sent
so thank you miss right thank
you Mr Chairman representative
on this it would just simply be
a assuming you know.
Price elasticity in the market
to stay the exact same then it
would go the that the rough
estimate now with the five
percent taxes approximately
twelve million dollars in
revenue so if you dropped it to
to
That it would be up.
You know someone that it would
of four point.
Three six seven eight I mean so
but that would be below the the
six million dollars and and tax
breaks.
state police estimates ten ten.
FTEs in their S. I. E. S. I. you
unit stuff like that so it would
just it would
We I would be around four four
point four as opposed to twelve
then I suppose we just do the
math real quick okay and
Representative Representative
Maestas and and then this.
Thank you ranking member Harper
it looks like Donnie's donuts
this is on here.
She is and she is in the
attendee list maybe.
Yeah that's why I couldn't see
you our apologies miss
regressive let me promote you.
To list and you can help us us
so these questions you should be
in already.
Thank you welcome you.
For me okay.
Great yes so the additional
funds from the tax would go to
the general fund about the if
you were reduced to two percent
tax that five percent tax that
would result in about forty
percent of the Act estimated
revenues that four point eight
million I will clarify however
the the current calculation of
the twelve million but based on
an understanding that the new
tax would be for sit down
locations at restaurants but it
appears from the ECDC amendments
that that tax.
Hold on all retailers that would
sell products so the revenue
estimated would probably be more
than that we need to pre
calculate the potential revenue
estimate with the understanding
of what the intent of the bill
is I will come and that this is
in addition it seems to be the
lead for excise tax would be
actively putting an additional
tax on liquor products one the
correct size taxes paid by the
whole seller this in additional
tax that would be paid by a
retailer you will need to get an
updated cost estimate and we
will work on that.
He's been updated revenue
estimate for that tax.
Representative this thank you.
Mr guys yes thank you so much
for that answer I would actually
like to propose an amendment to
take that excise tax from five
percent to two percent in
section six.
Okay Representative seven on
this do you have a do you have
what amendments prepared I don't
I don't this is a.
Just something that popped into
my head.
After.
Okay
Representative Maestas thoughts.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative on this I think
to draft it would be relatively.
Simple if you look on page
sixteen line seven.
You would simply change the word
I to the word to.
I yes that's the way I sought to
answer on this and I don't think
there's any other adjustments
that need to be made.
quick comment test that as
currently written it applies to
all point of sale package by the
drink you know and it's a
consumer tax it would be on
your.
Would you know when you buy a
drink at a bar whatever it that
would be the G. R. T. and then
that would be the.
You know whatever we choose to
call it the.
The license holder relieve.
Tax act or whatever and
yeah would be at the point of
sale it would be pushed on on to
the consumer.
In a lot of tourists will pay
that tax and things of that
nature so any Vinnies amendment
by my fellow co sponsors is a.
Is being friendly.
Okay
you know we don't we don't
generally do
Equipment on the you know sort
of off the.
From the diets if you will but
you know given I think given the
immensity what we're doing here
with and given.
The fact that it is a fairly
simple drafting
Process.
And just to of sponsorship of
the bill
with Representative and the same
access all good entertaining
it's
Discussion on.
And Representative I'm gonna
have you just I want I want a
Shuri lane and I are taking
notes and we can compare notes
after this so page sixteen line
seven.
State your amendment.
Page sixteen line seven I would
like the of word I to be
replaced with the word to.
Mr chair.
Okay.
Is there is there discussion is
there debate on this proposal I
see a hand I see several hands
up the first one I saw was by
your Chandler.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
thank you Representative I I'm
trying to understand the
rationale again is the rationale
is that the excise tax in our
state is higher than surrounding
states is that the so basically
for this suggestion Mr Chairman
representative.
Mr chair and Representative
Chandler yes just my thought is
that we are not competitive
currently with the states around
us and adding additional excise
tax makes us even more come
sorry makes us less competitive
and so that is my soul thought
behind this.
Thank you for that answer Mr
chair and representative is the
five percent of an increase of
what is currently the case Mr
chair and representative.
Mr Chairman representative that
is the way that that we have
read it yes is that it's an
increase on top of the excise
tax that is already there and if
chairman my **** has a different
answer than that I would I would
please enter to.
Please let us know.
But not different Mr chairman
Representative Chandler
Representative none this but the
tax portion of the liquor
control act is just as archaic
as the.
The rest of the code we actually
tax on amounts like old school
we tax on the actual amount to
like back in the day when they
counted up all the barrels up so
so with the taxes mention my
agency right Mr was is taxed at
from the wholesaler level from
wholesaler to the retailer.
Of this would be
At the point of sale passed on
directly on to the consumer it
would be a it's a new tax.
Okay okay thank you very much
for that answer Mr Chairman
representative that's all thank
you.
I see a lot of hands up I'm not
sure if it's on the bill or the
on the amendment so
Representative Montoya I of the
bill are on the amendment.
Your muted.
Thank you Mr chairman no I
actually have a question my
hands up for for questioning the
sponsor.
Further on the bill.
Got you okay Representative.
Representative Canada you are
muted are you on the bill are on
the amendment.
Did share I'm on the bill.
Okay gotcha thank you.
Yeah speaker you got are you on
the amendment are you on the
bill.
Okay well we'll.
Mr speaker are you on the
amendment very on the bill.
Mr Chairman he's can take in my
yeah your is up and we're
discussing an amendment
decreasing the excise tax from
five to two I'm not sure if you
wanted to speak on the amendment
or if you're still on the bill I
had my hand up for my earlier
comments and forgot to lower it
okay thank you understate you.
Chair a recent my status in
Representative at nine this so
just for clarification for the
public
You're proposing that we reduce
the proposed a five percent
increase to only two percent.
Correct.
Mr.
Understood okay well good news
is our our.
Fabulous Legislative Council
bill drafter
chase has been following the
debate and and texted me and
said that he's he's on it he's
probably typing as we speak
so without further debate on
this amendment.
Is there a motion to adopt this
amendment by representative had
none this.
Mr Chairman.
Thanks Moul by Representative
Montoya seconded by who I'm
sorry Strickler.
Representative Strickler second
is their opposition to the
amendment.
Seeing none there house bill two
fifty five.
Has been amended.
We are back on the bill and
Representative is you still have
the floor.
I'm sorry I'm Mr chairman did
you call on me.
I actually called back under
seven on this you still have the
floor but I'm not sure if he.
You know that the floor perhaps
he did you I yield the floor.
Okay thank you representative.
let me look at my list to make
sure I think you guys in order
as best as we can.
I have Representative Montoya
next go ahead Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative a my asked us.
There are several questions that
were asked early on by
People are attending and and or
worried about their.
About the value of their
licenses
and I think those are.
Very much
Great concern
So I have a couple of questions
around that that you could help
me with on the first one being
Mr chairman.
if the current license holder.
or or we see.
Doesn't change anything.
With their license they stay
with their license as is what
happens to their fees going
forward they they remain at the.
thirteen hundred.
Dollars a year for the for
address for the distributor.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Montoya no great
point a great point thanks for a
allow me to clear up some
confusion with regards to this
the only new fee is the
restaurant be lights that's the
only new feet and that's the one
that you drop down to ten
thousand dollars or that we did
rather a.
For your for your leadership the
current fee structure remains
the same it remains the same so
whatever you paid for your fee
last year that's what you're
gonna pay next year.
With some good news there's a
bill as Senate bill two which
waives all fees for this year
for everybody so that'll save
folks at the of you dollars and
then
In the bill it also waives fees
for current license holders for
five years so it waves the fees
for five years and then for
those folks who purchased their
licenses in the last five years
it will actually waive them for
ten.
so yeah it gives a little bit of
relief on on the fee structure
for current license holders.
So thank you for that Mr
chairman so that the cost to the
new license holder especially in
reality we're talking about
we're talking about any real
competition.
are restaurants that are.
Somewhere you would say between
fifty and a hundred
suits and or a hundred and plus
other than that if you're
talking about a restaurant with.
Less than twenty five seats that
that really probably is more
just in a rural area for maybe a
downtown area of of of a
redevelopment area but up to
fifty that still is your
moderate Townsend
that seating is still to go in
there and and spend more than
five thousand dollars for for
that a year probably still is.
Something that they're not going
to do.
For that be license but.
The in comparison you're you're
really talking about those
restaurant owners that are near
a hundred seats are over a
hundred seats who are any paying
dramatically more than the.
Thirteen hundred dollars a year
what would you say that all goes
towards holding the value of the
current license holders.
Thank you Mr president I I
believe so I believe so we're
just trying to.
Open up this market for a
restaurant industry without
detrimentally affecting current
license holders current best and
so yeah that's and that's the
new ones do we charge we do
charge twice out of charge ten
thou but we certainly don't want
to we certainly want these new
folks coming in
To pay a little more to join
this market
Then the current license
holders.
So from the standpoint of of
being able to lease
I I would assume I had a license
and I needed to lease it.
to be viable in the market
outcry just need to reset for
less than what the state is
going to charge.
if I want to lease it out to
someone who pretend to
potentially want to open up.
if I could go on lease it for.
Ninety three hundred dollars
ninety five hundred dollars
rather than spending ten
thousand dollars with the state
on an annual basis so there
still will be a market.
To be able to release your your
license is that correct that's
correct Mr chairman of some of
the there will be a market
And I think even greater than
that because it depends on the
business model if that
restaurant has a physical bar or
one stay open till two the
restaurant be is not gonna work
for them so there's a market
there and I think if if
entrepreneurs of our economy
grows the way we wanted to
they'll be entertainment value
entertainment venues and
entrepreneurs wanted to open up
places
that will that will create that
demand for those additional
markets for those additional
licenses that may become
available on the market.
Thank you for that
Representative so we we've
talked about this before their
other venues out there that are
currently locked out of the
market all together folks that
have like an entertainment and
food and a.
And and wanting to do liquor but
cannot like a
Following outlay analyst a
bowling alley with part time or
a little.
Racetrack outside of seeing
these in in Colorado call and
Durango has a little and then
you that has all of those things
and they have liquor and food.
So in New Mexico we have an
account for them at all and I've
heard folks directly someone
actually spent a lot of money in
downtown Farmington and because
they were a pool hall that serve
food even though they can prove
that they were in a.
Even come close to forty percent
in liquor sales
they they could not get that
license issued to them to say.
So there is so I the reason I'm
mentioning this is there has
been a lot of thought into
trying to determine how do we.
Keep from.
Detrimentally.
Farming folks are and at the
same time the concept that that
was even suggested that to me
offline today was will we find a
way to be able to get three
hundred thousand dollars to the
current license holders and and
and buy them back.
The real problem exist they can
buy them from the state.
I mean the buying them on the
secondary market essentially
they're buying them.
Our and and and we should be
talking about buying
Representative that's something
that that we haven't even really
talked about in this debate
today.
For this discussion is.
I mean we we can't I can't sell
or lease my my driver's license
a doctor cannot sell or lease
his medical license for a
dentist or contractor it doesn't
work at all I have heard that to
some contractors may lease their
licenses but I think that's a
not legal but I have heard that
but the Representative that's
the problem we're facing here
is we cannot.
Give back people the dollar for
dollar.
Their value we're we're stuck
within the constraints of the
constitution as a speaker egolf
alluded to earlier in his
comments that that in.
That there are some there are
very serious a constitutional
issues with just paying money
back at the same time.
One part of this discussion that
has not been made as of yet is
all of the people who have been
locked out of the market.
What we've done essentially is
we create created a monopoly.
For current license holders.
And that's why the cost is going
up like that it is supply and
demand.
And to whatever degree that are
that supply increases demand
will go down.
And so I am very sensitive to
the the argument that that that
people made today about their
value of losing value I do
believe they will lose some
value.
I think we've done everything we
could in this to try and keep it
from being overwhelmingly
detrimental but at the same
time.
Are
we in the last six years I've
carried.
Well over half a dozen
a liquor license bills some of
them as minimally as true
intrusive as we could possibly
could have have just a trying to
just affect downtown areas was
one of my bills another one was
to slowly increase
of licenses and and just put
more on the market slowly
but at every turn those have
been rejected particular by the
same name by many of the same
people who are who today are are
are.
Our.
CERN's and I can understand the
value is.
Going to go down on these
licenses because the monopoly
will it is going to have to be
dealt with however I've heard
over and over throughout my
entire tenure here as a
legislator from.
Small communities in particular
but people have downtown
redevelopment areas
or metropolitan metropolitan
redevelopment areas of our
districts we're we're a
restaurant cannot go in and make
money just selling fruit.
And that foot traffic and so so
the property values of
everything in our in our
downtown area in Farmington
we've got.
We've got many storefronts but I
grew up with that are that are
storage areas I mean building
for storage or perfect
professional services
and so so the entire.
Economy in New Mexico as is
being held down.
And so coming to a decision
about trying to address liquor
licenses.
It is a really a global question
of how do we help our
communities come back.
I'm very sensitive about the
timing as well the I mean we're
we're we're in the position of
right now shutdowns across the
state.
And.
Something like this I can see as
much more scary than if we have
done this a year ago.
but.
At the same time every year that
that we presented legislation I
sat before you.
In your committee Mr Chairman.
Probably five or six times on
these bills and each time the
the thing is this is not the
answer has to be another and and
I've heard the the the the
discussion today that.
It's back up again let's get
everybody to the table and come
up with something everybody can
agree with.
Unfortunately.
When we're doing away with the.
That secure market.
The eighty eighty the group
people who are who have paid a
lot of money but also have
benefited from being in a secure
market.
That precludes.
Other businesses that want to
open up and quite frankly I
think this contributes to
something we also have talked
about which is that the the
brain drain in New Mexico.
I know my kids.
Have all look at moving and have
done several of them out of our
community because it's just not
fun to be there.
and what happens is this happens
on a regular basis where where
young people from from
Farmington go to Durango because
it's more fun and they go up
there and what ends up happening
is somebody ends up get behind
the wheel and trying to drive
home after they've walked
literally from bar to restaurant
that serves alcohol to another
bar to some entertainment venue
and I think they're okay and get
behind the wheel of the car and
I drive forty five miles home
and get an accident.
Because that opportunity doesn't
exist in any of our small towns
it doesn't exist in a downtown
area and so
What we seen in all states
around us is massive growth.
One thing that we don't look at
is you look in Durango Colorado
all of those businesses somehow
exist with a bar right next
every other location.
And.
And we say that.
Once again it's it's the
statistic that the static way of
looking at things rather than
growing the pie we look at the
pie and say there's only so much
high and if we cut into smaller
pieces it's going to harm me
because I have a bigger piece
right now and I I just don't
think that is the case
completely.
I do understand people who have
looked at this is their
retirement.
And so this is a great
investment and I will hold on to
it and then all invested in it
for three hundred thousand
dollars a hold onto it for four
years and also look for four
hundred thousand dollars.
That's great but it's a license
it is not real property.
And and we have got to break the
cycle of treating these licenses
as if their property that are
owned by someone.
and that's not the case anyone's
liquor license licenses can be
revoked.
if if somebody did something
wrong or or or or to do that
they're there illegally serving
minors or or other things.
I do believe it's it's it's a
fair statement to say values
will go down some.
But I think if we can put in
place.
And along the way you that I've
heard from you Representative
Maestas you fully expect the
Senate to have their hand.
Looking a couple these
provisions.
But I just don't believe we can
continue to kick this can down
the road New Mexico's decimated
content the business's thank you
economically right now and and
the idea of how are we going to
get some of this business back.
I truly this is something that
we can do and.
There are once again you stated
it perfectly.
Will there be some businesses
that it might hit a little
harder than others I think
that's I think that's fair the
person that Representative
Strickler mentioned that
Bernalillo county's they've
already closed down all we have
left is to try and sell it or
lease it so that's why.
One of one of my purposes here
is to try to keep the least
value.
There so they might not be able
to go out on the open market and
sell it for three hundred fifty
four thousand dollars right now
but.
The the other way to look at
this is what the value is on the
on the lease market and I think
trying to keep that there
will I think that's a good
argument for even a.
Thanks who may be threatening
that they would call no showing
that they're still value their I
think it's very important I and
I appreciate.
you representative last us for
for working on this and and
listening to all perspectives
and I and I and I'm gonna
support this going forward and
I do believe there might be a
couple of things some people
have mentioned.
The idea that they hold on have
and I'll do that they have an
opportunity even if we don't get
back the package that that maybe
they might be able to.
Purchase it back.
I know that that that that would
maybe change the package market
a little bit
and I know that's not something
I'm not proposing that here but
I have heard that over and over
to maybe give some value back to
those license holders who who
really see that they're going to
be we have I don't know that
that's an answer but it is a
suggestions and maybe several
times
but I just want to lose the fact
that.
Where we're.
There's a certain value the
people paid for their licenses.
But they have also benefited
from the lack of competition.
and and there that's of value to
that's not being that's not
being brought up at this point
so any help I I support this and
I thank you for accepting
Amendments that we brought for
the day and and I'd like to just
get away to the governor for
signature thank you
Representative.
Thank you thank you
representative this could
Representative gonna.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
like I said earlier my comments
are on the bill so I just wanted
to go back to those I
appreciated that you all have
explained Mr chair and
representative the process to
get to fifty five from
introduction to date I love that
we're gonna turn all this into a
committee set up so we can read
a clean copy but can you just
talk me through what happened
with the amendment in the
previous economic development
and commerce committee that
related to the ten thousand
square feet I just really want
to make sure we're honing in in
in that solution and make sure
that our local restaurants and
grocery stores and folks have
room to be competitive in this
delivery market that likely it
will be quickly picked up by the
folks like Amazon and other out
of state corporations.
Thank you madam chair
representative Canada so if you
look on page nine this idea was
actually in the original draft
of the bill after talking with
packagetrackr folks and things
of that nature trying to craft
you know for craft the statute
to help
Help the mom and pops so but the
language was faulty in the
original draft so that's why we
amended and commerce to the
original draft only.
Talked about restaurants that
excluded giant restaurants from
from delivery and we wanted to
exclude big box retailers so the
language in the original draft
was in the case of a restaurant
license if the restaurant has a
facility that's less than ten
thousand square feet.
So we changed it in house
commerce Mr chairman
Representative lot economic to
say
And if the indoor retail space
is less than ten thousand square
feet in sales so.
So that applies to the the
package you guys it's the mom
and pop package license holders
to get to do delivery the big
box stores do not.
Thank you Mr chair
representative I am very much
aligned with that intention I've
received a couple of calls over
the weekend that there's maybe
still some more finessing to do
potentially if that ten thousand
is the right mark or what it
looks like so just once you know
I I totally am in alignment with
that part but just maybe follow
up with some questions about
where we got that ten thousand
number specifically I've heard
some concerns that in rural New
Mexico there's like grocery
stores that otherwise have
licenses and would want to get
into it locally owned but they
are above ten thousand like just
really trying to to to draw the
best parameters to meet what
you're trying to do so I may
have follow up questions on that
as we move this towards the
floor and get to see that
committee sub otherwise Mr chair
representative just want to say
again I hope we can keep up this
good good work listening to
Representative Monday away in
about the timeliness of what
we're doing and how we're doing
it now I thought was just
exactly captured why I'm
invested in this effort and
really love that we're doing it
in a bipartisan way so
Representative Monday at you and
I are sharing a brain today but
certainly appreciated they're
very clear and compelling way
you laid out arguments in
support of this bill so thank
you Mr chair representative.
Thank you vice chair Chandler.
Thank you Mr chair I too I think
M. in alignment with the
Representative Montoya but I
would not go so far as to say I
am sharing a brain with him.
Of the I this is a tough one I
know for all of us Mr chair and
Sanchez.
I'm certain that every single
person on this committee know
someone who owns a liquor
license and that person Mr chair
and representatives and co
sponsors and sponsors
the use it not just as a tool to
operate a business but off many
of them Mr chair and co sponsors
it view it as an investment.
Many and view it maybe as a now
stag
And have thought for probably
some time Mr chair that that
this was something they could
sell and retire with those
proceeds you know and all of
those kinds of things and I'm
very sympathetic to that point
of view Mr chair however.
I'm also says thank reflecting
back on what our responsibility
is and I think our
responsibility is to be looking
at what is the best for the
entire economy of the state Mr
chair and Sanchez what is best
for our local communities what
is best for our local all of our
local businesses and I think
weighing the various aspects of
the bill Mr chair and.
Balancing the various aspects
and balancing the various needs
of our community I I come out in
favor of supporting the bill I
am sensitive to the fact that
some people and I think it we're
ready we would be disingenuous
Mr chair if we said.
are gonna lose value they're
gonna lose their I think people
are going to lose some value in
their asset and whatever we can
do to
soften the blow easy the land
ease the landing is something I
know the sponsors are very
committed to and I'm sure will
continue to do so but on the
whole on the whole I think we
just have to recognize one one
hasn't investments one has to
recognize Mr chair that one
could lose that investment I
have investments and all kinds
of you know mutual funds and
some people have investments in
real estate and there is no
guarantee in any investment we
have that it is going to
continue to appreciate Mr chair
that it's continue going to
continue to hold value we all of
known people who've lost value
in real estate and other
commodities that they thought
was part of their retirement
plan and we all feel bad and we
think that's concerning of
course that's why people have
diverse
economic portfolios and I'm very
sympathetic with with people who
think they might be losing
something here but on the whole
by opening up access to liquor
licenses we are increasing Mr
chair the opportunity for others
to go into business and to make
profit to hire people insist to
stimulate the economy and for
that reason I support this this
bill thank you very much Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative I know there were
some conversations.
Last week about.
Introducing a limited number of
new all new licenses.
Yes the auction process to.
The six restaurant.
Just realize.
Perhaps longer and predictable
that I haven't heard any of
those conversations recently
the.
The.
Transaction.
Mr Chairman representative.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Scott no we had a
great hearing last week and it's
That idea is been kicked around
the last three four five years
so it does have merit
interaction but I think the
priority.
Is the is the restaurants and to
modify the beer and wine before
we kind of open up any new
dispensaries are retail licenses
or things that nature we this is
strictly targeted for those
restaurants that qualify for
beer and wine but that's
definitely to be part of the
conversation
If you know if and when we
expand those other types of
licenses particularly in the
rural areas whether we
implement.
You know regional quarter
numbers there's some counties
that are pry have too many
liquor store some counties that
don't have enough.
Well but not in this bill Sir Mr
Chairman represents got.
Mr Chairman representative I've
heard from.
Google industry or license
holder.
Representative show.
The
piece of legislation.
Was going to fairly dramatically
affect in short order.
The value of those licenses are
not I am very sensitive to those
concerns after all this is.
You that was created by public
policy and will be destroyed by
public policy.
Question is
it would seem to me to be very
important to to be able to find
a predictable reduction in the
value of those licenses going
forward.
Mr.
Representative thank you for
your interest all of our
questions.
Thank you representative Scott
speaker you got for the second
time.
Leisure and it's to rates from
the previous question.
And your muted Sir.
The reader can you hear me yes.
This thing on.
It
was a little zoom joke never
gets old.
Mr chair can we I want to touch
on one of the things that are
Representative Cadena mentioned
and that is the square footage
limit.
I'm up for delivery licenses and
as I read it.
I'm looking at the bill on page
nine is where I see the square
foot limit.
And it is talking about.
It's as if our the restaurant
can deliver yep this is on page
seven I'm sorry line seven eight
on page nine if the restaurant
has a facility with less than
ten thousand square feet in
size.
And Mr chairman that is the only
reference I see in the bill to
ten thousand square feet so I
don't think there's any square
foot restriction on retailers
but help me fight help me
understand this Mr chairman and
chairman assist to make sure I'm
not missing no thank you Mr
mystery grug no great catch up
the what you're reading is the
bill as introduced commerce fix
this provision so commerce
changed.
The word restaurant to indoor
retail space.
Is less than ten thousand square
feet in sales so
So the up so yeah deals with up
it is eliminates the big box
stores from dominating the the
delivery market
Against mom and pop package
liquor stores.
Okay I'm Mr chairman I I'd like
to see it if the bill advances
I don't know if we want we might
want to do this is a four minute
I remember when we included.
In the first version of combined
reporting I think a twenty.
With this in the twenty thirteen
maybe is we did this.
that senator Wirth bill.
Required.
Out of state corporations that
operate retail facilities with a
combined.
Roof square footage I think in
excess of twenty thousand square
feet they are the ones that had
to pay the complete they were
the ones that had to you
combined reporting
So I I I want to make sure we're
not too small with ten thousand
square feet yeah I do yeah yeah
I can imagine you know like that
I came or the name of the and.
The grocery store up in China
for example but you know it's
just that during the summer Mr
Chairman and you they very
definitely have wanted ten
thousand square feet under
single roof it's a locally owned
one off places like a combo
hardware store grocery store
bait shop and that you know our
tackle.
Our tech store so
it maybe we will maybe you'd
want to bump that up.
and talk about you can you know
combined total statewide of
square footage this operated you
know because everything about a
large grocery store.
I think I'm not really ready to
suggest language on the fly
right now Mr chairman and
chairman masters but I do think
it might more maybe you think it
might be a good idea to get some
further consideration of that
since some of the places like
this to work in China are are
not excluded you know
accidentally.
Thank you Mr chairman speaker a
Egolf no I agree we don't want
to exclude the wonderful grocery
store and tier C. or or places
like that so all of gets and
clarity and we'll pick that
square footage consistent with
with our policy goals.
Okay very well Richard thank you
Mr chair present at your hand
still up I don't know if it's
from the previous question about
follow up previous question
thank you Mr chairman Mr speaker
for following up on my original
point thank you.
Thank you Representative
president Maestas resemble Dona
none this it's it's a pleasure
to be working with you on this
bill it certainly is not easy
it's it's a very complicated
piece of legislation
substantively it's it's very
complicated very complex areas
about from a public policy
perspective it's also a very
complicated issue you know sadly
those that came before us I
think created a system that is
riddled with problems and so I
applaud your bipartisanship I
applaud you diligence I implied
your willingness to listen to
all of the
comments and concerns that we've
heard over the last gosh I want
to say I want to see we've been
on this topic for about a week
at least and in different
committees and different bills
certainly this work is not new I
know that you all have been
working on this very hard over
the course of several interim
sessions this was not sprung up
out of thin air this is a very
well thought out piece of
legislation and you know I I I
have not I don't have a lot more
to say other than kudos to you
for your hard work and
dedication with that I'm gonna
go to Representative brought it
up.
Thank you Mr chairman could you
pass.
Okay we have a due pass motion
and Representative Madam ask you
to restate the motion is a.
and the do not pass on
House Bill two fifty five you
need to pass on House taxation
revenue committee substitute for
house bill two fifty five is
there a second.
Second.
Has been seconded by by your
Chandler.
The lady let's go ahead and do a
roll call will please.
And you may be meeting we cannot
hear you.
Sorry about that Representative
Cadena yeah.
the speaker.
Yes.
Representative Harper I'm sorry.
No.
Why Representative.
Yes.
Representative lu Han we'll be
hearing.
Representative my asked us.
Yes.
Representative.
And and I'm sorry I didn't hear
you Representative was yes thank
you.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Right.
Representative Stansbury.
Yes.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative lu Han.
Vice chair Chandler.
Hold on one second right
Representative Representative
Eli I think you're muted.
I apologize.
Yes.
Thank you thank you.
Vice chair chapter yes.
Chairman Martinez.
And I may yes Representative ten
in the affirmative and giving.
By a vote of ten to three
Representative just as you have
a due pass up please circle back
with with chase at council
service with following this
hearing to make sure that what
comes to the floor is a house
taxation committee substitute
with all of the amendments that
were adopted today.
With that members we're gonna
we're gonna roll over house bill
fifteen
there is a discrepancy between
the FIR is from LFC and from TRD
and and and I'm advocating both
agencies to please take a look
at the committee substitute
that's been filed by the Sanchez
into please reconcile those
those numbers or at the very
least be prepared to tell us why
the the differences and then we
will also roll over house bill
one seventy four Representative
Anderson as well as house bill
thirty six will start with those
three on Wednesday morning at
nine o'clock good work committee
very long day today enjoy your
lunch break and will we'll see
some of you backing another
committee meeting in about
thirty minutes have a good.
