Representative Ortez here.
Representative Scott.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Townsend.
Chair container here good one.
Chairman thank you.
Both of or
will we get thank you for
joining us well into our work
with hospital one thirty seven
G. R. T. does childcare
assistance by.
Good morning Mr chair and
committee members I am glad to
be here in front of you with
house bill one thirty seven in
the second I'll turn it into my
incredible expert a small
business owner here in New
Mexico.
I have been able to work on this
concept over several years of
first along side of yes
Representative I chair to heal
at different points with senator
John Arthur Smith who is my
senator from down south over
many years and then picked this
up myself.
To me and to the advocates but
I've learned from including the
small business owners from all
of our state this bill is about
tax parity I've called the tax
equity but what we're doing
here.
Is attempting to create a new G.
R. T. deduction
for the the privately operated
child care and early childhood
education centers so in New
Mexico landscape many of you
know this you've heard this you
had your kids in these
situations and your kids landed
somewhere safe while you pursue
education are working your
legislative responsibilities but
in the child care and early
childhood and landscape they're
privately operated businesses
overwhelmingly their women owned
and they're owned by Latinas and
other women of color in our
state then there's nonprofit
centers including those operated
by churches and other faith
based entities and other
organizations that file with the
five oh and see the status and
then there's the publicly
operated centers as well those
that are coming like pre K. out
of our K. through twelve public
schools and otherwise so what H.
B. one thirty seven does is
deduct the G. R. T. for the
price of course privately
operated centers are the only
ones that are taxable entities
anyway it deducts the G. R. T.
on the services that they have
with the state with contracts on
the state of New Mexico so for
all those families that have
CYFD eligibility that's income
based again because we've made a
commitment to making sure
families have access to
affordable care all this does is
out to touch the deer to the G.
R. T. those out families that
are contracted an eligible with
CYFD support from the state this
does not touch the G. R. T. that
these entities would continue to
pay on their private pay
families so those are families
that have an income high enough
that they're not eligible for
any subsidies and they pay for
child care themselves so we're
not touching
the the G. R. T. should add
their family that is able to
afford it but the metrics we've
set up but we are attempting to.
yeah right many the G. R. T. for
the state contracts basically.
And before I presidential that
like I said this to me is pretty
straightforward I believe in our
kids I believe New Mexico is
taking a lot of steps in the
right direction to make sure
every little one has a shot at a
bright future and when we
reasonably expect as we should
that these privately operated
businesses meet the same
standards the same outcomes the
same level of quality care for
these little ones that that they
have the responsibility of
looking after and and and
teaching then they should be
able to do that with the same
dollar and it's just to me a
disservice and a disappointment
that we expect them to do the
same and to do it with less
money in a place like I call
home like like let's crucis
where we have some of the
highest here too in the state
that means that on the same
block there could be a nonprofit
faith based provider doing
incredible things for little
ones at that same exact
reimbursement rate and then I
can go down the street to the
incredible centers run by my
experts she's expected to do the
same with over with less than
eight percent of that budget so
alternative Angela here to.
To fill in all the blanks that I
left behind and get it started.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee thank you
Representative got and as you
mention my name is actually yeah
I on the toy box early learning
centers and hospitals that we
have the pleasure of serving
about three hundred in our
community and we've been doing
that for over two decades.
this bill house bill one thirty
seven is putting is requesting
that we create parity in funding
to programs like mine to our
counterparts of nonprofits and
public school education right
now most centers like money we
pay the gross receipts tax out
of our own budgets we do that
because only we can pass that on
to our families but as mentioned
those families are childcare
subsidies and it was determined
by the state legislative could
afford a certain amount of
medical care.
So I have for instance other
employees that comes in and her
co pay fifteen dollars because
that's what the state determined
her income could support but I'm
expected to turn around and now
tell her I also need three
hundred four hundred dollars in
gross receipts tax hirshabelle I
don't do that.
I can't do that that doesn't
mean that I have to find ways to
take that out of my budget which
takes away from my ability to
retain and recruit professional
staff you know put back into my
rooms for my children
educational supplies safety
bill.
We have those too I'm so we're
hoping that house bill one
thirty seven allows that person
to come off of us as well would
make is that many people aren't
I think there are some that do
pass that on to the families so
this is in some areas creating a
burden on the families and a lot
of times a barrier to care and
we are trying as a state to
eliminate those bearings
especially for most vulnerable
children so that they can have
access to high quality.
So we're asking not to support
house bill one thirty seven to
create carrying funding.
Thank you Angela welcome he also
present no Mr chair thank you
very well to the committee for
all those aid support of house
bill one thirty seven both in
the room and online please raise
your hand and we'll start here
on my left hand side with the
lady that would run this agency.
You.
Have.
H. M..
But.
Hi.
Access.
Have.
Workforce.
So.
Okay hi.
Sure absolutely at my programs
there's about two hundred
families.
Which ninety two of them are New
Mexico pick gate and then we pre
K..
We have to pay about fifty three
thousand dollars in gross
receipts taxes.
Which we have that we have to
take it out of the budget and if
this will H. B. one thirty seven
process we can put it back to
teacher salary benefits in the
classroom.
Are we Senator about a hundred
twenty two thousand in that
check and assistance to and we
buy a home within two thousand.
The last in gross receipts tax.
We see we go.
Most of the time we charge that
the gross receipts to the
families but we see that the
needs of the family is forty
cents when you're ready is that
single mom with an infant she
and she just came out of at the
chin and how may this so as you
go here on her first job so
we're not charging the a hundred
and twenty dollars in gross
receipts tax money to catch so
at by pressing need to be one
thirty seven the beneficiaries
would be the children the
teachers and at the in the
community not that those the
hundred that is that and I
wanted to the families are
paying like eighty dollars per
on for months.
So that when we go back to the
families with to fight the
inflation right now we go back
to the to the quality of their
lives thank you so much and I
hope you will just for one
thirty seven thank you next.
That.
Thank you members of the
committee Mr chair members of
Canadian thank you
Representative the not for
bringing this up again my name
is Barbara limited Rowe I am a
private provider in Farmington
I've got four centers and have
been doing child care for twenty
two years
I am highly I urge you to please
support house bill one thirty
seven for several reasons number
one being in regards to the New
Mexico pre K. tax paying
entities like myself are at a
disadvantage.
Mainly because the contract that
we signed with the state state
that we must adhere to the same
scope of work and standards but
the reimbursements are the same
however reimbursements are the
same but tax paying entities
must pay gross receipts tax back
to the state in Farmington we do
have one of the biggest tax
rates in the state my program
pays back approximately ninety
thousand dollars a year back to
the state for my contract that
money could be put into my
program with taxing entities in
our contracts the budgets that
are approved we are given very
little wiggle room and most of
the time the only wiggle room is
salaries so in turn in essence
my staff are are paying the
price and the teachers that had
to hold licensure have to hold
degrees are paid much value
lower a lower value in my PED
partners.
Number two regarding child care
assistance the secretary has
stated several times that she
rolled gross receipts tax into
the a new child care cost model
however we do not believe that
is correct
if so there would be two
distinct reimbursement rates one
for non tax paying entities and
one for tax paying entities
right now we are all paid the
same rate so my child care
assistance right I'm modest role
that cost down to these low
income families.
So number three we're only
asking for a tax exemption for
child care assistance not on our
private tuition this presidency
taxes passed on to like I said
those low income families
utilizing this program this
exemption will help are already
struggling families who are
working and or going to school
thank you for your consideration
thank you next you want to leave
our house bill one thirty seven
percent of.
Is that a one online I H.
patients.
Good morning with us.
Good morning good morning
members of the.
Many my name is David and I'm a
small business owner so in two
thousand my mother opened a home
daycare and called it will be
take care I she's very excited
for her small business however
this small business came with a
small burden which is the G. R.
T. tax I she knew she could pass
it on to the families however
she decided not to pass it on to
the families so she would do it
herself.
and sometimes having to borrow
from local title because we have
enough and could not cover the
gross receipts tax
she she did this for many many
years
now twenty two unit to twenty
two years later I followed in my
mom's footsteps I own for
learning centers down here in
the southwest and I do not.
Has did here to Texas with
disabilities because I know what
a burden it would be for my
family's not only to pay for
their co pays but also to pay
for the G. R. T. taught some
type of that
I live in some important Mexico
my dear to touch right now is
that eight point four three
seven five percent and again
it's one of the highest
And I wouldn't have the heart to
pass it on to the families that
I see struggle to pay the rent
to pay their bills and to buy.
thank you so much and I.
Thank you for.
Okay thank you the next can't
Christina good morning.
Good morning and Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
thank you so much for letting me
speak then my name is Sandra
partner and I'm executive
director of you can't early
childhood center in Albuquerque.
I'm interested in is the oldest
license five oh one see three in
the state of New Mexico and I
would like to speak on behalf of
this bill and strong support of
this bill and twenty eight years
and early connotation and I've
seen it taxes passed on the
family I've seen the burden that
it it those families have
needing those rates but I know
what the money does in a program
when it's not being reverted
back into houses and within my
own accredited program as well
as tax repetitive programs that
run the biggest difference you
see is and how you pay your
workforce and how that works for
supports classrooms
and so it additional staff
additional materials the
training the impact of this bill
on New Mexico on early parent
education will be significant
and so I just.
Please ask that you vote in
favor and I appreciate your time
and have a beautiful day thank
you Christina next shorties
George good morning.
Hello you with this.
In order to that's what.
Byron morning.
Mayra hello you're on mute.
Okay well
no not tomorrow
this okay very well let's go to
those in opposition of house
bill one thirty seven in the
room and online these raise your
hand in the room yes please.
One juror the school board
Mexico which short
Thank you for your war field up
and and raising
this is really for the issue
this is on the wall though that
we.
Champions for five years we are
of the last twelve years the
race on the
And.
So what we have rules.
For providers.
You also.
Of those laws alright that.
Thirty million dollars.
For our.
For the last twelve years to
stay
right.
A tractor I think that is
really.
Is.
Of this a lot of that
is.
Is
that right.
I think that's a question with
the department and work product
and nonprofit providers are.
Is that.
And not for profit should be
worked out.
Actually they should be worked
out I work.
Lots of industries in which
nonprofit and for profit
providers and services.
If we don't we need to our
meeting all of the for profits.
This this is taxes if we did
that we would.
So I just want.
Rules.
providers in the industry and we
really hope that this is all is
a.
Thank you anyone else in
opposition in the room online a
lot.
Okay very well it's going to our
committee for some of this and
Representative what that is.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative and then a
question for them I have a
couple questions so I can better
understand what we're what we're
dealing with here how many.
The for profit childcare
businesses exist right now in
our state.
Thank thank you Mr chair
representative artists.
Unfortunately we don't have that
information
well I appreciate we've now
heard some of the questions or
concerns potentially raised by
the agency a significant concern
I've had is that they don't have
the capacity to tell us what
this industry actually looks
like over years I thought that
would be a pretty
straightforward question like
where are the where the numbers
who's doing what and what part
of our state what County we
don't know that.
Mr chair representative we know
why we don't know that is there
reporting on Mr chair and
representative I'm not sure I've
been asking that question for
several years
again.
We I'm I'm grateful and and
didn't in our committee we get
also its analysis we have two
different pieces of committee
analysis we have a majority
minority in office we have
agency analysis that was
provided or wait and these are
all estimates based on who they
think might be out there and
they're using things like well
the boys and girls club is
always a nonprofit or to to
there always nonprofit so
it's unclear to me especially as
we've been pursuing this effort
over many many many years I'll
why they have not been able to
come up with the tracking system
to understand their provider
types and categories.
Thank you Mr chair
representative.
I just wanna clarify for my for
my brain I'm right now only the
nonprofit for profit businesses
that get a state contract from
ECECD's.
Hey G. R. T. on the award amount
Mr chair and representative
these privately operated
business owners are paying to
your TV all of their services
what our bill does is to say
that we would eliminate the G.
R. T. just for the contracts
they have with the state for
those families that have gone
through an income based
assessment deem to be eligible
for some
child care subsidy that they
would on that the only G. R. T.
limitation would be on that
money those dollars they're
getting from the state to serve
New Mexico's kids thank you Mr
chair representative do
nonprofits pay any G. R. T. Mr
Chairman representative they do
not so when I heard the agency
in the secretary of state over
many years that she increased
rates to include the question of
G. R. tease given that they
don't know what kind of provider
types out there and that every
provider of was given these
important and and.
Somewhat substantially based on
different types like we were
care otherwise
All those rates went up for
everybody so again the privately
operated facilities
our our meeting the same
outcomes including some of the
folks we had joined us today
Angelus child care centers are
five star centers which is a
pretty outstanding feat.
Miss daisy in southern New
Mexico in some part because I
start centers so they've been
doing that with less dollars.
Thank you hi Mr chair members of
the committee Representative
and also this is for a state
funded pre K. so we want to be
clear what we're talking about
you know state contracts because
that is the pre K. pays a
standard rate for per child for
that purpose and that's to
public schools nonprofits you
know tax paying entities like
myself but again we're still
subject to G. R. T. even on
those requests so we're having
to find state funded pre K. to
three and four young children at
eight to nine percent last.
Mr chair representative
government expert thank thank
you for that that's really
helpful for me to frame this
anyone Mr chair anyone from the
department here to talk about
some of the
contradicting ideas we've heard
that department is actually
building this into their cost
estimate.
Is there a vote yes
Representative here in the
audience the CDC CDC nobody came
that's just one more quick
comment you know I thankfully my
children are out of the.
Years paying a lot of money and
I did and my children went to a
knee on nonprofit center it made
a huge difference for me when I
when we have three pre K. early
pre K. and pre K. really made a
difference for for me my family
and I continue to live in the
early childhood education desert
in talks there are very many
providers so I think anything
that we can do to ensure that we
can create incentives
I suspect that thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative
Townsend.
A lot.
Yeah I are.
The.
The office.
Of.
For the fire or.
I understand.
Percent.
Right those two.
Yeah.
In the.
Our state.
Only.
That we are.
The act for that yeah Mr chair
and representative Thompson in
the impact of this bill the
implications of this bill yes we
are only attempting to eliminate
the G. R. T. on the the
contracted services that these
providers have with the state of
New Mexico I would argue that
all kids in those centers and
facilities would see a positive
from that including those that
are private pay families because
that means there's more dollars
for these incredible business
owners to put into increased
wages and professional
recruitment and retention and
like my experts shared more
dollars to buy in education
materials and other things I
would say they'd have an
indirect indirect benefit but
what the providers have asked
for four years is at least on
those state contracts that they
not be paying G. R. T. back on
those dollars again the law does
not prohibit that from passing
those up to your TV rates on to
families but in many situations
that would be several hundred
dollars a month for families and
like my experts have helped me
understand over the years for
families that might have had a
co pay of less than a hundred
dollars for for kids.
They can't afford several
hundred dollars a month and and
that means some families when we
asked where these kids and why
haven't they shown up yet is
because they still can't afford
it and those kids might instead
be you know with a neighbor or
someone popping in after school
when a seventh grader is taking
care of some toddlers because
again some of these centers have
had unfortunately to pass those
G. R. T. cost on to families and
we'd like to limit that.
Chairman representative it would
be interesting.
The hello yes Representative a
lot of the of the fellows of the
federal tax burden is paid for
by the industry the statements
that right now the would be able
to identify balance of.
Families in that world.
Mr chair Representative what
I've shared is that the agency
has not been able to provide
that information over years and
before we've had issues with the
F. I. R. where it's not been
separated and you might even see
that the information the
secretary provided estimated
that this question could cost
sixteen million the FIR said
thirty four again these numbers
are are pretty wildly different
but I just got a fact is was
there I didn't see that our our
our friend here an expert in his
own right Mr thought as has
joined us so I'm I'm glad that
you'll be able to find some
clarifications on there and
today.
Yeah.
There.
Yeah.
Heard from the sponsor I think
on Wednesday or I I think of
last week and so we actually
worked on this all weekend
trying to get some some better
data and and that fire will be
updated to reflect what we
worked on this weekend I think
we're actually narrowing into
much more like a ten million
dollar impact to the general
fund a similar impact local
governments and we were able to
get the data on not for profits
versus for profits we we found
that about forty four percent of
our providers are for profit so
that's helping us narrow down
what the bases and I think
you're right that we can see the
total market share the total
economic activity related to the
secretary but it gets tricky
being able to narrow down
exactly who would qualify as it
as it receiving a grant or
contract from the state and
that's where we can run into
some issues but I think we're
we're pretty happy with where
we're coming out at about ten
million.
Make.
Made by the industry.
Mr chair we were coming up with
maybe closer to combine G. R.
T..
Closer to sixty million this
again when capture all of them.
Thank you Mr chair hot off the
presses with.
Legislative staff working on
weekends.
To tell is that for sure thank
you chair
At eight.
It's still properties that we
come in the committee with the
F. I are the top five percent.
And
where we're at.
That we're leave without.
And I don't know.
Childcare if there is.
You got to get two years out
here.
Can't or is.
Our our providers in the state
and so I I I struggle with that
I'd like but it will.
Without regard to.
The status of your.
We'll be interested to listen
addressed questions that thank
thank you representative
representative about the.
Thank you to the sponsor for
reporter for all the experts are
helping us deciphered childhood
education in our state which is
two point
I know we don't know the number
of child care facilities in the
state their private interests
that we have an idea of the
number of the percentage of
young kids that are utilizing
subsidies do we do that.
Mr chair representative that I
need those.
Our record in the last counts
that.
Apartments was somewhere around
twenty thousand children.
Do we know what the percentage
is Mr chairman thanks for.
Representative.
Mr chair representative you mean
the percentage based on how many
children are in early childhood
centers yes so twenty thousand
out of how many.
And Mr Mr chair representative
I'm here is to stand is only two
providers.
School doesn't necessarily
receive child care assistance is
we can contracts so it whether
it's nonprofit to work for the
center that is the childcare
subsidies that's those around
the twenty thousand so those are
the ones that are and community
based whether that be not.
And I would I think the
overwhelming majority of kids
and families in New Mexico
accessing the services right
that have some kind of subsidy
they have to yeah well and.
Mr chair representative it it
depends on where the axe to be
honest I'm down down south where
I'm at I'm I'm a hundred percent
subsidies Appleton Senator order
three hundred and my children
receive these please Mr leader
that was on welcome she's a
hundred percent subsidies I'm
off work for.
Thank you madam chair thank you
based here and thanks for for
that that's the anecdotal is
pretty true across the board I
know that when we were expanding
ECECD are a early childhood care
and education budget we want to
capture as many children as
possible to encourage the use of
early childhood centers because
we know that the benefits to
children and families are
exponential as they get older
and enroll in these programs and
I I know this is the answer you
can't do that either throw it
out there just in case because
do we have an idea Mr chair and
and and and vice chair of the
number that provide early child
care education between the ages
of three months and two years.
Mr chair and representative I
don't have an exact number but I
do know that in the last
committee hearing that
kallikrein State Land around the
budget I'm it is one of the
lowest percentage that within
that.
Thank you so thank you Mr chair
the witness or expert everyone
for this information that is all
right those are kind of your
your we confirming what I
assumed in my experience Inc in
the system I will say it again.
That three month to two years is
very critical areas it is very
difficult to start the service
for a number of reasons and I'm
sure we'll have a hole in the
bottom of the day but that is
very difficult and we also know
that our population is likely to
decrease as a state over the
next ten years as a census gross
and we are aging population so
we right now from my perspective
from hearing what you're telling
me need to increase the number
of students are utilizing these
and increase the number of
people that are can have kids
and still have jobs so that's
what I'm seeing here I'm I'm
curious if in the future as we
look at this if the spots would
be open to sunset on this and
and the reason why state that is
that I know is we look at
economic development drivers we
look at sunsetting you know
incentives on that can encourage
behavior that we want to see I
brought forward to myself and I
I think that you know in so many
ways we should look at early
childhood education as
incentivizing the state because
I don't want to call it moms I
think it's all parents but I
will say it does affect moms
returning to the workforce and
how much they're able to
contribute to our economy
centuries of the sponsor maybe
Mr chair would be winning what
are bots are on sunset
potentially with.
Absolutely thank you Mr chair
representative throughout the
like most everything we do in
this committee today will add to
the temporary table and we will
continue to advocate for the
inclusion of this policies at a
tax package at certainly as we
have conversations about our
overall tax philosophy fund
there's something I'm open to
I think what's interesting here
as we often say if we and I've
done it myself if I brought
bills to extensive and says to
to to add more years on to those
deductions and we often see
speaking about pretty massive
industry if they don't have this
they're gonna leave the
heartbreaking part for me is
that our providers are doing
everything they can every day to
invest and stay open and care
for little ones and be part of
the early childhood beginnings
of our families so I I'm
certainly open to that if it's
in line with the other kind of
consideration for putting that
into this package it wouldn't
want these providers to be
singled out because frankly
they're not going to go away and
an offer and to threats that if
they don't get these tax
incentives they're shutting down
and so I don't I wouldn't want
them to be singled out or
treated differently up because
they don't make those kind of
threats policy makers like us
they're doing everything they
can to stay open not loudly
they're just asking for the same
dollars to get those incredible
outcomes for our kids.
Thank you Mr thank you for that
sponsored I blast and I'll just
mention here you know I I will
say that my County six we only
had enough child care for six
percent of the children before
the pandemic I don't know what
it is anymore time and so it is
a is a dire need is that my
child care provider was the
first person I told I was
pregnant so that is the
situation parents are facing
right now thank you thank you
Representative Chandler.
Thank you Mr chair.
I'm concerned about the policy
so let me explain why Mr chair
and that is.
I don't know what other.
Industries are I don't we want
to call it activities business
activities that are out there
that have contracts with the
state some of which are not for
profits and some of which are
for profits and I'm trying to
get my head around the long term
implications of this car filed
and how that would impact on
other contractors with the state
that provide equally valuable
and you know what necessary and
important services to families
or you know that's where I'm
coming from and so I really
would like to understand that
better in terms of president
otherwise next year we're going
to have quite a litany of
people.
Walking in and we're gonna be
having a lot of presentations
about how this is unfair because
of this yeah and so that's my
only concern obviously at
variance supportive of all the
work that you're doing and I
appreciate the value of the bill
Mr chair but I think we need to
be thinking globally when we
talk about some of these things
Mr chair and representative
thank you Mr chair
representative and I might ask
for the folks sitting behind you
thirty we could drop that.
Well there's a wall behind.
What was that.
I think this is a really
important point and something
that we've considered I think we
also heard some of this raised
by previous committee members I
actually think what we need to
focus in on here and why I've
been so invested in this effort
over many years it's we're
talking about educational
services we're talking about
early childhood education and
it's always felt a little off
putting to me to think that
we're yes because they're
privately operated businesses
these are service that has been
tapped like other services in
our state especially we change
the name to G. R. T. to some
kind of other tax but.
This is these are educational
settings with educational
outcomes and benchmarks that are
well established by our state
and by our new and and beginning
state agency so we have seen in
other states and other industry
like healthcare where those
arguments always being made
about what would taxes the
nonprofit providers or should
the nonprofit providers pay
taxes like there I think
healthcare is another good
example about where this is an
ongoing debate but here for me
this isn't about just a valuable
service that both contractors
I'm on the private side and then
nonprofit entities so what part
it's about educational services
specifically I think it's a
really important question I
think we should always be
talking about what president we
set.
For me this is in line with the
longstanding conversations we're
having about early childhood ed
and outcomes and the significant
billions of dollars of
investments that we're making in
that field thank you.
Yes Representative no Mr check
you Representative okay.
Thank you Mr
come with this I'm gonna commit
this is from a different angle
as a mayor.
As more in my town we had twelve
million.
That number is down to local
entities and I think the what's
that that
Maybe I misunderstood but but
the secretary had two options
there that may have come for.
no Mr chair and representative I
was saying it's real and
significant that the entire
that's not been updated yet has
a number that's much higher the
analysis provided by the agency
based on their estimate and
without them knowing how many
nonprofit entities they actually
have they were one was twice as
big as the other like I'm I'm
acknowledging that we are hard
at work it figuring out data and
apparently it's been years in
the making but that we don't cap
say with confidence that we know
the cost of this okay thank sure
so my question is how are we
going to make a local entities.
That's why construction and I
realised thirteen million
dollars or whatever that number
maybe today after they work this
weekend.
How do we make that whole.
And what we do do we go back in
and next year is Representative
Chandler said we are we had an
individuals in the Swiss cheese.
And so my concern is for the
local the state wants to give
two minutes ten million dollars
a that's great but at the local
entities that can be significant
and probably most of this is in
the Albuquerque and Los crucis
anyway but I'm concerned with
the smaller entities so thank
you Mr that's all Representative
Harper and.
Thank you chairman vice chair
activist you this morning so I.
I think there's maybe just that.
A little bit of confusion on
what this actually does actually
does two things like to just
kind of walk through make sure
I'm understanding it properly.
So the the first.
Saying this does it says
receipts from the Office page
one item a receipts for the sale
of child care assistance
services.
By a taxpayer.
Pursuant to a contract or grant
with ECC.
Are those receipts tax.
Well.
I understand and use that.
that when you apply for a
contract or for a grant.
We're not.
That is not permitted to put
gross receipts tax in.
As part of the dollars that are
covered by that grant.
So that's kind of the.
The heartburn is that.
The grant is for a certain
amount that you can include the
gross receipts tax in that grant
and then.
But I I read in the comments
from the CCTV is that.
They.
To try to help the the providers
this is on page two of the FY
are towards the bottom it says
to try to help providers of
because this is one of the.
One of the complaints one of the
critiques that the CCD have
received yes as our State
feedback stakeholder
roundtables.
That's a the collection of these
gross receipts taxes rates on
the level playing field.
Between the for profit and not
for profit and so in response to
that.
They've included.
Gross receipts taxes in their
cost estimating tool.
So it says here so when they're
doing a contract for a not for
profit which is not subject to
gross receipts tax.
Sounds like they're right it's
probably for that contract is a
little bit lower.
And then and then for those who
are for profit the contract rate
is a little bit higher price you
pay its share and Representative
Harper your logic.
Sound smart and I would I have
also seen for many years that's
what they were doing but in
fact.
Every provider is getting the
exact same reimbursement rates
so while they continue to assert
that they've done this in the
cost estimation models they have
not shared data with the chairs
of house appropriation or the
chairs of Senate finance they've
not sure that
The methodology as to which they
would have done that with anyone
at LFC and finally they made the
decision to continue paying
everyone the same rate so
something is amiss here I would
like mixer to just explain
briefly that there are different
rates established for different
categories of care but all
providers are paid the same on
those.
Mr chair representative program
so as Representative revenue
mentioned we are all given the
same right the only differences
in rates go to for instance if
your home based provider verses
the aid program like my dad.
The lady there are fluctuations
in range for those differences
but when it comes to
you know as nonprofit that is
the exact same as me facilities
same serving the same children
services are reimbursement rates
are the same.
So chairman and vice chair thank
you for that so.
What I'm hearing is the state at
the bottom is two from the CDC
is not correct.
That.
They say that the gross receipts
tax and their cost estimation
model that that's not correct.
Mr chair and Representative
Harper it would not go as far to
say that that's incorrect but
they have not demonstrated how
they've done not if they did in
fact use that as part of their
cost estimation model again and
again that increase.
To everyone because we continue
to see that.
and what I've learned from small
business owners in my district
for example is this last
increase came out I believe in
July of twenty twenty one about
eighteen months ago
the increase they got her child
and again they get paid
differently for a newborn the
ticket have a different rate for
a school age like after care
kind of program but across all
of that the range they got that
we're supposed to include G. R.
that we're set up to fact to
include consideration for G. R.
T. but also wage increases and
other things didn't even add up
to half the cost of the G. R. T.
they were paying on a monthly
basis so again if that was that
to happen and it wasn't enough
it didn't meet the full G. R. T.
and it was a increase for all
the providers out there.
Okay so so chairman and vice
chair thank you for that so so
the first part of this bill.
Sounds like
There is a problem here that
actually could have been fixed
our attention we could be fixed.
By the CDC the adjusting our
rates
is not.
in that place and this proposal
could potentially fixed.
Tions.
Okay.
Thank you for that the second
thing this does page two the
section B. three.
Seats are for profit
prekindergarten services for the
sale of those services.
Be deducted so of for profit.
Service to a family they would
no longer Charles receipts tax
for the cost.
They would still rate process
use tax when they go on by.
Yeah whatever is needed to run
the operation.
Those that purchased the surface
pros receipts tax in this.
That was interesting to me
chairman and vice chair because.
the decided to structure
themselves as a for profit.
And the destruction of sources
and not from.
So why are you.
Why.
Are we.
That choice.
Are we then wanting to extend
the same.
Nonprofit
benefit to them decided not
structures and.
Mr chair representative her for
I have intelligence Mr chair
representative program my mom
started this is twenty three
years I was act went into this
because before she started her
program she was an educator and
a different program
and when I look back at what she
did and I look at when I
actually I have the ability when
I have that same month that
comes into my office that says
the special legislative my part
as we intend to kick you out of
my.
I have the ability to have one
or to pay their.
If I was eighty at nonprofit
would have to convene a board we
have to get permission I would
have to do act I would by the
time I couldn't help that mom
she would be living in her car
with her children that is my
personal reason why I have to
continue to state as the for
profit that my mom is that this
because I've seen the good that
I can do when I'm able to do it
and get it helps me start my
families the way that I intended
to carry on with my mom's
always.
Mr chair representative I would
just not at I would just add
that that I've never understood
these these small business
owners as trying to get a
benefit that someone else has
but really just us we're doing
everything we can to meet the
standards and outcomes from the
state because we want to run
high quality programs and
they're just asking for the same
resource on the state contract
dollars to be able to get those
dollars back into their their
staff and their classrooms.
And Mr chair representative I'm
sorry I just wanted to on on the
land three it's talking about
pre K. contracts and that is
something that we cannot pass
down G. R. T. cannot be passed
on to families that receive
those services it's right in the
requests that those are that we
have to pay just show to clarify
for the difference between
childcare subsidies that in
statute right now we are left
passes on to families even
though many of us don't but the
pre K. contracts we can't.
During the thank you for that I
did not realize that the
speaker.
So this is only the.
For.
Services pursuant to a
prekindergarten act which cannot
pass.
That helps me understand
Thank you that's correct that's
correct.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Representative
vice chair of the Mr chair
I would like to do everything in
my power to help kids and that
was one of the things that I ran
on when I the even though I
don't have any kids I do have a
lot of family in New Mexico
One of the things that I don't
see it FIR which kind of
concerns me and that no.
I would like to support this but
I also need to do my do due
diligence Representative and up
Mr chair representative vice
chair
and I have some questions about
anti donation and I don't see
any reference in the FIR
regarding anti donation and I
have dealt with many many
nonprofits and and for profits
in my career
and I just need to ask the
question if we are not violating
the anti donation and up to the
state and the place that you
know we don't want to be and I
know that there are ways around
that Mr chair of and madam vice
chair
but I don't see that discussion
in here and I just have to raise
that issue because if I don't
then I'm not doing my job so I
just wonder if you can discuss
that it's similar to the the
concerns Mr chairman and madam
vice chair that Representative
Chandler released.
And I know that in
Some of the contracts that we've
done in the past we were able to
maybe charge five dollars or pay
five dollars
to get around that question but
I still.
Thank you Mr chair
representative but it's my sense
that that issue hasn't been
raised in these FIR is there any
of the committee announces that
we have in front of us because
it's it would not be considered
something that would.
Something of concern I'm very
better worse than this we've
heard including from on our
different folks that have
brought their depicts extensive
expertise to the committee there
are G. R. T. deductions all over
New Mexico I said it out loud it
will continue to see that
sometimes whether or not you
have it here to deduction for
your car about your industry
based is based on who you're
lobbyist was and what
relationships they had at the
time
I'm proud to have worked on this
for many years understanding my
my deep understanding commitment
is that this would have an
immense positive impact on the
kids in the center is whether or
not they're they're on its USD
subsidy or whether their family
has the ability to pay for that
but this does not come up as and
chanted donation issue because
of the ways that we've
structured our G. R. T. T.
deductions generally on the ways
that those have been designed to
give a tax policy or tax
incentives to business owners
are taxable entities in the
state.
Mr chair and Representative vice
chair I guess I need to have a
better understanding from a
legal perspective because if we
are at in fact giving something
to a for profit entity
I would like to have a legal
sorry you're standing at that Mr
chair because in the past and my
understanding is that anytime a
government entity gives and
Representative I I I hear what
you're saying but I just need to
be clear about that.
Mr chair so if I could have some
maybe somebody come talk to me
about this or give me a better.
Sort of feeling that we are not
violating interrogation I would
really like to have that Mr
chair and and Representative
vice chair thank you.
Thanks committee with what
Senator Mr chair and actually
see the I don't think this is a
question just on this bill but I
G. R. T. deductions generally so
maybe we can arrange for every
presentation out to talk about
how the overlap or fabrications
exist or don't with G. R. T.
deductions and that'd Division
close look forward to getting
that on the agenda
Representative just got.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Last year.
To for profit providers.
On probation providers.
Provide services both under
state contract.
And for profit.
Mr chair and representative got
generally yes but again
depending on what part of New
Mexico you live in and what
communities you serve we know
that across many pockets of our
state
there are providers that are
open to whatever family might
like to bring their children to
that program but overwhelmingly
especially in reports of real
New Mexico those families are
eligible for subsidies so it's
not often a policy of of the
program operator to say I only
take these kids I only take
those kids but by default it
happens that the kids in their
program in many parts of New
Mexico are all we're
overwhelmingly on kids that have
qualified and their families
have been eligible for the
subsidies.
So Mr chair and vice chair.
Show and in those circumstances
it's for profit.
I believe that was represented
some time the.
State contracts.
Included right ownership if you
will for G. R. T. there is some
question as to whether tech not.
You
too.
Kids in these programs.
And for.
Providers being paid under state
contract.
The same as the kids in private
Hey.
Or just private pay.
G. R. T..
Mr chair representative I can
tell you nine private pay which
you don't need but they do have
that fall off of child care
assistance that I have it is no
where near the cost that the
child care assistance contract
gives me so for instance my
right right now for an infant a
hundred fifty three dollars a
week and that includes maybe our
receipts tax because again in my
community just because they
don't qualify for that doesn't
mean they can afford Act
themselves so oftentimes we find
ourselves in I'm taking a bite
at a big reduction in
installation for those children
because the family have really
afford that either New Mexico I
think what makes and that
they'll very neat to me is that
our industry is very different
we're talking about creating
barriers for families to access
cab when we're talking about she
our team in our program so if I
were to turn around and I want
to pass that you're T. which I
legally have the right to do and
most industries do the impact
that tax on to Weber's receiving
those services if I were to do
that I would be creating a huge
burden and a huge barrier to my
family's been access to care
because they cannot afford a
three hundred dollar bill tax
bill every month to continue
services so I think that's what
we're trying to ask for help
with because at this time those
are two options either me in the
program I want to take that out
of my budget which takes from my
ability to support my staff and
my program or may pass it on to
that family cool the state is
already set to act for those
type of.
Hospice care but those are the
only options we have.
Okay for some additional clarity
Mr madam chair.
Can you give me an example of a
child in your program.
That is.
Three years old.
On
I am program is consequence of
the state contract what do you
all the state for that child.
Mr chair representative it's.
Fort St a three year old child
the end result trials and that
would be.
Okay and again it's go by a
range of start so our of my
program is a five star the
highest quality program so it
would be at nine hundred and
twenty five dollars is what's
the state would be reimbursing
me for that care for that child
and so if I were to turn around
and passed the eight to nine
percent tax to the family that
would be what they would pay in
on is the nine twenty nine and
ninety nine in Los crucis is
eight point three two one five
percent so I'm sorry I'm not
familiar with the cost because
again I don't pass the line I
don't know exactly what it would
be eight point three to five
percent of nine hundred twenty
nine dollars.
And are you allowed to charge
your trees on.
Additional G. R. T. overstate
remarks.
Mr chair representative we are
legally allowed to pass that on
to that family but most of us a
lot of us don't some of us right
now do because we can't afford
to take it on ourselves but
legally we can't pass that on to
the family but for instance as I
mentioned I have state and
another four of which is I have
another I keep thinking of her
because she has four children
under the age of forty
and friends and the infant is
one thousand five hundred twenty
dollars she has children to
consider to economic judgment
golf and she had spent eighteen
months
old
and she has a two year old and a
three year old and so
she applied for child care
assistance and it was determined
by the child care assistance
that that she did not have an
income that supported a couple
she had no public come did not
support it.
But I would turn around and I
would have to have her eight
point three to five percent on
somewhere around three thousand
dollars every month three four
thousand dollars every month she
would be responsible to pay if I
chose if I chose to pass that on
so for instance thank you Mr
president she wrote it out for
us that inmates with because she
has to each item would cost a
hundred and seventeen dollars
and eighty cents she has a two
year old ninety one dollars and
and eighty four cents actions of
three yearolds seventy one
dollars and sixty nine cents you
would be responsible for monthly
even though the state determined
that her income did not even
supported called.
And.
Mr Chairman that last year could
we could we get the same
information.
For.
A youngster under I.
Mr chair and representative that
we much harder to do because
every programs that their own
right for for private pay and as
I mentioned I for an amendment I
charge a hundred fifty three
dollars a week but I included
that includes the G. R. T. I
don't charge on top of the one
fifty three but every programs
at their own rates for private
pay so I think that would be a
little harder to.
Yes Representative when.
Hey guys it's sorry yes so it
it's different because we set
our own rates for private pay
that range that is given to us
by the by the state subsidies
that set by the state.
Mr chair.
Last year and export.
What you're right the problem
week for.
Previously discussed three.
Mr chair and representative
right now for a full time and
three year olds my right is one
twenty three a week and that
includes the G. R. T..
For more.
That family is the.
I want to.
Yes there.
A little less yeah around share
I am unfamiliar Mr chairman
again I'm one hundred percent
yes you do we don't really have
families and.
So.
Such a big discrepancy between
present the state requires.
Switched reimbursement the.
Significantly higher.
Can you give me a justification
chart that describes of course
Mr chair representative that
discrepancies because the cost
of care far outweighs what our
families can afford.
So it cost me way more than I
can passed out to my families to
operate my business to pay my
professionals to operate at that
quality it is far greater than
most Mexican families can.
Show would be fair to say Mr
Chairman chair of the state is
subsidizing private.
Was just significantly
increased.
I am much understood
contradiction.
Mr chair and representative I
think it'd be fair to say that
providers are using their rates
and and whether they come from
the state or their private pay
families they can to build
programs that quality but yes I
think it's it would be fair to
say that there certainly
bringing in more revenue every
month and figuring out how to
move that money to cover all the
kids in the classroom and all
their programming and operation
cost every day so yes it does
not I've never heard explained
as a distinct budget for like
these are private pay dollars
and somehow
those would cover the cost of
private pay because they don't.
Mr chair representative I
understand the question now and
the answer is is Mike programs
run off the entire budget that
comes in whether that be from
the state whether that be from a
private providers two you know
my provider my professionals to
you know in enforcement
occasional environment to make
classrooms to do although still
yes private page has access to
the exact same quality and has
that and others.
Mr chairman and vice chair and
export.
Who's going to talk to reduction
is.
The state contract much.
Going to go down all of this
sixty eight percent.
Yeah.
All pension providers.
Mr chair representative I'd see
that's the big question in the
room every time we an active
policy like this I trust I very
much trust these providers
across New Mexico to turn around
and use those dollars to improve
the outcomes and quality of the
class and other things maybe
set up so there may be questions
asked about what they're going
to do with those dollars and and
frankly the the secretary the
agency would potentially like
the fat adjust rates again but
so far they're paying the same
rates no matter what the
provider type is I know and it
was giving me lots of examples
of what she would do should she
have those additional.
Lots of thousands of dollars in
her operational budget every
month.
Just got.
Mr Chairman Representative.
Madam last year.
Do we have a.
I am much go on the side for
example the last five years has
they been tricked right and
pretty much static or somewhere
in the twenty can you give me a
percentage increase year over
year for the last few years yeah
what.
These providers the state
contracts Mr chair
representative certainly
the experts you can break it
down of course there's different
rates for newborn care or pre
school care so they'll explain
some of what's happened in over
I would say those rates have
continued to go up because our
state and including with this
governor as a champion have
decided to invest significantly
on access to care for little
ones before they even get to
kindergarten so those overall
we've invested more and we've
expanded the income
qualifications so that more
families are eligible for these
kinds of subsidies and contracts
so we've continued to to raise
both the range and we've
continued to raise the income
level so that more families are
eligible for these care
programs.
Mr chair representative before
the establishment of the
department and the Mavericks and
you guys just legislators I'm in
early childhood it we would go
years without seeing increases
in any of our reimbursement
rates prior to the last
reimbursement rate in twenty
twenty one are increased with I
have in twenty seventeen.
we don't get and adjustment
annually for for cost of living
an active projects with two
thousand sixteen was our last
increase before twenty twenty
one
opting.
To answer a question what is
dollars would go I'm.
Whenever I took over my mom's
business thirteen years ago she
had to retire for personal
reasons I took over I could not
afford to quit my job because I
couldn't afford to pay myself to
my program so when I took over
thirteen years ago I had to work
at eighty I rented a dental
office in my tap for six years
while I also ran my child care
program because I couldn't
afford to pay myself through my
program so what we ask for for
these type of deductions I
assure you I'm we want to go
back into our program we do that
because we're passionate about
it is something we really we we
see we've seen the value you
know long before many have it's
something we we really love to
do so what we're talking about
getting funding like this we are
talking about returning the act
that funding to these programs I
guess that I just went six years
running a program with the oil
painting from that program
because I believe in what I do
and so that's why these dollars
would do it would have
supporting professionals that
are getting their degrees to
teach these children it would
help my families to not have to
pay these gross receipts tax and
it would help them to be able to
have that in their budget you
know returning to that to the
economies where they live you
know putting it back into the
cities I had you know
conversations with the city
council and some part about that
very issue and we would be able
to put this money back into our
our.
Session of pockets which
interact with the back into our
communities.
Folks in the committee and and
and percent of the money should
we have another two.
The here after this and so I
think we've had a pretty robust
discussion of this already so
it's continued but keep that in
mind thank you for your
indulgence Mister chair just one
one more question and COVID and
that is I heard this but I
didn't hear and sure.
The.
Impact on local communities
hello my.
A major.
Which I don't conditions
support.
Mr chair and representative
Scott is not.
Okay.
Mr Chairman just one last
program to.
Sixty eight percent of the
bottom line most every business.
Would be very much appreciated
throughout the story.
So.
This call out to cost me a
little bit.
Local communities have to
answer.
Some sort of revenue stream to
maintain.
Sure thank you Mr
speaker Martinez.
Thank you in the thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative
I'll be I'll be brief I think
this is this highlights the
problem we've had for forty
years with gritted your teeth
there are some entities that we
the one that comes to mind is a
bill that I cared a couple years
ago but medical durable medical
equipment these are.
Exeter mostly rate I believe
through Medicaid maybe chair
there's no way really billing G.
R. T. to those entities and so
this legislature has made a
policy to I think it's an
exemption.
Sure G. R. T. and it's it had a
ten year sunset initially they
came back two years ago the
reporting right we we needed for
the ten years of I don't think
there's a right or wrong answer
here I think what we do know is
that you have a large secretary
of the early childhood space is
running provided by Mr chair
representative of private
providers in the spring
providers or sometimes nonprofit
states and their for profit and
for for for reasons we heard
right the there are advantages
to each of those in terms of how
you deliver services to
children.
As a representative said Mr
chair this will get temperate
tabled I do hope we take a close
look at this because I think
that it
that.
For lack of a better system
we've got a week and I hate to
use the word exceptions but
we've got to make exceptions for
lack of a better system
I appreciate Representative Lara
Cadena being very clear that
this is not one of those
situations where all these
wonderful very and providers are
going to leave the state if we
don't do this like I appreciate
the honesty because most of the
the state you don't get it in
any other industry but we're
told that all the time if you
don't believe in state and.
Really.
The most so I appreciate that
honesty I look forward to to
further debate on this is you Mr
chair.
And.
In this committee puts together
the tax package.
I do have questions that I think
need to be answered before we
move further and and that is
regard to.
Early childhood care
department's position that these
to provide money to help
reimburse but we heard that
maybe that's not supposed to be
happening I'm not exactly sure
how that works but I would love
to hear from those folks as this
tax package gets put together as
to whether or not that
that is happening and and and
whether it should be happening
and maybe should not be
happening.
at any rate thanks for bringing
the bill forward
you know it's a at the end of
the day it's it's kids and
families who who benefit from
the services and I'm I'm
grateful to the good work that
you all put in day after day in
the trenches with those kids
thank you Mr.
We have a gentleman in the back
of I think you will see ECECD
yes Representative he can't wait
that your question service
journeys the microphone please
of the.
Mr Chairman Mr speaker of the
house my name's there correct
and the deputy division director
for the early childhood
education and care department
it's a pleasure to come in front
of the committee I would like to
say yes we did include correct
gross receipts tax for for
profit providers in a cost
estimation modeling that inform
the recent rate setting and we
did additional offsets for non
for profit and government
providers for the same amounts
which is why the rates don't
reflect differences for for
profit or not for profit
government entities and we do
have to look at those right
settings yearly now that we have
a cost estimation model instead
of a market rate study so I want
to get that out there I think
the the expert testimony was
correct the last time that these
entities had a right to just to
post twenty sixteen before that
two thousand and nine four
solvency and believe that if you
have any other further questions
we can go into detail happy to
stand for questions as a
committees pleasure Mr Chairman.
It was our last the question and
so at this point in time that
that that's sees that the
discussion at this point because
with us back anyways we table it
so there wasn't every table.
The second second by because of
a loose any opposition to that
of a table should sing that your
bill's interpretable thank you
yes we have Representative
Harper on house bill three two
three change the name of gross
receipts tax.
Yeah I think one of okay good
deal.
Okay yeah.
Thank you.
Yeah.
All right good morning the
chairman of the committee
members were to do a big.
Your change here.
And I think I'm gonna start off
by.
Saying that words matter.
And maybe call to some of the
most famous lines from
Shakespeare.
Romeo Romeo.
Where for art thou Romeo.
And we all know that Juliet on
her balcony was not us where is
Romeo.
She was saying why are you
called Romeo.
And.
We know from the
that feud between the Montagues
and the Capulets you know that
here Julia says.
You know I will cast off my
calculated amended or or or what
about you casting off your your
logic you name.
And and then at the end of this
another famous line.
That we call a rose by any other
name would smell as sweet.
Right.
But.
What if we call that rules.
Skunk.
It was still smallest suite with
that not be confusing.
Right so words matter.
And the you know the tragedy at
the end of that plays a.
They both paid for the that the
difference of words with their
lives rate lower tax codes maybe
not quite that dire.
but what I'd like to do is let
me talk about this chart here
for me which you all have in
front of you.
This is a spectrum.
Of consumption taxes.
If you look at the four.
Left excise taxes here.
This is kind of a smallest base
rate five percent is what it
says there but these are like
your cigarette excise your motor
vehicle excise your alcohol
these are like taxes the fine on
something so it's a very narrow
base.
Then if you go all the way to
the other side.
You have gross receipts taxes
which are defined on a huge
banks.
Now interestingly this chart of
a few years old this is
particularly by the tax
foundation but to see were New
Mexico Alliance.
Right here fifty nine percent
you look at that
over which side is it no closer
to.
Gross receipts or sales.
It's it's actually much closer
to the sales tax side.
It is the gross receipts tax
side.
And and the reason for that is
over the years right one are
gross receipts tax started in
the nineteen thirties it was a
two percent tax and it really
did tax almost everything.
But over the years we have
narrowed to basis.
And the rate is increased and so
it has been kind of naturally
almost organically shifting
towards the broad based retail
sales tax.
So.
And as we continue to chip away
at that base and address peer
meeting and those kind of things
we will look more like a broad
based retail sales tax.
Okay so that's the gross
receipts tax with the others tax
I mean this bill changes is the
compensating Tax.
Now whenever I talk about the
contacts there is almost
immediate confusion with
workman's comp.
And that's not what this is that
all of the compensating tax is
County other side of our gross
receipts tax if someone
purchases something out of state
that is not taxable and they
bring it over here and start
using it here it is then subject
to the comp Tax it was a way to
keep states who don't have sales
taxes from
you know they were right next to
speak with the sales tax from
avoiding paying that tax to go
across the border by something
sales tax free and bring it over
here to start using it.
Well it would be subject to the
to the comments in tax for every
other state calls that the use
tax which makes sense right if
you bring over here to choose.
So.
that's what this bill does white
winery.
Why do this why go through the
effort of doing this and this is
a six hundred and sixty five.
Page bill.
And there's there's really two
reasons.
the first
is is mentioned in the FIR
actually appreciate this the
Economic Development Department
remembers we talked about this
about four years ago five years
ago and rest up.
And we got feedback from folks
that said.
Our state our state G. R. T.
can often when you're looking at
moving a business here or
looking at New Mexico tax
structure be very confusing off
putting and folks can just
discount coming to Mexico at all
because the here G. R. T. in
their time if they're more
sophisticated they would
approach the economic
development and or some other
folks here.
And say okay
tell us what our tax code we
heard that your team is yeah but
you of these exemptions
deductions and credits so it
really puts you know much better
putting
yeah we got we the and J. two
but this thing's the try to
track them but.
Really it's kind of hard to be
sophisticated individual and and
and entity income asking
questions.
So part of it is.
we want to not have that
documentation being the strong
you know
the other.
Main reason is we are not a true
gross receipts tax anymore.
Right here in states with the
sales tax find their base and we
have to provide our base and
their defined differently so
this is not we're to call sales
tax in fact the tax foundation
says that we have a broad based
retail sales tax they also have
a gross receipts tax.
All right.
The last thing I'll mention is
not kind of the history of this
bill so it rest of about four or
five years ago the house the
Senate or agencies we all agreed
that it would be good to rename
these two taxes we had a big
bill we dropped it it made it
through the first couple
committees and then the tax
secretary came and sat.
This is gonna be really hard to
implement and we're just about
to do house bill six change are
listening for you know internet
sales you know this is gonna be
a really hard time for the
department.
Can you please wait a couple
years to do this.
And of course I very much
support the department love the
work that they do and support
that and and secretary is doing
a great job there so I said yes
certainly pull the bill.
And I waited two years but it
was still just not a good times
were implementing now these
major changes now four years
later.
Talking with the secretary.
You know it it'll still be a
challenge to implement but this
is a good time to do it and so
that's why we brought forward.
I do have
we did just get the FIR from the
tax department right late Friday
night and had several
good changes.
And so I talked with the chair
this morning what I'd like to do
members is all how mention
quickly what this amendment will
do but I'm gonna ask we don't
take action on the bill today
that we just have to Scotian and
then when state I commend the
bill and we can take action on
it that we have with us time to
review the demand tenants in
good shape it's alright madam
chair thank you Representative
Parker.
Listening other places
I level presentation of the bill
we will also here at the high
level.
And that's that are coming that
given yeah we're if we have time
we'll go out to public comment
and then we will resume the
discussion and take action.
Three twenty three hopefully at
Wednesday's meeting.
Thank you thank you madam chair
all right so I will finish my
just mention the items that the
amendment will do.
first it'll push the effective
date out to January of twenty
twenty five so right now
effective date is January twenty
twenty four sort of push it out.
An extra here that will have
that as at the request of the
department.
Correct one topographical error.
that is in the bill.
that's matching the F. I. R. it
adds this we're not a temporary
provision.
That says no public or private
contracts need to be amended
based office change that if it
says gross receipts tax in the
contract will be deemed meaning
against the sales tax.
to also provide for language
that all the G. R. T.
improvements that have been
enacted and contacts of an act
by counties and you do not need
to go back out to the voters do
not need to be taken action on
by the by the governing bodies
will just be an automatic teams
change to the sales tax and then
also be a temporary provision
that says wall TRD is up when
they come in all of their
changes to Jan Tax no
documentation over this year and
a half.
That all the places were
references gross receipts tax
it'll be team to meant to be
meeting sales tax the same thing
with the compensating tax to use
tax so these changes are really
designed to make this transition
happen more smoothly and to
avoid any conflicts that we
happened during this transition
period and the last things
apartment mention of this will
take about three million to
implement.
And normally what we do is we
work with House Appropriations
to have some appropriations to
the tax revenue department
contingent upon Legisla-
particularly those passing and
so we'll work with
chairman small to make sure
there is language in house bill
two for that appropriation if
this if this is passed and
signed into law.
With that I will stop for
questions.
Representative Parker.
We are ready to go.
How many.
Right those today and there.
Thank
you.
My apologies.
Public comment if you would like
to speak in support of the three
of these reserves.
It doesn't look like we have
anyone weighing in in person we
will go to still do you have any
days I don't have my glasses on
to the back of the room.
We do not we do not we always
start.
Wholesaler recently.
Right here many of the classes
in case.
Let's go to the face in on
seeing that has the range to
begin.
I'm here please please send
me yourself and for your
comments.
Hi good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Dennis hall I'm speaking
today on behalf of Grover
Norquist and Americans for tax
reform in opposition to this
substantial tax hike on vapor
products.
The science shows that does is
it is the most effective
treatment.
That is when I'm not bill yet we
will it's time to get their next
we are still on house bill three
twenty three Representative
Harper.
we'll go to opposition if
there's any opposition in the
room.
The committee up Representative
long is Representative partners
explanation the amendment
yes Representative
recommendations we're neutral on
the bill very concerned if we
industry and that all
agreements.
Referendum.
They can be with.
So as long as the amendment
reflects the recommendations
after a usual.
Well I know your reputation
maybe proceed your name will you
please you are able to the
agency believes yes yep
Opposition online again I'm
sorry someone else in the room.
To
Joke dollars.
The.
Are you having.
And as far as of March this
hello not really opposition
sorry.
First of all.
So that there will be a this.
Representative on these and
other of all of the okay.
As well as this.
In the middle of.
The.
But it's a change their way of
statutes.
Regulations or inspections so
I was.
but that is.
Hello.
But so.
But I think you might be in the
long run.
The latest Office beauty.
Everyone is concerned about.
It was that I see.
This is not the.
It was.
As I understand it.
The.
Sure we have this weather of.
This bill.
Bill one that the credits.
Or
inductions.
The this is this bill.
That would this
is an Mexico the.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you for that we have
someone here on the left hand
side.
What are your Mr chair.
Eight
You know I.
Most of the bill says yeah we're
going to change the names and
sales tax but I was a little
concerned that any explanation
uses the term retail sales tax
yeah.
Well I was I was a and that
implies who is your.
That's a lot on and so
if this is Jane and then we're
Navajos that if this is a movie
for a sales tax retail sales tax
will leave on the point of sale
of that that would be that would
cost us hundreds of.
dollars.
yeah
to.
Over that as well.
Thank you anyone else that would
like to speak in opposition Rio
Arriba your own soon these these
are not now.
Carl.
These yourself and for your
comments.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee it's Leri
Sonntag here I'm speaking of the
individual that part of the New
Mexico business coalition also
better together New Mexico at
the to see but I'm speaking
because I work with a lot of
different businesses and it's
very rare so appreciate the bill
sponsor who this establish that
these one of the foremost
experts on tax policy with very
rare that I would disagree but
in this case changing the name
of our tax situation I would
call gross receipts is just
putting a band aid on a wound
that is not going to address the
underlying oil and.
That would cause more
complications putting the.
this bill off right here
certainly would be warranted
because there will be a lot of
confusion for those who are
trying to deal with the
structure that is gross receipts
tax as it was mentioned by the
sponsor is not true we just
gross receipts and crosses over
into a sales tax changing the
name to sales tax also doesn't
fix the complexities that
businesses will have to deal
with.
so I appreciate the effort of
trying to change the fact that
we're the about the only state
left in the United States that
has a gross receipts tax simply
changing the name doesn't
address the problem whatsoever
and so for that reason I oppose
this bill thank you.
Thank you anyone else that would
like to speak in opposition
we don't have anyone else in
secret.
That concludes public comment.
So as Representative Harper
shared he would like to have
some discussion today and then
take on this bill given that it
is.
I will go to a committee for
conversation and discussion.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and Mr
chair.
And Representative for bringing
this bill.
Could you share with all of us
what the hallmark of the sales
taxes.
So madam chair and Mr chair
representative Chandler thank
you for that great question.
So.
In general a pure sales tax
which by the way we don't have
any in this country taxes only
the final step of the
consumption change so when you
stick your fork in the meal when
you buy your iPhone.
that final sale is what is
defined as if your sales tax.
But chair and representative I
think this may be the point that
you're trying to get at all
states find their sales tax
differently.
There is an issue not in your
head nose.
Well let me maybe I was too
broad to my question madam chair
so under a sales tax system is
it not true.
In virtually every state that
calls or sales tax a sales tax
the consumer is responsible for
paying the tax and what it in
our system we have a G. R. T.
that the the seller of the goods
is responsible for paying the G.
R. T. there's a big difference
between a sales tax and gross
receipts tax so chair and and
madam chair.
That is.
Not quite perfectly correct.
So every.
Gross receipts tax is not
defined by who has the onus of
paying the tax.
The gross receipts tax based off
of the gross receipts and in our
state we decide the onus will be
on the seller.
Mostly so that we could tax the
federal government staff but
that is not the definition of
the gross receipts tax in fact
there are sales tax we are still
staff.
Mrs on the seller and would not
be strange for us of a sales tax
of the onus on the seller.
Mr chair madam chair I I'm glad
we're gonna be talking about
this because I've looked at a
list probably produced by the
tax foundation that has a long
list of states that have a sales
tax and my recollection is Mr
chair and representative that
nearly every one of them has the
check by who pays just the
purchaser of the bill it's not
the seller of the goods now I'm
sure Mr chair and madam chair
that there are exceptions that I
don't disagree but I think the
large majority of states that I
looked at during rest of time
was that generally the large
majority of states the sales
taxes paid by the purchaser of
the services or goods probably
goods because most states don't
even tax state of services so
second of all I'm concerned
about
the federal government we we do
call it the gross receipts tax
to distinguish ourselves from a
sales tax because the feds have
challenged successfully in
imposition when it it's the
purchaser of the goods and at
their federal government
building the purchase of goods
so I'm concerned that many
people in federal government
study Shakespeare.
And they're gonna start asking
us for
for that definitions and so on
and we're going to start getting
hassle Mister chair and and
Representative by the federal
government and that could be a
big problem for us in terms of
revenues and fights and so on
and so forth with them that's
one of my concerns so soldier
madam chair
That is a great question of
course I've given that a lot of
thought having dealt
I think with you quite recently
on on some issues with our
receipts tax and federal labs
and how we how we pay.
I want to make it clear that.
A sales tax the definition does
not include who pays.
At a gross receipts tax
definition does not include who
pays it.
That that is something that any
state can define.
And just because we change the
name of a tax.
two more actually reflect what
it is does not mean we have to
drive all the other states.
I'll give you an example Texas
actually has a gross receipts
tax.
They call the franchise tax it's
a one percent tax on all
business transactions.
Ohio also the gross receipts tax
they taught the Ohio you know
tax
They don't call the gross
receipts tax but that's what it
is because she caught the gross
receipts tax.
But if we are to be
intellectually honest and
consistent with the definitions
and rose being a rose.
The changes that happened over
the years have put us much
closer to a sales tax and gross
receipts tax.
And every state can define what
their base is at who has the
owners of paying.
All the states are sales taxes
the pyramid.
There's permitting the almost
actions because they defined
basically.
And this bill doesn't change
that the base that we've defined
just changed.
And having the onus on the
seller in the sales tax.
Although it is not the norm.
It's not strange and I I do not
believe that would raise rental
accident with that with the
feds.
Mr chair I think we just re.
Thank you very much for the
discussion I predict members.
What what.
Okay.
Back to the.
Back then to house bill one
twenty four I I text the
representative Thompson she said
she's getting right present it's
an education so she can make it
Rep I I text Representative
Ferrari and I haven't received a
text back so
This is rolling that I don't
know what else.
It was time years well and and
and not keep everybody but
that's nothing.
And and and I people to stop I
