There.
Representative Hernandez your.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative accord  yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative right
Representative Serrato your.
Representative Townsend.
By Dana.
Chairman thank yeah.
We have a quorum thank you again
for making at this point does
this online well.
The agenda here it does not
reflect that we do have houses
that.
So last week so well actually
yes.
This is the very good so Sanchez
expert witnesses on their way so
with that being said we're gonna
go to house bill sixty nine it
will best and it changes
Representative October the
fourth thank you Mr chairman and
I have with me my experts from
McCorkle he's on the board of
directions the Albuquerque
regional economic alliance and
chairman CEO and co founder of
Sandia science and technology
park development corporation and
so he'll be right expert you'll
see a few words want to get
started but just to give an
overview of the V. sixty nine
the angel investment tax credit
as amended we removed the refund
ability that was originally
included in there are I know how
much so my colleagues I
appreciate that.
And and what we have instead is
a bill that would extend the
angel tax credit from from
sensitive from twenty twenty
five to know twenty thirty and
increasing the annual aggregate
to five million from two million
dollars you know we believe this
works hand in hand a lot of
other efforts we've made to
increase business and support
entrepreneurs in our state and
you know looking at our venture
venture funding that we included
through NMFA last year we feel
that this will really work and
how those and make sure we're
supporting on turnovers through
every step so that their
remaining in New Mexico and
headed over to my experts to
McCorkle to speak a little more
that thank you and thank you for
allowing me to be here Mister
chairman members of the
committee
This tax credit bill.
Focuses on investing in New
Mexico start up companies by New
Mexicans.
And create long term permanent
jobs in New Mexico this money
does not go out of state this
money is is the best investment
That the legislature in the
state of New Mexico can make
because the jobs created by
these start up companies that
are funded by angel investors
are the best paying jobs that we
can find in the state we started
the science park in nineteen
ninety eight there's now we're
three thousand jobs in average
salary in the science park is
ninety eight thousand dollars
these are the sorts and kinds of
jobs that are created through
angel investing angel investing
is not unique to New Mexico all
states have some sort of angel
investment tax credit somehow in
fact reef refundable and in
some are not show.
You couldn't do better for
creating quality jobs then
passing this investment tax
credit it allows for growth
through the year twenty thirty
and we have seen growth over the
last few years in angel
investing I'm happy to answer
any questions that do what may
have thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you chairman quick briefly
just to close out along the same
lines as this record was
mentioning I was at a lecture
with the man and an angel
investor and we're in a very
competitive space right now for
these dollars as we know there's
a looming recession and angel
investors are going to be very
specific about where they're
investing their dollars there's
a ton of it of of interest in
New Mexico because of our our
national labs because of our
entrepreneurial history with a
lot going on and this is really
going into by more dollars into
the state and with that we stand
for questions very much that's.
All those in favor of house bill
sixty nine
at eight eight eight five.
You know online support.
L. A. wanted opposition.
It's not we want to live
okay with the committee
questions comments from our
committee Representative we're
able to.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Serrato I just
have to say you had me at
Sherman McCorkle
I was with them many many years
in Albuquerque.
Economic development and data.
True enough seventies stellar
stop supporters economic
development for New Mexico and I
just want to commend you Sir for
the work that you've done over
the years thank you Mr chair.
As with the there's not.
Thank you Mr chairman.
In the FIR or.
Chair of rules.
Question marks with respect our.
George to extra good tax policy
and one of those was audit of
the jobs created.
Since inception of the program
just the state to
Mr Chairman representative Hey
comprehensive audit of the
consequences of what we do for.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for the question
within the typical tax the
valuations we do know that over
I think the the average that
we've been spending is going to
million of the two million
aggregate so far and those
elements I'm not sure if they've
gone more in depth and that.
So Mr Chairman representative we
don't know how many dollars.
All.
All to this probe just I don't
believe so.
Okay Mr Chairman representative
just.
One last comment on one hand.
The state is promulgated tax
policy to.
Reduce or eliminate capital
gains.
Exceptions.
And folks who invested in these
top companies.
I'm not looking for.
Force capital gains.
So what we can do with this.
I would urge is to consider not
taking away.
Capital gains on because they
or.
Thank you Mr.
Representative Townsend.
Yes very thank you Mr chairman
of.
And if there is a site that.
What.
Stop and go on and see exactly
where the.
have been utilized for.
I don't believe so thank you
thank you Mr Chairman
representative for the question
I don't believe so when I was
look like going through the tax
and revenue departments
materials on angel investment
it's more mostly about
attracting angel investors more
so than about the number of jobs
and created but if I may on that
point and and also to
Representative Scott's point
looking at national data and
other states places like New
Jersey places like Minneapolis
these often are by and is it in
here as well is often bipartisan
efforts because they do see an
increase to the state for
initial investment and an
increase of of the proliferation
of of high paying start ups.
Representative that was my point
it would be a.
Thanks to sell.
Projects
Bill the state.
As the years that you thank you
bye thank.
Representative Chandler.
Thank you Mr chair.
I would like to have more
information about the
responsible concerned about that
there's a provision in the FIR
that talks about the anti
donation clause.
In addition I'd like to
understand better why we would
want to send a check to
investors out of state thank you
madam chairman thank you thank
you Mr chairman thank you.
Presented we had we actually
amended out the refund ability
in the last committee and while
I would love to have more
conversations with many of my
colleagues about it aw that is
not for today eight hundred and
thank you thank you very much my
questions answered.
Representative by Joan thank you
Mister chair and good morning I
just want to clarify for myself
and the listening audience today
what this bill actually does
just very clearly to make sure I
understand it I also the same
question as Representative
Chandler and wanted to clarify
that and do that was omitted out
in the first committee the
commerce committee so really
what you're doing because this
all when I first picked this up
look very familiar to me really
all you're doing is trying to
extend the sunset on legislation
previously passed and enacted so
it currently sits to expired
twenty twenty five you're trying
to move that out five years to
twenty thirty and then secondly
you're raising the cap from two
million to five million that's
all you're doing this
legislation thank you for ending
the settlement by street that's
correct okay and thanks I also
had the concerns about
personality so glad to see that
we're not having that discussion
today thank you Mr chair thank
you by over it's going to by
Chairwoman tables thank you
thank you Mr chairman
since this well Representative
has some history can you talk
about some of the success that
this happened due to this bill
thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative I'm
gonna head over to you Sherman
and within this record on a
moment but I will say that this
was initiated by a former
representative with all Culbert
in many ways she she was a big
piece of why we have Angela
busting so so much more in the
state that we did before so I
really you know my colleagues in
either Sanchez will really stand
on her shoulders of encouraging
that kind of investment in the
state I would head over to Mr
McCorkle could talk more about
it.
Mr Chairman representative
Just two or three examples.
There's a company that.
Can now made a contact lens for
a.
In perfect people.
At least this is something
that's never ever been
scientifically been able to be
done and tell two years ago
it is waived Din√© corporation
they're located in Albuquerque
the.
Initial technology.
Three three technologies ago
actually came out of state India
The now
Have produced their first ten
machines that can manufacture
these unique unique contact lens
they've raised about three
million dollars total
through three different rounds
of fund raising the initial
money came from New Mexico
investors and there's no doubt
that this tax credit was an
important part of that they have
currently about eighteen
employees
Once production steps up where
they're producing ten machines a
month
will we'll see forty employees
fairly quickly
There's a company that.
That has a new and different
imaging approach to brain
trauma.
They are now marketing in all
fifty states they've raised
about two point six million
This is unique there your
intellectual property is very
solid
brain trauma imaging is used in
in hospitals everywhere so the
market is very large once again
this is a very small start up
company I believe as of today
the only have seven employees
but their five year horizon is
to have over fifty.
Another company this is the last
example is gunshot detection and
lockdown service
dishes for in fact there are two
issues schools have eagle
technology has the the gunshot
detection in all of the school
buildings in our teacher
as we know it is sad as it is
the reality is that we need
gunshot in detection and and
lock down.
This company originated in in
Albuquerque
it's raised.
Two and a half million in the
last three years.
All of these companies were hurt
with COVID.
Question do you know business
slow down or stop during the
COVID
The eagle technology shares
seventeen employees all of the
all those wages are
substantially higher than the
common wages
Last year they did about one
point eight million in sales in
twenty twenty three their
expecting between twenty and
twenty five million in sales
they will also grow to fifty
employees those are the kind of
examples that this very yup
angel investing is the first
money in.
back in the day they were sort
of kind of a joke at the first
money and was family friends and
tools that we change the name to
to to angel in investing.
Just to make everybody feel
better thank you Mr chairman
thanks thank you Mr I have a
that thank you Mr chairman and
thank you for that answer so
when you get if you were if the
businesses wanting to apply for
and investment is it's.
Do you see a regionally do it
how do you take those request.
Mr Chairman representative if a
company wants to apply the the
go to taxed Representative.
they have to show that they are
headquartered in New Mexico
and that the majority of their
employees are New Mexicans
that's that's how they can
qualify then the angel investor
must show proof of the
investment
and that also goes to taxed Rapp
the investor must be accredited
investor which means that they
must have a net value of in
excess of one million dollars
excluding they're all.
So all taxed Representative for
them handles both sides of it
it's usually a forty five day
process or something like that
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr chair thank you for
Representative Harper.
Thank you good morning chairman
good morning forty three to see
you both and that our first
commend you on removing the
Senate Bill Oddie I know that
that would enhance the
utilization of this
but we have to be careful you
know we have very few refundable
tax credits so I'm grateful that
we've we've made that could
change.
And I I think I'll just ask.
if it's appropriate chairman I
think this would probably change
the FY are the fiscal impact of
this bill and.
The Jennifer from LESC here I
don't.
Do you if if if I can ask you
chairman level up.
With the responsibility would
being removed I imagine this
decreases the cost of if you and
the team and have a look at this
yet to see if
what's the new impact would
potentially be.
Thank you Mr chair
representative I believe there
has been a new FIR posted I
would have to go back and see if
the FIR the actual fiscal impact
has changed but I would imagine.
That it would break it down
somewhat just if liabilities
aren't high enough to capture
all that credit although a lot
of these taxpayers might be
highincome taxpayers if they are
investors so their liabilities
might be quite high I'll have to
get back to make sure that fires
updated.
Mr Mr chair if I made
Representative it was updated as
of a couple of days ago section
included it has just the
reoccurring words anticipating
nine hundred thousand annually
however I think from our
perspective in the state we
anticipated to increase between
the increased aggregate amount
as well as again a lot of other
efforts what what what we're
doing is supporting businesses
at every step of the start up
process and I think there's a
lot of other efforts that
already happened are continuing
so we anticipate a lot of that
will go hand in hand with an
increase.
Thank.
Will determine you should
question during conversation.
With the insurance.
It Mr chairman I I don't.
Mr Chairman representative Scott
not enough light no Sir I do not
and I I will I some of our with
this is I think we're
anticipating coming later Mr
chairman and representative but
there is the angel group so I
can get some more information on
you they might be on now is into
status going second so I can
find out for you how many we
have currently.
Okay it was questions about from
the committee.
pursuant to the this committee
maestro Mr chairman that we
temporarily table second health
health bill.
Sixty nine as of.
Thank.
Just the opposite
thank you very much we'll be in
touch instrument thank you
thank.
It seems that.
Okay so then that we have we're
gonna move down into house bill
seventy eight.
The Asian funds G. R. T.
distribution subset.
Be intentional morning thank.
You know we hear.
And I have to do my cardio today
no.
Orders.
Chair members of the committee
do you want me to use just like
you no one works as I.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee this is our house bill
seventy eight it does two things
it actually takes away the
sunset clause for the G. R. T.
distribution the should which is
how we find our aviation
department and the department of
transportation and increases the
G. R. T. distribution that the
department does get from a
yearly distribution of two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
I'm a month to five hundred
thousand dollars a month there's
a very complicated
Calculation that's all in the
bill for you I'm not going to go
into that and I'm also going to
introduce my export expert to
you this is right now he's the
director of the aviation
division of the department
transportation Pete if you want
to say a couple words.
Thank you good morning Mr
chairman and committee members
this is a.
Bill what it does is increases
the representative said by three
million totally here the amount
of money that goes to the
aviation division but the
aviation division does is it
distributes funds to about forty
nine airports in the state of
New Mexico so we're strictly a
pass through agency and and see
it has not had an increase in
funding since the year two
thousand and nine she's been
about fourteen years and so has
been an increase whatsoever in
the funding and what's happening
is we've had a couple of factors
inflation and demand going up in
those fourteen years and the
inflation alone has taken care
of approximately thirty nine to
forty percent of the purchasing
power of those funds which have
not changed the.
The other matter is the question
of increase and I'll tell you to
be brief is that we spend every
year Fund passed through for
monies of approximately six
point one million I missed six
point three million per year and
we're actually receiving six
point one million per year I did
some calculations of the last
five years sure getting behind
money wise and we're also having
to prioritize more and more and
more and the different things
that are needed by those forty
nine airports are coming closer
and closer to the present and we
don't want them to get here
because we dealing with your
planes that are landing out
there so those have to be in tip
top shape really all of the time
in ahead of time.
We are.
Thank you Mr I'd like to remind
my colleagues on the other side
of the aisle in twenty twenty I
believe we brought a very
similar bill that was simply to
re up the sunset for the G. R.
T. distribution for the aviation
department there was a very
robust debate on the house floor
about how this method of
the revenue of receive revenue
for the aviation department is
outdated it should be read read
done we shouldn't have a sunset
clause on Department that
depends on
Save up to a department that is
responsible for the safety of
our aviation system in the state
one being sunset into being
dependent upon a G. R. T.
distribution that has not
changed since two thousand nine
my colleagues made a commitment
to me then that we should be
changing that distribution and I
just wanna remind that I brought
my into the deal here I am so
we're in front of you now for
the consideration thank you Mr
chair.
So element in my experience is a
one.
I just have one thing to that we
are the mediation division for
for New Mexico department
transportation so we come under
them but I do want the committee
to understand Mr chairman that
there is no sharing of funds the
department of transportation
gets there funding under
separate statutes and the
approximately six million a year
that the aviation division gets
his under separate status of
there's no overlapping of the
funding.
Yeah.
That Senator questions Mr.
The the.
Of.
Forty two seventy eight as
amended
that has that these employees.
All right.
Is anyone else home life
this.
Anyone in the room not.
What the okay so the committee
for questions the doctor.
The chairman and the madam chair
it's good to see you again
so I just wanted to give a
little bit of context to this
bill those of you have been
around here for a little while
remember about five years ago we
saw this bill.
And we actually remove the
sunset passed off the house
unanimously and just over to the
Senate where they put the sun
back in and
Do not understand at all what
they did that because.
I mean I I mentioned early on
this committee we make sure is
reporting requirements and a
sunset.
For tax credit bills that have
to do is giving a business
benefit like we're trying to
attract a business or or develop
some some such as this
yeah we want them to come back
and show is did it work right or
to the needed anymore does it
need to your new right and
that's not the case here right
this is a distribution to a fund
that funds our airport
infrastructure in the far right
we have chairman and madam chair
we have forty nine airports in
New Mexico is.
And and the other thing although
to you know we talk about you
know why don't we increase the
Medicaid reimbursement rate
because that's just you know
three or four dollars to one
match rate and and helps are are
medically share drive small a
lot of these dollars are used
for federal programs and if I
remember right the federal match
is nine to one.
Right so so if we put in you
know five hundred thousand
dollars in one month you know
you're looking at.
Another potentially four point
five million coming.
From the feds to match that so
so to me this is just a no
brainer to should never of had a
sunset and I hope that the
Senate I mean that just shows
that the Senate doesn't
understand tax policies with
what will is
so I'm I'm hoping that we can
get this fixed this year thank
you chairman right I.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Sure what questions are you.
Representative Harper but I
would like.
To reiterate to.
Are these.
Capital projects.
That are supported by this funds
and would typically run longer
than one year appropriation.
Thank you Mr chairman for to
Instagram.
The capital projects.
The projects actually run
different times depending on
what the project is and there
are a lot of them are brand new
projects if there's an expansion
for example a building of a new
runway or the adding of a new
taxi way right along the runway
and those last depending on how
they're built they could go for
the last five years ten years
one dollars
so the that's the way that those
funds are more primarily applied
is two of those runs way run
ways and taxiways there is also
a great deal of maintenance it
needs to be done because the
runways and taxiways have it
also just like your highways the
the crack and the need to help
you and help there and there's
some shouldering involved in
that as well so so those can run
those are discretionary funds
all of these funds
Representative are funds that
are used in the discretion it's
best to funds by the aviation
division one one of the forty
nine year point needs to we
don't know which ones quite
frankly but we do keep track of
them and and we know when they
need something we will see the
airport again evaluation they
ask for the funds and then we is
specifically allocated to the
maintenance of a specific item
or the actually rebuilding of
something else which turns out
to be much larger in on those
big ones we get the federal
matching funds and the actual
matches eighteen to one just to
make sure that it's a four out
of every twenty dollars we put
up the the Federal Aviation
Administration put up eighteen
will put up one and to sponsor
the City of the company that
owns the airport that's another
dollar in so that you really are
dollars can go up as high as
nineteen eighteen to one it's a
pretty good investment.
Mr Chairman experts.
These projects are to.
Ortiz the needs of their
communities.
The answer is yes and by the
aviation division we have but a
fifty can form which is a list
of things at the condition of
things at every airport of the
ones that we Sir which of forty
nine at this point in time and
those and the federal government
does the same thing so every we
do it once every three years the
federal government does it once
every three years as well that's
how long it takes to circulated
around all the airports so
that's a kind of a living
breathing document details as
the condition of I think it's
around seventy five items that
anyone airport so that we know
the condition what the condition
is from one a check to the next
and we have a person in the
office actually go out to the
airport and look at the
condition of the airports and
check it out and see if they
need something or they'll tell
us to it's it's it's so we have
the Federal Aviation
Administration us and the
sponsors are looking at those
airports for safety purposes.
That Mr Chairman expert at thank
you for this problem.
To this question but.
I've long complained about the
parking lot in the.
At the airport in the capital
city of New Mexico being
unpaved.
And I understand Senator is
significant upgrades.
After we.
I don't believe these forms can
be used for that because I
think.
That is accurate from my
understanding of the way those
things are done if you're
talking about pavement one
parking lot in Santa Fe it would
probably with the pretty much
what our discretionary funds and
the federal government does not
usually match that kind of
project and is well on the
economic development because
you're outside of your plane
area quite frankly so so those
these funds did not really get
involved with that and I want to
ask or staff manager he's been
there longer than I have is that
an accurate statement Mr.
Mister Smith this is down more
and he's so staff manager.
The project requests like that
example of the parking lot Santa
Fe it's not a high priority
everything I have a really see
what starts with the run a line
out.
It's a one I have a good part of
this all the way down the
primary it's an eligible item
is.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
all.
Which is.
Your visitors.
A good first impression.
Option.
In the parking lot
State capital will boost your.
Thank you Mr thank you
Representative they're talking.
Thank you Mr as a new
Representative is a new.
Members of this committee I just
have a question for you said it
was a complicated methodology in
order to get about five hundred
thousand.
And so my first question was
we're that five hundred thousand
come from and my second question
would be is there a better way
to people installation or keep
up so you don't come back and
ask you to five years we need to
go to seven fifty and are they
tied together so thank you Mr
chairman diverted Mr brown.
I need to get into the weeds of
the tax scheme a little bit with
you the five hundred thousand
dollars a month and now we're
getting two hundred fifty
thousand dollars a month and
rescue for increased to five
hundred thousand dollars a month
that that would come from the
general fund and it does not
change exhibit legislative fiat
if you will there is an and this
so that produces would produce
at right now two hundred fifty
thousand a month produces three
million per year separatists
today that's not the SLO bonding
that we get the rest of the
funding is a complicated one to
to Representative was talking
about there are five other
statutes or for other statutes
rather they provide funding that
adds up to a total of three
million so three that we get the
that are guaranteed a two
hundred fifty thousand a month
and three million that very he
can go as low as in the form
millions and as high as up over
six million depending on the
economy those are gas taxes and
gross receipts tax questions
very small questions like one
thousand some one percent and
stuff like that that come from
these complicated statutory
scheme and the staff complicated
statutory scheme is actually
stated in the bill that is being
proposed so that those are the
complications this one is not
just a straight five hundred
thousand dollars guaranteed
every month.
Thank sure and if I may add Mr
chair to that the second part of
the question was is there you
know some other formula that
would allow us to be able to
compete with inflation without
having to come back to the
legislature with our hands open
on every so often and
Representative.
I've always thought that we
should fund the aviation
department which is
solely responsible for the
safety of aviation in the state
of New Mexico if I may emphasize
that should be funded and that's
similar manner to how we fund
the rest the department
transportation through a
developed road funds or other
types of tax that funds that are
not dependent upon sales such as
gasoline tax we used to have
Southwest Airlines and the Hyde
amendment which meant that they
used to buy and head to huge
amount of fuel here in the state
of New Mexico now that that
amendment is no longer in effect
in southwest is not here does
not have the same present we're
not making that much money off
of the gasoline tax anymore so I
have always thought that we need
to take a hard look at how we
fought how we fund the entire
aviation department and it
should be done in a similar
manner to how we fund the rest
of the department of
transportation so as to protect
this very important department
from the
you know the dangers of
inflation.
Thank you thank you
Representative but.
Thank you Mr.
That question is answered my
questions but I would ask Mr
chair that Mr right now pay me a
visit I do have some comparison
with the Albuquerque airport and
I'd like to know a little bit
more about how you guys are
funded and what resources have
so if you could just do that I
would appreciate.
I will pick you up thank you
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Townsend.
We have a question.
Representative Harper said there
was a nine one math you
mentioned eighteen to one match
is it in fact eighteen.
The
With it actually works is that
the federal government which
enough total of ninety percent
of the funding for a particular
project so if there is a a very
hundred dollars the federal
government will put in ninety
Bucks what then happens with the
other ten is the aviation
divisional putting five percent
and the sponsor potential five
dollars in the special put in
five dollars as well some to it
so that's eighteen to one it was
for every five dollars we put in
a with the fits put in ninety
Bucks I think that the result to
be eighteen to one and then the
other I just put in by the way
the actual sponsor on a number
of occasions we will put in the
entire ten percent not all of
them we go on a basis of need
some of the communities can't
afford to put in the five
percent so we put in some or all
of their five percent that's the
way it works so it's going to
very but we do have the
potential and it happens that we
get to an eighteen to one match
not all the time.
Apple.
Means of six million.
Actually just over a hundred.
Then to I'd like to elucidate
that a little bit more some of
the projects as mentioned by
Mister Moran are low priority so
that the federal government
doesn't get involved so from
that.
Average of six million that
we're getting every year we have
to put up a hundred percent when
there is matching funds from the
federal government it multiplies
it enormously but that's not all
of the projects Mr chairman and.
Are these projects the.
Hi how are they do beat up of
the state the cities that of the
forty nine year.
Mr chairman and committee and
Representative Townsend the way
that there is divvied up we have
one word in the statute and we
have guidelines to use of that
word and this based on need some
airports need more than others
for example you have the
important Hobbs well they have
your service there so to Santa
Fe some airports and so they're
going to take what they do
choose more they have more
assets there they need to be
taken care of same thing for in
India to the other end is for
example reserve New Mexico
they're applying the mounted to
have paved runway and it
requires some maintenance but
it's not anywhere near which
would expectativa the airports
in New Mexico with the exception
of the Albuquerque International
Airport to have their own
aviation team so that it varies
as look at the think about size
of the airport and more money is
going to go to them than to the
smaller airports because they
don't use it as much.
So
Chairman.
The masses.
The
historically how much is spent
on Albuquerque verses.
The rest of the state.
The specific amounts we have
spread sheets analysts showing
all of the expenditures dating
back to the beginning pretty
much of the agency I can assume
assume is computing started at
that point in time even before
then so I couldn't tell you off
the top of my head how much is
spent but we do spend an average
in the last five years of six
million statewide and that plus
plus the federal match but I'm
not counting that because we're
we need some help at this point.
Thank you Mr chair.
Expert may have.
This year we're going to sign
for ABC Division last owner for
the state we do not.
I could not get that for you but
I don't know that we don't.
All the other of course.
Thank.
Thank you.
Right it was by we've been.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative.
I thought I understood this bill
until I heard representative
Duncan questions apparently they
were helpful in clarifying to
couple of us I really
appreciated your responses Mr
chair representative about how
you would actually.
Want to see a significant and
sustained commitment to aviation
in part because.
For those of us that have the
privilege of flying Education
it's it's our safety.
Can you speak to why this is the
Avenue you're pursuing to
increase the funding of the
aviation division I'm not
something that would actually in
a clear and consistent weight
move through general funding.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you Representative Lara
Cadena us so this is actually a
long term per project we don't
know why our colleagues from
long ago decided to fund the
aviation department in this way
only they knew their prerogative
but this is what I consider to
be the first part of probably a
multi part a multi part series
of attempting to study what the
best or newer ways would be the
best newer ways to fund the
aviation Department would look
like I'm especially as we kind
of transition away from
you know from gasoline taxes and
Possibly gross receipts tax all
together so we're kind of
monitoring the problem the first
thing we need to do is make sure
that the department is
adequately funded I can tell you
right now Mr chair
representative it is not is
worrisome how under funded this
department is an as but and has
been asking for funds for over a
decade now with no such luck I
can also tell you Mr chair and
representative Cadena as the new
chair of the transportation
committee I am fully committed
to setting the problem over the
interim utilizing of my contacts
with the aviation division so
that we can come together and we
can put together a comprehensive
plan for something that I think
the entire legislature would
feel comfortable getting behind
but it but at this point Mr
Chairman representative there
just wasn't enough time we need
to get the money first I know I
said this last time into the
sunset bill but we are we are
slowly but surely improving upon
the the situation and we I hope
to have a a comprehensive
funding bill in front of you
hopefully next year or the year
after that thank you Mr chair
representative and I was glad to
meet your expert for the first
time a couple of months ago at
my local airport and really
appreciated learning up
About the aviation division I
also have a brand new member to
the tax committee so certainly
walk into that space with a lot
of humility but as a better
understand this bill I actually
don't even if I don't agree with
the referral here because while
we are extending the sunset this
piece about distribution is not
tax policy this to me is a
referral that would have gone
and maybe should go after the
to the Appropriations Committee
where we can have a much wanted
and serious conversation about
the funding that clearly has
been demonstrated needed over
decades so what I again
admitting some ignorance here
when I first read this and read
this quickly and I was looking
at the increase the distribution
of the distribution from two
hundred fifty thousand to five
hundred thousand I was reading
quickly is getting that this was
coming from the aviation funds
and in fact it is going to the
aviation funds from the general
fund.
When I realize that to me I
realize this is not actually a
change the distribution when I
first read it even insure title
for me implied that this is
changing distribution as a way
of changing our taxing capacity
but it's not it's it's actually
two separate things that same
let's extend the sunset.
As a matter of thank you public
policy that we don't understand
from decades ago let's put into
this bill the higher amounts
that would go straight from the
general fund to the CVC Division
you all have certainly convinced
me that this is needed at
important
But I don't so part of me is
like it it makes me
uncomfortable to just continue
down the problematic way I
putting more money in it without
addressing underlying concerns
that this is not a pro an
appropriate way to find a branch
of government so I appreciate
that you updated affected we
pull down special appropriations
and what have probation I'm
fully in support of doing that
again and at this point I'd
support this legislation but I
have concerns that it wasn't
referred to appropriations so
frankly they could be
responsible for having this
conversation that's not actually
about taxing infrastructure
policy thank you for clarifying
that and and I appreciate your
long term commitment to getting
this right.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
that we ask of our staff
Jennifer.
Would would you would you get
that set up up up yes last year
is is affecting at this point
that we have here.
Yeah I was chairman of the
committee what the session more
it takes revenues the one going
to the general fund this other I
it doesn't change the structure
of the G. R. TV or anything
about taxes being.
That the taxpayers.
So this is essentially the one
that we as of the.
The state this will affect the
tax structure and but but that
conversation should loss around
the speaker had at the end.
That where and so
At this point anyway the
question comes from the.
What the budget is one.
We make a.
Just a second
question do that second here
happy to refer you to
appropriations and that's with
the.
I think it's and that's
necessary for going to that that
we have
But on the other end of it there
has also been working on for one
time non recurring general fund
money earmarked for the aviation
True but we really wanted to
tax committee to kind of I guess
we'll find the path are fine the
way the easiest way to kind of
get this policy changed and we
are absolutely open for
suggestions but we've we've been
in contact with the
Appropriations Committee and and
they are aware of the aviation
divisions plight at this point
but I can appreciate you
educating.
This this this bill and leading
in the status of a nation that
this actually doesn't just
affect the tax structure so what
that means that this bit of a
motion of the second
any opposition to that motion.
Saying that it would do passed
house made the difference
because at thank you very much
Mr.
That that house bill one twenty
three tobacco tax.
Representative Ferrary.
No I wasn't paying attention.
And then a.
Check the chains.
Yes.
I didn't get a chance.
Has.
Thank this is.
The.
Representative Ferrary house
bill one twenty three tax back
tax rate and definitions was
yours right.
Thank you Mr chair.
Tobacco tax increases this is
two oh two number two two three
two eight two point three.
Make sure everyone has the same.
And
What it will do is increase the
pack of of cigarettes by two
dollars a pack or as the statute
says twenty cents for each
cigarette.
And it reduces the percentage of
all current cigarette tax
distributions to ensure
consistent distribution.
It also changes the definition
of E. cigarette to a device that
can be used to deliver air saldr
vaporized nicotine to the person
in healing from the device that
includes any component hardware
assessed three as such a
device that is used during the
operation of the device that
does not include a battery or
battery charger.
And changes it also changes the
definition of tobacco products
to include any product
containing tobacco or nicotine
whether natural or synthetic and
that is intended for human
consumption.
Where there's smoke TD to that
sort of dissolved or inhaled and
it changes the tax on tobacco
products to an excise tax rate
of seventy one percent of the
wholesale drugs.
Little cigars are taxed at the
cigarette right and this
legislation raises an equalizes
tax rates across all tobacco
products
making all nine cigarette tax
rates compare apples to
cigarettes.
The reason we're doing this is
this is the most effective way.
to reduce use of tobacco
products when the tax increases
directly passed on to the
consumers in the form of higher
prices.
And it also associated with
attempts to quit smoking
increased attempts to quit
smoking and Medicaid recipients
in New Mexico are offered one of
the most comprehensive smoking
cessation programs in the
nation.
And it also helps in reducing
smoking a Representative
eighteen to twenty four year
olds.
And it's the most and the most
effective target group to
achieve insisting lower smoking
rates in our state.
And with most adults picking up
it happened before they're
eighteen this will help us to
prevent all of the health issues
that a lot of people in our
state are on scene and
considering that ninety eight
percent of adults started before
age twenty six raising the
tobacco taxes can prevent
smoking initiation.
I'd like to introduce line
expert Linda Siegel.
Thank you.
Representative Mr chair members
the committee Linda Siegel for
the American cancer society
cancer action network we
frequently bring these bills to
the legislature
As public health groups the
cancer society the heart
association long association and
other groups we know that
raising taxes is the most
effective way to get people to
stop buying the products.
We've done something different
in this year's bill and there is
another bill which I'm sure will
be here soon.
We're raising the prices.
So that just a pack of
cigarettes is comparable with
other products here than tobacco
products are comparable with the
price of cigarettes and the
purpose of that is to stop
people from going to other
tobacco products other tobacco
products including E. cigarettes
Naft chewing tobacco all those
things that aren't cigarettes
you have cyclical cigars six
federal so if those prices are
high enough to be the same price
as cigarettes Gen that
discourages particularly you
from continuing to smoke or to
inhaled E. cigarette.
And stops them from even
starting in some instances as
Representative Ferrary said that
ninety percent of the youth that
start smoking or vaping do so
before the age of eighteen if we
could start that we can have a
definite impact on the health of
New Mexicans right now in New
Mexico are Medicaid program
spans over two hundred and
twenty nine million our Medicaid
program two hundred twenty nine
million on tobacco related
illnesses and the whole cost of
the state for tobacco related
illnesses the hall impact is
over eight hundred and eighty
million dollars this product
when intended when it's used as
it's intended does kill people
killed over four hundred
thousand people every year in
the United States to kill three
thousand people in New Mexico
and we're not going to be on the
product obviously but the ways
that we can affect people
starting to do this especially
young people is by raising the
price now forty seven point
three percent of smokers are on
Medicaid.
That's that's the number that's
the dollar amount that we're
paying for.
And though the tobacco industry
says it does not target use
units marketing because it can't
because of the nineteen ninety
nine tobacco settlement with
probably forty five states
Evidently they're marketing is
still reaching them.
Because of of the this impact in
New Mexico tobacco industry
spends thirty one million
dollars in marketing and guess
what we spend on prevention five
point two million dollars we
can't compete with that we we
can't compete with trying to
educate people rate of smoking
though it is a regressive tax we
would like to tax them out of
smoking and using tobacco
products thank you.
Thank you in the US.
I just like to add that in a way
it's not regressive because the
people who are low income the
ones who will receive the most
benefits from this increase and
there is another bill on Senate
bill one seventy eight to
Senator Hickey who was also
honored tobacco settlement
Interim committee and this was
Came from our meetings and.
Much needed legislation this
bill will make it so that they
will
Take those funds and put it into
a program prevention programs
anti marketing the different
things that are needed.
Thank you a point that this will
be for the items did you experts
say that this is a regressive
taxes that this is an
aggressive.
Well.
It's not.
Yes if you look at it as taxing
regressive but it's but yeah
yeah yeah yeah no I do thank you
as you all the audience please
all those in favor of house bill
one two three
please visit.
Okay that's going to yep these.
Mr Chairman is available to work
with Mexico which is which over
I really want to thank the
sponsor and and the work of the
interim committee and bringing
this go back again
yeah we're very concerned with
Mexico's higher rate of.
tobacco product use
young people we know that the
price point is the most
important factor in whether or
not young people we'll take up
the cigarettes and vaping and we
also know the New Mexico and one
of the lowest rates in the
nation reserve that so that's
the views of the bill that we
like the most like all wheel we
are specially in pro ridge a
significant increase in the tax
on tobacco products thank you
thank you.
Mr Chairman.
The flames thank you
this is usually
the Sanchez this bill is the one
for New Mexico high school kids
on the surface and that number
is phone lines.
The lotus.
The state taxes I.
And also you know.
These are highlights of this
bill is there are a lot of new
products on the market these us.
G. R..
He is not right we'll provide
full product transaction that.
And you know we're not taxing is
is why is that is this not.
That will.
These are really really cheap
highly addictive and you know
this well you know you can use
those products that troll Act
and then tax them just this so
twenty four.
Thank you next we will support
this bill yes Sir.
So last year.
you're only have.
So.
That is.
This bill is important get
access on I.
Representative Rowe.
After inflation
cigarette use is.
And have sometimes added that
was it.
and.
Hello.
Start date.
Transaction overview.
Sixty nine.
We
started.
I.
Thank you Sir.
That is there.
The
generals.
Action.
Richard this is watching the
contact families.
The.
Of course.
I
Representative.
As.
The center.
The options stop that
I just.
Help but also for the state as
well
The cost is not as.
Station or.
To help us.
All.
Everybody's.
Thank you thank you next.
I was in support yes Sir.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is.
The company I rise today in
support or opposition but we do
have technical issues some of
the company is one of the
wholesale distributors of very
smart growth in the stores what
we also perform part of this new
fund to the state of Mexico by
to see the status of to every
package of cigarettes and so
every year when these tax was
put through the try to make sure
that there's not a tax on what
is about to do additional tax on
the portion of it is already
paid for this spans forty years
we want to make sure that
there's a endorsed this engine
and.
Is because of the actual stamps
find for you know to prevention
of black markets you.
Induction out to fix the status
is it reduced and so we would
like to have that addressed
issue talk to the sponsor that
the funds are there okay with
that we're hoping that this bill
which should be one in terms of
the tax package or action forty
Department with there's you know
with the budget is is the best
that we can get back to so that
Mr Chairman Preciado the
committee's time and we think
about that Sanchez and then once
for their thank you for your
help and support House Bill what
two three it was on life
support.
If you want this issue going.
Okay let's start here yes Sir.
German German.
More often.
By for the judges to some.
Mexico.
Which yeah by.
Right exactly.
That.
Hello this bill.
Goes down pack tax
Representative.
Just ask
that if he does.
That will.
Last year.
From their duties right now to
try to stop problems thank they
don't go out and course of these
laws which were already or soon
opportunity to use our.
You're going to be a live album
surrounding states and make a
fortune bring in trouble over
the cigarette taxes or other
places within a lot of our
acting just on the tax rate
loan.
so if you recall we the
situation tragic situation your
words got so Madam York would
bring in New Jersey and other
places around New York there is
always.
Right.
To stand for the the man was of.
Died as a result of being
arrested for selling single
cigarettes with we would like
our so I it's going on
everywhere right now forty four
percent.
Your taxes like you're looking
for a large.
You're gonna see far more of the
black market you're not election
the results of your you probably
not going to like all of which
should be diverted to try to
enforce the laws are passing as
opposed to doing something about
for right part of being on the
other thank you Mr.
Thank you.
That was the real start yes
thank you Mr chairman.
This for all three of want to
mention to me that this title
right.
Mourns one of more.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee of about four years
ago.
Things you raise the age to
purchase from eighteen to twenty
one but we also the industry
work this meeting we work with
the legislature to galleries the
cigarette tax of thirty
four cents to two dollars so
this bill would double that of
tax increase
just have for years and so the
thing that's a little bit
onerous usually was regressive
tax and frankly Mr chairman and
members of the committee the the
product that is being updated
that we see a dramatic increase
especially and and
kids.
AVO is is Canada's.
And so if we really want to deal
with all of the issues of
additional things like that we
really need to have more
conversation about all the
little problems tobacco and
cannabis we need to maybe talk
about.
Thank you next additional.
Mr chairman members of the
committee lines be able
hi Representative Mexico
trolling or.
They are small business owners
throughout the entire state and
they had a tough for you.
Pandemic hello we have interest
rates of the twenty year high
places for your on we believe
because of those challenges this
portion of the New Mexico lower
income.
Most of our customers are Laurie
for that reason that those thank
you yes I'm good enough okay.
For anybody else in opposition
in online and opposition.
Joanna's.
What a good morning with this.
I think one that.
Good morning Mr chair actually
I'm testifying in support when
they called on support the check
presume faster than I could
click raise my hand so may I
testify in support you're good
okay Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Joanna
Strother I'm the senior director
of advocacy for the American
lung association we support
house bill one twenty three
increasing tobacco taxes are a
win win win policy public health
when tobacco taxes help adults
to quit and use not start it's
widely supported by voters
multiple polls show that voters
on both sides support tobacco
tax increases and of course
it creates revenue for the
state.
Companies and their allies
continue to make false arguments
that taxing cigarettes will not
generate new revenue and lead to
new senator in cigarette
smuggling smoker tax evasion but
that's simply not true in two
thousand ten when the cigarette
tax was raised by seventy five
cents per pack sales declined by
almost eight percent and
increased revenue by sixty eight
percent generating three point.
Generated thirty seven point
five million in revenue for New
Mexico significant tobacco tax
increases always produce
substantial net revenues in
every single instance where the
state has passed significant
cigarette tax increase the state
has enjoyed a substantial
increase to its state cigarette
tax revenues well above what
they would have received absent
any rate increase this occurs
despite significant declines in
smoking rates and tax tax sales
because the increased tax per
pack brings in much more new
revenue that is lost by the
decline in the number of tax
tax.
Taxes do not small retailers out
of business or create a huge
black market again these are
talking points used by the
industry that you the numbers
and create certainty businesses
did not pose out in two thousand
ten and we still increased
revenue by sixty percent today
the American Association ask you
to support house bill one twenty
three thank you thank you and I
also liked.
Okay Robert you with this are
you in are you in support or
opposition.
Opposition Mr chairman okay
good.
Good morning and thank you
ladies and gentlemen of the
committee my name is Robert pool
with fresh picks distribution
we're a local distributor for
the last thirteen years as a
proud New Mexican aid if it's
small business owner I
definitely.
Object against this unfair
taxation you're nearly tripling
the tax rate which I think will
spur black market and for people
to continue to skirt taxes as a
whole people shop online people
will shop in the neighboring
states and will actually lose
putting I think it's an
enforcement issue what you guys
rolled out the last tax increase
there wasn't a lot of
information out there about this
many people didn't understand
that there was taxation on bay
drugs and I think more education
and enforcement for fare
collection of existing sales
would actually increased.
Acts Revenue above just
increasing the rate increase in
the rate will heard the state
it'll hurt consumers so we
object.
Thank you very much for the it
was a lot top tennis job with
us.
Good morning thank you Mr chair
and members of the committee my
name is Tom Hennessey and I run
the brewer oil convenience
stores we're a local New Mexico
business and have thirty six
stores around the state of New
Mexico we've got stores in
this committee when you're
districts in district eleven
thirty three forty five fifty
four and fifty seven.
This is bad tax policy that will
only continue to affect low
income New Mexicans as
disproportionate rate which is
regressive in nature.
The proposed taxes will cost
drugs in New Mexico to be
significantly higher than our
neighboring states the average
pack price would be over ten
dollars in my customers could
save significant money by
getting their products from out
of state resources for example
by traveling to Texas the
customer could save on average
twelve hundred dollars annually
on their product.
This bill will only grow the
illicit market in New Mexico by
making New Mexico the fifth most
expensive state for tobacco
products according to the
McKinsey Center New Mexico
already has a major illicit
market with an estimated thirty
seven percent smuggling rate
which is also the fifth highest
in the nation.
If this bill passes it will only
create for further grow
unintended consequences of bad
tax policy.
These oppose house bill one
twenty three thank you for your
time top it would also let.
Okay.
We do
That that that okay.
The committee up welcome to
contract okay I just wanted to
say that we do have an agreement
on the.
On the amendment to do okay
perfect thank you for some I
list is question within the.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Ferrary and I do
need to pop out to other
committees I asked to jump in
quickly.
You all heard me in the interim
period you know where I stand
because this built in front of
us I think I need to say hello
to be transparent amid concerns
again.
I am absolutely with you of the
dangers of tobacco nicotine I
don't give a damn about the
profit of the industry or the
folks that have profited from
selling these dangerous drugs in
our communities for a long long
time.
But beyond being aggressive for
me this policy is racist.
It does not reflect the
realities of families in New
Mexico that for generations have
been struggling with trauma and
have turned up also it's a
dangerous and illicit
substances.
To move through somehow survived
that pretty horrendous States.
Like I said in the state we
never reconciled our histories
of colonization and genocide the
folks impacted most directly by
substance use and addiction are
people of color are indigenous
people are folks in rural
communities.
I'm a mother of an eleven year
old a fifteen year old and I
said this out loud before like
my kids say we can use the
bathrooms of schools because the
smoke is so thick that it's
unmanageable.
I continue to say I will throw
down for other kinds of
proposals and ideas that could
somehow intersect and affect the
ways young people are getting
drawn into these products.
I'm here to talk today about the
thirty million something spent
on marketing if we could done
marketing on these products in
New Mexico I would sponsor the
bill glad to provide up
alongside you all.
But to increase taxes on folks
that have the least in our state
and Kerry the most in our state.
I just can't get behind that.
My additional concern that
you've also heard me raise is
that I think our state
departments are behind the curve
on their programming pointed out
young people.
I think it's a shame based I
think it's point of the stereo
types at our families I I don't
know a single person that wakes
up and I use I know and love a
lot of tobacco users that wakes
up and say I'm so proud of
myself I can't believe I'm
modeling this unhealthy practice
for the young people in life for
my kids like nobody feels that
way they are addicted to these
dangerous drugs and when all we
do is point out and say tobacco
is horrible don't use it it
means that we are casting folks
that still use it as they are
making a moral failure to
somehow do this dangerous thing
that's been consider of
themselves and their future and
their health and their little
ones.
I think like how do young people
creatively response something
like part of me wishes there was
like a weight we can yes young
this on six other issue we could
like come Pharm.D in people are
using these drugs and likes I've
been there like fifty dollars on
apple cash every month
if we reinforced right we're
making a decision.
You're making a decision that's
healthy and potentially
different like could we make.
I just think there's so much
power in young people and social
influencers and media
influencers like one of the ways
that we can leverage that
instead of shaming families that
still uses dangerous drugs to
actually affirming create space
where it's also cool to just not
do this to not do this anymore
and I think about how quickly
once we had the bill symbolic
people start using seatbelts or
how quickly for most of the
country tobacco became a thing
we don't want to do because that
wasn't cool anymore to me when
we say New Mexico has one of the
highest rates of tobacco use is
that a Medicaid eligible well
yes we also have the highest
rate of Medicaid eligible people
in the whole country.
So to me that's a lot of people
are struggling they're living in
poverty they don't see or find
realistic opportunities for a
healthier future across their
lifetimes so of course those
numbers are high and of course
those numbers have is terribly
situated
I wish I could support this
because your intention is so
important especially for people
again I see you know I disagree
with one of the committee is
that that.
We raise the age to twenty one
that's enough it's not if it's
clearly not enough it's not
working it's not feeling but I
don't think this is the point
either young people are not
supposed to have their hands on
these products and they do
everywhere.
I'm not a fan of the costing
more policing in our schools I'm
not a fan of law enforcement
criminal penalty.
But I don't think yeah we have
the right answers are the right
messengers are the right
policies because this has.
To me not a fiscal impact but
human impact social impact and
it goes back generations to
travel in New Mexico so.
We appreciate your attention I
cannot support this is tax
policy because again most of the
people that I know somehow so
used tobacco products are
struggling with addiction we've
decided that this dangerous
product somehow legal we decided
to other drugs as part of a
racist drug war were not legal
system having channel themselves
in acts of recovery integrating
here.
And we think it's appropriate to
raise the dollar that they pay
part of their survival I just
can't do it I respect you all so
much I know I probably get lots
of hit for this and I'm willing
to not because it's how I show
up as a policy maker so again
keep bringing creative ideas
tell me were ready to provide
marketing tell me that we can do
other things in school so that
we can have different
conversations about how young
people can actively and
affirmatively make choices like
I'm saying maybe incentive
prohibitions on campus we have
bathrooms another place
basically we can go use nicotine
in tobacco so then there can be
different crowds of teenagers
affirmatively using their little
feet to go somewhere where they
don't have to engage in those
products and it's instead of the
thing that happens the thing
that you want to do that you get
to do that but somewhere else
kind of deal thank you all I'm
gonna pop into another committee
thank you Mr chair for allowing
me the time thank you for over
I'd like to respond absolutely
but Representative today that
you are.
Using the very reasons we are
doing this as a reason for that
you are opposed to it we are
doing this to protect young
people because the plasticity of
they're using with their higher
prices down this is a gateway
drug drive sit down as it did
talking about this you went out
for a long time.
This is where young people it
start it will help prevent them
from starting in increased
prices of the building will help
prevent them from doing that it
is a problem in our schools also
will make it so that
African Americans who smoke and
are one of the highest as well
as Hispanic users it will help
them decrease and guide them
towards less consumption and
then also make it so that there
are programs for the smoking
cessation going to the lowest
income lower income I should say
and that might be the users not
everyone smokes but those who do
let them get that support to and
there's right smoking cessation
programs we can those those we
can make sure that they get
those this is something that is
really critical to turning this
around it's not something that
is racist or something that is
going to make it better for
anyone if we don't do this it
will continue this problem the
costs as eight hundred and.
Forty four million dollars a
year in New Mexico that costs as
its taxpayers to.
And so we need to do this so
that we can
it's that is supporting the
tobacco industry making it so
that people will also have that
benefit of reduction.
Thank you for your comment
that's good research and.
Thank you Mr chair.
I'm interested in hearing more
about the fate the piece of this
bill so tell me again if you
will Mr chair and representative
what is it intended to do in
terms of raising the tax on
taping.
right now the vaping product
are at thirty one percent and it
will raise up well that yes my
experts she has those
Chairman.
The bring the tax.
This includes a one I these are
four point five Sierra.
And this is our shows that fifty
cents per year.
That was our I.
And Mr chair and representative
how does that compare with how
we tax cigarettes I'm trying to
get a sense of.
What the parity might be too
that's what I'm trying to right.
Mr chair representative chairman
or.
Director way up here all the
other tobacco products are down
here what this bill does is
brings them out of taxes we're
proposing on the vaping products
are doing tobacco on all of
those is what other states do
charge a percentage of the
wholesale price so this bill
charges seventy one percent of
the holes are price bringing all
the other tobacco products to be
comparable with cigarettes now
the other bill we have doesn't
raise the cigarette tax but then
brings all the other products
out to the current price of
tobacco you for both of them I
believe.
Yes.
So Mister chair and
Representative just for clarity
this one you believe brings it
up to what you're proposing the
new tax be on cigarettes okay so
all right and that is what I'm
just trying to clarify just from
my perspective I have a sense
and I certainly haven't spoken
other members on the committee I
would just want to but this bill
fails
to move forward you have a
backup plan to bring parity to
think things through another
bill is that right correct okay
thank you very much Mr chair.
Thank you that is Representative
Harper.
Thank you chairman and that
madam chair let's go to see you
here at this morning so I I
guess I just have two thoughts
in in person I'm I'm very
grateful for that by your
dentist remarks.
But
I have actually spent a ton of
time looking at the data because
this is fascinating there's lots
of good data.
And there's a difference between
correlation.
And causation.
Right I remember when I was in
New Mexico tech taking my design
experiments Class the example
they used was a.
There is a correlation between
dryer sales in the United
Kingdom.
And deaths in Africa due to
starvation.
Right so you could actually
trend those two things together
and you'd find a correlation I
don't think any of us would
agree.
That is we outlawed dryers in
United Kingdom seven eight are
being built deaths due to
starvation in Africa right that
that doesn't make any sense
right so there's a correlation
but not causation.
And and my analysis of the data
shows.
That there.
Is maybe not even a correlation
between taxing increasing
taxing.
And the usage of these products
by minors.
But I did learn that there is a
huge correlation and I would
propose causation to the anti
smoking campaigns that use of
cigarettes and miners what would
we had all the billboards you
all stop smoking would you have
the the commercials you know on
TV
I mean there's a huge drop in
the use of cigarettes by kids.
And so I I would say that.
and maybe I'll use some of the
data presented here to to to
maybe bring this home what I
heard today Act Chairman
representative was that ninety
percent of folks started
smoking.
And get addicted before the age
of eighteen.
Well they can't legally buy
cigarettes before the age of
twenty one so where are they
getting.
Right so
to me that speaks to.
clearly we have a a serious.
smuggling issue certain the
largest in the nation these
folks are getting cigarettes and
other ways that going to the
store and buying them legally so
I don't agree that raising the
tax will actually have the.
A positive impact on decreasing.
use of tobacco products among
minors now face you'll actually
associate German Representative
all allow you to respond sure
well.
Give us thirty general report
the on smoking concluded that
smoking rates go down when the
price of cigarettes go up
through tobacco tax and both
kids and adults are sensitive to
cigarette tax increases.
The price increases and across
the fifty states with the
greatest tax increases saw the
largest decline in smoking and I
have a chart that shows DEC
first and
Four fifty a pack in youth rate
was five point three percent in
the adult rate went down twelve
point seven percent and then it
goes on and on with the
different states that do and
have increased their rates it's
proven its science based.
And there's no arguing that this
is one of the most impactful
ways to reduce smoking in our
state so specially for you so
chairman and representative I I
appreciate you bringing that
data for example going to the
weeds because.
As a PhD researcher accomplish
no word.
I will say sciences on my side.
And and what I would just say is
there are many things that
contribute to a minor's decision
to smoke and when you do a
sector analysis when you look at
multiple variables you can
determine to what effect those
variables have an impact.
And my analysis including ads
and campaigns to that data we
show a very like I mentioned
it's a very small correlation
very small factor.
So in general is technically
correct there is a decrease.
But huge factors the one that
has the most impact is the ad
campaigns where it's no longer
cool your classmates you looking
at you and like.
That is way more effective at
stopping smoking and.
It costs two dollars more so I'm
gonna go get it from a friend
who's got a the budgets.
And part of the comprehensive
that Mr chair I'm sorry
and representative part of the
funding that goes to department
of health this word
tobacco prevention especially
with you part of what more
funding would go into would be
part of the marketing and
to help work around the decrease
with also the tax increase yeah
so it's chair representative I I
I appreciate understand argument
too but I think that's also not
right because the reports I
looked at from the tax
foundation which evaluated
smuggling across all the states
and so they were number three
shows that we are right now
losing sixty five million
dollars in revenue because of
smart.
I imagine that number would go
up if we double our cigarette
tax Mr chair representative I
don't know how they would get
that.
Kind of information it's not.
You know it it's not tracked
it's not something that somebody
report so I don't know they just
pull that out of the year so
chair representative at the tax
foundation is a very reputable
foundation across the US
we have an awfully talk about
how you could come across those
numbers I imagine there's a
pretty decent plus or minus to
that number but I would see this
direct order of magnitude.
And Mr chair I think I'll just
mention one last thing sure so I
think it's up to the tax
commuters elements of good tax
policy right.
At
I I believe very strongly that
our tax code should not be an
outline.
That's on the high end for the
low in.
Right so right now our our
property taxes are elsewhere in
the lower rates are pretty low
I don't hear anyone rushing to
New Mexico to with your because
of our low property tax right so
we're probably losing some
revenue that would be useful in
other places if we brought the
property tax rate.
On the other hand if we're to
highlight something we could
potentially chase away those
activities right working we used
to be kind of water rolled on
income tax but that has been
slowly creeping up and worrying
that that is now having an
impact on businesses growing
here folks coming here right so
I I really think it was a Kanemi
This Is New Mexico state This Is
Mexico you really just want to
be in the middle of pack.
And that's where we were a
couple years ago on the
cigarette tax
four years ago we raised it by
thirty four cents were not my
teams working here.
But because of our geography you
know we're pretty high and
slightly now totaling it.
I think I heard that were given
out number five in the nation on
cigarette tax.
I just think that's a bad tax
policy and and I'm just you know
could be intellectually honest
here you know we are low on the
gasoline tax we really.
The Republican area want to turn
my Republican card right I would
advocate in both for reasons
actually taxes should be middle
of the pack.
So so just for that just for
that reason alone I think I
would recommend to the committee
that we not look at taking one
of our taxes and making a stand
out like that is an outlier.
This year Representative yes are
you more interested in how that
looks other people or are you
more concerned about saving
lives and help people and also
the savings to our health care
system so Mr Chairman
representative hi take great
offense to that statement you
are implying that I don't care
about people's lives that I care
more about how we look.
Okay that's the staff you know
all for this one I think it is
what we're looking at that tax
policy here and I think it's all
the services part of it so
stable tax stuff and so what
it's worth the state focused on
considerations here so that's
what that is.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative of I
I want to speak a little bit
more about that the black market
portion so you know I myself
started smoking when I was
fifteen sixteen years old and
spoke for twelve thirteen
fourteen years
finally kicked the habit I use
of E. cigarettes as a way to be
able to take my make a team down
to zero and finally just had to
kick the.
The habit of something all that.
But you know how you get on
to talk Instagram and other
social medias and your with that
said I'm still it with that and
I haven't done that for years
but a quick Google search last
night while I was reading this
bill
Shows how easily accessible
cigarettes are to be brought
here at a much cheaper rate
about forty forty two dollars
apartment versus about seventy
dollars part here in person you
would would and electronic
cigarette.
Kids are about half of what they
would be here and there is no
problem with them just getting
shipped to my door if I wanted
to go that route
so I really do think that the
increase in our cigarette taxes
just gonna push more people
especially unfortunately the
younger people that I wish we
could find ways to get them to
to stop smoking it was.
It has I I will have health
issues now because I started so
early
But there I don't think this is
the way to do it I think this
just pushes more of that younger
generation the one that I'm more
worried about to online sales to
because it's cheaper it's easier
to get past and online are you
twenty one button that you have
to press when you get to the
website but there's really
not crazy verification or
verification that you can easily
get through online so in I think
that.
I like the end result of.
Getting kids to stop smoking not
smoke at all or use the
cigarettes or cannabis or any of
that
but I think we need to look at
other avenues rather than.
Raising the taxes that's all
I've got if you'd like to
respond.
Mr chair not a lot of yeah you
don't you don't have to pay I
just wanted to to let everybody
know how easy it was to get
these drugs into our hands at
any given moment.
I would like Mr chair is to say
that I know there's a lot of
people who say they go to the
building and to stop it as a
station that has not been proven
to be true.
Okay what if this is the act is
is being out of this evidence
right I was going to say that as
well it worked for me it may not
work for the next person so
that's Representative drive.
Thank you Mr I have never been
the cool guy in the commercials
back or I'll call of ever.
Grateful for that my wife and I
were in
Our country and in the airport
when we're getting a fly home.
I looked at a partnership rights
we were just kind of window
shopping and audit said this
product will kill you.
I'm all for doing that in the
United States as well.
I've got two questions for you.
You said that it is not
regressive in fact helps the
Medicaid level would you explain
that to me could.
Mr chair and representative
Duncan
I was saying it wasn't I mean
it's seen as being regressive
but it's progressive in the idea
that we're funding will go into
Medicaid we're both low income
smokers would get the benefit
of.
And health care.
Okay okay I I.
Thinking of that district thank
you one of the question that
you stated statistics about
showing that raising taxes
decreases smoking can you show
statistics on the black market.
The statistics are there
available.
I don't think there's any way to
track with the black market.
What reports it knowing you
know.
Thank you Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative and miss.
This year olds.
Yes.
It may.
Appreciated points right.
She started looking page seven
of your hand.
This is that.
Mr Chairman.
Representative and miss work
got.
You.
One for fifteen on cigarette tax
rank.
And then we've got.
You smoking right over in the
third call and Mr Chairman.
Representative and miss a
scatterplot of that is going to.
Sure.
Correlation.
The Twain actual rates and you
spoke.
What.
What is going on here is
something else.
Which I believe this
representative was represented
by Representative Cadena.
And.
Representative Harper.
Could you put your question.
These.
Representative Ferrary.
Mr chair yes just a moment.
Direction.
Mr chair and Representative
stock these are the reduction
right not to use three currently
here.
So if we raise the tax this
would reduce by eight point nine
percent an adult sixteen
percent.
So this is not part of the
right.
Okay.
As a call as a direct
consequence of these taxes and
and chair just a second we're
trying to clarify.
Will give us the.
Mr chair always the microphones
because.
I like.
That Mr spot these are you know
for example the students got on
highest tax.
And they're right among you this
one point three.
And adult additional points
that's not the reduction.
Yeah so the the these are the
current rates as per.
You know the.
The source.
Hello so it is our current
rates.
and then these are the tax.
Okay so Mr Chairman
representative miss clearly.
Better plot to use we're going
to go back.
What are Representative Harper
later yes.
A question of correlation with
respect to.
Surely to questions so something
else is going on in the system.
And.
I only opinion the.
Something else is in fact social
pressure.
Or.
Economic circumstance or the
family history or number of
other factors that would not
necessarily be.
Price of one one last point.
Mr Chairman representative and
miss out number of
conversations with.
The administrators my school
system part of.
And it was represented in
multiple carriers that there is
an epidemic.
In the schools.
White was about marijuana.
Not six.
Do you have any data.
That would.
What if you will.
Marijuana usage cigarette usage
lows affects overuse.
Mr speaker and representative
Scott that we don't have that
information it's you know not
part of our bill since it's been
legalized so recently I don't
know that what statistics they
are already compiling on.
To be able to make that
comparison I just like to add
that thinking among youth is
twenty five percent.
And Mr chairman that mechanism
is available for both locations
which is is that.
Mr chair and representative that
I don't know.
Thank you Mr.
I have a couple questions.
We were before a final.
Motion but it in regards to your
development and I can appreciate
where you're coming from regards
to wanting to
impact the usage of tobacco and
the impact it might have on
societies and so for that I I I
definitely understand were my by
Jones stands regards to concern
I I come from one of those
places that represent a large
portion of of
Maybe America Mexico and I and I
see I see the usage of but the
same time I can appreciate the
uses because I grew up in a
society where tobacco use is
actually appreciate as part of a
culture and and and you know
like it or not I mean that's
just how I grew up and how we
the the the culture continues
and so my question though for
you is if you increase.
The right.
In the state I also have to
increase their rate on their tax
for those that sell on the
reservation or even those this
page.
Mr chair and committee members
yeah we don't have any control
over that.
So they don't have to match at
all the tax rate for the down
but the would be.
wise to do that on their own but
we can't.
Their sovereign.
Okay okay
Okay folks that is a yes thank
you Mr chair preview the time
first and foremost thank you for
your tenacity.
Keeping at a long.
We've talked about this before
you go or I stand on these
issues
I DO want to caution us not to
use the word racist or racism we
we knew we were teaching impact
of that word.
Representative.
I think that as we.
Consider right and I have asked
the question is about more money
for prevention cessation.
Or is this about taxing a
particular industry out of
existence.
Right.
I cut my teeth in this
legislature.
As an advocate for prevention
and cessation of tobacco
products this call.
Representative different
substances that affect our
communities.
At the same time I think we have
to be
we have to be open about.
What the end goal is here.
We do have a three point four
billion dollars surplus.
This is about getting more money
into programs I'm all for it.
Without having to raise the
money from for these products.
At the same time.
To somebody's point up here.
we raised the age twenty one but
kids are still accessing so
something's happening right
probably of the conversation
that the the industry should
have.
looks itself and also with our
retailers on the ground to
figure out why and how that is
because that is a problem.
Up to the earlier points made
you know I was looking at page
seven of the chart you know you
it's it's it's a little bit all
over the place right you have a
mock.
Which has a three dollar tax.
A little over three dollars and
they have a smoking rate of six
point nine percent.
They look at Wisconsin which is
a lower tax rate but then a
lower smoking rates.
So yeah I guess we could
increase that we can double tax.
And I wonder how much our
smoking rates would fall both
for use in adults and and I I
think the answer is we don't
know.
And I see miss I think three
with that I think that's the
crux of this we don't know.
And to the by race point I am
concerned.
About the person who.
If this is their only by.
Here in New Mexico that's a
pretty damn good by half
compared to the others that are
out there.
This is very difficult space for
me to navigate my father smoked
for.
Almost fifty years we just what
you're.
Good on it we just cold Turkey
you just couldn't do it anymore
he stopped.
But it's taken thirty years of
his life yes you madam is here
for the session it looks like an
old man's up that'll.
Right.
Thank you for me.
That's the one last year.
That's one less.
And every time tobacco taxes
increase in the last twenty plus
years it never kept them from
she just went to the cheaper
cigarettes to probably our.
So that's not to say that this
very complicated proposal.
One way or the other should be
tabled action pass I think a lot
of space here Mister chair and
we need to the ranking.
Member of and your tax team are
working on a tax package.
There's always room for
improvement in the tax code
whether it's personal income tax
rules receipts to back drugs
cannabis liquor.
Property.
All the property gets really
tricky it's a point to.
There's always room to improve
the tax code to accomplish both
fairness and equity within the
code.
And then also the social impacts
we want our tax code to help us
on the edge and I would I would
I would highly recommend that
this committee
Look at this through that eight.
Because I think that this
committee has historically done
a really good job of bringing.
Different types of tax policy
together on one eleven.
As a tax package
not.
Willingly kill or moved out.
That can.
The tax package so that Mr chair
I know we know we're running
short of time I appreciate the
militants thank you.
With real quick
I raising this tax it probably
Representative Martinez
Martinez would have made it so
that your father had had quit
smoking thank earlier in earlier
years because it is a deterrent
and it takes a village for all
of us to raise our kids and it
by raising the product costs
that the TIRS young people most
effectively to and that we can
make it so that our kids are
going to using the building for
cigarettes thank you
Representative Castellano.
To try to make a motion to agree
to.
The second.
Okay.
Yeah opposition.
Seeing that think we
