Represent
representative.
Yeah.
Today
looking at his.
Secretary exactly.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Present
energy
credit we.
Okay
this is.
Remember the company
take proper retirement from the
national laboratories currently
result I didn't work out where
we operate our own business.
Good morning chairman is the
committee.
This toward scripted for
protection who purchase it this
isn't
just storage system the text
residential commercial
industrial bill or agricultural
property in mexico
percent of the purchase and
installation cost of certified
system amount of five thousand
dollars
out of the rest
and fifty thousand comparison.
You could have no more than one
system her property.
There's a certification through
eminer the aggregate is four
million in one calendar year.
The the amendment allowed
taxpayers to receive energy
store system in captains credit
after the annual tax credit cap
had been exceeded to claim the
tax credit for the next taxable
year why do we need it we need
to promote wider adoption of
distributing energy system in
the state of new mexico
see energy stories can also be
used as short term back up power
in an emergency and we've seen
that will have people other
presentation talk about that
little bit
in it in just a second.
And
in our house energy chairman
small talked about the use that
the entire bucket of energy
environmental conservation and
renewable energies less than
between five and two percent of
the tax expenditure year of a
year for the state of new mexico
attacks expenditure new mexico
is my newt when it comes to
environment conservati.
Passed this bill and when
getting that's happening next
era energy resources it's a
hundred twenty megawhat one of
its to energy center it's down
by chaperole or some of you live
it currently has four hundred
sixty eight thousand solar
panels in fifty mb of battery
storage so energy storage is
happening in new mexico it's
happening all over the world and
it continues to
grow it was reading one article
said the world energy storage
capacity forecast to exceed a
terror what our by twenty thirty
the terror was one with twelve
zero so that's a lot of what so
i'm in a pass.
Thank you madame chair committee
for all the recent stated
information that the the need
that we have in reaching the
goals that we have with our eta
for our state and the economic
development that this bill
brings as stated we are looking
for a thousand percent growth in
this.
And the need in in.
And I just want to be very clear
that this is something that we
will definitely see in in make a
market for our state so it's up
to us to make the decisions and
to further the growth of this
through this bill thank you.
Madame chair members of the
committee I wanted to mention
and attribute of energy storage
that may not have been mentioned
previously or discussed
representative clearly storage
can capture intermittent
resources such as solar and
wind.
But the benefits of resiliency
and reliability added by storage
in a distributed fashion as well
as the central station fashion
is important for resiliency and
reliability despite the best
efforts of our investor owned
utilities and co ops who do a
great job managing at the aging
infrastructure we do have a need
for resources at the end of
these long lines to support
resiliency and reliability
particularly in cases where
windstorms fires ice storms and
other things take out the
physical infrastructure so thank
you for the opportunity.
Of energy.
This credit was part of HB for
five forty seven that was.
We will go to the audience for
comments will start in person
and then go to those that have
joined us over zoom are there
people who it is there anyone
who like to speak in favor of HB
seven.
This.
Can stay there just please share
your name and keep your comment.
I'm here representing the
chapter or thirty five thousand
supporters I knew with the
chapter so it's a pleasure
meeting this committee for the
first time this morning and we
especially want to think you for
your commitment to climb task
so we're here today support each
b seventy three energy storage
which would enable the on safe
capture
roof top solar stores helpful
store.
And official cases of emergency
but also in allowing homeowners
and businesses to use
we have credits from roof top
solar now it's time to build
storage into the program thank
you so much for your time and we
appreciate your support on this
build
thank you.
Morning chair and I was the
committee my name is the
calendar climate and which
director with constitution
mexico and for reasons the
sponsors and sleed out in my
colleague here support the bills
thank you.
Over
good morning chairman
cards are service in moscow
his household an option during
emergency situations and
building a charge their energy
storage systems during all
conditions also start system
could be utilized resource with
the electric until in the case
of an emergency this could help
electric do happen which piano
works hard every day to prevent
for these reasons you have to
port
thank you
anyone else here
in favor of the seventy three
good morning.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Right we'll go to
like.
Can you hear me.
Randy yes please begin.
Madame share members of the
committee my name is randy's sad
work i'm in the president of
positive energy where solar
integrator in in mexico then
here for twenty over twenty five
years.
Today about less than one and
ten of the source systems that
we sell have storage on them
and much fewer in on the
commercial side so there's three
really important things that
that this does dispel does and
one is.
For those businesses in an ups
move out the ups and downs
of loads and when there is
cloudy
it can smooth those edges out to
lower demand requirements the
second one is already mentioned
back a power in the third one
which is a the self consumption
feature.
That would be used by youtubity
if if they had storage on a
large negative outside is that
it it multiple is the value of
stolen since there's only about
six hours a day of of sign.
Did not plays that by these two
or three times
and extends the value of that
solar to.
To our to the business the
homeworker or
any organization and and so
those things are essential for
for the script transition grade
modernization so I am hope you
are support the bill I have
seventy three thank you very
much.
Good morning.
Madam chair and members of the
committee
we are fortunate to have an all
electric home to have solar on
our rooftop and also electric
cars and we appreciate the
opportunities that are offered
with this bill we do not have
storage but we would like to
have storage I think it would
benefit people like us but it
also would benefit the whole
system and I urge your support
thank you
thank you next we will go to
mike with someone citize.
The.
Good morning I met
members of the committee my name
is michael so that I work for
send one
in farming but i'm sent my
citizens alliance has a dozen
members in northwest in mexico
and were seeking innovative
approaches to energy situations
we are in complete support of
this bill for energy resiliency
as a salad investment in our
communities and a pap forward in
energy transition taking so much
for consideration.
The.
Next we'll go to barbara
california.
Yeah.
Good morning madame chair
committee members and by
retailer speaking for the legal
woman voters of new mexico the
league supports incentives to
develop renewable energy sources
and so we ask for your support
for this bill thank you very
much.
David book.
Hi madame chair and the
committee i'm in live in the
north valley now because key it
is cloudy right now and I don't
have solution yet but i'm
planning to get it and if we had
storage right now we could use
we could use that and we it's
not sanny so this would be a
perfect time to use torrent so
for all the reasons that
everybody expressed I am very
much in support of this bill and
I pay plenty of taxes so i'm
willing to pay a little bit more
to make up for whatever tax
credits
don't come into the general fund
and willing to pay a little bit
more to cover that thank you
thank you david hopefully you'll
repeat that when we talk about
personal income taxes for
next week to step be wiseberg.
Good morning madame chair and
committee members I live in the
east mountains and I often read
the next door app and a frequent
complaint is about power outages
and if people here had access to
storage
it would really help a residence
increase their energy security
especially as weather becomes
more extreme and we become more
vulnerable to it so please pass
this bill thank you very much
we'll go toward mccartney.
The.
The.
Better error and committee
members my name is word
recording
you'd listen to this bill go
through the pat last commit
committee hearing and many of
the opponents of the bill
stressed the fact that it's only
people with a lot of money that
couldn't be able to ford battery
storage and it impacts below
income people in our state
because.
They're basically subsidizing
the
tax incentive for the the
wealthy
they are looking at the big
picture the big picture is that
the more battery storage that we
in the able across the state
lowers the peak demand.
And pete demand is what is so
very very expensive the cost to
put in a gas peak plant.
To operate occasionally to meet
that people is passed on all the
rate payers and increases all
the rates
the co op and burlington vermont
is incentivising their colour
members two put in battery
storage to not only so they have
consistent electricity when.
But power goes down but also
because it lowers peak demand
and made all the have to spend
their huge amount of investment
to be that picked the band so I
encourage you to look at the old
picture of how energy storage
benefits assault thank you.
And the last person we have to
speak in support is tom solomon
if you would if you were still
under.
Thank you madame chair
my name is tom solomon I am a
cocordinator of the climate
focused environmental group
three fifteen new mexico and the
on behalf of our six thousand
supporters we are in strong
support of this bill.
Battery storage is an important
feature of the energy transition
as we implement more and more
admit admittedly intermittent
resources like solar energy and
wind battery storage provides
that firming capacity to bridge
the gaps the rare times when
neither one is operating and so
incentivising this market for
battery storage with this bill
is part of the total solution to
get us off a faster fuels and
address the claim at crisis
which is so important to all of
us send all of her children so
for that reason we have all of
our supporters support this bill
and I encourage the committee to
vote yes thank you so much.
Back to the audience in the room
is there anyone here to speak
in.
You have joined us on zoom and
would like to speak in
opposition to HB seventy three
please raise your hands now.
Representatives will go back to
you if you'd like to make any
comments before we go to the
committee.
We have wind we have solder
energy storages that third
prong.
Convince you of that.
Have represented a
thinking that i'm shared thank
you representatives of bringing
forward this bill I had a couple
quick questions can this be
stacked with the incidents that
are at the federal law is that
it's a either.
Uh representatives right madam
chair yes it can be stacked with
the investment te.
Madam chair and representative
this actually may be for mr down
but of course it's real
just to also curious looking
their fire mentioned that you
told has a ten percent tax
credit in the same thing in the
region are there others that are
comparable to this or even if.
I'm sorry.
III do know that there are.
Think you manage here in the
representatives I had some
interesting stuff in there
anything I think it's a good
firm
but there were some pieces one
thing that I thought was of
interest that if they are
mentioning that they didn't
anticipate that it would hit the
capital right away for million
but as because more popular
perhaps it we rolled over that
madam chair and represent it
seems like a really a good
opportunity to continue that I
think this is a one zero
mentioning this is the third in
the store that we're creating we
really are a state that is
leading in encouraging solar
encouraging.
And we need to see what coming
we need to have as many economic
incentives to get businesses to
establish here to incurred our
own communities to establish
these the battery stores that we
need so I am in this.
Thank you next we have
represent.
You don't I have a few questions
for you.
I don't really know that I want
to answer for them but many
you probably been asked before
and so my first question be you
know on a typical home what.
The.
But i.
Four hours
there are different durations.
Solar panels.
So
madam chair representative of
darken quite honestly that.
Typically.
The.
What group of trying to help
you.
We're trying to help all our
groups so i'm
going to be
you know I was thinking about
how it would use this as a mom
three kids I would do a standard
of standard system that I charge
at night and use during peace
times during the day when my
kids get home in the morning so
there's a whole lot of uses so
it's not just for the rich like
i'm sure you're gonna see but
it's there's there's all that
uses and there's a lot of people
who are very much
environmentally
I mean everything is about the
environment and climate change
in all these things it can
happen and this is just part of
that so it's it's I believe it
can go cross the the spect.
If this is just another tool
would you accept an amendment to
put.
I mean if we're going to tools
okay I have a brooking j.
And I don't have to worry about
it normally big bill.
If we're trying to impact folks
I think we've been hood went
that those of us can't afford to
pay tax and I appreciate the
gentleman that said that he.
But also this is a tax on every.
One last question when the money
runs out unless you I want to do
this.
And is zero list that okay I I
didn't get it last year but can
I get on the list this year or
you know.
April fifteenth am I going to
be.
And they actually.
They would then.
If we're gonna we're going to
put all.
The.
They cannot chair.
I have just a handful of
questions that are just.
Yeah.
The sunset.
The first question is.
Power reading to qualify.
This minimum power rating is
different than the federa.
Valid here representative I am
not sure about the answer to
your question I do not know.
We did try to look at.
Thank you for that
I think I just reco.
There's a there's a good reason
why it's the ste.
If it makes.
Other question.
And then that has been brought
to our attention but I think a
good rationale for that.
The.
It would make.
Somewhere provisions.
Another question
my understanding is.
They actually check from the
state for three thousand.
The.
And general.
Well those for those who mention
representative for those people
who are the border of of this is
going to be tight for them but
they want energy storage this
would also help them I would be
one of those people right I will
I I don't have a high tax credit
number retired but if I want
this that getting that you know
installing in getting a little
bit back would help him everyday
people versus.
This.
Thank you manager
that they would say that that is
why you're not seeing as.
Tax it we are looking at
creating because.
We're looking at other questions
the proceeded you were trying to
get the
would benefit from this that
could otherwise not afford it
anything that's what I think
it's answering yours and other
people's qu.
Yeah.
I I still.
Just have a hard time.
Right.
The.
This committee.
We do have a f.
Thank you
my last technical question.
There was a question
just just a technical sex
perhaps.
Is.
First wish you the when I talked
when the bill talks about what
are eligible costs.
Department suggests that costs
related.
Not no there isn't sorry.
Yeah
that's we can do that.
But yes if you work please
consider
we don't know what's going to be
in the task.
Yeah.
Representative but I don't.
Um so good morning
representatives most of.
So I have a technical question
and it relates more to
and I know we're doing a lot of
things to
encourage ebays.
Um one of the questions that I
ha.
And whether or not there have
been amendments to adjust the
building code to encourage the
l.
Um and i'm just gonna found out
some numbers because you go.
So the US standard residential
electrical voltage is a hundred
twenty bulks um eb's require a
level one.
Commercial buildings there
electrical voltage is a hundred
and twenty.
Two hundred a two hundred and
seven up to two to well two
hundred and seventy seven four
hundred and eighty and even
in a fleet for example would
require about three.
So i'm just wondering if madam
chair
as were doing us which I
support.
Are we considering that we're
creating legislation that can't
be implemented because.
Medicare representative right
thank you for that insightful
question about our capability of
our infrastructures
I hope from talking with the
people at the regulation and
licensing department
construction industry's division
that they have recently
completed a significant change
to the building codes to allow
incorporation and easy ready
infrastructure into the
electrical portions of the
building code so it's.
Very positive I think our
electorate code has n.
To accomplish that so I believe
that the new code will
accommodate the the right
recepticals and the breakers in
the building to accommodate
electrical vehicle charging.
Thank you manager yeah I just I
just don't want us to be
producing the policy at this
level of were not adjusting
especially for smaller
communities and if we're truly
and I heard representative
harpers concern if we're truly
trying to encourage eves at at a
level.
And
he i'm in a really low income
than we need to encourage that
when we are building housing.
And when we are building
commercial buildings that the.
Otherwise we're creating policy
that is just gonna sit on a
shelf somewhere so I just I just
want to insure that as were
roading on us and you said that
they are looking at.
But I want to be certain as I
make my vote that you know these
things have actually.
Really quick method I just got a
techn.
A new energy conservation code
that includes even readiness
requirements.
Just a few points and questions
so the started with a cap of.
Amended to allow
for the for the possibility of
the cap is met we can get into
the next year.
Can we get into the next year
even more so after the f.
And then the next year
and the next year.
Represent cha.
Future.
Yes it would be.
But there is a sign.
It's the let's so it stops the
there's a sunset madam chair so
there are these dangling credit.
Yeah.
When
people start bumping into the
caps and the sunset will
essentially matter chair be the
cap.
This is not the best system
madam chair I I don't know how
to address it but you know we've
had please for help from emerge
especially because I think
they're the keeper of the cap
and it's not good it could
because we start getting these
madam ch.
And to us from our constituents
and then what happens.
We come in with a bill that
cleans it all up.
So I I find that approach.
I don't know
how's that and I think we need
to come up with a better system.
So that's one point
the second point is
on the station
was brought up.
Speed qualified yes.
If they're not
the identical qualifying.
There's going to be I don't
think you're gonna be able to
stack you know i.
But that's something we can be
telling people and what's going
to happen.
People will apply for the
federal credit they'll get it
and then they'll apply for the
state credit they may not get it
and then what are we going to do
we're gonna get more emails
you know well you know the piece
that this works for the fads it
doesn't work for us how come you
drafted the wall that way it's
really confusing that he's going
to be a bunch of complaints
we're going to be getting a
bunch of complaints madam chair
so another messy thing about
this is that that should be
fixed it should follow the feds
madam chair or it doesn't
qualify I just cause I can see
not good stuff happening.
In its very unsatisfying for a
tax period here well that's the
feds and worth the state and we
do it differently and then
there's all kinds of great and
then we'll go to get to get
request for an amendment.
So another issue i'd like to
point out and
madam chair and represent i'm a
little leary of the refundable
part.
Having
bright bills for a refundable
credits they almost at least all
of mine I think would be fair to
say pretty sure
our related to attached to low
income
and
it is much as I would like to
s-.
Um
for low income it's it's it
hasn't a very nab.
Nebulous or and you know not a
really strong attachment to low
income you can argue this is
going to spur of the market i've
heard this argument will spur
the market and then will get
more and then they'll be lower
priced and then lower income
people but that's going to be
out there beyond the five years
madam cheer i'm sorry I just
cannot visualize that level of.
Advancement
and that rather loose
relationship to low income
people so you know I I would be
leary madam chair making this
refundable we don't have a lot
of tax expenditures this year
like we did we thought.
And
this will curve into that
mountain chair by making it
refundable the the FIR madam
chair is going to show a.
The I just want to raise.
Thank you representative for
those remarks
to the the renewable energy type
of market we have to provide
some some types of incentives
instead of if we were to attend
and as mentioned perform we
outlined representative duckin
spoke and asked how what the
cost is to implement something
like that to the tens of
thousand tens of at least ten
thousand dollars
that doesn't really serve it and
completely cover low income so
if we were to attach my weekend
language to this bill then
I see we're going with that I
don't disagree with that but I
would say that we we are
entering a place in serving a
specific integration incentive
and investment for what this
with this town serves so i'd
like us to not you know to bring
up for it that you know it would
be very hard as mentioned for
very low.
But if they do got if they were
able to do they felt that that
was a priority for their
household and they were able to
take the incentive that this tax
provides then they would be able
to cover a lot of that I don't
disagree with you but I don't
know the answer completely on
the federal mistake we do file
separate.
Tax returns if you're going to
professional and state so I
don't know if that was if that
would
be part of the discussion and we
could talk about that a little
bit more but very separately
federal tax taxes are very
different from our state taxes
so well I I as as as a taxpayer
for files
that's been my experience and I
think those but if that is a
problem I really think we would
like to work on that.
Audience it is the practice of
the h.
Yeah.
I also wanted to appreciate some
of the concerns and
considerations brought forward
today again excellent that laid
out so much of this for us
and then and important
conversation about who are tax
credits benefit
isa.
My use of power my family's
power with our ethics and have
worked.
I have a real property so
multiple meters with ad wells
and properties.
And I am not an expert like many
of you are and so I trusted that
a highly recommended solar
company could figure out what my
property did because I wanted to
question the full extent of that
and and get whatever solar
panels I needed to to fully most
of the days I don't have energy
stored
power my mate the extent of my
property and because of their
miscalculations and engineering
and because i'm not an expert
and double check it turns out
they install the system on my
property that does a third about
what we actually use because
they calculate it on the ron
meter instead of the full extent
of the meters and for that I
went into a debt of twenty seven
thousand dollars.
Um.
Because there was also a glitch
in the date of completion of the
project compared to the data was
permitted.
Somehow uh at first they use the
date in december and I was one
of those considerance except
that nobody the email and on my
ethics I don't use my name
either way I use
my partners email because I
don't want it to be considered a
perceived that I might have had
a special accommodation so i'm
not calling anywhere i'm i'm not
find the secretary of emergency
or tax to confirm.
So I was one of those
frustrating people because
mistakes were made around every
corner.
But what was real for me is that
I had a lot of privilege to go
into that debt to make those
decisions and now i'm paying
monthly to mozart for my system
that covers a faction of my use
and I still have massive has
elected does in the enter to
cover the rest of my.
Although we're always like put
on your hood he's put on your
sites don't
but I thought I was going to
alleviate some of my magging in
and said it's amplified because
now i'm so his twice
and thankfully and eventually I
I will in this filing year be
able to get those.
But I tell the story to say
that.
My income and my provides
allowed me to make decisions
like that even if if they
weren't quite as I expected and
my privilege and income would
also allow me to do something
tour and energy storage if I
ever had enough panels that I
could actually store in.
I previously committee and
representatives was proud I
think my first term to work on
an even credit and so much of
that debate was sent it around
that income cap.
We were trying to design that
credit so that new mexicans of
lower means.
Could match their consumer power
to those values and
consideration around climate
change and and wanting to be
that kind of i'm consumer
whether it's energy of this
instead of otherwise.
But we debated a lot about
making sure the folks find a
hundred thousand.
So i'm wondering presenters if
those are conversations you've
had meanwhile I also wonder if
if this is appropriate to be a
refundable tax credit but even
so and if that were to move
forward have you talked about
having an income cop.
Share no I don't talk about an
income tax they own income car
and week we would be willing to
take that out
of the bill.
Um as far as.
Thank you president members of
the committee yes as it was well
articulated last year we thought
we had a.
And it's going to be a much
tighter year
I think you all have made clear
and compelling points and as
this conversation moves forward
considering whether this could
be a non refundable tax credit
and even with that whether it
would be appropriate where that
income pat capt is to make sure
again if if there's folks out
there that this really is the
decision maker and that really
changes their capacity to invest
in the kind of technology just
but.
Start to figure out what that.
And with.
If we want but there's really no
such thing
to metal chair do i.
You're your bill has been for
like the tables will accord to
the ongoing conversation thank
you.
For those listening
and now we are not doing it
one forty today responses have
asked that we roll themselves so
the remaining agenda for us
today is a presentation by
secretary starting and
potentially some of her team
from the taxation avenue
department.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee i'm stephanie
sharon clark secretary of the
taxation revenue
good morning good morning share
members of the committee my name
is mark shaken tax policy
director of the taxation and
revenue
thinking so much for inviting us
to talk about the governor's tax
priorities for this session and
this was a new presentation that
we were requested to give last
week to the senate tax committee
and and you know i'm thinking
about that I think it makes a
lot of sense and and maybe we
should talk about doing
presentation like this at the
tax committee organizational
meetings so you see what you
think um oh rates are mark and I
will we'll go through the slides
when I say weren't we're not
planning to do a deep dive on
any of these because each one of
these proposals will ultimately
come through your committee for
that full hearing but we are
here if you have particular
questions um today that aren't
included in the sites.
The.
Moving the slides okay great
so i'm just like to first a
comparison of of the governor's
vision for capacity for a tax
changes this session it's
slightly different than the lfc
framework the executive budget
rack includes five hundred
million for recurring reductions
to general fund but the new ones
there is to split that five
hundred million between
recurring tax cuts that are
truly forgone revenue for the
state and then redirection of of
revenues from the general fund
to be distributed to a different
fund so the executive proposed
three hundred million of
recurring tax cuts and two
hundred million or so every
direction of general fund
revenue elsewhere that could
include things like the health
care affordability fund that
i'll talk about on the slide in
the little while I could include
things like the motor vehicle
excise tax to the road fund
different distribution of
flicker tax source of things.
We'll talk about fight three.
So if you look at fight three
and please let me know if i'm
speaking to our future things to
be back
is the best manufacturing
equipment tax credit this is
intended as a company then to
the federal advanced
manufacturing production tax
credit that have a most which
was created in the federal
inflation reduction act
it refers specifically to
production of materials that
were authorized by section forty
five x one of the inflation
reduction act which is now
section forty five x of the
internal revenue code and that
incentivises production and sale
of solar and wind energy
components inverters all find
battery components and
applicable critical minerals
these are all things that are
defined in the federal tax code
but there are for example for
solar looks like things like
sheets of the material that is
used to capture some like virgin
electricity I think for winds I
would include things like
turbines and blades so those
sorts of things that are listed
explicitly so the federal credit
encourages production and sale
of those items
they proposed credit on the
state side which is for personal
income tax and corporate income
tax credits will give new mexico
a competitive advantage by
offsetting the cost to equip
facilities to produce these
products so the new mexico
credit is intended where someone
who wants to start up production
of those things that have a
federal credit and it allows
them to spend money and get a
credit for equipping those
factories that are going to
produce that stuff not for the
land or the real estate or the
building just for the equipment.
So that credit or offset the
cost to encourage those
facilities and that will kick in
before the federal credit is
available from the sale of the
products so first they got the
credit for building the factory
and equipping a factory then
they get the credit on the
federal side when they actually
commence production and start
selling those items
the credit is the lesser twenty
percent of the equipment costs
or a twenty five million dollars
per project it includes a
clawback.
If the fulfilled these ceases
operations for a hundred and
eighty consecutive days or more
within two years of claiming the
credit so because the credit
will be given before production
starts we want to assure that
the facilities actually used for
the purpose that the person is
claiming that they built it for
it right so if they say well a
lot of equipment can be used for
multiple purposes we're not
going to build that forty five x
stuff anymore we can claw back
the credit or if they simply
these operations and in
conjunction with the economic
development department we
estimate not more than one large
qualifying project per year but
likely fewer everywhere asked in
the in the senate committee I
have this but only applied to
large projects and answers no it
applies to anyone who was going
to create a facility that will
produce the identified.
Before you go on.
Yeah.
I'm out i'm sure I believe this
bill is probably going to be
introduced today by
representative throughout and
there are co sponsors as well
but she is the lead sponsor.
Um the antislide number four we
were going to hear this bill
this morning so we would have
skipped the slide but we'll go
through it and just a little
detailed this is how spell one
forty governor's bill creating
clean car tax credits
representative hockman vehicle
is the lead sponsor on this um
so this is similar but different
to the past electric vehicle tax
credits that you've seen in in
past years it's also
I could say the same thing about
senate bill eight which was
prefiled by senator tallman but
senator talmin has also assigned
on as a cosponsor of the spill
some of the main differences are
you know this is still a credit
to purchase or release for three
years electric vehicles but it
also includes for the first time
plug in hybrids and fuel sell
vehicles
it's also a corporate income tax
credit sort of getting to the
the point that i'm represented
i've heard from a little while
ago if the pit credit is
available for partnerships and
llc is it would be fair also for
corporations to be able to take
you know advantage of this
the fees out schedule is
important and kind of
complicated but basically for
the first three years tax years
twenty four through twenty six
that's proposed that there's an
original credit amount it's up
to three thousand dollars for a
new electric vehicle
facing down it half of the
credit on any used to be a call
that's a new feature of this
credit as well compared to last
year's and this is the first
time that on is contemplated
used vehicles being eligible um
the credit for a plug in hybrid
or fuel cell vehicle is less
than an e v at two thousand
versus three thousand and then
there's also charging
charging unit credits
contemplated senate bill eight I
believe has a three hundred
dollars charging you to credit
this is a little more nuanced
it's it's up to four hundred
dollars for a traditional level
two charger but there's a credit
of up to twenty five thousand
dollars for a direct current
fast charger or if your cell
charger
the capital costs of installing
one of those are great but.
They do make a lot of sense and
maybe multi family residential
complexes are commercial areas
they can charge an avia colon
something like thirty to forty
five minutes
as far as the some of the
details about the credit it's
contemplated to be refundable as
well as transferable
transparable gets you to what
you know is referred to his cash
on the heard that on the day
that an evience purchased it
could be transferred to its
dealership at full value
and we believe that between the
transferability refundability
and the availability of this
credit for use vehicles those
features go long way to make
sure that this is very available
for a lower and company
mexicans.
So the phase out schedule is it
it's a little i'm new once in
that rather than a a firm cap on
the credit we've tried to manage
the target fiscal impact through
the phase out schedule instead
we don't want what we know that
the number of even is being
purchased in new mexico is going
to rise significantly in the
coming years and so we don't
want to run into that kind of
situation where people are
denied the credit in you know it
like like you spoke of like they
have been recently in the solar
tax credit so again rather than
capping the credit or creating a
you know carry over a situation
like representative channel
mentioned a few minutes ago we
are phasing out the credit um
down to seventy four percent of
the original credit in tax
you're twenty seven
fortydashnine percent the next
year and thirty two percent the
following year before phasing
out completely in twenty thirty
and the results of that from our
estimates is a maximum cap in
any europe about forty five
million.
Any questions on this one before
I go on.
Thank you we have one slide
number five the health care
affordability fund distribution
and this is being sponsored by
repapancy
the healthcare affordability
fund was created in the twenty
twenty session by senate bill
three seventeen new mexico's
insurance premium tax pursuit to
that bill increased from one
percent to three point seventy
five percent and that was to
replace a discontinued federal
fee on insurance companies.
I'm the new revenue was
distributed between the health
care affordability fund and the
general fund with revenue to the
health care for the building
funds scheduled to phase down
from fifty five percent of those
revenues to thirty percent of
the premiums or tax on july
first of this year twenty twenty
four this bill will maintain the
distribution to the health care
affordability fund at fifty five
percent of the premium tax
revenue
six thousand small businesses
are currently benefiting from a
ten percent premium reduction as
a result of this fund positively
impacting forty one thousand new
mexico employees.
Be well new mexico and roman
increased thirty eight percent
over the last year due to this
the healthcare affordability
fund with fifty seven thousand
additional sorry fifty seven
thousand in excellent currently
and finally a native american
enrollment has more than doubled
in the past year and again this
is all due to the health care
affordability fund and so that
is the the reason to maintain it
at fifty five percent rather
than thirty percent of the
premium surtax
the charter of the bottom side
shows the fiscal impact of that
going forward to the general
fund again this is one of those
where there's not actually a an
overall impact of reduction in
revenues it's just where those
revenues are being directed to a
special phone rather than to the
general fund.
Thank you madame secretary i'm
gonna please you can read the
previous bills it's my.
Have a conversation about them.
Each b seven was not referred to
the tax.
Why that happened or
matter processes madam chair
i'm not privy to you know the
the committee assignment process
but I would think that it's
because it doesn't change
attacks it doesn't change who is
taxed through at what rate or
you know any exemptions or
deductions from that tax it's
simply changes where the revenue
is distributed so I imagine it
went to hfc probably.
I believe.
No that in be aware of that part
of the conversation is also or
for us where it becomes relevant
and I am glad.
The presentation and remember.
As of now that we are.
Okay um in the last the last
slate that will go over with you
is is again this is the bill
that I expect to be introduced
imminently perhaps today i'm i'm
not sure exactly but it's
generally referred to as a
health provider assessment and
for any committee members that
were in the legislative process
in twenty nineteen you might
recall the health care quality
surcharge that was enacted in
twenty nineteen it's similar to
that concept but different.
What that bill did in twenty
nineteen was impacting skilled
nursing facilities and this one
is different and that it would
impact hospitals but the idea is
that you have a set of tax
payers who are charged an
assessment based on after
receiving federal cms approval
to do so
the assessment money comes in
and in this case where
estimating about three hundred
and twenty six million per year
and assessment revenue would
come in from hospitals the
health care call easter tragedy
on nursing facility is smaller
that money would come in and
indirectly it would be able to
find increased funding to the
state medicare program which
funds a three to one match in
federal revenues so this three
hundred and twenty six million
estimated new state revenue
could result in one point two
billion in additional federal
medicaid money following into
the states are really growing
the piper for health care in new
mexico and it would include all
hospitals except federally and
state owned hospitals other than
minors call facts there's a
lower assessment for rural
hospitals I I believe it's a
fifty percent assessment for for
rural hospitals rather than a
hundred percent
the new revenue as I mention
would get act would be
distributed to a newly created
fund but it would be used for
the administration medicaid
health
the health care authority
department the authority would
distribute the money to the
that's in this fund the details
on on the program of course
there are not really tax related
not our bailey work but this
this big picture that i've
explained of medicaid funding
and coming back
the key to the reason that these
taxpayers are willingly
supporting this legislation is
that it comes back to them in
the forum of higher provider
reimbursement rates so the the
tax payers pay this up to six
percent assessment but it comes
back to them
with a federal match so again
this is not something that will
touch the capacity for the tax
package because it's a revenue
razor.
But it will be a governor of
spelled.
We would pretty question members
of.
This one is I know this I think
it just heard about this let me
get back to the committee
is it is it representative I
guess okay.
Oh great okay.
We stand for any questions.
This.
No.
Have a lot for you in this.
Thank you thank you.
Anything else before
okay you all on monday think you
have to.
Yeah
yeah.
I tried
to.
You want to be reached by
it.
Yes.
Yeah
I think.
If you don't like it
particularly.
I would not want to do this
yes the other day
yes i'm
been there
Maybe for the international yes
you should
use
the state
of the very so
it is alternate
yeah
yeah
I was trying to I back there but
most
of them
should some
detailed
i'm sorry.
Okay.
Okay
I know
I I do
businesses
got it
okay
I have.
Yeah.
Right
yeah
The.
Yeah.
Representative okay so office.
And you guys have started.
Yeah.
A lot of stuff.
Yeah.
So the one forty.
No.
The.
Okay.
And then we follow everything
out.
Yeah.
The.
Before.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I.
The.
This.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I.
The.
Oh.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
The.
The.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
The.
The.
