Thank you here.
Representative Harper.
Representative hearing on this.
Representative Mart√≠nez.
Representative Ortiz part sorry
yes Representative Scott.
Representative set out to you
Representative Townsend.
Chair.
I'm sorry vice chair.
Condemning.
Chair Lente.
Thank you everybody is present
thank you all again for joining
us a lot of first start off by
allowing our members to with the
agencies themselves I will begin
on my right side.
The speaker would.
Thank you Mr chair good morning
everybody this Martinez we got
is.
Don't worry it'll be full and.
Yeah one thing is representative
from district eleven this is my.
Each year the legislature in my
case here on this committee
first under the mentorship of
the ways and means chairman
Jason Harper followed by House
taxed Representative chairman
Jim Trujillo I had the great
honor of serving as the co chair
and then chair of this committee
for a year learned a lot still
my favorite committee.
I think the best comedian the
Legislature myself
and excited for this group of
leaders to.
Continue the good work of tax
reform and the important work of
tax reform in and of course Mr
chair also briefly for the team
at LFC for all of the work the
are really truly rock stars.
Thank you.
Hi I'm a Representative Linda
Serrato Representative the south
side of Santa Fe and this is my
second time in the.
Mr chair during a goes this is
actually my tenth year and I
think this is my.
Maybe forced to be here or maybe
I think it's forty years that
I've been on tax it's a little
hiatus for awhile so
but I'm glad to be back I think
this is a always a great
committee and good to know I
think that we have really worked
towards making some some big
changes it for family and I'd
like to continue to do that so
thank you Mr chair great thank
you Representative.
Good morning everyone Cynthia
Borrego
I am Bernalillo county but I
grew up in Santa Fe and Espanola
so this is like my able to but
coming back and I would love it
I used to work at taxed revenue
when I was in college.
So I actually have something to
compare and I will tell you what
I did my first the first time I
worked at tax Representative I
was pulling staples that PI teas
and.
PHEVs and jacketing them and
micro fishing the second time I
worked at taxes revenue during
college hi
I was a bookkeeper and I'm not
kidding you guys but a pencil to
the paper literally and it was
just like the worst job I ever
had in my life.
So I'm excited to be here.
For those of you who don't know
I was a former city councilor
and also former city planner in
Albuquerque so have a lot of
experience in terms of
Albuquerque and planning so ask
me about land use and I'm happy
to give you some answers.
Thank you Representative.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee and Christine are
yes I represent most of Taos
County I am a long time and more
and first time member of this
committee.
I'm in my third year now so
really excited to work with all
of you to make New Mexico budget
working families.
good morning Mr chair and good
morning committee members I'm
Representative Christine
Chandler house district forty
three that district includes Los
Alamos parts of Santa Fe and
parts of Santa Fe County hi on
the committee since I started in
the legislature so that's about
four years I shared it for a
year of tax but I also love
House Judiciary I'm so pleased
to be Cherry House Judiciary but
still working on issues that
really interests me in terms of
making the Tax Code more
equitable and fair and easy to
work with thank you so much Mr
chair thank you.
That's good are far less.
The far left.
Hiding it for so long.
Hi.
I.
Amazing.
Yeah all.
And it's not.
Representative what which is
okay okay.
my first year on tech.
I look forward to.
All of these people have a lot
of the.
The.
And of.
Activities or.
Thank you welcome.
Of those got.
There was that
Scott.
I'm sure the central Lea county
and the northern portion of the
town of all time.
Perhaps the most compact
district.
House district.
This is.
Your number then on the tax
committee for me.
I've always enjoyed the job all
conversation and they look
forward to more drugs and I'm
going to do my best to educate
these rookies.
As we move forward this session
thank that's it thank you
Representative okay.
the gentleman working in
Representative district two in
San Juan County and I am on this
committee.
I like to thank you for seven
days.
just Fernandez I represent
district sixty in Rio Rancho.
To my right thirty here on the
tax committee and looking for to
keep out possible.
Good morning chairman money
station Harper I represent the
northern Rio Rancho area in San
Juan County.
this is my eleventh year on this
committee had up I have to agree
with the speaker this is the
best Committee and the House and
also is the committee that I
love.
It and it is awesome I mean.
Yeah I had the privilege of
chairing it many moons ago that
but also.
Also having my chair
Representative Martinez and then
and then going on to us that.
Chair Chandler and and gentleman
which I'm really excited to work
with this is a it's a great it's
a great committee where we can
really just help New Mexicans
and so really excited to be
there thank you let me.
Representative none of thank you
Mr chairman good morning to all
this first drums Committee on
staff that's our camera.
That is.
Once.
By Representative district
seventy which is our San Miguel
and towards.
and it's a pleasure to be honest
I just got a text.
I'm I don't think he's watching.
Wait until.
You madam thank you Mr.
Can you check committee those
listening unexpected this
webcast my name is Gail a lot of
that then and I wanted to the
state representative in district
three and and then I County I
Representative three historical
communities Misia where my
family's been for generations
and where I wanted to raise my
little ones some of the biggest
and then the west side and south
of Los crucis lots and lots of
activities on the left side of
the valley and a stretch of the
county that goes out to the
county line including us the
state correctional facility by
the New Mexico state fairgrounds
and I was uses industrial park
and that alongside with me
defending colleague chair and it
goes I represent the main campus
in New Mexico State University
this is my third term Tax
Preciado although learning
that's happened here I say often
in in in part this is been.
My drive to show up in the
legislature that I believe that
the moral code of a government
is how we spend our money and
how we raise our revenue this
committee offers the kind of
delivered delivered its base for
rested Center what matters most
to our New Mexican families and
our constituents so I got to
have sixty day session of the
brand new freshman and have
second water with chairman to
the time of it since then I just
appreciated your clarity you can
Montoya and and the ways that
you bring your values into these
conversations I could not be
more excited to be back at it
with you chairman thank and on
this committee can thank you and
good morning thank you thank you
at finally a direct link they
live incentive level Mexico
eight seven zero zero four
Representative house district
sixty five which includes that
of all county San Juan County in
Rio Arriba county happy to be
the steward of this chair
shipped this chairmanship of
this committee so we're honored
to do the work of the loss at
all of you great minds for a lot
of good reasons but most
importantly to make sure that we
can work together effectively
and openly the projected Lee
expect fully so we can do a lot
of good things for the people
that sent is here so with that
being said I have some other
things to say but before I do I
I want to give a little bit of
of time for our staff to induce
themselves that as well but
before I do I want to work
Representative also recognize
that between our more seasoned
member that's that our freshman
or our our news our new B. so to
speak and I don't I don't
recognize that Mr thousand that
you're this your first time
session is that you.
But in any event hopefully those
that are sitting next to new
members or new where members can
also be able to to to talk to
them to coach them to to help
them out if there is any
questions about process so any
questions on tax policy whatever
it might be but also at the end
of the date just ask ask ask
this is make sure that we can
all have open dialogues without
further ado let's go into our
introductions for our analyst
major.
This.
a lot.
Thank you all.
get.
Hours.
Share this and
this is.
Here are working.
I love it.
Again the minority analyst let's
go to the committee and just.
On hi.
On.
Welcome that we welcome folks
and then we also have under the
committee and also be doing this
by the end of the week as well
but I also want also recognize
committee assisted.
You guys want to.
Introduce yourself.
Good morning my name is Lauren
may then this is my third year I
am so grateful to all of you.
The discussions and this is the.
The webcast and.
Thank you.
And billion and if I am in
charge of all committees.
The new John that and so.
So I'm excited about my new.
Or
I have one of those and then the
first time committee attendance
and I'm just learning so much
already I'm really excited to
learn.
Thank you thank you all for
being here and then I also I
mean we have a great audience
when we have some.
But this that's the LFC staff
easy to would introduce yourself
please.
Money is the money provided the.
that we are here as well so like
us on the cost of the.
Bill.
I and I are easy for us have you
have anything.
And.
And then on Friday we do start
doing feels we will in fact
start utilizing the the zoom
network something that we all
learn how to do well during
during the pandemic so at this
point I think it's a tool that's
obviously here to stay we have a
big screen the house of we'll
continue use that and try to
bring in as much public input up
Representative even
presentations that we have we've
we're we have folks that want to
present that can't make it in
person we'll talk about that a
little bit more in terms of of
the options around that but at
the end of the day it was just a
nice this opportunity when I was
the act here to have people
in rural communities that could
make the Santa Fe just to save
you know thirty minutes of
something that they could call
in so then from from there
farming you the farm animals in
the background know that they
could really be a part of the
process of that's super
important to me so what we will
we'll have that back and will
make sure that the utilize of
the best way that we can but in
regards to it to this committee
as a whole against super honored
to be part of this committee
super honor to work alongside
all of you
those of you that sat in on agon
Water back when I was the chair
of that understand hard work to
set in as a committee member or
maybe presented in the committee
is that you know what we're all
adults here we recognize that I
want to make sure that we are
all respectful of one another
what we show respect for this
committee and its members we
show respect for the
participants in the presenters
that is what we show respect to
those that make their way that
are from the public to make sure
that we understand where they're
coming from and that we do not
stifle discussion we did not
stifle of their opportunity to
say what they need to say is so
that being said it's my hope
that we can do that kind of
tradition here in this committee
because I know for a for a long
time this committee's been run
by a lot of great people former
chairwoman jalape should you but
you know we're back from COVID
what that place we've never
been.
So we learned a lot of lessons
so in time in terms of that I
want to make sure that we can
appreciate being back in person
again being back without masks
again not having to sit at home
when I can see like this perhaps
but at some of the meat it's a
different it's a different day
and so I'm happy to be back in
person and I'm I'm super also
thankful for the leadership of
our vice chairwoman because she
brings a breadth of knowledge
and intend to bring or in a lot
of different aspects of this
committee because I think it's a
report that she played a large
part of this as well because I
trusted judgment I trust your
values and plus you as a person
to to be able to help us out in
this committee to make really
great decisions so also I want
to make sure that we have.
Regardless of party I don't care
if you're Democrat or the
Republican if you are in the in
that seat and you're going to
present something we will have a
fair hearing and and that's just
the way it's going to be we will
also I'm a stickler on following
the rules but we will always
have a notice of an agenda the.
Prior to making sure we meet the
deadlines of the notice of
agendas for the committee
members here you'll get in that
that notice of that of of that
as a J. that what's going to be
on it just so that you know what
to prepare for the week ahead
over the days ahead also part of
being a stickler on rules I want
to make sure that we understand
that there is a twenty four hour
rule on amendments that I will
follow those who would do that I
will trust act and I don't
committee assistant her name is
is trees that that is that is
and I'm sorry but but but that
would be need to comes back you
know I will trust her as our
staff for issues that if you
tell me that so and so did meet
the twenty four hour rule I will
trust her that she knows her
time and that we will not push
it when we should be pushing it
no exceptions if if your body or
if you're to so and so so what
we're not gonna do that okay
also.
At at at at at.
Let's see right here
I also
want to make sure that those in
the major understand that that
you can you can call me whenever
and we can work together will
have certain caucus meetings
with their own with their own
pockets but also with those in
the minority I spoke with with
Harper and we had a really good
discussion about how you know
arts expectations and I also met
with the with the ranking member
Mister Scott and I told him that
I would work through you for a
lot of communication efforts as
well so at the end of the day
being transparent being able to
communicate openly is super
important me so we can all feel
like we're part of this process
we have a large responsibility
in this tweet in this committee
I I'm I'm starting to learn the
breadth of that responsibility
up quickly so noted noting that
we are responsible for the
capital outlay aspects of of
this body is is very important
so I want to make sure that we
we we do that well we do it
efficiently we do it timely and
I'm glad that we have the staff
here that we met last week's the
that's going to help us out
immensely to do that and and
make sure we can pull it off
also we have a tax package now
that has grown in terms of the
terms of the opportunities that
we have but I don't want to with
that way just because we have
that opportunity to make sure
that we can be mindful of the of
the investments that can be made
and that that that the
properties that can be had for
everybody in the state whether
your in downtown Albuquerque or
Santa Fe or if you're in the
middle of a plague New Mexico I
want to make sure that we we we
we ensure that we're doing good
tax policy for everybody
noting that it's my intent that
I will be working with all of
you to conduct a reproach and
also in regards to that tax
package that will be presented
sometime in the near future
that.
We will continue the practice of
of tabling bills that have any
type of fiscal impact to do to
us okay and then we'll come back
and we will revisit that and I
haven't yet pinpointed how we're
going to make sure that the
deeds of the arts have a fair
shot of saying these are what
should be part of this package
whether it's we've heard X.
amount of bills to get pop
answer your top and then we'll
figure that out but we will
definitely bring up a process
that'll be equitable for
everybody so that we can all be
part of it so that even if we do
have a three hour debate on the
floor you guys hold Lujan that's
why that is you know you part of
a process here that's all that I
care about make sure you
understand where you are at
because you're the group you're
the group we're the we're set
here by our colleagues to ensure
that we understand tax policy
that we can put put forth a good
tax package so
As for that you know I I just
want to just make this a quick
one respect every time and
that's one thing that we will
start on time all the time and
then we will if there's no basis
to be done we we will we will
conclude that all I think we all
have a lot of other things to
get to do so with that being
said I do want to also note that
I tried to bring Richard in the.
it will take to do this
committee today to give us
revoked right presentation of a
presentation that I have on my
desktop New Mexico policy tax
policy it was not available I
can get a hold of it really so
it's going to be a point where
I'd like to still none the less
bring him in sooner rather than
later to help those season
members those that have been
here ten years or even longer or
those that maybe this might be
your first meeting to really
understand and ask those
questions that maybe in some
cases you might be embarrassed
to ask which appears to be a
safe space to say okay.
If if we're gonna deal with this
stuff I should be able to
understand it and so that being
said I want to make sure that we
can bring him in sooner rather
than later as I mentioned while
we're hearing bills but none the
less on Friday we will start
hearing built this you will be
running
you know those that have
legislation Mr Townsend.
Former German chancellor and
chairwoman generators chairwoman
German chancellor have built on
Friday and that being said if
there's any questions the bikes
are are are on and and and
you're welcome to make any
comments or questions if not of
I think we can be sure to come
back up right.
All right that means that will
raise the upright.
