Here
representative gave us
representative herper
representative on this
speaker martinez representative
or test i'm here representative
scott.
Representatives
here
representative thompson
madam by.
The.
I'm here
good morning mister chair
members of the audience out
there no changes in this agenda
today so we're going to go right
into the first bill which is
hospital three zero eight mister
chair would you explain your
bill is ma'am thank you madam
chair good morning members thank
you for allowing this to present
house built three o eight madam
chair member's house built
through it authorizes the issue
and of general obligation bond
capacity that this year totals
in approximate two hundred and
eighty nine point six million
dollars including the cost of
issues for four bond issues the
four burning issues contained
the bill include the following.
Thirty point four million
dollars for code complaints
equipment vehicles
you'll do hold off we get this
to.
Okay
continue.
Please continue thank you
manager for th.
Let's go then though
rehiterate thirty point four
million dollars for code
complaints equipment vehicles
renovation and construction for
senior citizens center state
wide
second ninety million for
academy excuse me academic
public school public and tribal
library statewide.
Number three two hundred and
twenty nine million for higher
education special schools tribal
schools for infrastructure
improvement statewide and
finally ten million dollars for
build out of a state wide public
safety radio communications
system.
The chart before you to which I
think that they'll have lists
the projects and amounts
included in the bill the major
projects in this case include
fifty two million dollars for a
humanities and social science
complex at the university of new
mexico
thirty five million for a
college of pharmacy renovation
at the university of new mexico
health sizes center.
Twenty million dollars for
infrastructure upgrades at the
new mexico state university
fifty million dollars for
agriculture science and
experimentation station state
wide eight point five million
for kelly hall at the domestic
or institute a mining and
technology ten million for a
fuse maker space at the central
new mexico community college
nine million for an early
childhood facility at western
new mexico university.
At this point in time members of
this committee who was then for
any questions.
Thank you mister chair would you
please introduce your expert i'm
sorry next to me I have kelly
cars well who is the capital out
there group and for eleven
everything lfc.
Thank you mister chair before we
go to questions from the
committee we're going to go to
the audience if you are in
support of this bill please
raise your hand
and if you like to speak and
support we can start on this out
with gentlemen in the third
route
if you'd like to you don't have
to
if you'd like to speak on this
thank you metal chair my name is
gerald the director for capital
outlay for the new expire
education department and.
The.
Anyone else would like to stand
and support the bill gentleman
chair members of the committee
like in a librarian
standard support of nineteen
million dollars for libraries
across the states this is
critical money for books and
updated computer
thank you anyone else in the
rumour supports where you go to
the zoom if you'd like to speak
and support this bill please
raise your hand.
You do things differently in
this committee.
Yeah.
Thank you madame chair and
members of the committee i'm
sean pell president of eastern
mexico university in roswell and
I stand in support of this bill
thank you thank you shan all
right if you oppose this bill
please raise your hands stand
up.
On zoom.
Okay mister terror negotiate
would you like to respond any of
the comments no matter any of
the two comments all right
anyone in the room
representative towns
thank you member chair
mr chairman i'm always to ask
this question.
Absolutely thank you madam chair
and thank you representative it
I think for best explanation I
will ask to go through
everything that she's gone
through through lfc so people
can get it from the beginning to
at this point.
Manager representative towns and
so general obligation bonds are
a form of bonds levied against
property taxes state wide.
This bill would maintain a flat
miley so it represents no tax
increase.
The projects in this bill once
authorized by the legislature if
you all choose to do so we'll go
to a state wide vote in november
if each span question is
approved by voters the bonds
would be sold by the board of
finance and the spring of twenty
twenty five and become available
for all the projects in the bill
so what you're looking for.
Yes.
Mentally.
But I think people but they
don't understand and I always
answer is what we are doing as
we are selling if you might
report could use that term the
cash dream generated from
property tax.
Where we're selling that.
The bond a larger amount of
money correct.
Managed her representative
that's correct.
And.
The.
Madam chair can you tell me what
that
the value of that cash dream.
Madame chair representative I
don't have the you're looking
for the revenue figure.
I do not have that in our fire
i'm sorry
it's we are we are selling the
bonds on a about one point point
one three six percent that tax
value of propert.
So madam chair and.
The.
The.
Expert the.
Cash dreamed arrive from
property taxes that the mexicans
pay.
We are we are offering th.
A larger bond.
So we can fend all of these
capital outlay projects that's
what we're doing.
And that cost to the taxpayers.
In dollars.
Madam chair representative i'm
sorry we don't have the exact.
Amount beyond the figure I just
gave you as far as the the mill
levy on the property taxed on
property values.
For that.
Is.
There seems to be
and we always bonded th.
Madam chair representative yes
as far as I know we do it every
other year.
The.
And how many of these bonds do
we have.
The.
Mister chair I sorry madame
chair representative towns and
so the bonds are authorized for
essentially four years from the
date you authorized them three
years from the date they're
issued by the board of finance
so at this point we're sort of
at the end of the twenty twenty
two cycle and the twenty twenty
two sorry twenty twenty cycle
and the twenty twenty two are
still outstanding.
So many charifier major so
people understand we're paying
basically on the three years of
rears a property tax a we're
bonding
our are bond values run on the
three proceeding years rolling
forward.
Madam chair representative I
believe so yes.
Thank.
Represent scott
pretty much here.
Mr chairman.
Madame chair representative cars
well course.
A customer question involves the
need to approve what we're
proving today in local bond
elections in november is that
accurate.
Madam chair representative it
would be a statewide bond
election that goes to all voters
in the state and a general
general election in the for
everything that we approve
madame chairman's course will
everything that will prove here
today will be one question on
the november balances
madame chair representative
there'll be four separate bond
questions as part of this
package so one for senior
centers one for the libraries
one further higher education
projects and then one for the p
twenty five state wide public
radio communications project so
there is a separate separate
question for sort of each
category of projects.
Okay
miscurse well i'm unfamiliar
with
communications project I have
seen that before could you
describe.
How that money is going to be
spent madam chair representative
scott so this is a project that
has been funded through the gob
bell I believe at least once
before but sometimes it's funded
through just kind of the normal
statewide general fund or
severance tax bond package and
it is a state wide project that
the department of information
technology is
running that is about a hundred
and seventy million dollar
project overall so we've been
funding it will continue to do
so over multiple years and
essentially it's tammodernize
the radio communications systems
that public safety agencies use.
And madame chairman scores well
the expected life of this
communications equipment.
Madam chair representative at
least ten years so but probably
longer I mean we haven't
modernized the system and of a
very long time so this is this
project is building out the
infrastructure it is not like
the radios and stuff like that
those would be purchased and
upgraded separately.
And madam chair mr chair have we
seen this it isn't individual
project anywhere
madam chair representative so it
has been funded as a project
through the general obligation
bonds package before and then
last year we funded it through
the general funds capital and
essentially it's you know a big
chunk of money that do it is
that deploying all over the
state to upgrade the
infrastructure that kind of
provides the back bone for that
communication system.
And madame chairman's cars well
do we know what percentage of
the project is complete versus
budget and the.
Associated expenditure
madam chair representative I i'm
sorry I don't have that
information before me but we do
have it on file so I can get it
and get back to you later today.
So many chairmen scores were we
know how much money will be
required to finish up that
mind was actually.
Madam chair representative yes
so like I said the kind of total
project estimated for quite a
while has been about a hundred
and seventy million dollars
I again I
can give you the exact figure on
what we funded to date I don't
have that off the top of my head
right now but I would say maybe
we're roughly halfway there
madame chairman's car as well I
would very much appreciate.
No I will we stand on that
project is it appears to be
pretty significant amount
madame chair representative yeah
I can get that information back
to you later today and and just
to give you a sense you know we
we've kind of intentionally been
phasing funding for this project
because it is so large and also
given the fact that you know
that the the agency
is you know managing the project
and getting things done
progressively but like if we
provided them all the money
today they wouldn't be able to
go out and just spend it and get
it all done in the next year for
instance so we're kind of
rolling rolling the money out
progressively
and the work is happening
progressively as well and add
obtainer's cars last question
this
modernization project is the
responsibility of do it.
Madam chair representative yes.
Thank you
scott thank you representative
dunkin
thanks manager i'm gonna follow
up on that miss carswell if it's
possible so our county has a
communication center is that
related are you putting the new
equipment into our communication
center.
Mister chair representative no
so
my understanding is you know
they're they're upgrading kind
of like the towers and stuff
like that that provides sort of
the ultimate foundation
for those radio radio
communications systems and you
know another big goal of this is
so that
kind of everyone can be
communicating on in the same way
and so that the ability to be
and radio communication is
consistent throughout the state
there are certain places right
now where the state police for
instance can kind of lose the
ability to communicate with
dispatch
thinking about him chermouth
cars also it's basically just
for the state police.
I'm madam chair representative
no it will benefit all public
safety agencies state wide and
that's just an example of sort
of the need for this okay thank
you manager that's what I was
wondering if it was for one
specific group or force for all
of our police department shares
sheriff's departments and state
place madame chair
representative yes for everyone
thanks madame chair that's
ripped on kind represent harper
thank you chair and chairman
california you
I just wanted to maybe clarify
what's going on
so
you go back maybe two or three
decades and
different agencies had different
radio systems and they would
work on different radio
frequencies think of like your
your car radio right
so the police department might
have a different frequency than
the county sheriffs then the
state police and as technologies
have developed two there are
actually better more stable
frequencies right think about
your wifi right it used to be
two point five ghz and now it's
five year to hurt soon you know
people are talking about wifi
seven right so so what the
responding is really doing is
allowing us to upgrade our
infrastructure that towers so
that the work or folks in
different public safety folks
can upgrade their systems to
work on different frequencies
that are better and then can be
shared amongst all the different
agencies so they can they don't
have to pick up a different
radio if they want to talk to a
different person they can use
the same equipment
thank you thank you represent
harper I have a one question and
think you represent towns and
for
having us explain how this
general obligation bonds work
what happens if anyone are the
questions fails.
Um madam chair than the bonds
would not be issued for the
projects that were part of that
bond question and they would not
be funded
thank you
thank you expert so the the
funding that had been allocated
to them does that go back or is
it just not expe.
Madam chair so the bonds would
just not be sold at all so
essentially no funding would be
issued for the projects that you
all had authorized.
Thank you.
The.
Now i'm chair
I just wanted to away in on that
radio communication system it
really is an advantage for the
whole state in terms of public
safety and creating a system
that is compatible amongst all
of the cities in the counties
and the municipalities and what
it does is it really creates a
better system for our public
safety
in terms of fighting crimes so I
just wanted to comment on thank
you
any other questions committee
the will the committee.
Madam chair this is for passing
this is not a temporary tip
thank you
madam madame chair move a dupe
a do pass motions on the table
by representative chandler
seconded by representatives
call the role.
Representative yes
representative because the.
Representative channel yes
representative yes
representative.
Yes.
Representatives are yes
representative towns.
And.
Yes
congratulations chairline to you
have a do pass on house bill
three zero eight five ten to
zero and representative towns
into explains vote
medicare I think although this
has been customary that in times
when we have three and a half
billion dollars new money I
think we ought to reluctant our
bonding.
Philosophically and and say if
this cost of additional.
Is is really worth it or we
deploying our capital and right
manner and I I have
I think bonding is it's a great
process.
The money like we've had here
over a year.
I don't know that.
Additional costs to go out with
that thank you thank you mister
chair you'll you will stay in
the hotseat to explain the next
on the docket hb two fifty two.
Coffee or anything water.
Manager whenever you're ready
whenever you're ready mister
chair ready right now well all
right let's go let's do it okay
so folks this morning we will
also present the twenty twenty
four house version of the tax
ominous bill and when I first
begin by thanking each and every
one of you for your hard work
over the past three weeks the
work that we have done in this
committee again continues to
amaze me and I continue to
appreciate the civility and the
participation by each and every
single member as we move forward
to this goal of today and so
based on the discussions that we
had last week in the joint house
and it taxed meeting again I I
was very much interested in
hearing their perspectives on
what they wanted to have or of
what they were seeking to have
is their priorities in the house
in immediately senate version of
a tax armor because bill.
And so last week's meeting was
simply that in terms of a
sharing of ideas and and
understanding of concepts and
perhaps trying to avoid what we
had last year and that was
during the last two days of the
session in regards to having to
convene in a conference
committee to hash out
differences and so where I think
we're moving towards that end
if you'll note if you look at
the at the house tax version of
the tax armed with bill it's a
ganary a revisit to twenty
twenty three this year's bill
was drafted intentionally to
make it non veto ball lessons
learned last year is that when
you make a bill and try to clue
include everything it may
destroy everything and we saw
the worst of that last year so
this year to make it non vehicle
we we create it in a way where
there are no rebates within the
bill that is passing over to the
senate or may pass over to the
senate as well as there are no
moving funds from the state
treasury like airmarks in this
case to
anything so at this point in
time noting that we have been
working with the lfc to come up
with the capacity and we knowing
now that the capacity is two
hundred million in regards to
what I have been told that we
should be able to follow as a
direction that is direction that
I have taken and then try to be
responsible in regards to how we
can create graphs something that
takes into account that number
what we've done is is is our
best to stay within that dollar
amount with an allowance for
this entered with the senate to
do its own work as well.
This year's bill noted noting
that the difference last year to
this year that last year we just
had a lot more capacity to work
with so we wanted to do
everything in the kitchen sink
and we found ourselves
being cut by that that's why it
was vetoed so this year with
less of a capacity are built
this year as highlighted by
house build two fifty two which
is the tax brackets
bill that I presented to this
body last week that is the most
expensive
portion in this tax package but
it is in the principle of the
package providing true tax
reform for all new mexicans
especially those at the low to
middle of income wage brackets
others in this bill
and now not all note those here
in a minute.
Continue provide the potential
benefits for all the mexicans
and not simply just specific for
industries and or initiatives
that may be popular today we
want to make sure that we were
taking this by a way of
providing access to that these
benefits are felt by as many
mexicans as possible and so at
this point in time if you allow
me to go over
the
bills that are part of this
year's
tax honour this bill for the
house and and note that we went
through a practice here were
where I had had folks go through
and and and check their their
their most
popular if you will bill that
we've heard thus for and so
these are ones that that there
are those so the first one will
be.
The.
House bill one thirty four
energy storage tax credit this
bill would enable energy storage
facilities to be included and
industrial revenue bonds
negotiations the bill would
treat energy stores facilities
identical to renewable
generation projects.
The bill immense and existing
jeep deduction for sales of wind
and solar generation equipment.
To energy sales of energy
storage equipment to a local
government the bill provides a
sunset of seven one twenty
thirty four and the cost highest
cause in the outers would be two
million dollars.
The second one is house built
two fifty two that I present
last week a pipe ranked the bill
adjusts the income tax brackets
to increase progressivity and
target cut rates for working
families these proposed tax
breakers do not impose a tax
increase on any income level the
personal income tax structure
proposed in this section will
decrease taxes for all taxpayers
with the rate
with the rate decreases targeted
for the lowest income earners.
And the highest cause for this
in the outers would be a hundred
and seventy six million dollars.
Third angel investment credits
house bill eighty three.
Extends the sunset on angel
investment tax credits from the
end of twenty twenty five to the
end of twenty thirty that credit
is twenty five percent of the
investment up to sixty two
thousand five hundred dollars to
all credits capped at two
million dollars the credit is
not refundable but maybe carried
forward for five years the cost
for that in the outers may be
upwards of two thousand two
million dollars.
Fourth.
Rural health care practitioner
credits.
This this was presented to us by
representative else through hill
house bill one sixty three adds
over five thousand health care
practitioners to be eligible for
the rural health care to income
test credit of three thousand
dollars more than doubling the
current number of participants
at two thousand people.
To a group more healthcare
providers in rural new mexico
the credit is non refundable but
maybe carried forward for three
years the credit does not send
set the cost for this in the out
years may be upwards of eleven
eleven million dollars.
Next capital gains deductions
house bill thirty seven
presented by representative
channel repeals the forty
percent capital gains deduction
currently in statute and
provides a and it provides for a
twenty five hundred dollar
deduction for everyone it
retains a forty percent
deduction for the sale of new
mexico businesses up to one
million dollars of income to
make sure those who invest in
new mexico may protect their
investments
this would be effective and
applicable one one of twenty
twenty five this will not have a
negative impact on our general
fund but rather potentially may
increase upwards of sixty five
million dollars
the next is one fire recovery
tax credit representative
martinez and represent borregal
house build ten created income
credit to compensate for the
construction of homes destroyed
by the cafe can you herman peaks
fire for all wildfires in
calendar year of twenty twenty
one through twenty twenty three
cap at a total cost of five
million dollars per year and at
fifty fifty thousand dollars per
home this credit is non
refundable but maybe carry
forward for three years the cars
to this in the out years would
be again five billion dollars.
Next corporate income tax rate.
House bill to sixteen harper
replaces the two of the current
two tiered cit rate structure
with the flat rate of five point
nine percent.
Current rates current grand
rates are at four point eight
percent on incomes less than
five hundred thousand dollars
and at five point nine percent
on income more than five hundred
thousand dollars
cit tax payers with incomes over
five hundred thousand will pay
more than fifty five hundred
dollars more per year those are
incomes less than five hundred
thousand will pay about five
hundred dollars more per year on
average this would become
effective and applicable one one
of twenty twenty five with no
negative impact to the structure
but rather a potential benefit
of about seventeen million
dollars.
Next would be
city single sales a portion men
representative harper house
built two sixteen repeals using
a combination of sales
employment and physical presence
to calculate the apportionment
of multistate corporate income
tax in favor of using only sales
for all cooperations and passed
through entities this will in
general increase corporate
income taxes for national and
international corporations with
smaller physical presence in new
mexico but more sales and
provide very substantial tax
reductions for businesses that
have a relatively large property
and payroll relative to their
sales within new mexico this
provision is intended to
incentivise cooperations to
build plants built facilities
and headquarters in new mexico
and higher new mexico workers
but export the new mexican
products produced produced
products or services out of the
state at this point in time I
don't see any recognized impact
positive or negative
that the legislative finance
committee was able to provide
for me
on this
sorry
second a last house bill ninety
three representative cakes
medicaid renovation g rt
reductions create a grt
deduction on home reservative
renovations like rams and in
shower bars for those on
medicaid there is no sunset to
this there is a potential
negative impact to the two to to
the general fund of about four
hundred and thirty five thousand
dollars in the out years and and
finally
challenge your provider guarty
deductions represent cadena
house bill one sixty six creates
a grt deduction for profour
profit childcare providers on
contract or receiving
grandfathers from ecd.
For from the guardia the
deduction will sunset july first
of twenty thirty four and there
is a potential negative impact
to our general fund in the out
years of about four and a half
million dollars and with that
matter and members of this
committee we would stand for any
questions that I would be
remembered by the introduce
members of my expert staff and
that is
this mail is the daughters of
jennifer beyond and then we have
branded.
Great brand eggs combined so
with that being said manager we
will stand for any questions
thank you mister chair al before
we go to questions from the
committee we're going to go to
the audience if you are in favor
and like to speak in support of
this bill please stand up.
These are for the for those who
are in support of the bill
anyone in the room.
Mister chair members of the
committee filled your work with
mexico voices for jordan
I guess to quote
representative harper they're a
good bill is one that you like
at least seventy percent of
something like that and the I
We wish that there was a
increase in at the high end
like
we understand it that's not in
the cards this year we do
I like the fact that the capital
gains from last year that
compromise is back in the bill
this year and that will help
to make our tax system a little
more fair and a little more
stable and so we especially
appreciate those to pieces in
this legislation thank you
thank you bill and anyone else
in room
morning madame chairman members
of the committee my name is
market goods and i'm raising a
support in particular there are
many good things this was
mentioned before but in
particular cheer champers
energy storage utility scale
storage is a very good piece to
this bill it's important for
great reliability sustainability
that that peace be in there and.
Much anyone else in the room
well good assume it reads your
hand if you're in favor first we
have and I really hope I don't
which are your name developed.
Not they did that perfect chair
woman and thank you
sure women and committee members
I am to west all i'm with the
greater albuquerque chamber of
commerce and there's a lot in
this bill that work out and have
to go through we appreciate the
hard work that everybody on the
committee has been doing
especially chairman line take a
dealing with trying to get
something that is going to get
past the finish line we'd like
to talk specifically about how
still two fifty two though there
are other things that we do
support the angel tax credit
among them but attacking the
state's personal income tax
rates and brackets is job number
one and as representative lent
is said it's just can increase
the number of brackets it's
going to address the rates it's
going to change the income rate
within each brand and that's
going to really help all tax
payers with rate decreases
targeted at the lowest income
earners and the most savings
realized really by our
believered middle class there is
just no way to emphasize how
important this is
our pit brackets haven't been
adjusted since two thousand
eight and that should answer it
all again while there's a lot to
look at in the still two fifty
two the core of it the original
of it on the tact brackets the
chamber really supports it thank
you so much for all your heart
work thank you next is
communified.
Great sorry difficulty and
moving thank you summit.
You're meeted again.
Now yes
okay sorry about that just
having some technical
difficulties thank you so much
madame chair and members of the
committee i'm communicable men
representing the real ground a
chapter of the sierra club we
strongly support the inclusion
of HB one thirty four energy
storage tax credits making the
treatment to earth storage
facilities equal to that of
renewable facilities were left
with a couple of questions
it does sound like the
refundable tax credits might be
spun off into a separate package
and that are hope is that the
other climate tax credits will
be in there and we'd also like
to better understand the fiscal
impact of a single factor
corporate tax structure for oil
and gas in the state and would
love to see an fire thank you so
much
thank you so much now it's hard
for those who are an opposition
mister man chairman members of
the committee
while I sincerely do appreciate
all the fine things that are in
this tax package that encourage
investment in new mexico
particularly trouble that don't
understand the wisdom of
mandating single sales factor
for a lot of companies you know
it's it's popular in our break
polarized climate by store rocks
with big companies.
National companies but I
represent several of those folks
in new mexico that employed
several thousand new mexicans
that provide impredable benefits
and high paying jobs that do
incredible work in their local
communities with volunteer
employees contributions and
money and support work at a time
when we're already experiencing
his storic tax coaches and
revenues and new
mexico I think it's a it feels a
bit short sided when we're
trying to encourage investment
property plan equipment and
employees and new mexico to
eliminate the ability of
corporations to use those
investments health offset their
corporate tax liability so I
just don't see how it.
With everything were saying
we're trying to do a new mexico
and have a particularly hard
problem with that burden thank
you.
Thank you so much.
Thank you matter chairman is the
convention morning my name is
jady bolinkan registered
lobbyists for union pacific
railroad
the only issue in this bill for
union pacific railroad is the
mandate at single sales factor
i'm an explain to you why
as you've heard this is this is
a fairly complex complex tax
matter it's way more complicated
than one single sentence that
says all business income she'll
be a portion you know based on a
single sales factor those of you
who bend out of the border and
santa teresa no that we have a
great thing going we're trying
to develop international trade
down there and get that border
going
only about twenty miles away
there is a very very competitive
operation tried to do the same
thing steal our businesses get
those manufacturing a
warehousing jobs in all pass of
texas let's remember texas has a
zero corporate income tax ours
is my point nine percent so
right out of the gate union
pacific and our businesses down
there the sanitarist are at
almost a six percent tax
disadvantage that means those
operations are six percent less
profitable now to take this
provision on in mandated on
union pacific real you make our
operations at the border even
less competitive without passo
that is clearly not the intent
but that is the result of having
that provision in there
there should be exemptions there
should be qualifications to that
because it's more complicated
than what it's thank you thank
you mister bellington market
good morning mister madam
chairman members of the
committee my name is marketing
is also and I do raise today on
behalf of horizon
to speak solely to a
representative harper single
sales factor issue which right
now we would be opposed to as
many my cars have said there's
quite a bit of investment that
goes on by a lot of companies on
their own has over pretty close
to six hundred employees in new
mexico.
Has just this in the last twenty
twenty two spread about a
hundred billion dollars on
upgrades in infrastructure to
various facilities and has also
included about they have about a
thirty two billion dollar
paperless for their employees I
just hear new mexico and so this
would impact us negatively
significantly and in the past
this committee and every pretty
much every year that we have
done single sales factor there
was an exclusion that was
included or are
we were very much appreciated it
was included last year as a
matter of fact in in the tax
package and we have very much
appreciate having that save
language included again if this
measure does school for and
without the sunset which we've
also talked to with
representative harder and the
reasons for the negative task
consequences about that but it
is a disincentive for companies
like that and we're trying to
help you with school companies.
Thank you very much matter
thank you anyway else in the
room
it's not i'm sure the committee
i'm ready about.
We have also made significant
broadband infrastructure
investments and for the same
reasons outlined by mr goods
all.
Thank you.
Regularly are you okay are
anyone on the zoom in opposition
to this bill please raise your
hand.
Develop your your hand is still
raised would you like to speak
in opposition.
Okay coming your hand is still
raised.
Let's go to.
God
I think she careless on tag.
Yes madam chair can you hear me
yes we can okay thank you madame
chair members of the committee
i'm cornless santag president
ceo of the new mexico business
coalition i've got mixed
feelings about this didn't know
winter speak but I will tell you
were very supportive of a house
bill two fifty two
we have seen even from colorado
when you lower taxes people come
and business thrives were
opposed to anything.
That would cause a tax increase
less is more when you're talking
about taxes so I just want to
make that general statement as
you go through this whole
process anytime you're
increasing taxes that is the
deterrent from businesses in the
state growing and investing in
their business and for new
businesses to come here so I
hope you'll keep that in mind
new mexico needs business to
come here thank you very much
for your consideration of my
comments.
Mr chair anything else before we
go to committee no manager were
ready for questions will go
first to representative channel
thank you madame chair
there are many many things that
I like about this tax package.
But I do want to express my
concern in particular about the
single sales factor
first on the.
Seems like a late arrival and by
that I mean mister chair we had
a really good meeting on friday
and I very much appreciate
your effort mister chair to have
a combined meeting with the
senate in the house that was
great and we had a great
conversation mister chair
amongst all of us as to what the
priorities should be and I think
we need to acknowledge that we
heard loud and clear from the
senate side at least the
majority leader of the sanit who
has a very strong interest in
tax policy as you know mister
chair
really objecting to pursuing
the.
And I will say it's also one
that I object to.
So let me sure those reasons
first while I appreciate your
statement mr chair about the
advantages that at least the
perceived advantages.
Aside question
have been substantiated but at
least their perceived advantages
we failed to really acknowledge
the fact that in our assessment
or fire which we got I got this
morning it says in determinant
but likely negative in the fire
that we received I think mister
chair that was also the same
last year when we were looking
at.
I am disappointed that we do not
have a better sense about single
sales and what the true impact
is across the board and I wish
we could try to get our arms
around that much adam chair and
mister chair before we take this
on
in the state cause I think we
have a responsibility to do our
very best to get some sense of a
how negative madam chair and
mister chair it would be so
that's point one or two the fire
although you read part of it or
at least in your remarks there
echoed a number of them points
it failed to know however the
oil and gas industry will likely
c significant tax savings
because those businesses have
large property and pay roll
factors but very low sales
factors in the state and we
don't know what the size and
scope of that is mister chair
because as they said we haven't
ever been able to get a real
strong read on how what the
fiscal impact is of such a move
it concerns me that we are
looking to give a tax cut to one
of our most significant
industries in the state madame
chair and mister chair and I
think we need to be very
transparent with that factor at
least that statement in our
assessment that it could well
cut taxes for
our biggest industry and
therefore cut taxes for the
state you know limit our lower
revenues and that we just don't
have a good grasp on and I don't
think we should be moving
forward until we have a better
grass on the fiscal impact
lastly in this goes to
our cooperation and working with
the senate last year this was a
significant ish issue I believe
mister chair not the only issue
of course but a significant one
in the discussions between the
house and the senate and I know
our goal has been to move behind
out mister chair and not get a
set us up for another.
Conflict situation that might
forces in the conference
committee that was I think me
knew as the lead on that for us
I i'm sure you can appreciate
how difficult it was just
observing it mister chair was
difficult and I can only imagine
how those of you who were
experiencing it felt but I would
really like to avoid a
conference committee and I would
hate to think that this would be
an issue could be an issue in in
it and I would like a commitment
if we do not take it out and i'm
contemplating emotion asking
that we take it out that
everybody agree it's not going
to send us in the conference if
we keep this in in the senate
takes it out.
At lastly last year as a
compromise on the single sales I
felt I didn't object one the
package came because I knew how
hard people were working but we
had
I guess you might call it cafe
material style single sales
you might be single sales one
you know or you might not be
single sales you could do three
factor and that in my opinion is
the absolute worst it's hard on
the tax department I can only
imagine tracking that mister
chair and madame chair and also
you know it's like well I guess
me as an individual taxpayer
might start coming forward
mister chair saying i'd like
you know the cafe serious style
of personal income tax were I
could choose methodologies just
so that I could pick which one
gives me the best tax advantage
so any effort to try to go to a
system where we give them a
cafeteria style choice between
single sales.
You know three factor I think it
would be a complete disaster for
us mister chair and would
strongly discourage it so to
some
object to single sales we don't
know the full scope of its
impact and until we do I don't
think we should be pursuing it
to it seems likely to give tax
advantages to our largest
revenue source oil in gas and
three I think it could send us
mr chair into conflict with the
senate when in fact we had
intended mister chair through
our friday discussions to have
some level of consistency and
you know I I don't want to say
it was a full consensus but a
general consensus about the
direction we were going and so
thank you very much madame chair
and.
My conversation will not be able
single sales but imagine there
will be more on that just
briefly want to say that I
appreciate some of the things
we've done and here that are
positive for business overall
especially no is highlighting in
your looking at the different
things that were encouraging a
rural health care practitioners
encouraging more people to use
the industries who want to see
grow encouraging investment in
the state I think that's really
a positive overall and I know
that we are always moving
towards transparency and I think
we are moving in the right
direction and especially last
friday's meeting is is
definitely something that I had
never heard of happening before
when it came to the tax package
so I really appreciate
leadership separate for that so
I know we had a limited
capability
to move around around a two
hundred million dollars tax
package but I do feel like
there's a lot done with very
with the nominal means we have
so thank you.
Thank you representative.
Six minutes here and chairman is
he great to see all this morning
and and I want to think all the
folks here and for their their
comments
it's it's interesting uhm.
Of course I will talk a little
bit about the single sales
factor it seems that that is the
ear that the provision is bill
that's drawing the most
attention
but I did want to take just a
moment to talk about
the bill overall
managed here and and chairman
and there are
many great provisions in here
we've seen i'm sure chairman
some great impact are from the
angel investment tax credit that
a sun setting I think it makes
sense to push that out.
I'm i'm very interested in the
fire recovery credit.
I appreciate the.
The purpose of that
would like to learn a little bit
more about how that's that
structure that's the the one
bill here that we really have
not seen before
we are paused there if you have
a moment i'm sure in chairman
just III know this has been
recently
updated to perhaps strike more
targeted at what we were
attempting and we just maybe
talk a little bit about that how
that the structure now.
Yes madame chairman
representative harper it'll be
on h thirty one of your
substitute bill and this bill is
specifically for fires that
occurred in calendar years
twenty twenty one through twenty
twenty three so that i'll
include the cafcanian hermes
peak but also the make bride
fire in the black range fire and
the the credit year is
specifically against tax
liability so non refundable and
it's capped at fifty thousand
dollars per home so this is a
taxpayers who who can prove that
their home was destroyed in one
of these fires and that they
constructed a new home less any
federal assistance that they
received and the amount of that
expense that remains is what's
allowed to be taken as a credit
against personal income tax
liability carried for over it up
to three years
yeah so many share in chairman
is he thank you for that that
that was one of my questions was
can this be stacked you know
when it comes to
receiving the benefit of the
federal plus this and it sounds
like
now i'm sure chairman that has
been resolved here that it's
last that difference that's
right okay that's that's great I
think that's what we're
intending so thank you.
I also appreciate the rule
health care practitioner credit
and that were modifying the
hours so it doctors and nurses
can actually take the occasion I
know nurses don't work forty
hour work weeks they were
usually three twelves and so a
lot of them do not qualify in
the rural area because of that
so that this that is a great
change I really appreciate the
child providers yartee deduction
we had folks here earlier in the
session presenting on on that
and how they're helping their
families and and basically
eating the gross receipts tax
for them.
There are many great
things about this bill there are
of course the restructuring of a
personal income tax.
I personally like the flat tax
better
but this does really benefit
those who are on the lower
income scale and so I can
understand
helping those folks out
especially when we're doing
really well revenue wise with
three point five billion dollars
of revenue right now you know a
hundred and seventy six million
seems like a good thing.
There's others but manager
chairman one of the things I
really do not like about this
bill is the capital gains
deduction changes
this was
part of a bigger package that
was put in place maybe fifteen
years ago ish maybe twenty years
ago.
Um
to
essentially reform our banking
and our capital industry there
are many blows they went through
to address that and part of it
was this capital gains deduction
and we've been slowly whittling
away at that and and and I
am concerned that
you know this is going to hurt
investment in in rural areas
it's getting hurt and investment
in in urban areas as well
III.
Urban animal
I am grateful that there is a
provision in this bill that we
had last year which addresses
the sale of a new mexico and
business that was really my
biggest concern was that you
know in a moment part business
they go to sell and you know
they don't have a four one k or
you know a pension selling out
businesses there are retirement
estate
and I appreciate that we have a
provision who it says a million
dollars of that sale can be
deducted up to forty percent
I I would really i'd like to see
that be the average
price of selling a business
which is closer to two or three
million dollars
but this is you know this is a
one of those things right right
i'm i'm not going to stand here
and and say I have to like a
hundred percent of this building
have a pass I think mister
jordan did a great job
summarizing right this is one of
those parts of the thirty
percent of all that I don't like
that i'm going to support uhm.
So that said let's go to single
sales factor and
mount chair and chairman
last year and really every year
for the last eight years I
presented seeing a sales factor
in the merits of it and i'm just
gonna give you the very quick
description of what it is why
every state accept for
four now have gone away from the
three factor
and why I think it's important
so.
I'm just as an example because
examples are easier for me to
understand let's say we're
looking at how
I big multi state company pays
its income tax like mcdonalds
great listen say mcdonald's made
a billion dollars last year how
much that should be taxed in new
mexico right should it just be
won fifties.
Because we're once they are at a
fifty
probably not because there's
probably a lot more activity
mcdonalds in new york said in
new mexico right
so what happened was back in the
fifties and the sixties folks
put together and equation in it
at three parts
it just said what percent of
your payroll is in our state
versus everywhere else at one
percent of your buildings you're
you're your your real estate is
an arsenic or several realts and
and one percent of your sales is
in our state and everywhere else
it was just say in our case
mcdonald's it's.
Uhm four percent
payroll three percent property
and two percent sales
you would take that for three
into an average one together and
you get three percent.
So three percent of one billion
dollars is taxed in new mexico.
That's how the three factor
works that's how it basically
all the states have that in
place in the fifties and sixties
now the trauma that is.
States figured out that what
happens if.
The.
Um business the states to expand
outside of your state well I
mean they've got now more stuff
outside so that percentage goes
down or they hire more people as
the other state.
So that percentage gets bigger
outside your state it goes down
so now instead of three four two
it's maybe.
Three three two and so for
expanding outside your state
them the percentage goes down
that you collect here
right so it's almost an
incentive to expand outside of
your state because the tax they
pay here will go down
now the worst part is the other
side what happens if a business
here decides they want to hire
people or experience
then those factors go up and so
now it's for five eight
and now they are paying a much
higher percent of their taxi
here in the state and so it is a
major distance of to expand and
higher here
and that's why over the years
alabama arkansas california
colorado of kinetic delaware
georgia illinois indiana I work
kentucky louisiana main maryland
michigan minnesota missouri
nebraska
new jersey and you have share
joined us last year new york
north carolina or again
pennsylvania rhode is in north
carolina texas you taught west
virginia wisconsin and the
district of colombia are all
single sales factor
all notes that are five other
states don't tax income.
And
if we pass this so the only
states that will still have a
three single sales factor or
alaska huawei kansas and
oklahoma who are clearly the
bastions of good tax policy
so that said I I just I want to
maybe track something that was
said earlier.
To higher and expand in our
current system.
Increases
the tax paid it is a
disincentive on our current
system to go to single sales
factor.
Expanding and hiring a new
mexico
will no longer be considered as
a factor you will not be
penalised for doing that that's
why these are states have done
it.
And now going to the fire which
I think is fascinating right the
whole question how much is this
going to generator you know what
are we gonna lose like all good
tax reform it's wumpy some
people will pay more and some
people will pay less and when
you add that together it's
roughly equal maybe a little bit
negative here because
manager and chairman I
completely agree with a chair
channel we don't want to do a
cafeteria style and that's not
what's in here it is everyone
has to be single sales factor
it's not you get a picture one
that you like the most.
And so when you do it that way
you will have some winners and
losers and so I am actually
grateful that we have some
lobbyists here saying that this
is your hearts if we didn't that
would mean everyone was coming
out good and we were going to
lose a lot of money
right and all just mentioned
just because they were here.
Verizon
last year made twelve billion
dollars.
If this passes they might be an
extra one or two million to new
mexico.
Eighteen t last year made thirty
two billion dollars if this
passes they might pay an extra
one or two million to new mexico
union pacific last year made
twenty four billion dollars.
If this passes they might pay
five or six or seven million
more time mexico.
And the reason that they are
here
and spending their resource
money here is because we do not
pay we do not cherish gross
receipts tax on their local fuel
which is a huge deal they save
tens of millions of dollars
every year on that
provision
and I think that's a good thing
that's why we have a lot of
activity at senators.
So
I just want to say
that going to see your sales
factor
yes we will have some people
upset at us but it is good tax
policy that has been adopted by
states that are red and blue
because it encourages and as not
planished people from expanding
and hiring a new mexico.
My last comment
chairman should and i'll just
say two I just want to think
those who have supported this
voices for children to support
this center on budget and policy
has supported this
there been our prior secretary
to democrat secretary of the tax
permanent g money said this is a
great simplification in a great
thing so
the less than I want to speak to
is regards to the corporate
income tax removing that lord
bracket.
And this is one of those things
where you could look at me and
say what a terrible republican I
am i'm raising taxes on
corporations shouldn't I love
all corporations because on the
republican
well if you look at states that
have a a good tax code they only
have one set bracket.
And that's because the argument
that is made about pit brackets
like what we're doing here today
right folks who are perhaps
don't have as much coming in
there pocketbook maybe we
shouldn't tax at the same rate
as folks that have more coming
to their pocket books they can
they can maybe afford a little
bit more
you can't make that argument on
a corporation rate a corporation
than didn't make much this year
that doesn't mean it was a small
one it could have been a big one
that didn't make much rate
and
that revenue that they make it's
not like that is at the source
you know means of that that
business of you know putting
food on the table right it's
it's it's just what their
business made that you're not.
And so what states they have tax
codes do as they have the top
pit breaths top sip racket be
equal to the type pit gracket
and what that does it make sure
that there's not a disincentive
or there's not an instead of
distressing your business in a
different way right if you if
the if the corporate exact was
lol you might have some people
who would have structured as an
elc or something that would
be paying under the personal
Vice versa so that's why
I believe it's right to do to
have one corporate income tax
bracket at the top level just
good sound tax policy wise even
though that will generate a
little bit of extra revenue and
I leave that as good good tax
reform as well so with that man
i'm sure you need members thank
you mister chair for the time.
Representative.
I think you met chair chairman.
Your
adjust.
Regardless of where they are on.
The.
That is a good move.
I am.
I'm concerned about.
Including.
Energy storage private.
The.
The
process.
The.
Has been successful in times to
create jobs in the mexico that's
what it was that's what it was
designed to do.
Storage projects like is identi.
This creates a c.
Investment in san.
The.
And so I I think that is
probably.
And you have to realize.
But some of these that are
capturing the savings are
capturing these savings on the
back so in the mexico taxpayers.
For the benefit of out of state
shareholders and those that
consume that power outside of
the mexico.
That means a problem.
Removing the capital gains
production I think will be
detrimental to investments in
the.
The.
The.
Yes the measure is
seventy five percent for twenty
five percent account makes.
Makes good policy.
Okay you know but I represent.
Yeah.
Is is heavy.
As a state.
Date that it might be
detrimental to support an
industry that supporting you.
I think we have to look at that
I think we have to support all
industries that create jobs from
the mexicans that make.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Madame german community members
represent our tests first
congratulations and thank you
for checking this morning's
first part of the meeting
appreciate you you're welcome
forever manager mister chair and
regarding regarding the bill
that you propose in this
committee.
I'm i'm talking about the text
credit even the hospital one
forty
sure I think it is okay madame
chairman
representative hockey be health
oaking that bill simply stated I
mean that that that the cost of
that bill I think was upwarded
about fifty thousand fifty
million dollars and we just
don't have the capacity here and
I think to be responsible in
terms of of how we're trying to
create capacity and provide two
tax reform without creating a
christmas tree of sorts in our
tax package if if the senate
finds a way to fit that into
theirs absolutely but I think at
this point the way that we've
structured this here is that
with our limited based of
capacity we decided to go after
things that I think that
everybody knew mexico today
would be able to benefit from
and apprec.
Representative but I go.
And i'm not sure who i'm asking
this question to actually think
i'm asking my colleague
representative harper
regarding the single sales tax
and I see that there are a lot
of states that have gone to that
method so how to search
benefit small businesses and I
have to ask the question because
I am a small business and then
i'm here small business but I am
a business and i've been paying
taxes for business since twenty
thirteen well actually twenty
eleven
so i'm just wondering i've heard
all about the corporate side of
it but like a smile llc or
something like that can you
respond to that or mr chair I
don't know who i'm asking the
question to manage
medical I would do for that to.
Yeah
i'm sharing chairman and
represent great question so this
provision only applies to a
multi state corporation trying
to figure out what percent of
their total earnings gets taxed
in new mexico so for a small I
believe all of our small
businesses may maybe there's a
handful that or not are
structured as l c's or partner
ships this doesn't apply to them
because they're passed through
energies they pay it they pay
the comes through the personal
income tax so this really only
applies to a few dozens of
businesses.
Representative.
Madam by sharing and thank you
chairman lender for your
leadership on this package I
think it represents.
So many of our values and around
the round the table as a whole
and so I think there's there was
a lot of negotiati.
Just a lot of
new mexico I did want to give
you the opportunity though to
talk about some of the reason.
So if if you would call them in
in the presentation of capital
gains and I think that river
their dunkin had brought that up
in regards to how it became to
be a million dollars
and and you we called at last
year when it was presented in
the original house version of
the tax package that that number
was it was much smaller and so
as it evolved through last
year's process and as it
involved through the house floor
went to the senate it was a
it was massage if you w.
Was taken and appreciated the
collaboration was had between
center and house members and so
it evolved to the language that
it is in today which reflects
exactly what it was last year
when it passed and went up to
the governor and so that was the
evolution ab.
I just wanted to point out on
some of these
initiatives that we did take on
I know with the eve tax credit
we also did receive federal
funding for it for that and I
know that's going to be in
progress starting this year and
so it gives us I think time to
start looking at doing a build
out and looking at building
capacity and start looking at
really bringing down the cost of
these before we we really start
doing a full blow out on that so
I I think it's happening it's.
Um.
Because we do need to be able to
have the capacity to eventually
travel across our state using a
needy and I don't know that we
have that capacity at this time
so
I just wanted to comment on that
I think that the real health
care initiative I think yeah
representative garcia will be
very happy about that I know he
he's been working really hard at
that and I at times you know we
we put different
services that would be.
I think just to to really plug
rural new mexico we need to make
sure that those services.
And she the ones that have to
travel to participants so I
think that that's a a good part
of that of course the angel tax
credit I think that that really
does
faster the ability to to bring
in investors and businesses and
a course for day care services I
was particularly happy to see
that that made that tax credit
metered in so very pleased with
the overall reason.
Manager i'll move a do not pass
on house bill two fifty two but
I do pass on house taxation
revenue committee substitute for
house bill to fifty two
think your representative of
harper we have a prepared
motion.
Oh.
Yes manager
representative
representative channel
yes but i'd like to explain my
vote
representative dunkin yes
representative googles.
Representative.
Representative yes
representatives.
Representatives are at all yes.
Representative.
Management checker than yes and
chairman and yes ma'am.
We have a do pass a successful
motion on the house tax and reb
committee substitute for.
Thank you very much I do just
want to reiterate that my
concerns about including the
single sales factor in that not
only do I disagree with it as
policy but also my concerns that
it could lead us to a conference
committee and I would like to
underscore again that it would
be a real disappointment if that
were something that drove us
into conference where we then
have yet another controversy
with our colleagues in the
senate so I would encourage us
to be accommodating should it be
pulled out on the senat.
Thank you merchant woman thank
you committee members for that
boat at this point in time now
that we've done the work of this
committee to pass out of a tax
bill now we're we'll begin to
hear other bills that maybe does
it doesn't have a reflection
here in this tax on numbers bill
and I think what will begin with
perhaps it on on wednesday
having an alcohol day as I like
to call it
not to drink not to part
but attack the talk about
alcohol policy and the bills
that are are surrounding that
this year
thank you
and chairman does the timing of
the alcohol day coincide with
getting this bill out
but that that'll be it desert
just a heads up thank you matter
to thank you for uh letting
folks know about the potential
schedule for our week and I just
want to share a lot and see
representative herber night
where late today because we are
presenting a bipartisan proposal
to reform alcohol tax modern
right not you represent
representative her non design I
relate because we were
presenting our alcohol tax bills
in household and look forward to
