Representative Harper.
Representative at this.
Representative lu Han.
Did.
President you good morning
Representative last best.
Here thank you.
Representative Montoya.
Representative role metal.
I'm here thanks thank you
Representative Scott.
Thank you Representative
Stansbury.
Here good morning everyone good
morning Representative Strickler
here.
Thank you.
Mr Chandler.
Here.
Chair Martinez.
I'm here.
All right we have a quorum all
good morning everyone I hope
everyone had a good weekend the
restful weekend and I hope
everyone staying safe and
healthy we've got three bills
this morning we've got house
bill ninety eight which is TRD
agency tax cleanup bill that
Representative Harper and I are
are caring together we have
house bill forty two which is
the lowincome comprehensive tax
rebate Representative Chandler
visor Chandler.
and then we got house bill forty
five changes to the rural health
practitioner tax credit by
Representative Garcia.
In the matter Representative
Garcia is is is on but if he is
on maybe we can go through his
bill first
given that the other two bills
are being carried by members of
the committee at inotes had a
reserve Chandler and observe
Harper have the other tax
cleanup bill in another
committee this morning as well
so it will be going back and
forth but A. president gets yes
here we could probably.
Go through his bill and and and
get role in the U. CM anywhere I
don't I don't see him up there
Mr chair Mr chair.
It happens to be in state
government Mr chair because I'm
in both committees we can now do
it be in two places at once in
our new virtual world.
And he is in state government
I'm watching it now.
He is sending a bill.
Yes Sir.
Might be finishing up soon Sir
but I that's not quite impacted
in that case why don't we start
with house bill ninety eight.
Representative Harper and we
could just get Roland and and
we'll try our best we'll see
what we can do here in terms of
us switching back and forth.
whenever we have secretary
Jordan Clark on the line yet but
she's going to be one of our
experts you late so I don't know
if you see her back there I will
move for older permanent can do
right now thank you for telling
excellent excellent so we'll get
started
house bill ninety eight members
there's a substitute bill that
was filed on Friday with the and
our analyst everyone should have
it.
The long and short the committee
sub amends the tax code to make
administrative changes and
clarifications prevent disputes
closes loopholes and identifies
cost savings as I said at the
beginning this is a TRD agency
bill the original bill have has
been endorsed by the revenue
stabilization Tax Policy
Committee the tax advisory
committee as well as the tax
practitioner advisory committee
these are those bipartisan multi
agency committees that were
created a couple years ago.
As you know the code needs
regular updating in order to
reflect case law involving
technologies and administrative
changes as well as lessons
learned.
There is a small fiscal impacts
the bill but all of them are
considered to be non material
Some of the changes from the
original bill verses the
committee substitute we remove
section six and seven from the
bill because there are concerns
about limiting personal income
tax credits to residents only
could potentially create a U. S.
Commerce Clause violation so
that's that's out from the
original bill that was endorsed
by rest up to the substitute the
substitute also amends a couple
of sections of law to clarify
the ability of physician
practice groups to claim these
items you probably heard quite a
bit from from those folks over
the last couple weeks about that
specific piece there were some
concerns that the language in
the regional building really
match what they're trying to do.
Up it also changes to your these
wage levy language to allow the
delinquent taxpayer to retain
forty times the state minimum
wage per week versus forty times
the federal minimum wage simply
because our state minimum wage
has better kept up with
inflation with that I want to
pass it on to my co sponsor
Richard Harper and then we'll
have our our expert our
signature of taxation revenue
seventy Chardon Clark go ahead
said Harper.
Thank you chairman of a great
introduction and the as always a
pleasure to work with you on on
this.
Bipartisan legislation it really
is to help the tax department
minister Tax Code.
it has been many years
since our tax department had run
an agency tax cleanup bill.
and that causes problems not
only for the department but for
the tax rate.
my thank you know my dad as a
practicing CPA is a in doing it
for more than thirty years and
it helps not just the department
but the taxpayers when they need
understand clearly.
of the law what they should be
taxed what they should not be
taxed.
So I started last year we've got
our first HSD cleanup bill.
And and.
Senator Clark.
It's a great job putting that
together kind of very short
notice this year we have a very
comprehensive bill that really
touches lots of different parts
of the code and I was pleased to
be part of the bipartisan
committees the tax policy
committee to help review and and
give direction and ended up
endorsing this bill.
and.
Thank I really like one of the
changes here is that
Chair Martinez mentioned at work
now trying the.
Garnishment kind of for for
garnishment we can tax.
Tax dollars to the state minimum
wage.
Was much smarter and going with
the federal.
I also really like section three
which talks about innocent
taxpayer spouse really.
Many of you have probably know a
friend like I do who
It was an ugly divorce and
one of the.
Members of that partnership
decided that they were going to
run up a bunch of credit card
bills and and just I it was tens
of thousands of dollars
and because of our our how the
statutes read right now the the
innocent spouse had to
participate in covering half of
those expense.
so I really like see
this provision that says
essentially if the feds have
granted missing spouse relief
for certain trade in the state
is also going to implement the
essence Phelps really for the
same period so it again and it
aligns our tax code with the
federal I'm I'm not going to all
the details here.
but this is this is good this is
good
legislation will help the
department and the tax payer so.
With that.
Mr chair I yield.
Thank you recover and and I I I
made a mistake it should be
Representative child traveler
chairing the meeting it's just
weird when you don't have to go
to the hot to present the bill
and you just can't keep flowing
so I'm gonna pass it on to
present Chandler in the event
that she has to leave we'll have
Representative role metal
takeovers chair.
Thank you very much Mr chair
Secretary shirt in clerk would
you like to add anything to the
presentation.
Thank you madam chair and I want
to thank Representative Martinez
and Representative Harper for
their comments on this bill I
think they did a great job of
explaining what the bill does it
for you I just want to thank the
staff of the taxation and
revenue department who
percolated up all these ideas
over the interim and worked
really hard starting way back in
about June and July to you know
start drafting these proposals
and identify them and and that
them fully and with that I'll
just stand for any questions the
members may have.
All right thank you very much
it's now time for public comment
I see one attendee who has
has his hand raised.
Clarice Bello.
Clarice.
I don't hear it I believe you
are muted maybe any of his hand
this down all right
this group
well there you are hello.
So how are you very well if you.
Yes we can.
Yes.
Boy and the second me
additional.
And one of the US.
The members of the committee.
So you will Senator the one that
individuals the one sent off and
will make you go for the money I
will.
Right away.
Representative in a bushel the
act requiring the loss.
On Monday ma'am in with the
of our whole idea must be
attentive be L. as in the US
ideas I'll order.
The building back let me smoke
given that most of us taking to
personas that are Sandel.
Muscimol a person not going on
the order EDS.
I thank you madam and then with
the study the financier.
We for media usual don't be in
rush through the
but also mental hospitals people
there by adding them the list
the program of the windows.
I mean Madam they meet me at the
what are the political reducing
with.
Shown.
With us the more persistent.
No the the ideal possible
fourteen twenty three more with
the annual commercial the the
million injectable.
One thank but the other with the
sentiment that.
It would be so.
Twenty two reporting bills
Senator deal.
And then also.
The lady to show correct but
only for my tax.
Yes bye and that's six
With with units.
You know like when we are in
rural Mexico.
Okay so the amendment abortion
for me yes they were hosting
this what is he.
Much of it would entail forty.
What if we inject.
Madam chair put point of order
I believe the the public comment
district was in support and I
can I can translate.
Roughly for all of us but it was
that it was Committee in support
of house bill forty two which I
believe is is your other build
your elector bill that will be
coming up here a little bit
and so the Mr Bello was stating
that you know her family has
been impacted by COVID and for
her this is a positive step in
tax reform is to increase.
Of the low income comprehensive
tax rebate for families like
hers more less that that's what
was stated thank thank you very
much Mr excuse me
Madam chair
We do have an interpreter that's
online right now.
So we because we were in
anticipation of what was going
to happen on hospital forty two
so I guess what we want to let
everyone know is that.
House bill forty two will be
heard after house bill ninety
eight so those people that have
their hands raised please do
that only per house bill ninety
eight at the moment.
Thank you very much miss Medina
for that clarification I see
Carrie Brunner has our hands on
this bill house bill ninety
eight.
A good morning madam chair and
members of the committee.
Excuse me my name is Kerry robin
pruner and I am the registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
Medical Society we do support
house bill ninety eight
particularly that clarification
that was needed in the committee
substitute.
Around the deduction that our
healthcare providers are
currently able to take and why
we've been working on this
clarification for several years
and just want to say our
profound thank you to the
attacks and Revenue Department
secretary starting Clark and her
team and also the sponsor of the
bill chair Martinez for working
with us to make sure that this
language was tight to ensure
that the providers that are
currently eligible to take
production continue to be
eligible to is deduction
regardless of how they organize
their practices legally and not
we ensure that we're not
increasing on the eligibility of
this disruption to the point
where it would be a fiscal
impact the state budget so it's
been a thin needle to thread and
we appreciate everybody's help
and support in getting it done
thank you so much.
Thank you Mr we have Jason Weaks
up next.
Thank you Mr chair
madam vice chair and committee
members my name's Jason Weaks I
represent on the contract this
for Optum Optum is the largest
physician management group in
the state and I'm just like my
sprinter we've been working with
the department of the Sanchez on
that specific provision related
to the provider tax deduction in
this bill for quite some time
it's a needed clarification from
our standpoint that ensures that
our physicians can continue to
take this important deduction
and we just really want to echo
exactly on the same sentiment
from the medical society really
appreciate this a clarification
being placed in the law we do
feel like it is perfectly
tailored to you give the
relevant clarification allow
everybody who's currently taking
the deduction to continue to
take it without expanding the
scope of the deductions so
wanted to express that sentiment
we are rising strong support
legislation and thank you all.
Thank you very much Mr Weaks
miss Romano.
This is house bill ninety eight.
Frank Mason please house bill
ninety eight.
Can you hear me madam chair I
can okay the thank you good
morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Fred
maybe going on with thank you
Mexico and first who does to the
department and the sponsors are
this bill to clean up the code
and I hope this does become an
annual tradition I think it's
great the state great for
taxpayers I want to talk
specifically about one of the
loopholes that's close by this
bill.
Last spring as many New Mexicans
began staying home to reduce the
risk of exposure to COVID
nineteen some grocers began
imposing the state's gross
receipts tax on groceries that
were ordered for home delivery
this tax which was over and
above any delivery charges was
especially burdensome on elderly
disabled and immuno compromised
New Mexicans who are the highest
risk of severe illness to
prevent deliver groceries from
being taxed house bill ninety
eight would change the law so
that any food sold by a grocery
stores not just at the stores
will be tax exempt the change to
the food tax can be found on
page fifty one line six.
Root vegetables and baby food
should not be taxed regardless
of whether they are purchased by
someone standing in the store or
ordering online or by phone and
having those same groceries
delivered.
Mr chair if I may hand the gavel
back to
Representative Romero I have to
go to my next committee thank
you for the opportunity to care
about my first chair thank you
very much.
Thank you madam chair R. eight
will look at the hands receive
Lucy Hernandez if she's
available now.
House bill ninety eight.
And my if you're there.
Your you should be able to speak
I see that.
It's all open if they will give
them ten more seconds.
Okay everyone I think we'll go
ahead and move on and close
public comment for those in
favor of house bill ninety eight
and sar apologies to anyone if
there is tough to technical
difficulties there we definitely
want your voices heard so bear
with us
alright Mr chair well let's go
to those who are against house
bill ninety eight first.
Any hands raised for and an
opposition to house bill ninety
eight.
If you lower your hands I still
see money and Lucy were pro so.
Please disregard that.
Okay and any comments for house
bill ninety opposition.
Okay let's go ahead and give Mr
chair the floor.
Again you have the four Mr chair
and we'll go ahead and open it
up to questions from the
committee if you have no further
comment to close.
Thank you madam chair other
questions at this point.
Great questions from the
committee.
Yes ma'am Representative
Strickler yep before thank you
madam chair thank you chairman
and
You say just a couple of a
clarification points to can you
and your team explaining the the
clean up for the leasing versus
licensing as it relates to
property just a little little
education on on that particular
clean up and I have a couple
more as well real short.
Yeah I'll take a short and tried
to okay thank you thank you
Secretary.
Okay thank you madam chair Mr
chair and representative
Strickler
so basically what what we're
doing as in the in the gross
receipts and compensating tax
act currently the definitions
around leasing and licensing are
not adequate basically to
prevent a lot of dispute some
confusion on the part of
taxpayers so there is several
years of case law or common law
that have happened over many
many years through decisions and
orders and various court
opinions.
Related to license licensing
property versus leasing property
and first one is taxable when
it's not what one of the areas
that we think of that we you
might be more familiar with this
like it if you enter a long term
lease of an apartment or
commercial building your long
term lease which is when it's
over thirty days is not subject
to the G. R. T. but a short term
life use like you might occur if
you
you know take a an Airbnb for a
couple days or short term lease
something that would be subject
to the G. R. T. and we have a
lot of unsuspecting taxpayers
who
just don't know what the rules
are and so we've taken all the
common law and all the case law
that come up over many many
years and just put them right
there in the definition so that
taxpayers and the department
staff have a better chance to
know what the rules are and then
just voluntarily comply with
them and we think that they
should reduce protests we think
this should reduce disputes and
litigation and up avoid the be
and a sad situation where a
taxpayer who means to
voluntarily comply just doesn't
know what the rules of the game
are and ends up with the tax
assessment that they didn't
expect.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you that that helps a
lot and I can remember that
because vacation rentals are
real common in Santa Fe and you
know want to get hit up for that
kind of tax and we're as a hotel
is you know pretty much subject
to.
Lodgers tax and and whatnot.
In another another question in
the about your stay if they can
help us on this to Mr madam
chair and Mr chairman on the
only gas severance tax
the clarification of the product
you know it's it's mainly
natural gas I mean I'm pretty
familiar with this but hello to
have your explanation and
understates to good fiction I've
double checked it but it's good
to have the committee at yeah
this is pretty interesting
situation there with the
thousand keep the gas is what we
normally sell
at the well head and that would
produce a lot of natural gas in
New Mexico and and discount
cleans that up a little bit and
maybe give us a little.
Timer on on on that.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and and
Representative Martínez
Representative Strickler I'd be
happy to to explain to the
committee what those sections
are about there are four
different acts that are amended
similarly and they're all energy
production related and what
we're doing is defining the type
of volumes that need to be
reported for each particular
product and and the the thing
that happened a couple years ago
that we're trying to prevent
from happening in the future is
taking a step back for a second.
of course that the.
Price times the volume of that
energy product that gets
produced is the value of that
product so its natural gas or
oil or whatever you have priced
time volume equals the value and
the way New Mexico's laws are
set up and some of these taxes
each year we divide the.
Volume that we sorry divide the
value that was reported by all
the producers by the volume to
kind of in for what the price
was for each fiscal year and
that price that we kind of back
into by through the value and
volume we get the price the
price is used to set next year.
So it has to be correct everyone
said the right tax rate and what
we found a couple years ago is
that in the natural gas area
different crude producers were
incorrectly reporting their
natural gas volumes and that was
leading to the wrong price being
calculated and therefore the
wrong tax rate being sat in and
taxed rose had no way to force
them to amend their returns to
correct this and so the tax rate
was that wrong and as a result
the general fund lost somewhere
around I think it was about one
point seven million dollars by
the tax rate being set too low
and we couldn't do anything
about it so all we're doing in
those four sections.
Is stipulating what metric
volumes have to be reported in
so that this doesn't happen
again and the it so it doesn't
have a fiscal impact just
insurers that the state funds
get whatever is the appropriate
amount they're supposed to
receive.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you to Stephanie and and and if
this is this is a good clean up
and I know
Natural gas producers
the B. two you quit line is very
important because you're selling
thousand cubic feet of gas a gas
you know in increments so you
know like a barrel of oil and
you may have a locally to you
gas stream and so you know you
get a little less price for if
you have a high higher PTO work
thousand be to use want to be to
use for example which gas four
of the code to make sure work
formation up in the San Juan
basin for example you get a
bonus get you get a little extra
money for that in in the state
the state captures a additional
tax revenue and that that's good
and of the one point two million
dollar clean up here I think
severance taxes pay your
I'm just guessing five hundred
to seven hundred million a year
it's a big it's a big revenue
stream for the state I think we
get.
Only gas all the if you bundle
up all the only gas taxes it's a
you know from from severance tax
to Altes to
G. R. J. it's it's over two
billion dollars a year so that's
it's a big Revenue string or say
about the our of our cash flow
so thank you for that
clarification and then I'm.
We got a.
I'm just looking through my
notes here.
I think it's that think that'll
do for may appreciate all the
description it's a good it's a
very good cleanup bill thank you
Mr chairman thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Stephanie.
Thank you Representative
Strickler next on the list we
have Representative my S. this.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Representative Martínez
Representative Harper and
Secretary starting Clark the
couple quick questions on the.
Committee so was there any
significant changes are just
mostly on clean up to the
cleanup.
Madam chair.
Mr madam chair and members of my
staff as they they were I don't
think super significant we set
to do a sub just because it is
you know just tracking these
things can get complicated but I
can tell you quickly the first
changes to remove section six
and seven from the building
issues of concerns potentially
with the U. S. commerce costs
this was a section that would
limit present compacts credits
to New Mexico residents we took
that out
the second change were
amendments to clarify to the
ability of physician practice
groups to claim.
Certain tax credits that came as
a result of conversations with
that industry they were a little
bit concerned that the previous
language didn't quite capture
the the spirit of what they're
trying to do and then the last
change is to.
clarify TRD is wage levy
language to allow a delinquent
taxpayer to retain the state
minimum wage verses the federal
simply because the state which
has kept obviously better pace
with inflation so those for the.
The the operative changes
that I think you should know
about.
Thank you madam chair thank you
of them of being as does that
language on the minimum wage.
It's a state or state or
whichever is highest.
I believe it's a state Mr met
madam chair representative.
Can I comment on that yes please
of the vote.
Yeah.
Yes so originally the bill had
the federal minimum wage and
that's because that's what our
statutes have
used to for the last you know
several decades average hours
long it's been in statute.
Obviously it hasn't kept up with
inflation.
but when this was drafted
Really we didn't have the change
in government that we do now.
And so you're looking at going
from forty times eighty times.
And then potentially a change to
the federal minimum wage so you
see this could stare step to the
point where the tax department
could never garnish wages
and so talking with the
secretary we decided let's let's
tie it to what we have control
over let's let's bring it to the
state and that way when when we
change our state minimum wage or
when we want to make this change
from forty to eighty we work
work or the ones in the driver's
seat.
Thank you madam chair no great
explanation these we are.
What is getting the number eight
you but it's it's are definitely
good public policy because you
can in regards to the words of
Dr somebody under Donna con.
It happens with regards to our.
Revoking of driver licenses for
sell the the child support is
counterproductive in the men's.
So exponential moment on our.
Madam chair of madam secretary
on our.
Are no exception is on the
committee so but sections eleven
to nineteen and twenty one on
the page at all.
Dealing with our.
Alternative evidence to claim G.
R. TV that's in the middle of
our.
Bill passion nontaxable
transaction certificate I thank
you for your work on that it's
only reasonable and.
Dozens of.
The state doesn't.
Now it just allows people to
who.
Or nontaxable transaction is
that.
How retroactive is that
Were just the same as any other
tax.
Thanks bye.
Thank you madam chair and and
Representative my Estes
this is more of a a
clarification then a substantive
change to law related to the
alternative evidence there's
already a section in law I
believe it's seven nine forty
three that was enacted a few
years ago that allows
alternative evidence to be
submitted to substantiate
eligibility for various G. R. T.
deductions the problem that we
found and that the department
brought forward is that
taxpayers aren't aware of it so
if I'm a tax payer not a you
know like a tax practitioner who
lives the tax code every single
day if I'm just a regular
tax payer who has a business I'm
gonna miss you know maybe go
maybe I'll get as far as going
and searching the tax code to
see if there's a deduction
available to me but the problem
is they might find their
deduction but it doesn't say
anything in the actual deduction
tax right now about alternative
evidence just as in TTC's and so
if you're not a tax practitioner
your we're we're really just
trying to link that information
there were taxpayers will find
it so there's nothing about it
it doesn't change the law
there's nothing about
retroactive like alternative
evidence has been available all
along for the past several years
this is just to make it easier
for taxpayers to understand our
tax code.
No thank you madam chair thank
you Secretary no appreciated
just two minutes work I out.
Have the privilege of serving
with many of you on the ensuring
economic stabilisation and Tax
Policy Committee activity has
discarded so much credibility.
that that I think given a thirty
day no we should try to do this
every year in the last thirty I
think but that committee staff
of approval we can now get some
some strong drugs in addition of
the policy changes.
Each and every year thank you
madam chair.
Thank you representative I ask
us if there's no further
question I will entertain
entertain a motion from the
committee.
I'm sure if I may.
Go right ahead I move a do not
pass on house bill ninety eight
and a due process on our tax
revenue Committee substitute for
House Bill ninety.
I just can't.
Thank you with that we will take
the role.
Secretary St share this with
the.
Info for you.
Is Elaine on.
Okay go ahead a lame
Representative Padilla.
Representative the speaker I'm
sorry yes.
Representative Parker.
Representative none this yes.
Representative lu Han.
Yes.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Stansbury.
S..
Representative Strickler.
Yes.
Representative.
I'm sorry I didn't hear you.
Yes thank you.
Sure Chandler.
Yes.
Yes.
Thank you chair Martinez yes.
Twelve in the affirmative.
There are the native.
That you have a do pass Mr
chairman and if I had a gavel it
would knock it down.
You will have the floor again.
Thank you for Senator metal and
thank you members and and let
let's keep this bipartisanship
going for the rest of the
session with all of the other
bills that we're going to hear
in this committee
I appreciate the time
So let's so.
We've got a couple of other
bills
Last four is.
The phone is.
Buzzing a lot so let.
To get off my physics
so we've got house bill forty
two.
Representative Chandler but I
believe she's presenting another
bill in another committee later
we will.
Are you back I am not your bill
Mr chair you did okay did you
finish the other star I.
Okay I did want to just do the
little spill to everybody and
how they can.
In your duration community land.
I'm sorry to.
My apologies I was going to have
different just trying to in on
how everybody can access the
interpretation of what's going
on.
Okay.
Senator it's not thank you sorry
all so before we continue we're
gonna do a little bit clean up
here with the zoom so please
bear with us members
So I reserve salary you're
finished with the other
committees you can now go on to
house bill forty two exactly yes
Sir right so stand by please.
Elaine as people come in and now
can you please put them back as
attendees you know the the as
people.
Give public comment I think if I
think a few folks are are stuck
in in the committee as
participants when they should go
back as attendees to begin
please move them back that would
be great.
and the house bill forty two I
know there's quite a bit of
public comment
I believe and also there will be
a need for interpretation so I'm
gonna have a different
A jump on here and explain to us
how the interpretation button
works so that we can all go back
and forth as needed Dever more
you are you on there.
All right thank you chairman
Martinez said hello Committee
it's data from here I'm just
going to give a quick little
rundown of the language
interpretation feature so we've
got appear on the call here at
the health who's gonna be our
language interpreter Peter if
you want to just jump into the
Spanish language channel that
will allow you to to translate
directly from English to Spanish
and then for folks on the call
is either panelists or it can do
you should see a little
interpretation icon at the very
bottom row of icons there was
like a little glow I think that
you have three options one says
off which would just be to the
normal audio from committee one
says English which provides
English language interpretation
if we have any Spanish speaking
public comment right then and
then if you're into the Spanish
channel that will provide you a
Spanish translation of the
English language going on here
that makes sense I think the
most part it's by is is not for
most people to hang out into the
you have off or English Channel
and then if we have somebody
providing public comment Spanish
you just click to that channel
you'll get the translation.
Make sense.
Okay sounds good great interment
if I may want to thank you for
the taking a stab to make this
possible.
It's it's convenient but it's
also important for folks to be
able to.
Address the legislature in their
native language and I appreciate
Mr chairman you and and the
staff working to make this
possible thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
and and all credit to the to the
team to Elaine endeavor and the
entire staff for for according
this
They're the ones that they made
it happen also to to some of
these wonderful organizations
that are providing interpreters
as well so
with that.
Let's go to house bill forty two
and I think that's all the house
cleaning and needed to do is
that right everybody good.
My good Elaine.
Yes Sir I believe you are.
Okay thank you
Representative Chandler why
don't you go ahead and present
your bill then we'll go to.
Madam and they will come to
committee for for Q. NA go ahead
Representative very good and I
think you're aware Mr chair I do
have an expert amber Whalen from
voices for children so.
Thank you for the opportunity to
present I am presenting on house
bill forty two it proposes to
amend the low income
comprehensive tax rebate and and
frankly it's a pretty
straightforward forward bill the
low the low income comprehensive
tax rate also known as elector
has been on the books I don't
know perhaps thirty or so plus
years and it was created some
time ago in recognition of the
fact that our tax system is very
regressive and frankly it's
gotten even more regressive them
from three decades ago and it
it's based on the fact that we
rely very heavily on the gross
receipts tax system as our one
of our major revenue sources
and.
That system of taxation
is not a progressive system and
it disproportionately impacts
low income people so the purpose
of elector was to try to address
that to some degree through the
income tax system and it created
a
A table of frankly income of
salary ranges and in a in adopts
a rebate based on the amount of
earnings at the individual makes
with a greater in bait rebate
for lower income people and it
also hinges on how many
dependents the tax filer have so
there's an inverse relationship
to mouth and need so that's that
in a nutshell what we what we
did is we applied the consumer
price index starting from twenty
two years ago which was when the
on elector was last adjusted and
moved it forward so it changes
the income levels and it changes
the amount of the rebate and
that is the bill in a not show
Mr chair.
Thank you Representative
Chandler ms wall and welcome to
house tax and Rev.
This morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is amber Wallin and the deputy
director at New Mexico voices
for children as noted by
Representative Chandler lectures
a rebate that's available to
very lowincome taxpayers of all
ages in our state including many
kids families and seniors it's
claimed by one in every five tax
filers in the state the provides
really crucial support for the
families that need it most so
currently that's those making
less than twenty two thousand
dollars a year Sliq goes to a
lot of families with children
and something not as well known
about elector is that low income
seniors over sixty five years
old in the state actually get to
additional exemptions and so
they receive higher amounts of
the rebate by virtue of their
age now for just a very brief
background on the rebate.
As noted by Representative
Chandler was originally designed
offset regressivity in the G. R.
T. but while our gross receipts
taxes continue to rise
significantly over the years
especially high in certain rural
areas as noted by the sponsor
elector hasn't been updated
since nineteen ninety eight and
will look to remain stagnant
over the past twenty three years
the cost of living has steadily
increased and what that means is
that fewer and fewer residents
are able to receive the credit
and the claims of actually
dropped by nearly thirty percent
since two thousand eight and the
amount of the the expenditure
the amount of really critical
economic support that it
provides for those.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
I think we look your back.
I was promoted to a presenter I
think so you could see me as I
spoke and so every it rejoined.
But the meeting and so.
Thank you for that and thank you
to the staff of the the
committee all a back up just a
tiny bit late my comments will
be brief of but is noted by
Representative Chandler Lichter
has been updated since nineteen
ninety eight and so while the
rebate remain stagnant and
increased the cost of living has
substantially increased and so
that means if you're residents
receive the rebate every year
the number of people who receive
every year struck by about
thirty percent and the amount of
really critical economic support
that it provides for families in
our state has dropped by thirty
six percent just as two thousand
eight so increasing elector to
account for the rising cost of
living would mean that many more
New Mexicans would have access
to that relief at a time when so
many families in our state are
struggling to buy food keep the
heat on and to provide really
basic necessities for their kids
so this bill would have the
effect of increasing the income
threshold from twenty two
thousand dollars per year to
thirty six thousand dollars per
year it would also increase the
maximum amount of the rebate
particularly for larger families
and it would mean that more than
a hundred and twenty five
thousand more New Mexicans who
need it now more than ever would
see that really crucial economic
relief so like New Mexico
families we know you all are
facing some incredibly difficult
choices and investing in winter
is one of the very best ways
that the state can invest in our
families and our communities and
our economy because research
shows that low income families
receive rebates likely after
they spend that money quickly
and locally we their basic needs
and also hastening our economic
recovery so we sincerely
appreciate the Sanchez
commitment to this crucial
relief bill for those residents
most in need and appreciate her
and your commitment to these
types of programs that will
really ensure that all New
Mexicans can survive through in
front after the pandemic thank
you Mr chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you for being here mismas
Wallin Representative Chandler
anything else before we go to
public comment not at this time
Mr chair thank you okay.
so as a reminder if you like to
provide public comment please
a rabies raise your hand and I
can see one hand raised three
hands race at this point.
but if you'd like to provide
Madam raise your hand and then
we'll call on you and our our
staff will will move you to a
place where you can address the
committee
please keep your comments
Brief to the point try to not
repeat what others are saying
and just be cognizant of of time
in general
Is we you know we we don't have
to go to the floor after this is
the way we usually would but you
know we still have other
committees to get to at some
point so with that I am going
to.
Call on first on my list
Ms.
Colletti ladies could battle.
Yes.
Seizing addresses co chair yes.
What
of
the members of the committee.
Radio the center of the work
that each of the ones on the of
the people so I will either have
a look at it do you keep the
sentence in a bushel the act
regarding the house.
I'm eleven the amendment and we
drove off this month the tent
then be analyst and on a side
yes.
Hold on the dating back to let
me see what it also does not
make the keys at this or not
that are from the.
Lucinda lasting one percent.
Going to the.
I think that's what I meant in
with the study the financier you
for me a short the opium
Barcelona via mail I don't so
that those people are in WSD
program of the mental.
Anything yet that for nothing
but we should worry.
Show identical with us the more
persistent.
What are we are the impossible
dimple Fund him off with the
annual.
Then you give us so you done yet
they get going to common sense.
Well impact along with the
settlement that.
Okay let me just feel that to
recording they all Senator you.
Is
that what I wanted for my best
with the funniest part of this
is it's almost done with fiscal
to show this in a few critical
we affirm if you go if you will
though the amendment abortion
from yes they were hosting this
what is he and I to be put into
your forty S. capitol jungles.
Yes yes it is yes below.
What.
And and just just as a reminder
to folks if we can this is more
for me but if we can speak a
little bit slowly.
Your.
Okay let's go next on my list I
have a.
current rate Reacher Lutheran
advocacy ministries.
Good morning chairman can you
hear me.
You morning thank you good
morning Mr chair members of the
committee binding this occurred
regular on the director of
Lucerne affix the ministry of
New Mexico also you're speaking
today on behalf of the New
Mexico conference of churches we
have course are here today to
offer our sport and for H. B.
forty two and urged passage to
your committee well this one
didn't excellent job presenting
the reasons why adjustments need
to elector need to be made we do
have only one concern and that
is that moving forward there's
no annual cost of living
adjustment provision in this
bill in this will simply be
repeating the pattern that with
all of the last twenty two years
and so we hope something might
be able to be done about that
before this bill reach the floor
but never the less we do support
HB forty two and urged passage
thank you.
Thank you Sir thank you for
joining us today.
let's see.
Next on my list we have hoops
sorry.
Support the fish the fish go
ahead.
Hello this is seaport Mr
chairman and committee this is
to pour and nefesh and I am a
registered lobbyist with New
Mexico thrives the state
nonprofit association for New
Mexico and non profits serve
many of the people in our
communities and we strongly
support house bill forty two so
that people have.
More the income to help
themselves and we think this is
a great bill and has proven
itself in the past and we we
encourage the update to it and
thank you.
Thank you for being here let's
go to kind of mend FLOTUS.
Miss Flores you are on the line
okay when is this.
Yes one is this the members of
the committee then so I can only
protest member of the center of
the one the into the eventual B.
one financial so I mother and me
and thank you that on homeowners
in Sandel Act that with this I
don't think us.
Is that enough for you they
activate when they those.
Thank yes it is those who need
those fundamental company and
I'm looking up the study and an
email put on the back of the
committee that that vote is also
for this with our back window so
it and thank.
Your vote they don't want to
stay in this as the economical
a so don't get the we had almost
given that either one of them
with the respect and NCS but
then I got a list of the.
Yeah one
that the comedian New Mexico
then yes given that the middle
but I do that with financing and
I'm and thank.
You may make you need for the
imposed CENIC's but most good
when you need anything.
But I am most of the I am the
minister supplement that is for
this okay let the only system
the actual big one and they
those it was so impressed those
part of the media and the
reckless but I think we're
supposed.
That's the most can linger Mr
that's the media's known he can
this this is it the most A. list
open not afford money access
community CLS from UPS you must
want to see them.
What and see.
When they those.
Which of us.
That's just what I go by at a
senior to a FLOTUS.
A.
At the next on my list I have
Of the last name I just have a
my idea.
When no not this could come was
there anybody up we can hear you
so we're gonna go to page
nineteen.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Paige may
and I am here representing New
Mexico voices for children to
stand in support of HB forty two
I want to thank the sponsor for
a dressing the critical issue of
family financial security at
this time because we know that
this pandemic has had a very
unequal and disproportionate
impact on the health and
economic well being of a lower
income New Mexican The New
Mexicans of color so increasing
would really improve equity and
fairness in our tax code and
provide a targeted economic
relief to New Mexicans of all
ages so we urge your support for
H. B. forty two thank you very
much.
Mr chair if I may enter up to
the toggling back and forth
between the English and Spanish
sometimes it's switched so I
know that's a technical thing
but I just want to let folks
know that if you if you're not
getting the English or the
Spanish and one of the other
lines that you can switch in the
right light that's working for
the language that you're looking
for thank you Mr chair.
Thank you for clarifying that
Representative Romero.
if any members at any point you
know you have issues with the
translation just just stop stop
us and we'll we'll make sure we
get it figured out.
and see next on the list we have
We have floated Sanchez.
Hello when this resolution yeah
C..
All right see then thank the
members of the committee the
number as your lan that this is
a member less almost Chavis and
report grant Daxi on.
Thank all of you a lot of these
you know I ran use BB and going
to the Stalin or make you cool
LSU are rows of.
Is it a game at the highland
restaurant this.
Go local Sierra so it is so data
get together on me how you'll
solar.
I mean the political Seagate
also looking of a whole.
But.
But I do and I am the co school
because so it goes without
college.
N. as manuals.
It is manual Noriega's Gallo
said got it on that I think they
say maybe the lotus elan.
Bill C. initial agency
impuestos.
All of this in my manuscript
angle it that I'll follow those
rules those findings and see all
we've recently as is the
sentiment this Daniel COVID last
Monday then gave me the drive to
get on the Senator.
That awful and we want to we get
a half that that also are
missing money that if you aren't
going yes No every.
It was.
No in not not any motions that
you less but I was first on the
screen with your.
It agency that's I do us most I
know you all motion lacking the.
In the in the New Mexico State
on.
It was the most value added yeah
well yeah I don't know still see
our yep okay not a medical and
those would be to go mall now
when that advocacy on lotus so
your story up we handle not
asked to be appointed bagels yes
but it will skip well on my side
is there is a place that but I
do that though on that one yeah
good asked yes.
We address.
One of the.
When the essence in your receipt
in the members of the committee
thank the numbers and it started
then this he's going members all
sexy on
the very bottom of the inning
Daniels going to be hosting is
also.
I mean there's so yeah automatic
US I get get things will get
clear that I'm the well.
Automatic annual means buses and
only because then I want to make
that media is that apple so when
that.
Even though there's a host body
in gun U. S. Daniel that we let
up and they need to be the
second goal was there for me as
a the ROIC obviating SMEs well
so in New York on to that
amendment.
Look at the only reason month in
their most idea and I will at
the owners of the vessels and
dampen the Marlins those
individuals on the list and then
build we can provide early
literacy and those on I look at
what it goes through the NM
owners would stand that but I
believe the almost the last of.
We're also going to give Brady
at that day can you give any of
B.C at the homeowners the bloom
is also as in mother India we've
been another thing they need
city and we're trying to them so
that the output of what is our
government pays the bills and is
that they give it up and then.
Come in maybe he called me as
possible your pharmacy with
those we could okay is that late
in the second L. is Google link
us to make estimates that states
for renewable as I mystical
nanogram yell those are those
are the one M. as in mother
thepercent been using comment by
media.
New Mexico okay aboard that
level many animals that a moment
of UCL's going to stick on your
day.
With those go over million
blacks young yes it'll come in
anyways but I could be that the
that this came out of the season
but I asked those medical
utility level is that there's no
medical you know the
analytically Billy west those
Espanol's idea most but twelve
what is the only be looking at a
brewery in that uses DNA action
right when they built yes.
That is what I go by at a loss
thank you for being here.
Let's go next to I have a last
name but it's yeah Yannis.
Because I come from a working
class family.
We have always worked hard in
the dissemble live working
specifically in the restaurant
industry's.
During the pandemic our income
has been significantly impacted
before annually we barely made
enough to get by this is why
reimbursement such as that
provided by the slough would
benefit workers and families
like fine.
Make that make less than thirty
six thousand annually especially
now to be able to move forward
with a debt so we have acquired
to the pandemic I as well as
more than a hundred and twenty
five thousand eight New Mexican
families who contribute to the
community will benefit from this
change in the law I hope that
this was passed and in the
future we're able to use this
tax rebate to pay bills and
accumulated debts please support
H. B. forty two it would be a
great benefit to low income
families thank you so much.
Thank you for joining us let's
go next to at all the last name
here either it's idea.
Mr.
Yes All I Want to say yes.
In requests in members of the
committee there the number is
not M. at the needs some in
this almost axiom every need
them also portal trying use of a
hundred restaurant yet to send
you submitting.
The bill Lucas.
Miss madam you sort us.
Musicals of the meeting and.
But thousands so so that's the
end of a hundred and one of
those misses the numbers to see
hosted the and school last name
was me this get by that you must
somewhat again settles a score
less than most believe that
making some Muskoka programs.
This class is the what is the
most common baking your vote
what is needed in the by this
mean again the focal focal.
The needs of our community
though EMT then to help me sort
us to look at I hope it is yes
tell us and then.
As we wanted but I'm also throws
in senators that bundle agency
for as C..
Wonder what I'm also going to
say Mr videa conspiracy escalate
Kevin if you set up a how it is
yes it was meant as a foundation
means on artists and Anya city
amendment will tell you that but
up for the second month and was
just four minutes inside you
very up on that Mr they're with
us.
Which is that a high lotus and
will make you court missile
disposables Mr simplest us yes
the lady not can be no those
that got us.
Is in the care of those support
can even the boldest and most of
the money that is done we
funding you must someone is
those dimples if you still have
the funding.
Genesis students look Juanita
this bill Google or apple in
late are to be put into a those
okay city what I'm when grand of
an excuse you but analysts does.
The host but I'm Stephanie late
by local media immunity.
Yes.
That's what I'm hoping and
knows.
I don't see any more hands up
in support anyone in opposition
to.
To House Bill.
New.
Okay I don't see any has in
opposition to house bill forty
two so all I'll go back to the
sponsor Representative Chandler
anything you want to add before
we go to committee.
Now Mr chair.
Very well we'll go to committee
next the first on the list I
have Representative Harper.
I thank you chairman and the.
Madam vice chair it's so.
Right to have.
To talk about this bill with you
So.
Yeah it's been mentioned already
the the last updates to this law
was in.
Nineteen ninety eight.
And.
And I I completely agree that it
needs to be updated.
It was also mentioned earlier
I'm glad.
The point of this law being
passed was to address the
regressivity of the gross
receipts tax.
we all know that
we've been working but the
bipartisan way to look at how we
can address.
The big
black guy of our tax code the
gross receipts tax.
And this was an update was
actually part of our very first
efforts about six seven years
ago and house bill for twelve
there was an update to win
during that will as well so I am
very supportive of.
Updating.
This now.
Nineteen ninety eight.
anyone want to guess what the
average G. R. T. right was.
in nineteen ninety eight.
it was four and a half percent.
Was the average G. R. T. right
across the state.
and something happened in the
early two thousands we saw a
huge spike increase in the gross
receipts tax rate.
And we can argue about the
politics of this change but the
truth is when we removed the
gross receipts tax on food
groceries.
There was an immediate increase
of about one and a half percent
on the gross receipts tax rate
went from about four and a half
percent almost overnight in one
year to an average of about six
percent.
And then you add in the changes
we made about seven or eight
years ago was hold harmless
phasing out that was another
roughly one and a half percent
we add up all the different
county and municipal right
Stewart added on.
so now we're looking at an
average of about eight percent
New Mexico across the state.
So.
Well when you look at that
change in the impact that's had
on on people.
you know when we took the tax
off of food the state and cut
its spending right spending is
continue to go up.
So that meant.
That taxes on other things have
to go up that's what we saw this
increase in the gross receipts
tax the tax on everything else
is going on.
And this really.
In my mind hurts the income our
hearts are the the lowincome the
most because they are not paying
tax on food they had.
No food stamps now called him
snap but those benefits are not
taxed.
If they had to buy food in
addition to that benefit that
was tax so so yeah that that
provided help but the tax on
everything else a car repairs
fibers everything else went up.
So.
That's how we got into this in
the situation.
So now let's let's talk about
the actual problem and I think
this is really important as we
heard lots of great comments
from from folks in the audience
about trump's comment from
paying bills.
no internet being inexpensive.
I don't know if all if you've
noticed but this year was the
first year that the feds passed
a law that we cannot tax
internet transactions.
so if you look at your internet
bill now you don't have any
resources tax on it.
now this is a big deal to the
state I think is about forty
million dollars of revenue that
we we lost.
But again that's a.
Senator folks who aren't paying
that gross receipts tax anymore.
So I guess the question is.
Maybe I'll ask you this
Representative Chandler
minimize chair.
So what was the.
Was there a particular
methodology used when you
selected the new
Limit from twenty two thousand
two as it was the thirty six
thousand and.
Was also methodology decided how
much to increase the budget by.
Well Mr chair representative
what I worked with Clinton
Turner to come up with a plan in
terms of how we would address
the inflation Clinton picked a
consumer price index model.
and what we did he did was he
applied it to the existing
salary bases and the exemptions
in our and the rebate numbers
and what we did was we rolled up
to the nearest five hundred
dollars in terms of income and I
think on the rebate it was five
dollars if I have that correct
in my mind and I hope that
answers your question Mr chair
and Representative Harper.
Mr chair and Representative
Chandler it it does and I'm very
pleased to hear that answer
I was concerned that we are
you know just doing something
that feels good to almost double
that you know I love the
methodology you chose of looking
at the actual consumer index and
and scaling I think I think
that's a great way to update it.
I'm keeping was the original
same of offsetting for low
income the some of the red
regressivity of sequels receipts
tax so.
I want to commend you on that
that's it's a great approach
and.
Do we know
What's the fiscal impact is
expected to be for this update.
Mr chair and representative I
believe the FIR done aside about
forty eight million dollars a
year rough estimate but I think
that's the number that I recall
Mr chair and representative.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative and if I recall
correctly that's about the
ballpark of what what you're
costs right now maybe maybe just
a touch lower maybe someone can
correct me so so it is roughly a
doubling.
Mr chair and Representative I
think that's a fair statement
yeah.
Okay
Right so.
Obviously has a fiscal impacts
would have to see what makes
into the tax package
This year
But I wanted to just mention one
more thing for us all to
consider.
We had during the interim thank
you the year before.
Richard income gave a great
presentation.
And his mother folks as well
that went over all of our
benefit programs.
And if you recall I love what he
what he did for the she put the
cost to the state in the average
benefit individual.
And became very stark that there
are some of our budget store
costing a lot and not helping
much.
And and and to me that kind of
open minded the idea that we
really need to do some.
Look with a fresh set of eyes
are different programs.
And what I'm really.
Hoping we can do is looking at
the big picture right so we we
have we have you look at all the
different programs we have I
just got off the top of my head
we have Medicare Medicaid I mean
for lowincome we have which we
have a section eight housing by
the way we work on all of those
we first got married they were
super helpful.
We have elector we have tennis
to help was folks looking for
jobs we have working families
tax credit.
I know there's others that I'm
missing.
But when you stack all those
popular different regimes.
We we have something called
cliff affects.
And these are very real right
when when your income.
You know starts increasing all
of a sudden you can fall off a
program.
And I've been told by some
people that the this isn't real
New Mexico we don't have this
problem I've talked with lots of
people say no this is a real
issue and actually a close
friend who had an employee a
great employee and she came up
to halfway through the year and
said.
I'm sorry I've I've got to a
because if I get one more
paycheck in the fall of my my
budget.
No so this this happens New
Mexico and and what I want to
make sure we're doing is when we
adjust these programs
individually.
That we're not.
Increasing this cliff effect
problem what I really love is if
we can get you know staff for I
can get some time to actually
plot always different programs
on top of each other based off
of income and make sure that we
don't of course affects those
people go up in income if we
want to encourage them to have
you know go out and get the
American dream that we're not
penalizing them by dropping
their budget too fast it should
be you know it should be a
gentle offset.
So I'm.
Mr chair and Representative I
just want to encourage you I
think this is I think what you
need to be updated I think you
methodology is great.
I really think that we should be
more analytical data driven and
targeted.
and addressing the bigger
picture instead of.
Looking at one program in
isolation and so that would be
my.
My encouragement to all of us
and you.
Thank you for that
Representative thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative Harper
let's go on to Representative
got into.
Mr chair madam chair thank you
I just wanted to first they.
Well assessed getting a much of
it one step at a lot in Espanol
it'll quit line than that okay
Sunday scandal those lost not
only gonna ask is that one of
our RTC bundling the small you
get all of this you can ask us
at those but again it's not a
goal we invite that that but a
school child I use that this
he in the will of us must get
the amendment which us
experience the US economy and
get emotional because they host
so they look is that possible
got any and was just money that
is and then dismissed moody's
the agency requests yes are you
Senator lord party by the
following the small madam and Mr
chair and madam vice chair I
just first wanted to appreciate
I have started to begun seeing
the interpretation happening in
our different communities and
every time it floors me to think
that for even my constituents
who are four hours away from our
incredible capital are working
class families are families that
have jobs to show up to and
children to raise to imagine
that some folks get to think
through their day differently in
order to participate with us in
real time is just profound and
every time it starts to happen
including our first first
meeting here with us today I'm
just so grateful and
appreciative of those New
Mexicans of showed up otherwise
I I should know by now Mr chair
that in tax if you don't raise
your hand quickly are are up
Representative Harper is going
to be this all the important
questions I also wanted to ask
generally how we've got into
these numbers appreciated that
insight on your really
thoughtful methodology
Representative Chandler but I
also wanted to ask and and raise
a point that was brought up in
public comment are we setting
ourselves up to again just fall
behind by moving these by moving
these figures and and again
solidifying them I'll be I'll be
it increasing that.
Ways to putting to a solid point
thank you madam Mr chair and the
Representative Chandler.
What's the.
Mr chair just to respond I I I
agree that of the cost of living
index was an important point
that was brought up on public
comment and I think I know this
bills will be temporarily table
because it has a fiscal impact
and it certainly something we
could look at thank you
Representative Mr chair.
Yeah we thank you.
Representative Strickler.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
I two years high school Spanish
is not taking a and so I
apologize to my my daughter
Emily speaks fluent Spanish and
I need to I need to.
To improve my Spanish skills but
Anyway thank you Mr chairman
thank you thank Representative
Chandler and yeah I'm just a
little math here I think this a
sixty three percent increase
In the and the cap from twenty
two thousand to thirty six
thousand I know that's to.
Taken some you know inflation
and cost of living in and then
you explain that very well on
the methodology from Clint
Turner and Mike my question is.
If you have if you you file your
your income tax return in New
Mexico and
And you have a you don't only
eight you don't owe any income
tax so in New Mexico will again
be a rebate is a is that
correct.
Ms see.
Mr chairman Mr Representative
Esther Mexico that's correct
okay and I have a good friend
that is a tax preparer for a a
RP for the senior citizens he's
a senior citizen to civil
engineering and I give them a
laptop and he can he can do
pretty much all the simple tax
returns and he said he read he
had mentioned to me.
that are surrounding states they
don't do that so
no Oklahoma where my son lives
if you have a negative income
tax you know you just don't pay
any tax so it is that your
understanding at and I'm not a
tax person but I think I think
we were unusual in that.
We actually give you money back
even though you have no tax
liability.
Mr chair and representative that
may be the case but I'm always
reluctant to make direct
comparisons about tax policies
in other states because we're
all different and we rely on
different mechanisms to fund our
government and as you know Mr
chair and representative the G.
R. T. is such an incredibly
regressive tax I can't speak to
to how Oklahoma does there other
things I would I would suspect
they have a much more
progressive income tax and the
real and property taxes are your
are addressed a little
differently so good point but I
think we need to be very careful
we try to make those kinds of
picking and choosing of what we
want to compare what we're
talking about tax to do that I
love to do that Mr chairman and
madam.
The challenge in in the last
year that's a good point the G.
R. T. is definitely coaches were
an out liar none of our
surrounding states we do have to
compete with our surrounding
states it's not over surrounding
states as a gross receipts tax
or sales tax on services
Representative not competitive
advantage
and we we do have to where that
money is this call is being
competitive but now it's a real
good point in and yeah just you
just puts a spotlight on the G.
R. J. I I know in our community
we're you know Colorado's just
next door and and they don't
charge gross receipts tax on
services a lot of by my fellow
business ownership they they
farming on CPA services and
other services to Colorado and
maybe other states because that
they would like to save the
eight point three seven five
percent G. R. T. that we
currently pay in the Farmington
San Juan County areas so
Well that's all I have.
Really appreciate we need help
we need help our low income
folks there's no doubt about
that
and I think we got a lot of
programs that that does that the
the the other working folks out
there they're working their
tails off and I'm reminded that
I have a I have a good friend
that helps me part time she has
for time jobs.
And and and I'm just amazed on
how hard these folks work.
Well in different fields and
she's to it this this particular
lady it is assistant is one of
my suit is a system for may and
I I I found out that she she's a
tax preparer I had no idea and
she so creative she's terrible
tax and she did my youngest son
income tax season he's a full
time stay in a spore and he's
get a big tax refund so hello
the thank you madam thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative Chandler.
Thank you representative
Representative Romero.
Thank you Mr chairman egress as
well
for lack of common that if we
got enough where they as the
I should be adequate what I
think those I.
I am also.
Very bad a how to practice my
Spanish so poor apologies to
everybody
That said this is so awesome I
just want to thank the
not only the organizers behind
this for answering many many
questions over you know the
weekends and the time in between
to do this hard work in
particular just on how we make
our tax system more progressive
that a lot of what we're looking
at today with elector I just
wanted to clarify to since it
was an education for me that
this is a starting point truly
because thirty six thousand
dollars in our local area is
does not go far already and so
when we were doing the back of
the napkin and our previous
committee and house consumer of
public affairs this of since
nineteen ninety eight this is
translated to about seventy
seven dollars per year per
family when we look at the
calculation and what this
expands to is roughly about just
over two hundred dollars a per
family so when you're thinking
about what this means to those
who are critically in need of
the extra dollar to see it
extend it doesn't mean the same
thing all around the state but
it does mean a lot for the
families who need that bump it
to be able to continue to
survive and thrive not only
through this pandemic but in the
future so that said I again just
wanted to comment about some of
that that that really critical
interest and how we move this
forward I'm again make it more
progressive around the state to
extend those dollars word means
the most I look forward to
working with Representative
Chandler and New Mexico voices
someone's and everyone the
advocates to to see how we can
do that in the future but never
the less I think it's so
important that we are coming to
the twenty first century with
this and how it affects people's
lives so I just want to commend
you and and I hope that we can
continue to make progress moving
forward thank you Mr chair just
wanted to make a comment thank
you again said to the Sanchez
into the advocates.
Thank you representative
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Question for road to present our
Representative Chandler vice
chair Chandler do we have a
comprehensive.
Short or analysis that shows all
of the programs that are
available to low income families
in New Mexico this is a forward
to Representative.
Harper's line of questioning.
And.
With respect to all of those
programs would show that
Cliffs that was mentioned
earlier discussion do you have
any information that would
that would shed some light on
the.
Mr chair and representative
other than the information that
Representative Harper shared
regarding Richard inclines
information I have nothing be on
that and I said I do not have
any information on that close
the fact that I I think could be
in line you at this point in
time I think it's a very
interesting point in and I would
like to see
kind of a litany of programs but
at this point I don't have a
comprehensive list for you Mr
chair representative.
And Mr chair representative.
It would seem to me.
The.
Comprehensive review of all of
these programs are available
would be certainly in order.
Representative.
Perhaps a piecemeal approach.
We're one of these programs may
be negatively impacting another
where we end up working at cross
purposes.
Mr chair representative thank
you for your interest that's all
I.
Thank you representative.
see no further hands up up spoke
too soon Representative Maestas
eight thank thank you Mr
chairman thanks
sorry for the late hand but just
just wanted to stand in support
of this bill and.
I echo the sentiments of folks
for the representative Harper
that.
you know what I'm a proponent
which is tough tough at times to
tax everything the same.
Tax every we single.
Transaction the same as it
relates to G. R. T. that there
be no.
G. R. T. exemptions except merry
they may be limited
circumstances I can't think one
right now.
because that way we'll be able
to
And that the way we add
progressivity isn't with bye bye
G. R. T. exemption on food but
but rather be created with the
income tax code doing things
like this
you know what are some tax
credit aggressive income tax
structure things of that nature
we can we can still have opened
over seventy within the overall
tax scheme and still tax
everyone the same
Including up.
You know nonprofit organizations
and things like that thank you
Mr thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative.
yes I think I I I've I will not
belabor the points made I think
that
I think there is almost
universal agreement that elector
needs to be updated it's been
way too long.
I think some of the concerns
raised with regards to the
fiscal impact are are also valid
a minute is it is a high ticket
item
and so as a result of that we
will be every tabling this bill
while we.
Get a better understanding in a
better grasp of where our
finances will be and and you
know what our budget situation
will look like.
I I will add that you know this
is some of the concerns of the
convicted I think they're
they're real I do
I do have some concerns though
that.
you know we view public
benefits.
as it is as as something that is
you know robust
or even super helpful I I think
that there's a case to be made
that some of those benefits
lag behind and and I think
electors an example that it just
kinda.
Had a lag behind and we just
kind of assume
that you know one size fits all
and and obviously every
situation is very different so
you know again not to take away
from the concerned about the
cliff effect but certainly I
think
you know even looking at that
chart with all of these public
benefit programs I I would
probably argue that some those
benefit programs need to be
updated as well probably all of
them to be quite honest and then
I also think that you know we
need to be looking beyond public
benefits as as they were
conceived fifty years ago and we
need to start thinking about
what they look like in the
future
you know moving forward so.
thank you present chancellor for
for bringing the bill forward
it's always I think a great
debate in a great conversation
to have.
As the session progresses will
we'll lock come together as a
committee and begin to look at
many of these incentives that
that were were envisioning
credits and whatnot and we'll
make decisions at a later point
about what will move on and and
what will not.
with that
members I don't Representative
Harper I know he
He he might want to chime in
here if if you wants to about
the the temperate tabling
I think he he usually does a
pretty good job of.
Being very gentle with the these
decisions.
Yes thank you chairman I'll jump
in here and perhaps for members
who are new on the committee or
not presented before on the
committee.
It is long been the standard
practice of this committee
to temporarily table bills that
have a fiscal impact.
This was the case when I I was a
freshman and the committee chair
was at Santa.
and when I had the privilege of
being the chair I have that same
wise policy.
And and subsequently
He internal Martinez and decided
to keep the same same policy and
what it really does is it.
Keeps.
This committee from being.
A subcommittee to
appropriations.
if we just passed every bill
that we liked and had a fiscal
impact out here.
we can be passing out five
hundred million dollars worth of
New.
Expenditures on the budget.
That that that's typically when
you tabulate all the bills that
come before us it's roughly
about a half billion dollars of
past.
This is the last word also
passed a tripling of our state
taxes you know
We can't afford that so we have
to appropriations to decide what
risks that the budget so wisely
this committee decides to do
that it's
ourselves we will temporally
table all these bills were was
appropriations to find out how
much room in the budget and then
we'll put together a tax
package.
we work together on that I
personally there's usually does
from both sides of the island
from both chambers.
so works well.
So that's.
Those who are familiar with the
process
we gently carefully nicely table
these bills for reconsideration
later.
And Mr chairman I know I'm not
allowed to debate and then make
a motion.
Unless you want to give me
permission to break that rule
this moment.
Representative mais.
Mr I can I I I move to gently
table of the.
Senator.
Well as.
Thank you for that and thank you
for that explanation
Representative Harper
seeing no opposition
Representative Chandler year
house bill forty two has been.
A deadly tabled.
And will will revisit at some
point in the near future at as
we as we work on a and the
package all of us together thank
you thank you ms Wallin for your
expert witness and and thank you
to all the testimony which
will get us to that though is
this the one you're assuming
Anna a Representative also but
esencia.
Mr chair.
Think question yeah I've heard
of references during the bill
presentation to a committee
substitute was that a committee
so coming out of a previous
committee or where we Templi
temporarily tabling a committee
sub to HB forty two what is that
how does that work in
relationship to a temporary
table if we have one.
Thank you for that questions
have got enough so we've tabled
house bill forty two I think in
in the future if
if the tax package is to be put
together then you know we would
look at things like literature
that the bill coming up next the
health practitioner tax credit
would look at all of them that
come before us and then we would
either introduce a brand new
bill or or that's probably what
would happen I'm assuming but it
would be up to the committee.
Chair not madam Representative
so just a quick if someone
brings the committee so we can
vote on the committee set up and
then table the committee's sub
right okay to six.
We might thank you okay thank
you representative.
Elaine do we have the
Representative got to see a on
the line.
No I have not seen him enter
yet.
Okay.
Committee.
She might be.
Representative Chandler would
you mind shooting him to text
see if he plans on coming over.
Mr chair.
Co sponsor some of the can.
I don't think so I think you.
On.
Let me double check though.
No he's not here alone
We probably should just wait
just in case.
Although we've all seen this
bill many times so we could
probably just put it on
ourselves.
But we'll give it will give them
a minute couple minutes.
Anybody have any good jokes
today Monday morning.
Yes Mister chairman the the rams
got a hall of fame quarterback
yesterday.
So see all in the Superbowl next
year on it yeah you know that's
an interesting trait I have been
I've been reading about that
treated nine just not sure I'm
just not sure.
But I love Matthew Stafford is a
fantastic quarterback.
He's got some some guts.
That's all I got Mr.
No response yet Mr chair.
All right.
I'm making a quick phone call to
his Committee assistant to see
where he's at right now.
Thank you later.
Mr chair I did want to just talk
about the interpretation
features and since the first
time or using it sorry.
I hope that it can help us all I
was switching back and forth
just for everyone if and it's
working it so incredibly well I
just want to commend the ability
that are legislature's bringing
that together but also you know
if we start seeing fireworks Mr
chair it could turn into a
political talent up and I just
wanted to.
Out there that we wanted some
political theater we kids we
could really do it in the in the
way that could be really
dramatic resumes.
Just wanted to start recruiting
folks for that.
This
message will be entered
Representative Romero.
Thank you Mr chair for
entertainment although there are
never any fireworks in this
committee we we've had a couple
of little fireworks here and
there but we keep it pretty
chill we keep it pretty boring
we keep a pretty tax code the
you know and nothing really
exciting especially when we meet
early in the morning nobody
wants thanks committee this is
the committee of the walks
along still have drama.
I I I put in my two years in the
house Judiciary
The late Friday nights.
Yeah.
Members here's what we're gonna
do Mr chair I just heard back
from representative Garcia he
said the system needs to let me
in.
The system you know would be
elevated to a panelist I believe
Mr chair will have that and I'll
take care of it right now I see
market.
Thank you Lynn.
Chairman I believe he is are now
panelists.
Representative got CA good
morning to you.
Sorry we had to a.
To to track you down in in the
cyber world but I we're glad
that you're here to join us to
present your house bill forty
five so without further ado
please take it away
Representative thank you is this
the mount chairman and
It just that I wasn't time tied
into your system yet as a
panelists even I was around for
some reason.
You know I wasn't able to kind
of get into the group let the
never the less the steam out
chair
Thank you he
I mean we went on the as the
leading us to all of you.
Mr chairman
This is the sixth straight year
that I've been carrying this
legislation.
last session it passed the house
by fifty four zero.
and let me kind of share with
you the the scope of the bill.
The bill basically does two
things we have a
Rural health care practitioner
tax credit.
At.
And initially
The legislation that created a
two tier credit.
and we one aspect one element
over legislation is that we
basically are equalizing the
credit.
currently the two tier is that
such
on the five thousand dollar end.
We have physicians osteopathic
doctors dentists psychologists
and what I interest on the three
thousand dollar and we have
dental hygienist physician
assistant certified nurse
midwives certified registered
nurse and Miss Suazo says
certified nurse practitioners
certified nurse specialist.
What we're doing with this
legislation is were equalizing
the credit to all that
presentation the practitioners
that are in the original
Act.
the rural health care
practitioner tax credit and in
addition what we're doing with
this legislation Mr chair is
over adding we're adding and
this is more more most important
is that we're adding three
professions the pharmacist
social workers and behavior
health counselors and therapists
and the.
In these will also fall into the
five thousand dollar tax credit
on the personal income tax.
Mr chair the rural health care
practitioner tax credit.
Maybe in two thousand seven.
And I remember that bill clearly
it was real near and dear to my
heart I supported it the
amendment.
And
The Sanchez basically.
I identified the highlights of
the bill which was want to
reduce work shortages in rural
areas.
And underserved areas and to
retain current practitioners in
these areas.
And one point that really stood
out in terms of presentation was
that it would also enhance
economic development.
And the way that the Sanchez
portrayed that yes for example
when a print when when a health
care practitioner.
Up on the credit say goes into
our rural community here she
moves to that community what is
typical is that person then goes
around versus the house.
And automatically becomes a
client in all the businesses in
that role community.
And that was the notion in terms
of highly generate.
Economic development and Mr
chair wire be including.
adding pharmacists social
workers.
Behavioral health
this is the legislature.
I'm.
The New Mexico health care
workforce committee.
In their last six annual report.
As recommended only these three
professions.
For inclusion into the role
healthcare practitioner tax
credit at.
You might as well as for.
Who is that.
Your for me.
Is comprised of twenty four
members.
And these members.
Come from medical for medical
association.
And.
Diverse groups.
Thank do and perform the.
The New Mexico and New Mexico
Society.
I was in high.
I.
What founder it also improves
the company improve your health.
And the purpose of this.
New Mexico health care workforce
committee is the kinda Act do
analysis of state licensed
health professionals in our
state.
And their their reports are very
detailed and specific to the
point.
To detail and one other one of
their task is also to look at
reducing Representative
shortage.
And the chair of that committee
is Dr Richard Larson executive
vice chancellor at UNM Health
sent under.
And.
The pharmacist.
In terms of of including them in
this tax credit.
You know I was born and raised
in a small rural town.
To continue Mexico.
And the main pillars in our
little town.
We're the church the school.
The clothing department store.
The movie house.
The fighting or.
The overall we can't without a
full.
And the and the mom and pop drug
store pharmacy.
And
You know some of my fondest
memories in terms of a teenager.
I know growing up in this small
community.
Was
Thank you bring.
At a fancy counter.
At the drug store.
Thank you drinks like got you
one see anywhere else in town.
Thank god linemate.
Look for.
Thank god Jareth sprite.
Thank the.
Chairman initiative where else
in town did you say we have that
drug store.
Not and four forty it from the
annual you know we were kind of
in hog heaven you know at this
budget for.
And Mr chair.
Whenever a pharmacies under
worse in a rural community.
A piece of community spirit
guides with that.
Mr chair why do we want to add
social workers.
Mr chair social worker in a
rural rural New Mexico helping
navigate the medical therapies
of a disabled veteran is more
crucial than a brain surgeon.
Mr chair of behavioral health
are there this.
In rural New Mexico.
Using state of the art
techniques.
Your palm of a five year old
child.
Thank you so
It more critical.
Interject.
Mr chair.
Bill analysis at the moment.
In a report of the New Mexico
health care we're committee
there are ninety four
of the thirty one year health
providers are speak.
Zero.
Hello all our.
Supporters in behavioural health
constant therapists.
They remain at odds with
the L. O. for the tax credit.
Mr chair by pretending to
Parkers and can't health health.
After.
The entire behavioural health
report the.
Mr chair
The New Mexico healthcare work
committee As You science
determine where best of.
In rural New Mexico.
This leads us to believe that
because bank port Act and alter
my is been expand rural health
your this tax credit act.
The pharmacist.
Social workers and behavior
health therapists and sports.
And before I go to my experts
bill Tinker with the pharmacy
association I just want to say
that the analysis that you have
from the tax revenue and on the
fiscal impact.
On the F. I. R..
Is really coming close to what
we have stated from the very get
go.
Because from the very get go Mr
chair when I started this bill.
The analysis in terms of the
impact we're coming in at twenty
two million dollars.
And you can see how far they've
come down mainly because myself
and Jeff Eaton from LFC I mean
from Legislative Council
services economist is no longer
with us but we figured why these
estimates were so high in that
the F. I. R. in the tax and rent
we're we're we're identifying
cost based on all.
License providers.
Within the pharmacy social
worker in route therapists and
counselors and not.
Practicing.
Professionals in these three
areas so you can see the why
we've been able to Whittle down
at the expense in terms of that
the the impact and
and and we still feel that that
five point three million is
still a little high considering
that not every very eligible
practicing well.
Well to the rural communities to
take credit of.
The Prescott of the act.
And with that Mr chair I would
like to yield to help thinker
one of my experts on this
legislation and I think also
that miss with law your own
without also might be in
attendance I'm not sure.
Thank you representative Garcia
Mr Tinker welcome good morning.
and ms Witt lock if you're on
here as well will will permit
you to experts and you may
address the committee.
Mr chairman members of the
committee this is Dale Tinker
with New Mexico pharmacists
Association
As many of you will will recall
we have been working to get
pharmacists included in the tax
credit for many years I've
appeared before this committee
many times over the years and
always appreciate.
The efforts Representative
Garcia in promoting this
legislation on.
I do want to encourage you to to
support this bill move it
forward.
The pharmacists are one of the
few professions where there is
not a shortage of of
practitioners
we work many years to improve
and into expand the scope of
practice that pharmacists have
so they can do disease
management they can do
prescribing in some categories
pharmacist can as you all know
give a good share of the shots
that patients get around the
state.
We don't have a shortage the
other practitioners have we just
have a distribution issue so
what we want to do to try to do
is encourage pharmacists to move
to other parts of New Mexico and
one of the mechanisms of doing
that is through a tax credit.
So.
I would like to in encourage
your support of this legislation
and at this point out I'll turn
it over to Karen for her
comments thank you.
Thank you Mr tanker I was the
weight loss welcome to house
taxation and revenue committee
good morning.
Thank you chair members of the
committee Karen would lock and
I'll be brief Representative
Garcia really did a good job of
describing the importance of
social workers in a rural
community I'm one of the things
I do want to point out
as we are looking in the in
these rural communities many
social workers don't even make
enough money to qualify for the
tax credit but those for those
who do this is a very important
part of the part.
Of
providing these the social
workers an incentive to stay in
rural communities many of them
can make more money and
And urban areas but they stay
because their families are in
these rural communities and well
established sometimes for many
generations and it's really
important that we provide the
social workers that are eligible
some some incentives to stay
there with with that I will
leave it and enter any questions
you may have thank you very
much.
With that Mr.
I see anything else from you Mr
chair with that we stand for
questions.
Great thank you before we go to
committee let me go to the
audience and see if we have
people in support and opposition
let me go to those to support
please raise your hand.
In support of.
of the bill in front of us here
we have two hands in support the
first one is Cat Sanchez.
Chair and committee members
thank you so much for your time
today my name is Cat Sanchez
policy associate with gold
futures formally known as young
women United.
We have done extensive and
significant work over the years
with licensed midwives and
expanding access to midwifery
services in rural New Mexico and
we appreciate and support the
bill's sponsor has brought and
continues to bring forward as
the committee considers a
variety of tax credits we ask
you ask you to consider
including licensed midwives as
eligible providers the tax
credit is already offered to
certified nurse midwives as
mentioned however not including
licensed midwives who often have
a much lower income creates an
unnecessary disparity in the
midwifery community thank you
for your time today Sir.
Thank you for being with us.
Next we have in the.
Many think I cannot see your
name your I don't see a last
name Linda.
Good morning I'm sorry this is
mentioned that gonna goal I am
the lobbyist for the New Mexico
pharmacy business council which
represents independent community
pharmacists around the state we
are so grateful to the sponsor
to continually work on this
effort we really hope this is
the year as independent
community pharmacies we are the
ones that are within the fabric
of the community and yes it is
economic development we can
bring pharmacists in and it's
also an important part of
community stability and help
when they are able to stay so we
very very much appreciate this
legislation and we think that
you will find it's very
beneficial to New Mexico's
futures and will serve as our
rural communities thank.
Thank you for being with us any
other any other comments in
support.
Seeing none anyone in opposition
to house bill forty five.
All right we'll move on to the
committee.
And first on the list we have
Representative Strickler.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and and thank you.
Chair Garcia
I sure like getting the
pharmacists to
full disclosure my son laws a
pharmacist in Dublin Ireland and
I'd I'd love to get him
let love to get him to move to
Farmington and help help our
local pharmacist
We we have a a labor shortage in
San Juan County and I think I
believe we're the fifth largest.
County in the state hundred
twenty five thousand folks in
San Juan racial is is County on
hospital and.
They do a really good job with
their they have to bring in
contract
medical professionals and and
sometimes they work three
monster traveling doctors a
nurse practitioners physician's
assistants
you name it the they they bring
in a lot of good folks from all
over the country and they have a
a three month contract
usually on the on the shore on
the minimum and then maybe two
years R. L. L. on the long range
and Senator Wirth in New Mexico
no they pay they pay taxes and I
believe your bill or maybe you
can help me Representative
if they would be covered under
this tax credit.
Mr chair and representative of
Strickler a.
great beard thank you.
When recognize.
I'm sorry.
Senator
what was that what was the
specific aspect of the doctors
and and nurses that fill the gap
you know in EDD San Juan
regional hospital for example
and
this that's a very popular way
of for filling our
Sore you know our medical health
care shortages and so they're
they're working in you know in
San Juan County Farmington for
example and now the other I
assume they're going to be
they're going to get a ten a ten
ninety nine from Santa Fe racial
and they're gonna be paying
taxes New Mexico to Texas.
you know Representative R. Mr
chairman and Strickler
We've never had that question
posed to us and all this.
And I would think.
That they would have to seen
groups.
It actually have to be a
resident of that community okay
and on a permanent basis okay
and but I I I need to look into
that and check with the tax and
Representative department and
the department of health to see
if that is the case
with me on that one person's.
Representative Strickler and yes
yeah if if and if I if I'm
listening correctly if I heard
your question correctly.
in order to qualify I've got
provide X. number of hours to I
do site located in approved.
Rural health care underserved
area.
And I'm looking at page two of
the bill and it looks like it's
two thousand eighty hours for
that particular taxable year and
I think that goes your question
Representative Strickler if I'm
not mistaken.
Well thank you thanks for that.
Chair because we do have
contract doctors that that stay
on for a year two years at a
time we
there's a gentleman exam turn as
to.
I'm from New Hampshire that that
worked
in our community for two and a
half years.
And so you may qualify for this
if you Corsi he says retired but
but anyway that's what but the
question and what one last
thing.
Representative Garcia.
The we can have a a tradition on
this committee that would put a
sunset on these bills and will
also work reporting requirement
at I believe this bill is
lacking and usually as a five
year sunset
this that does that is that
makes sense to you
Representative to to this I
guess through to add that sunset
to as our former colleague bill
mccamley would always to.
A man and
a good bill like this.
Weiss.
Mr chair representative dribbler
if that is a protocol this
committee I am a very amenable
to that Mr chair.
Thank you thank you
representative thank you Sir
that's all I have Mr chairman
and and thank you chair Garcia.
Thank you representative the
clear.
Let's go to Representative
Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative Garcia for
bringing this forward and
I just want to comment I'm
leaving the building in a
different screen but I really
and I really like the definition
of rural this is a great
definition in statute.
What's up page five line
eighteen says rural means an
area or location identified by
the department of health as
falling outside one urban area
and so I'm of the opinion there
is no urban areas in the state
of Mexico maybe on third and
market in Albuquerque that's
about it but our entire state is
rural and if we do classic
counties you know Dona ana
county is a big County person
county east of the mountains is
is rural so.
So I a lot of our definitions of
our rural or outside of plastic
counties but if you get outside
of the the town itself no
Farmington Santa Fe.
Rio Rancho crucis Albuquerque if
it becomes we're also.
So I really appreciate that
aspect and then with regards to
the the sense that Mr chair
representative Garcia
Representative supply this is
current law this is current
policy really changing the
policy a whole lot of this kind
of expanding the definitions of
health care worker but I I so I
do think we need to take a look
at this as a as we should all
tax.
Thanks provisions but
But I think this because this is
settled law it may not need a
sunset but.
With the chair Garcia's amenable
than.
But I guess you know course
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr president Garcia.
Thank you representative.
Representative Kevin a.
Hello
Mr chair representative Garcia
I'm grateful to have you in
committee today I just wanted to
say again that I certainly
appreciate the intentions of
these efforts and as others have
said the real help tax provider
credit is so important to so
many of our communities I do
want to kindly offer as I have
other years my concern and it
seems to really resonate what
you've offered today Mr chair
representative Garcia is that we
may not have all the providers
in that we need and potentially
there's ways to more effectively
imagine the entire rural health
tax provider credit to make sure
that those that need it most and
would likely make professional
and personal decisions about
showing up in rural New Mexico
are using this fund just
something else that I've offered
other years is that for folks
that are on a higher income of
that scale I don't know that
they'll make a decision to show
up for rural and frontier
communities when they're in six
figures and getting a three
thousand dollar credit but when
I think about some of our
providers that are integral mid
level mid level service
providers including
they think that that could
really help and change the
financial stability of their
families so I also just wanted
to name but I appreciate some
elements of providers that are
listed in representative Allison
still I know that of course is
we temporary table years to date
that I would love to be part of
conversations to make sure that
as we get these folks in I'm
fully supportive of of those
those three professions that you
brought in today I want to make
sure if there is a couple more
that we consider we're really
thinking about the kind of
providers that have the scope of
practice today like for instance
licensed midwives that are
showing up routinely in our
rural communities because the
ways that their scope of
practice and their professional
practices are designed at much
lower numbers so so giving them
more flexibility to decide.
Where to set up so I would just
ask of Mr chair and
representative that as we move
for these conversations I expect
we'll hear Representative
Representative Allison bill that
we just ask all the right
questions like are we targeting
the right people I think what
someone shared earlier earlier
about Mr income was key when we
know like some of these programs
are costing us a lot but they
may not be getting us the impact
we want here I really want to
invest on making sure those
providers that are bringing in
less resources and dollars have
have the bigger impact and
support from us to discredit
thank you Mr chair and
representative.
Thank you for those comments
Representative that I got into.
and see just to prove that
Representative Harper doesn't
always go first every once in
awhile he'll go second to last
Representative Harper.
Thank you I was feeling bad you
know.
Well my questions what I'm sorry
I'm sorry.
Of so.
I just had a couple couple quick
thoughts will be history so
Mr chairman and chairman Garcia.
You've carried this bill I think
you said for six years five or
six years that correct that's
great Mr chair yes so so you
really have been the champion of
this issue for a very long time.
And last year
I believe this bill is part of
the tax package that this
committee decided to send
forward.
the fiscal impact was low and we
felt that this was
a worthwhile.
endeavor and so we in a
unanimous bipartisan way
selected this bill to move
forward so whether you are new
to the committee that's that's
kind of what happened here.
And then.
Chair chair Garcia it just
didn't cross the finish line in
the Senate is that right.
Mr chair and Representative
Harper that's correct it made
everyone committee.
and the and and then it went
over to Senate finance and
They just didn't get to it.
even though we were trying to
kind of work on the sidelines in
terms of
Kind of on an amendment
there at the end.
So
Yeah that's that's that that's
the trail that it that it up Mr
chair.
Yes thank you chair charter CI
yeah I think all of us have
experience with.
I'm dying and Senate finance.
So.
There are a couple great many
great comments were made in the
committee today I I wanted to
especially point to
Representative cut Dennis
comment about looking at.
The impact of a particular
credit and and the streets
trying very hard to start adding
reporting requirements to every
credit our production or
exemption you know whatever that
comes to the committee so we can
look back and see how effective
it.
At the same time it also kind of
conflicts.
With one of the basic principles
of good tax policy that you know
laughter write both agree on and
that is neutrality.
And that it's not.
Appropriate to tax someone who's
doing the exact same thing
differently than someone else.
And when you look at that
districts fleets right taxed
with this happens depending on
how you structure your business
are you a non for profit are you
a for profit if you're doing the
exact same thing are we taxing
you differently that doesn't
make sense to give you an unfair
advantage or not FOR
disadvantage.
We we see it was
You know kind of how we some of
our older exemptions really
target a particular industry and
even a particular business
with in the industry we give
like a threshold dollar amounts
that if you are doing gross
receipts less than nine million
dollars and you're doing this is
that you qualify.
Then that makes folks we're
doing more of that business you
know more than a million dollars
gross receipts they don't
qualify so so now you're you're
we're competing big boys and
little guys and so.
It's just interesting to think
about.
You know is it really helpful to
give this budget to rural folks.
And not just everybody.
And I bring this up because our
our health care G. R. T. tax
code is a complete disaster it
is just so that.
Frank we shot to give a great
presentation I think was your
and a half ago and rest of about
this and everyone's eyes are
just you know this big when he
was done I'm talking about all
of the Hodge podge in all the
different ways that we tax
health care and and you'll be a
tax attorney he says you know.
This is like the the give us a
lot of work when we start you
know suing everyone on equal
protection is
protection plus.
So.
We support this bill last year
chairman and Mr chair depending
on how these four shows how much
money we have available
appropriations I imagine we will
again this year.
But I just want folks to
understand that.
the reason we've had this bill
these last six years is because
our health care G. R. T. what is
a complete disaster.
And if it was fair if it was not
a Hodge podge was uniform.
We won't be having this
discussion.
so
I think all all we read that.
Chair and.
Hope that in the near future we
can do something a little more
brought that addresses our
hodgepodge of taxes for the
healthcare sector thank you.
Thank you yeah no no doubt
thanks for for that insight.
Anyone else have questions or
comments on house bill forty
five.
Okay see none Representative
guess yet thanks for your time
thanks for bringing the bill
forward as you know will will
entertain a separate tabling
motion for the time being but I
agree with Representative Harper
I mean I think this is is an
important bill and and
unfortunately it has to be done
this way short of us fixing the
the the the court which is
really what needs to happen.
so with that
Is there is there a motion to
every table Representative
Chandler.
Mr chair thank you all right
gently temporarily table this
bill.
All right let's see no
opposition Representative SCO
will we'll table house bill
forty five and and bull will be
working with your in and your
staff over the next few weeks
as we.
We finalize our list.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and and
god bless you on this great
thank.
Thank you.
Members that is all the business
we have for today but we did
have a we had a birthday
yesterday Representative
Stansbury Happy Birthday to you.
Knowledge.
your your special day and thank
you for.
For all your work on this
committee and
Next year I'm sure will be
celebrating together.
I can't think of a better way to
celebrate my birthday then to
pass fair and just tax code for
New Mexico.
He
also agree she that.
Excellent well members without
any further business we will
reconvene on Wednesday at nine
o'clock the agenda should be
coming out here so and all work
with the with the team to get
that done today.
We are joined thank you all for
your hard work to.
Everyone.
