Representative Harper your.
Representative Hernandez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative Ortez here.
Yes Representative Scott.
Representative Serrato your.
Representative Townsend.
Vice chair condemned.
Chair Lente your.
We have a quorum we're gonna
switch things up this morning so
let me give you the rundown for
our agenda we will start with
House Bill number two two two
diverse sales gross receipts.
Right you can take that the
table already and then we'll
talk to you then after that.
And then after up to David this
is bill will go to house bill
one ninety two.
That the house bill one ninety
three.
That will go back up to health
bill to be sixty three Smokey
bear and then house bill three
sixty eight those two if you
recall we already had a hearing
on on Wednesday so is at seven
minutes to take care of on those
your.
Finally we go to the house bill
three sixty seven to wrap up our
morning stuff any questions on
that order if not.
Representative Hernandez the
floor is yours thank you Mr
chair.
I'm here to present our will to
to to.
Mr chair and the members of the
committee we're here today to
address a pressing concern for
families throughout New Mexico
as we are all aware the burden
of childcare costs can be
crushing with diapers being a
substantial an unavoidable
expense average family spend
approximately a thousand dollars
annually on this basic necessity
and for many this cost adds to
their financial struggles also
drivers are not covered by week
or snap benefits.
More to co sponsor the
significant piece of legislation
that seeks to exempt divers from
gross receipts tax in our state
the small but impactful action
would provide much needed relief
to families and demonstrate our
solidarity with their struggles
the COVID nineteen pandemic is
only magnified the difficulties
faced by families with cyber
banks across the country
witnessing a two to three times
surge in demand and a staggering
eighty six percent rise in
distribution efforts removing
the sales tax on diapers will
allow families to secure this
essential item you need to take
care of their children.
This is not just a man economic
matter but a public health issue
as well making sure that every
family has access to clean dry
diapers we can prevent the
spread of illness and improve
the health and well being of our
children and families let us
come together to pass this
legislation and make a tangible
difference in the lives of
families across New Mexico is
our opportunity to show our
commitment to families and to
demonstrate that there will be
in the forefront of our
priorities thank you I would
like to introduce my experts.
Contact on the Santa Fe County
clerk but this bill is nine nine
years in the making the original
those drafted in two thousand
fourteen we identified that in
the tax code adult diapers are
not taxed considered medical
devices but child divers are not
one of the issues we hear from
families is that they're living
paycheck to paycheck so when we
have the tax free holiday they
do not have enough time or money
to buy on drivers or they may
not know their expecting a child
the other issue here is that up
to fifty six percent of parents
report in the last year they've
either been late to work I'm
able to go to work because they
couldn't find occurs or they
don't have adequate divers in
order to be able to engage with
child care because one of the
things about divers is that you
have to have a supply of drivers
provided your child care
facility in order to be able to
utilize that care so we're
hoping that you will help us
make the tax code equitable
between adult members and make
sure that we get some relief to
working families in New Mexico
thank you so much welcome.
Our other Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my apologies for
walking in late I thought we
were last on the list but never
the less I I deferred my
cosponsored my expert witness on
all these issues it's a really
important tax rebate I know
somebody or some of your well
like this trying to figure out
how to say no I know nasally but
the point is the point is this
is important and a lot of people
as of Michael Sanchez at nickel
in
said they are there are very
important needs that we need to
address with this bill and I
hope that you will work with us
to move forward thank you.
The first in our hearts.
So the.
You know we're we're ready for
questions it those in the
audience here in support of
house bill to to to have those
online.
Is is working with yep okay and
those online we should also
support possible to do the right
at the start at left as I guess
but.
Mr chair members of the New
Orleans.
To well as the tax.
Errors are in violation of the.
During the COVID.
These
taxes.
I.
You are are.
This tax.
During my time as president G.
earlier about forty she started
as the
things are moving that much.
The world.
Randy potter.
I.
Thank you do we have others in
the audience here in support.
so if you'd like to speak in
support of HB to to to please
raise your hands.
Janet Williams go ahead.
Hi Janet Williams
hello good morning madam chair
and members of the committee I'm
with the national organization
for women and we strongly
support this bill thank you.
Thank you Janet we have others
on them.
In the room do we have anyone
here to speak in opposition.
Thank
you okay anything else like that
before we go to be ready.
Maybe.
There is and what to.
Representative set up and.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representatives for you for this
bill thank you the process of
being here I appreciate this
conversation I'm interested to
note is there any information at
all about how.
The increased cost limits the
number of diapers that it that
it family uses for their
children.
So what we know from States
not decreases that madam chair
and members of the committee
what we know about diaper uses
that people do ration they often
re use divers are hoping each
just the even the cost of the
taxes going down the people can
gain more from you provide more
for their Buck and be able to
not have to ration so much
honestly diapers is quite
challenging for all families
what we saw during the pandemic
was that supply chains had gone
down and so people really were
rationing their diapers and some
families are for free using
reusing or diapers at home so
that they can say that I
supplied for child care so it is
it is pretty dire for families
who are living quite on the
lines not because you can't use
your money your federal money
and we can snap so we're hoping
that even just a small reduction
will allow people to not have to
ration their supplies thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative and expert for
that one thing I I'm curious
about is that and all the all
mentioned I don't know if you
have more incentive which we
help
obviously when you re use
diapers for you have extended
period which a child hasn't
changed increases the likelihood
of diaper rash and other uses
heat issues hi my experience
there is you know very few
creams are effective against a
rush and they're really
expensive do you have any doubt
about how that is impacted by as
possible
madam chair thank you for.
so we recognize that direction
that obviously is the problem
we're trying to prevent we would
like to see I would personally
like to St Paul childcare
supplies do not expensive but
we're here today to try to make
equity in the talk of tax code
which is that adult diapers are
considered medical devices in
the tax code and there are there
for not tax so we have seen sort
of a inequity in the tax code
that we can fix thank you thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative for that I I
appreciate this a lot of ways
and especially following the
pandemic when parents were faced
with formula shortages which
created a run on you know I
tease the increased breast milk
supply otherwise as we know
access to washing machines it
can be very difficult for people
on the meeting comes so the idea
of you know reusable diapers is
also very difficult you know
just not to mention the time at
center that takes on that so I
appreciate this coming forward
as a little bit closer the FIR
and the impact on that but the
fact this is included as part of
everything else we've already
been doesn't make sense right
member madam chair members of
the committee I mean when we
look at the impact of the tax in
the FIR the reality is working
families are paying that tax
rate so it is an essential item
that everyone needs to use and
just like we don't I know and
some of that
committees we discussed a
special items like food and
other items that are essential
items to families this is not an
item that we should be taxing
transaction thank you thank you
madam chair thank you thank you
Representative.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative this issue this
morning.
I just want to share a couple
slides
And that is the.
As we always connect.
Opportunity tax credit.
and that really just why.
Look at our Ocean City has
relief is lost.
So many.
So.
It's.
And if we could take that lock
is just cheese noted down.
On the basis.
I think not actually much.
Pieces.
Done in the past.
Just one example I want.
So back in the two thousand and
two or three.
Tax.
Receipts are sufficient tax
US cities of why.
this will help those with low
income.
And this is what really
happened.
Are the only time we were on a
roll we were using.
Source.
And those are not tax.
And so we are doing as remove
the tax on.
The state cut and how much the
state locals who were being that
we do have a legitimate.
What we did was we increase the
tax rate on everything else.
The tax rate on almost
immediately provide extra one
percent.
So those folks who.
Hello not hang tax.
that tax on their
loaded car repairs on their
lives wait what.
so we actually.
All
right so.
Representative.
This actually.
Divers would actually help a
little.
I is that right that's.
It is health these.
There all the time.
so so I'm sure this would all
but I am very concerned when I
hear things like sure the taxes
this.
for that because.
Does it stop.
I can make very.
straight face on she's not in
taxes.
utilities commission on the
taxes
Not only right I mean.
Legislature's.
For us as a joke.
If we just follow this money
traction with you taxi messing
with people's.
Nine thousand percent tax.
And no one will buy up both in
New Mexico.
Right although some runs.
So I very much believe that we
should tax every.
Everything she tax do that you
can do about a little over
eight.
Government
troops are contributing to many
service.
So
those are my thoughts.
If you have anything you'd like
to share thank you.
Madam chair and.
My dear good for you like the
way it suck up my dear good
friend Representative Harper
I've known I didn't know your
kids are still in diapers.
What about the.
I've known you for ten years.
And it the the issue is I think
you're right about about this
and nobody should be buying
boats in New Mexico and we have
no water.
But the issue is
Well we mitigate this issue of
the Swiss cheese taxes let's not
penalize the people who are
struggling to pay for these
items and and that's the real
issue here how do we make sure
that we're not making them
struggle with whether to buy the
diapers of the diaper cream you
know right we have to figure out
something and.
I understand the other layer but
the reality is that's not make
them pay for our issues this
figure out how to do this
without hurting them thank you
Mr chair thank you members of
the committee.
Cheers.
The last time on the issue.
Last on the.
Looking at the FY are the impact
general.
Of course the locals here offers
an access route three to six
million dollars right.
and we're looking at this
house and other ways to address
this.
I mean look at the actual
savings for a family G. R. T..
I didn't do that to.
I guess it's.
One hundred dollars we.
Committees.
Tax the gentleman which really
the litter is designed to cover
gross receipts taxes that are
paid by low income families.
I think we already in a way
taking care of the situation.
So
result thank you madam chair.
Representative gave us.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you to the Sanchez I just wanted
to make sure that we clarified
that the drivers are
children and adults is that
correct.
And
You know we talk about a three
million dollar hit
I would think that there would
be some counterbalance to that
when we talk about it once we if
we're not if children or people
are spoiled diapers there's
gotta be some medical balancing
of that so can you talk a little
bit about that.
Our.
Actually thank you thank you
madam chair.
That are not.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you
Representative back I just
transaction so I do think that
while maybe it is not a
measurable impact certainly what
I mentioned before when families
report that there were missing
work or trying to find childcare
there is impact on our
productivity as the state our
ability to have parents get to
work not be penalized for
missing work not being penalized
for having to miss work at to
ensure that they have child care
I'm an obviously incontinence is
a struggle for people who suffer
from it and miss work or so
there is certainly health
impacts and probably hard to
measure productivity impacts on
our economy when we make these
items are available and easier
to get thank you and madam chair
not to be so.
You know just imagine yourself
having that problem walking
around with the rod behind you
need to have those supports a
lot of people don't have them
that's the bottom line.
Thank you.
madam chair I use it when we
when we factor in Leger what I
would say is if if we're gonna
look at that I mean is this a
place that we can we can start
to do some of that balancing and
and incorporate this.
And maybe that's where that.
Tax deduction goes into so just
thank you for bringing the bill.
Thank.
Representative Scott he.
Thank you madam chair
representatives thanks for.
Wash doctors reviews.
Madam chair representative.
so we do know that parents do
try to reuse their disposable
diapers in an effort to stretch
them a lot of people who are
working because child care
facilities do not allow them to
use reusable washable diapers
they have to use disposable
diapers and so if you are a stay
at home parent or you don't have
a most child and almost all
child care does not allow a
washable diapers because it's
considered a health risk and
there's human waste involved so
if you are subscribing to
usually a service that has
washable diapers that's usually
just from home when you send a
child to child care you have to
use disposable diapers and that
is where the cost is significant
because unlike the I'm like food
or other essential items there
is no federal program to cover
that cost.
So madam chair.
Experts would to Chris receipts
tax applied.
Transition services which
Washington time.
And madam chair Representative
no it would just be for the
disposable diapers that are kind
of the essential item that we're
seeing among working families.
And madam chair representative
do we know how many millions of
times.
Disposable diapers School.
I met Madam chair representative
we do not know specifically I'm
certain it is too many.
But that is the reality we're
living in because the way that
childcare facility the childcare
facilities Dick because there's
so few of them and it's in such
high demand they're the ones who
dictate what the rules are the
rules for engagement and the
rules for engagement for talk of
legislation because of the
liability of reusable diapers
having human waste associated
with them I mean sorry a
washable diaper is having issues
waste associate with them
because of the liability and the
issue of being concerned about
spreading disease and bacteria
they absolutely insist on
reusable diapers that is a
reality find ourselves and so
certainly I would like to see
less diapers go into landfill
make sure their compostable all
those wonderful things but
unless there is an organized
program around childcare
facilities to do that that will
not be in our near future.
And madam chair.
Representative sin.
An expert just one last question
also.
Are choosing to play field
provided.
Average cost for diapers in a
prostitution eighty dollars so
what we're talking about here's.
Our products.
Per child is that accurate.
I think that's not I think.
Yeah.
Madam chair and representative
Scott yes it it's a about five
dollars but.
For the families that we're
trying to target the five
dollars it actually would make a
difference to buy other things
to people living you know less
than paycheck to paycheck and
that's really who were trying to
reach with this.
Thank you madam chair of the
tobacco.
it's Representative Harper.
To look we've got quite a few
programs or to designed to help
these folks are just barely
getting by and.
All the rest.
Session the first session chair
thank you.
Thank you.
Before we go on to committee at
debate I do just want to clarify
and ask again it does appear by
your definition of diapers.
That there is not a distinction
between reusable.
Or otherwise so just for those
listening in those in the
audience because this has a
fiscal impact after this lively
discussion this will be a
temporary table no matter what
but if that is your intention
but this only applied to
reusable diapers I would
potentially up focusing on not
definition that at this point.
Thank you madam chair.
Next we have Representative
Chandler
Thank you madam chair I will be
brief I want.
Eight three.
Thank you for acknowledging that
Representative Townsend.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for that levity Representative
I'd like some clarification I
have gotten a little bit of
conflicting information that
adult diapers are only taxable
if there is a up prescription or
direction from the doctor and
line correct AUMENT.
Madam chair.
At.
What can we get our local tech
a tax expert Representative
appropriation I think we've.
Sure.
Tax on.
What are the main line yeah
right.
Right.
Of the total
She is
Okay that's super helpful thank
you and the second point madam
chair is I'm going back to the
discussion about what to which I
really appreciate I don't recall
that as part of a potential tax
packages we are talking about
indexing the not just the rebate
amount but now the income amount
so that will help going forward
as we're thinking about
supporting working families and
the sorts of items as well and
with that I conclude my comments
thank you Representative
Representative docket.
Thank you madam chair
A statement was made about
adults is as opposed to a child
actors and and in our industry
adults pay tax on those and as
if we're looking at that the.
This Psy.D that's getting older
and older within state within
the care that we give that
probably would help those that
most needed as well.
Thank you thank you
Representative just as a point
of clarification I think some of
us got to hear what your
industry is might you just said
that as a bit of context for
your comments thank you madam
chair I own an assisted living
home and so those that are on
hospice those are taking care of
those family members after
purchase those pay taxes on
those thank you for that
Representative thank you
Representative political.
Thank you for that clarification
Representative.
Madam chair representative so in
the reading that spent and and I
do have a family member that I
buy
that senior.
Depends or whatever I have yeah
they are very expensive here and
representatives so I do
appreciate this and I do
appreciate that you don't need a
prescription for it because I
think that that includes a lot
of people
so in reading this I guess the
question that I have is this is
also include imminent hygiene
products no.
Okay madam chair.
Percentage of
Last year right so last year
Representative Trujillo carried
that and then the diapers are
being added to that code that
was passed last year that did
encompass the feminine hygiene
products so that's already in
statute we're just adding
diapers to that statute.
All right thank you Mr.
And committee any further
questions.
Thank.
Madam I think it.
I'm sure I move to table a
table.
Second from Representative set
up the thank you are today.
I thank all of you for the
robust areas.
Madam yes Representative
Townsend.
These three or Mr real
opportunity with the new team
goals that are out on.
Health food food food.
Is all about you to see that.
Or it could be.
Happy Friday everyone.
Since we have some new folks in
the room I mean again we are
amended agenda for that day will
be going next Representative
Brown with house bill one ninety
two after that will follow again
with Representative brown house
bill one ninety three then we'll
go to Smokey bear house bill
three sixty three.
Then House Bill three sixty
eight Senator finished right see
all mayors and city managers in
the room House Bill three sixty
seven.
Representative Brown thank you
madam chair good morning
everyone I have house bill one
ninety two and one ninety three
shortly thereafter.
Richard members house bill one
ninety two proposes to eliminate
the perception caps that the
legislature placed on social
security income and the type of
state taxation of something we
did last year so
madam chair members of there
were
representatives and senators all
across the board here in the
legislature last year who worked
on
trying to stop the taxation of
social security income New
Mexico is one of just a few
states now that continue that
still do tax at the state level
for this income.
The governor last year asked for
a full repeal and it didn't
happen so the caps were places
as follows person who's married
filing separately would have
seventy five thousand dollars
income and that's just gross
exempted from this tax people
who are married and filing
jointly would have a cap of one
hundred fifty thousand and
single filers cap of one hundred
thousand so madam chair members
as you can see there's there's
even a marriage penalty.
Because these caps are are still
index these captured existence.
So what we're trying to do with
this bill is just kind of what I
call finish the job and that
means to just eliminate the
capsule together my co sponsors
representative Armstrong and
she's going to try to join us
shortly she's I think designing
a bill right now in other
committees so madam chair New
Mexico has a billion dollars
basically built into the budget
for fiscal year twenty twenty
four for tax reform.
And it's the position of many of
us that New Mexico has the
capacity to just get rid of
these caps.
And why does that matter well
Madam chair New Mexico if you
Google it you look states that
tax social security income New
Mexico is still on the list of
states that do even though we
have those caps.
And so basically we have not
gotten off what I call the bad
panelists are there are retired
there are retirees who look at
taxation before they decide
whether to stay in the state
they're in New Mexico in this
case or whether to go to a state
that does not tax that income
and it can be seven hundred
dollars or someone average of
basically tax savings for that
for the constituents if we don't
tax this.
So madam chair I I'm not going
to go long on this because we
had extensive discussions last
session and I know with our new
members here I prepared to
discuss any aspects you'd like
if you want me to go over that
again but I just want to just
say that house bill one ninety
two is simply to remove the caps
and to basically get us better
press you representative madam
chair we're going to do public
comment now we're gonna start
with those in the room do we
have anyone in the room here to
speak in support of H. B. one
ninety two.
We're gonna start on the left
side go ahead Sir.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Jamie
wanted speaking to the daily
have a greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce New Mexico
New Mexico Canada should fight
to be one of the best places in
America to retire I think we all
know that in line with that goal
we shouldn't be taxing social
security income we made a lot of
progress toward that end with
last year's legislation this
bill finishes the job that
you've already started thank you
thank you on the right hand side
yes the had thank you madam
chairman is pregnant and I'm
with the New Mexico we got
interested in this issue about
four years ago we put up this
report on the city's Crisis
around retirement security and
that was prompted by a study
done by UNM it pointed out that
sixty two percent of New
Mexicans have ten thousand
dollars or less save for their
retirement so these people try
to make it.
Solely on there's social
security.
And as you know it wasn't
designed as the sole source of
your retirement.
it was actually designed to be a
supplement.
And so we just think that it
made a lot of sense would you
repeal that tax and low and
middle income people and we'd
like to also for you to consider
repealing the entire tax it
works across purposes with all
the money that you put into
economic development and tourism
because we are repeatedly listed
as one of the worst states for
people to retire to
in four years and money magazine
these reports come out every
single year and give us a black
out so I would agree with the
sponsor that we should go ahead
and repeal the statutes thank
you were going to zoom do we
have anyone in favor that would
like to speak in favor of H. B.
one ninety to us so please raise
your hand now.
Let's see if today it's car
letter not go ahead Carla.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members this is Leri
Sonntag here speaking of the
product so I think there's
another committee and the New
Mexico business coalition for
reasons previously stated by the
bill sponsor and others in the
room encouraging your support of
house bill one ninety two thank.
Thank you and I was just hearing
Larry from folks on the
committee that it's consistently
hard to hear you all when you
share V. as soon so just
potentially next time if you can
get closer to maker look close
at that we I do have a hard time
hearing you we have anyone else
in zoom I would like to speak in
opposition to HB one ninety two.
Okay I'm sorry in thousands of
poor and now we're going to
opposition opposition in the
room go ahead.
What the bills were move which
is your
the bill we have discussed this
bill on your
and I would just say all the
rules are you looking at this
year just one eboost those in
the higher income.
Our tax code is already set up
so that low income families are
paying about forty per cent
higher tax rate yeah the very
rich and this is another.
Right for the very rich I'm
already also spearheaded the
band live this long and I
thought I'd take it with the I
will be tax free.
and I've been I'm asking that
you look at the issue years and
economic that we did our taxes
and I've given over
forty million dollars plus
to the topic thank you thank you
do we have anyone else in the
room that would like to speak in
opposition.
Tax and soon please raise your
hand if you'd like to speak in
opposition to HB one ninety two.
Charles Charles.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee of
Charleston markers beyond me
half of New Mexico voices for
children action fund R. as bill
said.
Frankly as these people speaking
in favor of the bills also said
this is not going to help lower
and middle income New Mexicans
which is the fast majority of
New Mexicans it's only going to
help the wealthy retirees in
terms of the list.
The reality okay that's a
reality that there's a bunch of
this that sometimes say that
we're not so good on taxes.
But the reality is more New
Mexicans workers are population
growth are population growth is
from elders and seniors moving
into our state it's it's the
younger people who.
and working families who need
any additional tax breaks is
your opposition to this bill
thank you very much yeah moving
to committee discussion we have
Representative political.
Share
Just trying to wrap my head
around this
so I just would like to hear
your comments regarding those
comments about it only helping
the people at the higher end
is it I don't think that's what
your goal is so.
Chair
chair and representative thank
you for that question I I do
have a couple thoughts on that.
First of all
we do a lot to New Mexico for
lower income individuals and
families and our tax policy is
so focused it seems on that but
I consider all constituents and
what what's good for them and
it's important for us to
remember madam chair
representative that this income
has already been taxed when it
was taken out through payroll
deduction so this is actually a
double tax and I don't think
that's fair these people worked
all their working lives they
have this money set aside for
their retirement and then New
Mexico you know that under
before last year was taxing that
income so it's their money and I
think they're entitled to have
it it's been again taxed once
so Madam chair representative I
hope it if that if there's any
other aspect of that you want me
to discuss I think we're not
talking about that much money to
the state in terms of tax
expenditure madam chair it's
very doable for us this year and
our projections for state
revenue for the next five years
are very very rosy we can't
afford to do this and again I
think New Mexico does get a
black eye for continuing to to
tax we fix it a little bit but
there's there's this the
ultimate solution and that is
just limit this tax and there
are people who Madam chair
representative and members of
the committee there are people
who really look at this when
they make it up for retirement
location decision.
So madam chair spending so just
thinking about just a little bit
more so you have people at the
lower end maybe that make or
retired at thirty thousand
dollars or something like that
and then retire and they get
their social security so that
gives them a little bit of
handy right into their to their
social security when they
receive it because they wouldn't
have to pay that tax rate my
thinking this properly Madam
chair of.
Figure this one out a little bit
more Madam chair representative
and members so it it really just
it you know people's income can
change even in retirement some
people actually go out and get a
second job I've I've seen a lot
of retirees at work restaurants
for example because they they
can't make it on what they do
but this just helps all of our
seniors
have more to to use for for
their needs and I thank you
madam chair more disposable
income is what you're saying is
that they would actually receive
that.
They would pay that tax so they
would actually receive that into
their their paycheck or not
paycheck but.
Whatever that that checked the
check goes into your account
managers Representative so they
just wouldn't the state wouldn't
grab the tax on that income and
it also another point and madam
chair members is that
When we have these cap some
people like I said they may get
a second job or whatever their
situation the change they may
actually end up not getting the
exemption and it could be a one
dollar difference so if
someone's income from all
sources of state married filing
jointly is what well okay say
it's a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars plus one dollar
they're not getting any
exemption and if we eliminate
the cap and chair representative
that's just more fair for
everybody.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair and thank you she at
that time.
Thank you madam.
Date.
The.
Madam chair representative towns
in it I think about it I've got
some numbers here I think about
it's changed a little bit the
last two years some have gone
away from that state tax so I
think it's about ten right now
thirteen thirteen still do tax
at the state level.
And the.
Representative by the way.
We were discussing about.
Seniors that.
And retired on
social security.
But it wasn't sufficient.
Just for the in their standard
of living and they go out and
get another job.
The New Mexico desperately
needs.
Yeah it's the benefit.
To them that I think you're
trying to reach yeah.
I would support is because those
are the ones that are that have
on the it better and we should
we should I never heard that so
I think
I think your ideas is good this
year last year the year before I
I think that idea and I think
it's good for New Mexico along.
Thank you thank you
representative that can.
Thank you madam chair
Representative I would like to
ask a little bit about the gains
from this if we're inviting
seniors to retire New Mexico and
to those seniors are going to be
spending money tell me what
those games are with those
changes being able to use this
and spend money in our state.
Madam chair representative
Duncan so thank you again for
that question
we touched on it a little bit
but basically what it means is
madam chair that that people
will have more money in their
pocket and what they'll do with
that is probably spend it during
retirement years and we say to
get to retirement and then when
we reach retirement I think most
people so now's the time to
spend what I've what I've been
able to to store so we're going
to see more seniors going to
restaurants it seems to be a
favorite activity of a lot of
our seniors they're going to you
know take trips they're going to
basically spend a little more
and whatever whatever they they
want for their from their family
and we also see
The less pressure madam chair of
them to have to maybe go get
another job to meet their
expenses that inflation has
really hurt everybody and and
this measure would take a little
bit of that pain away I think on
that as well you Mr madam chair
members may know that the
federal on the federal
government taxes social
security.
And that went into effect I
think about nineteen eighty four
and there's an acknowledgement
that
what they have now because of
inflation is actually worse
works less to them so it makes
another good argument for
getting rid of the caps.
Thank you madam chair
would would we as a state that
be gathering taxes from the
money they spend in other
categories restaurants movies
strippers clothing whatever they
would like our.
Yeah Mr chair and representative
Duncan so exactly right it's
good for the economy it fuels
the economy with people have
more to spend.
And we all benefit from that as
well thank you madam chair I
have one deep concern on this
and and madam chair I don't
think that you'll be able to
have a quorum here to vote on
this because all of us will be a
benefactor of what's get rated
take place.
Just to stay in.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative thank you woke
everybody up without.
Representative Lente advice show
to make a motion to be tabled.
Thank you Representative
Townsend thank you
Representative Brown we're back
to you or back to J. Lente thank
you.
Of course so your Mr chair and
and members out not too
surprised about the tabling
that's how it works in this
committee but please do remember
if you would that we have a lot
of capacity in terms of tax
reform it's going to be a good
year for that and this could
very easily fit into into that
so Mr chairman members of my
next bill is house bill one
ninety three.
And what this bill does is it
doesn't deal with the caps
except that it does index
the the tax to inflation and so
what we do is adjust the income
caps as inflation does what it
does and if we don't indexed to
inflation we are roading the at
the value of that exemption for
older for offer for seniors so
we decided Representative
Armstrong and I Mr chair that if
you didn't like house bill one
ninety two maybe you'd like
house bill one eighty three.
And so we're giving you a second
chance to help our seniors and
without repository requested
very good let's go to the
audience all those you support
in the room and online for house
bill one ninety three please
raise your hand.
Starting on my right hand side
yes revenues thank you Mr
chairman for the nation and
thank you Mexico and I would
just emphasize that passing this
bill the only beneficiaries
would be people that are low
income and middle income we do
try to protect last year when
you pass this bill because as
the representatives that with
thousand inflation adjusted
inflation is now six seven
percent it's just been a road
back to being a tax on
people.
Thank you Sir anyone else on the
side of the road they also
decided anyone online want to
speak in support of house bill
one ninety three.
Are are the good morning.
other zero eight.
let's see anyone in opposition
of house bill one ninety three
in the room or online.
Saying that that's going to the
committee for questions and
answers that Representative
Chandler.
thank you Mr chair I did find
this suggestion much more
palatable and you know I've been
suggesting indexing on other
things and I think that's a very
reasonable potentially something
I could support thank you Mr
chair thank you for the comment
about the.
Thank you Mr chairman thank
Representative ring for this
bill can you remind us the last
time that the source of the.
The amounts that we.
Exempted from the social
security tax was raised prior to
this we we list.
Mr chair and representative
Rogers I'm not quite sure I
understand the question but we
did just a legislature do some
tax reform last year so I think
that is that is the most recent
example I have a would be made
we made a change in the state
taxation on social security
thank you Mr chair the
representative I believe before
that we wanted and early
nineties with late eighties I
believe was the last time that
we exempted in New Mexico now
right is that correct.
Mr chairman and representative I
don't recall that and I I have
another full notebook in my
office this whole subject.
I'm just trying to think back to
all the material I have I don't
recall the New Mexico it and
that's just need I don't recall
any Representative by members
can help the other I hope so the
fed's stamps I think now it's
twenty seven thousand or so so
because the feds exempted from
off your adjusted gross income
used to be twenty five thousand
it's now I think up to twenty
seven thousand so I think Mr
Chairman representative maybe
that's what you're thinking of
thinking and that's often
references something that
already is not taxable what what
whatever age you are at so thank
I hope that helps thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative that's kind of
where I was getting out a little
bit here is that when whether we
as a legislature passed things
that have a.
Set number it doesn't account
for it comes back to us to have
to raise whether that be.
Right tax exemptions or whether
that be minimum wage you know
comes back to us to do when we
clearly are saying that the
market is shifting and that with
inflation and changes the
economy we really do need to
allow CPI and other pieces to to
change it so well thank you in
your Mr chair and representative
you and your colleagues are
super smart and dissipating that
we would funds were possible
because you know the objective
that we passed we did recently
was to ensure the middle income
and low income seniors didn't
have to figure out that month to
month income that they were so I
appreciate it I would appreciate
IT support.
What else question the context.
Chair I move a temporary table
on house bill one ninety three
most raise their second.
Second the opposition seeing
none of that route know the
process thank you for your
presentation this morning space
of time with this very good
thank you all so much Mr chair
thank you Jeff okay so that's
good and it's good not to Smokey
bear.
Shopping at the.
I
promise you we come back to you
guys and we could not promise
made promise kept and appreciate
your your patches.
So you Miss Mister chair.
Mr we we set up our state
drawing these.
Itching them we've done to
cherry picking up that are part
okay so the floor is yours thank
you
as and I think you all have to
be amended.
Copies and I.
At the end I did it.
Yup two five one nine eight.
A good two two five one nine
eight point one can someone move
that for two session please
hello their second second very
good opposition okay please stop
what you're amendment all right
this amendment page two line
twenty we struck the ten dollars
and put it to the twelve dollars
that they said it would.
To
make this place.
And on page three line for we
struck twenty twenty six and
Senator twenty twenty seven.
And then on line nine that we
struck twenty twenty four twenty
twenty five and and maybe in
twenty twenty five and twenty
twenty six.
And then the line twelve we
struck the comma or and insert
it and.
And then
Line fifteen.
Thirteen two thousand thirteen
we struck the COVID.
And then on nine fifteen we took
out twenty twenty three answer
to twenty twenty five.
Structure of the twenty four
answers twenty twenty six.
And that online nineteen we
Twenty twenty three and and sort
of twenty twenty four.
Mr chair members of the
committee this conforms with the
language that was recommended to
us by indicate very good
anything else that on the
amendment no Sir okay committee
members questions or comments on
this ammendment.
Our motion to adopt the cement.
Their second.
The opposition to that amendment
no I see none yet amended bill
we did go through the hearing
process on Wednesday both in the
committee and in the public and
so what is the pleasure of of
this this bill.
Just to do that would do passes
their second second any
opposition to that two passed
this take a roll call just for
fun.
Representative Branko yes.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Duncan yes ma'am
Representative guy and okay.
Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Townsend.
Representative.
vice chair could DeMint
yes I'd like to make a comment.
Chair landed yes.
Have a due passi unanimously and
bipartisan.
Mr.
Thank you Representative I also
see on the house transportation
committee and it seems like it's
working out some issues around
referral and consistency in
referral for the license plate
also just for the rest of the
committee and then members I you
all got here got here quickly it
seems like in the most direct
way in the in the way that we're
now trying to get everybody else
to follow along so just for
those listening what will have a
slew of license plate built in
the next couple days folks have
asked why and of course that's
because and we do as part of the
TRD Department so you all got
here first and it seems like you
did it will also now in its
transportation we're asking
everyone else to make the
amendments that you've led the
way with have that consistency
so thank you for paving not
happy
thank you madam chair thank you
for your patience.
Right.
Yeah.
Next next on it we will then go
to house bill three sixty eight.
This is a Representative Harper
Representative had enough to.
If you call our committee
members that we also had a
hearing on this on Wednesday
discussed it particularly on the
committee in the committee and
then also with the public
comments as well and so they
have come back with an amendment
and so at this point in time
whatever you're ready
Representative I stand when we
could end up if you would please
we just had to go to numbers
thank you Mr chair looking at
amendment two two five three
three eight point three
point two two five three three
eight point three everybody have
that in there binders.
I think we all should and so is
there a motion to move this
ammendment.
Their second.
Well if you to explain your
amendment thank you Mr chairman
committee after the discussion
and the helpful in clarifying
questions and comments including
for Representative Chandler we
have gone back upstairs to make
sure that we eliminate of the
line that reference the forty
percent related to capital gains
instead now that is references
the statute of then we have
added to a definition on page
sixteen line twenty four making
sure we're clear with our
intention and and the
implications that come with this
bill and then on page of line
seventeen we are defining for
the first time and only other
points to this passed through at
tax situation we're defining
pass through entity so that is a
definition that are drafters
pulled from the IRS and that
we've included here we have mark
here again today as our expert
we have several folks in the
room thanks out of her secretary
that appreciate depreciated the
intention when we pass this bill
previously and have come forward
asking us to polishing clean up
this bill is locked thank you
very good let's go to the
committee with any questions or
comments on the amendment
Representative.
J..
thank you Mr chairman not to be
hyper technical and hopefully
not smart aliki on the amendment
Mr chair it says less the
percentage and if we're talking
about possibly adjusting.
Should the other bill you know
the other on a limitation of the
capital gains deduction pass at
is not a percentage that is a
flat dollar amount and I know
that maybe some type of
technical Mister chair I
apologize but we are talking
about taxes and maybe hi for
technical isn't out of the
bounds when one is talking about
I'm really not trying to be
difficult but I just want to
point that out Mr chair.
The
budget funds to that.
First Mr chair I appreciate the
hyper technical view and we and
we are currently looking closely
at that.
Okay.
What well you are what we give
some time to ship to for them to
look at any other questions as
we wait for that response.
it is.
That thank you Mr chairman
Representative Chandler again
good morning my name is mark
shaking on the tax policy
director of taxation and revenue
department I thank you for that
comment Representative
I we will clarify that language
we can go back and try to find
that again really it's there I
see the point you're making I
think that will we were trying
to say was Representative is
allocable to each owner.
so that's why I was really a
very closely to make sure that I
see where the confusion can
arise and us so we can try to
read draft that.
So if you want to try to reach
draft that that you want to just
take this back road again if
they get this right if you want
to try to do something on the
fly State I wouldn't be
comfortable doing on the
flexible to make sure this get
that get this right but I if you
what I'd ask Mister chair I
imagine we have a room full of
debate on our final bill
potentially we could run up
stairs see if we can get this
addressed quickly and if we're
still in committee just finish
hearing it today if not roll
over to the next meeting at the
great land ready.
With nearly up our our present
their produce Mr harbor is in
another committee right now so I
I am I'm afraid that if he's not
here we we have to roll is so if
the vehicle.
I he's not here either yeah yeah
so that's my fear is that that
we will have digital that bill
and then we will just come back
on on Monday
this this this one Jack our
product education right now.
Well bills I'd like to see that.
It appears that the municipal
league is in town for their
Santa Fe days.
And I think that they're the
people that have most comments
on that bill so I would wonder
if there's a way that we can get
somebody to just presented in
order to take public comment I
don't know if Representative
Harper would be amenable to that
yeah of.
I know that that's at the.
All right now I'm in a in all
fairness
Education is probably sitting on
the table and I let him know
that is built up in the meantime
if you want to run a try to make
that amendment that's fine we
can bring it back but I think in
terms of of the process
obviously what we.
You know that the bill that's
coming up house bill three sixty
seven with all due respect to
those that are in the audience
that have come from all parts of
the of the state to be here to
make comments I don't want to
disrespect that either so why
don't we do this
This is a little unorthodox but.
Why don't.
Why don't higher lease present.
Of mice showed.
I
also share you can yeah I don't
I am pleased present the opening
and and while it comes back what
will go to public comment that
that the voice to be heard and
then with the technical
questions will come back to the
up to the to the
Rostrum so that we can then
begin more of a debate on that
point is that appropriate I
think in terms of I think that's
per allowing us not a wasted
trip for members in the audience
of.
Thank you Mr chair.
Secretary welcome.
Would you like to.
The.
D. O. U. some.
The room is crowded chair under
a lot of pressure.
The representative Lente
standing in for Representative
Parker
HB three sixty seven.
Thank you madam chairwoman.
House Bill three sixty seven.
is one that is sponsored hi
Representative Jason Harper that
I stand again for this morning
at and and so elect presented
that House Bill three sixty
three contains two provisions
that continue our recent
progress to address longstanding
problems with the New Mexico
gross receipts tax this bill
improve Mexico's business
climate and provide significant
and broad based tax relief to
all New Mexico businesses and
consumers first this bill
reduces the statewide gross
receipts and compensating taxes
by one quarter of a percent on
July first twenty twenty three
the statewide tax cut will be in
addition to the quarter tax cut
of last year for the total
statewide state reduction up
half a percent reducing the G.
R. T. encompassing Tax by
quarter percent will provide two
hundred thirty five point four
million dollars of recurring tax
to the shared by every single
new Mexican business and
consumer secondly this bill
providing broad gross receipts
tax deduction for business to
business professional services
this deduction what that did we
end the issue up here meeting
that is right the gross receipts
tax for decades the new
deduction is estimated to reduce
general fund revenue by a range
of sixty dollars to ninety three
dollars in the sixty to ninety
three million per year and
reduce local government revenue
by a range of forty two to sixty
three million dollars per year.
Difficult sales taxes did not
include services New Mexico is
blessed to have a broad tax base
that includes services but we
are long overdue to ensure that
services are only taxed once at
the final consumer transactions
simply put the pair meeting that
exist in current state is there
a current law makes it harder to
succeed in business in New
Mexico.
With that being stated of the
backside.
This continue I have more to
say.
Most importantly the new
deduction will be most
beneficial for New Mexico
smallest business Wealthsource
things like payroll services
legal services and accounting
services it is simply not fair
to tax small businesses on these
services when larger businesses
avoid the G. R. T. by having in
house staff to provide these
services there are some.
Who will argue that this anti
peer being deduction is
narrowing the tax base and that
brought tax base is the best tax
policy.
But it's also true that the
principles of tax policy
describes setting a broad based
any lower rates but this
deduction is different than most
G. R. T. deductions we consider
as the Legislature.
This deduction is attempting to
entirely eliminate the tax any
narrow specialized product
rather a native double taxation
of business services while
keeping every bit of the
existing tax based edtech for
final consumer goods and
services we are aware that local
governments have expressed
concern at the revenue they will
forgo due to the proposed
induction the state's
unprecedented fiscal position
demand that we take bold action
to improve our tax system and I
believe that the work together
that we can work together to
implement tax reform also
supporting our local governments
lastly we all know that the G.
RTZ regressive tax with low
lower income families spending
more of their income on G. R. T.
than wealthier families reducing
the tax rate and reducing the
cost of consumer goods through
eliminating peer many will
provide welcome tax relief to
the lowest income New Mexicans
who we all know will circulate
the savings back to their local
economy with that Madam
chairwoman I also have with me
secretary of the department tax
and revenue if if the issue like
make a comment thank you Mr
chairman thank you madam chair
members of the committee it's
pleasure to be here with you to
have the opportunity to talk
about House Bill three sixty
seven I think chairman Lente
covered all the remarks that I
would have covered in all to
stand for questions thank you
thank you so we are going to go
to a public comment thank you
for your flexibility today and
thank you Mr chair for making
sure these New Mexicans get
heard we are going to start with
those here in support of the to
be three sixty seven so we're
going to start with people in
the room and that we're going to
go to zoom so for those
listening on so if you'd like to
speak in support of HB three
sixty seven go ahead and reserve
room your hand now will come to
you shortly in the red.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee is.
In in the.
Issues over.
Thank you for New Mexicans.
Transaction.
It does not.
Right.
The Business Clancy.
I wish this change will provide
much needed targeted tax.
This is
task oriented.
Jobs.
Thank you others in support
there on the left hand side.
It was the committee on.
Support of this bill it's very
important because it helps what
would be the small businesses
and big.
Earlier the taxes offices is
yes.
Because they have to pay your
team this professional services
because they often don't have
the size required to bring
services in house.
This is usually about the
services that house yeah if
they're in your state
we appreciate all the little out
of this.
The small businesses that are
often higher move into this
small businesses that outsource
this work you will serve as our
creating jobs for New Mexicans
your tier due to personal income
tax for New Mexico people.
They're contracting with yeah
this call vote windows in there
are facing additional tax.
It is that the four percent
reduction in the bill also
consumers and businesses.
Others in support of the three
sixty seven.
Say no others in the to do so
reserve fund.
I was a service awesome all
hundreds like weeds and pan
option here.
And so you do have you ready to
speak in support.
Prospect.
Good morning madam chair it's
Leri Sonntag here can you guys
hear me better now yeah actually
we can't thank you very.
Excellent thank you for letting
me know madam chair members of
the committee on behalf of the
New Mexico business coalition we
stand in support of house bill
three sixty seven the we would
love to see a complete.
Rewrites and getting away from
gross receipts tax but this
would be a move in the right
direction for small businesses
and those.
Working in our state we support
we encourage your support of HB
three sixty seven thank you.
Thank you.
Cooper I like it very.
Madam chair members of the
committee karla Kugler with
associated builders and
contractors we stand in strong
support of HB three sixty seven
I'm to the Sanchez point many of
our contractors experience
permitting on professional
services simply because they do
not have the in house
capabilities to be able to I'm
at to do the services at
creating a disadvantage so we're
excited that this helps level
the playing field for our small
businesses for those reasons we
we stand and support thank you.
Thank you seeing no one else on
we're now going to go to members
of the audience those here that
would like to speak in
opposition to this bill let's
see.
Share hands okay this time we're
gonna start over here on the
right hand side in the front
row.
And if I'll ask if I sergeants
please we're gonna ask people in
the room just because we're
getting a little feedback around
hearing on the microphones they
will hold the microphone for you
you're going to come up and make
your public comments we can make
sure we're recording them
especially in in part because I
imagine not sponsor
Representative Parker would like
to hear these and I want to
quickly grab.
Hi I'm Jeff Korman more beagle
last I am I stand in opposition.
I think it's a great me it's a
great bill and to get to the
point where it starts take away
money from our small communities
we have a budget of one point
nine million.
A hundred dollars makes a
difference to us and and that's
that's the only issue.
That I have and
wish we could maybe amend this
bill and I are do something with
it to fix that issue thank you.
Thank you.
I actually want to keep going
through this of the southern
here but we'll get to see of.
Time for.
Fires.
Representative Parker so we'll
give him a second to catch his
breath just again for
transparency Representative
Harper we order room full of
people here including folks that
we hear from the disability for
their annual meeting of so Here
wanted to do the favor just for
presenting that so that we can
again
those already spoke in support
and we just had one coming up is
issued and all you'll get to
hear the rest of.
And.
What are required to have you
back.
Good morning just a second to
get down and get settled.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I am Danielle
Duran I'm the Los Alamos County
inter governmental affairs chair
and I'm here in opposition of HB
three sixty seven
and now the county understands
the need to investigate
opportunities to clarify the New
Mexico tech Paul tax policies
the county council opposes
consideration of any bills that
could significantly affect the
revenues of local governments
without a study on the impact to
those local governments and the
equal and transparent sharing of
a methodology and results of
such a study so we oppose the
bill and hope that you will vote
no thank you.
Do you think we're doing this
morning we'll continue on this
side of the room.
Yes there.
Actually that we are people
reading your.
Get live eight.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
I'm very on the city manager for
Representative home and
We're here today to stand in
opposition the that was the
fact.
In order that we.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee
my name is Scott very the city
manager for the city of
Representative home
attended a to stand in
opposition for the bill of the
bill sounds like it has a.
A good basis that we can agree
on the concern of what rural New
Mexico City is the impact on
local.
Revenues and and the local
government in rat tone we
operate on a on a marginal
budget and I and I cut revenue
cuts up public services we
understand being ten miles from
the state of Colorado the
interstate up up situation with
recruiting investment and
business to New Mexico we
understand that very well I
think that we are behind and
there are lot of strategies that
we can implement to become more
competitive in the up in the the
regional economy but if we cut
services I think we actually
drive investment away so I think
this is a bill that has a good
intent but probably unintended
consequences as well that we
would need to evaluate thank you
Mr chair.
Welcome.
Is your back on the same side.
All up there and we'll get to
the folks at more than one we'll
get to you.
That.
It would also the secretary of
state.
Not.
That based on the floor of the
bike.
I apology con and I'm the city
manager from the city of two can
carry and the impact that this
bill would have on our G. R.
tease FX's for public service or
law enforcement streets
improvements and I'd like for
you all to consider that so
we're not position thank you
thank you thank you for joining
us this morning anyone else on
this site so that it's going
House.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Charles good marker
excuse me three of the half of
at the end of the C. action fund
this morning and with great
respect for the sponsors and the
secretary
we we urge health concerns about
this bill especially what one I
will mention that has been
mentioned which is it
specifically exempts certain
professional services not all
professional services so there
are many services provided by
people advocates whether it's in
the palm point opportunity
commission Human Rights
Commission presentation so on
labor in situations you
situations where where there are
people who often could be
lawyers providing that service
but there are other times that
other people other than lawyers
to provide those services so to
use that that
Representative Harper is analogy
about Swiss cheese this is kind
of melting a little bit of the
Swiss cheese but there's
renewable so some the Swiss
cheese is going to fall off the.
Out of the out of the room thank
you.
You anyone else in this that we
wish to speak in opposition to
house bill sixty seven another
will go to this side of the the
stock back in what.
If you can make you wait for the
right.
Good morning members of the
committee my name is JD
Bullington registered lobbyists
for the City of Santa Fe
I had a lot of experience with
this issue up in a lobbyist for
twenty seven years is no
question about it Karia betting
is a legitimate issue for the
business community but there's a
couple of other big points here.
the fiscal impact of the City of
Santa Fe for example is probably
about five million dollars for
Albuquerque I'm sure you heard
from the lobbyist how much it is
all of you have municipalities
in your districts that are going
to take a hat I represent
ability Chama their gross
receipts tax revenue a month is
eighty thousand dollars a month
no I don't know how many
services we're talking about
Chama would be affected but the
point is many of the small
communities that there's no room
for error so those are a couple
of big things to consider the
third big point to consider is
that who's holding the back your
cash right now and it's the
state of New Mexico if this bill
passes this year I think it's
very lease we should look at if
we have a surplus that having
the state come in and help out
some of these municipalities are
going to take a hit they're
being asked to do more in terms
of fighting crime fighting fires
providing more services and you
know with inflation they're
they're really going to be put
into hardship here to time when
they're being asked to do more
so there's a lot of things to
consider here and I think we can
eventually come to a balanced
approach thank you.
Next.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Charlie mark is
registered lobbyists for the
city of Gallup Gallup is in a
position where they have such
high needs and anything that
affects their budget negatively
affects them in a dramatic way.
And so although it you know we
have hold harmless what ten
years ago this item does.
And so I understand the need for
I think JD was very eloquent and
and the points that he made up
but you have to figure out how
to protect the revenue stream
from the to the civics thank you
very much.
Next door as.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for
listening to us today Jack
Torrez mayor the town Bernalillo
happy to be here with you today
and we'll try to basically
suspend because there's so many
things that could affect us like
all the other municipalities
were concerned about our revenue
we've been fortunate in a lot of
ways but in other ways were like
every other consumer are costs
for everything continue to go up
one of our big changes in
Bernalillo was we had to
increase the starting pay for
our police chief so we could
keep up with the challenges we
had with our good neighbors in
Albuquerque and Santa Fe and all
the dollars they were throwing
at their police forces we raised
our starting pay from twenty
three eighty five for police
officer to twenty nine dollars
that took it to our budget but
it was something we had to do to
protect our community looking at
this our first pass.
We're looking at about a three
hundred thousand dollar hit to
our budget those are real
dollars we have a lean budget we
don't have fat anywhere in our
budget at three hundred dollars
means a decrease to services the
other thing is we're quite
concerned about the details
further into this up
this proposal we're concerned
about whether this would
decrease compensating tax
another it to us we're not sure
but it looks like it might
affect small cities assistance
fund another hit to us the other
thing that concerns us is
appears to be business to
business selling so to add
insult to injury we would
continue to pay.
Gross receipts tax to services
we pay for well not getting this
revenue another hit to us so
again
the professional services side
is the biggest hit but there's a
lot more to this bill that would
affect all of us negatively we
oppose it strongly and we hope
that you will put it down.
Joining us next.
Good morning chairman miss
members of the committee my name
is Gregory Martin and the
village administrator The
Village of us learners and on
behalf of the more Charles
Griego on a village council I
stand in opposition of House
Bill three sixty seven primarily
for the same reason you've been
hearing from other
municipalities obviously in Los
Lunas is K. we can say we're it
fortunate to be a high growth
community we've invested quite a
bit in our ability to attract
and retain businesses and we
appreciate that we've been
successful but obviously with
that investment comes
Current and future
responsibility to continue to
maintain and provide additional
future services for the growth
of the community and our
residents and businesses and we
Basically need to continue to
keep keep the rest revenue that
we have and not let it disappear
thank you.
That is doing this this morning.
Next.
Good morning Mr Mr chair members
of the committee my name's hatch
Miller on the inter governmental
coordinator for Santa Fe County
and I just want to speak
specifically about the losses
that Santa Fe County would incur
if this bill were to pass
based on our current estimates
through our finance department
this would be a hit of
approximately three point two to
four point two million dollars
annually and that's around four
to five percent of our annual G.
R. T. amounts that we receive
this would affect us and meeting
that we'd have to rely on our
programs and services and.
Cut back from certain areas and
make the holes
Plug the holes where we can so
we ask you to the not past this
bill thank you thank you Sir.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is the
Four Pelamis city manager for
the city of Los crucis.
I appreciate the opportunity to
to share Jeff it's out.
I recently told a business group
at the
fact the bills association it's
open you know builders cities
don't build cities builders
build cities
Developers built develops it
it's not Mexicans of.
But what we didn't talk about is
we have to maintain cities.
At any type of revenue.
You take away from the city
that.
It limits our opportunity to
provide of fostered environment
for business I appreciate a lot
that's been discussed about this
bill I think any opportunity to.
To provide businesses with
real relief for given an
opportunity to.
To flourish and cut taxes this
is something that I appreciate.
But when it when it affects the
the coppers that's something
that we have to do with that you
can see city managers we.
We don't come to testify but
when you.
When you affect the coffers
that's that's when we all come
up we show the full for so
appreciate the opportunity thank
you.
Thank you for joining us this
morning.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for having
us my name is possibly to
Maestas I'm the mayor of the
town of house and would like to
come and speak to you in
opposition of HB three sixty
seven a little bit of house
right now one fifth of our
budget positions are vacant many
of those positions are and the
public works departments public
utilities roads and the regional
landfill we're trying to
maintain competitiveness with
our fast food restaurants and
our services are not being
offered because we can't fill
these vacant positions right now
so every every dollar means a
lot to us would also like to add
that well I recognize the
importance of leveling the
playing field between businesses
what also helps business be
successful our good roads
reliable infrastructure and
without those and our businesses
can be successful with house
thank you.
We need to be here.
Thanks.
What Mr chair members of the
committee of Bill Jordan with
New Mexico New Mexico voices for
children
I'm glad that the chair went
back up to sue the chairs
because I related more pose the
bill if you were sitting here
but
Representative Harper
Representative Harper however we
have.
We have just.
We've already had a chance to
discuss our disagreement with
the bill and I just want to say
we're very much in favor of the
G. R. T. a rate cut we think we
can actually afford it this year
and it's going to help families
it's going to help business
everybody is a winner when we
can cut the right also you all
have been working to try to find
a way to broaden the base so
that we can lower the rate.
this the other provision in this
bill
works against that and it's the
anti permitting piece of the
legislation that were strongly
opposed to
however you do find the base the
reality is that when you
Tax fewer things.
you end up having to raise the
rates are put pressure on the
right and that hurts all of us
so we have no reason to believe
that if we pass this that there
will be others come back next
year and say wait a minute my
piece of the what about my piece
of the pyramid and it'll be
never ending so we really hope
that you will continue to focus
on broadening the base and
lowering the rate for everybody
instead of enacting the at the
pyramid a piece of the
legislation thank you.
You.
Next.
Working.
Mr chairman committee members I
thank you good morning create
the opportunity to be here I'm
like more some more Clovis and I
want to speak in opposition to
the bill but in doing so I want
to say I am all for the leveling
the playing field for small
business and I anything that
would promote business growth
that within the private sector I
in the region of our state
however in practice as the
policy body and and and those
that approve the budget in
Clovis I know how close things
run with with finances and so
I'm concerned about anything
that would take away from those
revenues I in particular in
Clovis we have we have dug deep
and and and through compensation
plans have have increased rate
which is which is which is hard
right and then we if we look at
another minimum wage increase we
know that that means maybe one
or one and a half or even two
million more annually out of out
of our budget which we can ill
afford any particularly if I may
and in the case of of our city
as well as some other member
communities of eastern New
Mexico they're dealing with our
water issues we are constructing
the pipeline I which is a
service water conveyance system
which is going to bring water to
to our communities that project
while we have ninety percent
grant between wonderful support
from the federal government and
and and you the state of New
Mexico at ten percent peace has
involved my city and others
taking on a tremendous amount of
that which we've pledged our G.
R. T. to service and so I just
ask is there is there a better
way is there is there some other
way that that we can do this
because as I said I'm for the
leveling of the playing field
for the reforming of of G. R. T.
because I see I see the need to
do that however we have to pay
the bills and and so I just ask
that you would consider amending
if not voting no thank you thank
you everybody this morning.
Next one of.
Members of the committee my
name's Act based on the
S. city manager for the city Rio
Rancho I spent the last fourteen
years of my career in that state
and local government coming from
private sector before that
you know what I'm not gonna say
we're if the rental in favor or
against this bill would like to
say that we don't like the bill
we got a bill rate will be
champions for competitive
business economy business
climate in New Mexico as well in
Rio Rancho I think there's great
value and reforming our tax
policy and lowering the base
unfortunately it just feels like
this is coming at the expense of
local governments some of you
may remember XP the cabinet
secretary Economic Development
previous administration and tax
policy something that came up
all the time with local business
small business fast growing
start ups as well as out of
State entities looking to
relocate New Mexico it is an
important task that you're
taking on looking at how we can
improve our tax business client
we just ask me for from Senator
city manager's ability
ministrations Thomas traders
please be considerate please be
mindful help this may affect our
resources our sources the number
one source that we have to
provide local services not just
the basic but what communities
want they want to deliver come
from gross receipts tax.
We consider and mindful of those
need to be impacted have on us
this bill advances throughout
the legislative body thank you.
The rest of the this.
The.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Sanjay Papa I'm the chief
financial officer for the city
of Albuquerque
this bill has two aspects one of
them actually we support which
is reducing the tax across the
board we are in support of that
however when it comes to deepen
our meeting conceptually it's a
great idea however it would be a
huge blow to Albuquerque in the
it is something we will not be
able to state and ccording to
you know.
LFC and also muny league that
estimate
to of the loss to Albuquerque's
roughly thirty seven million
dollars up to thirty seven
million dollars that is
approximately seven percent off
of what you already have an and
that is something I'm not
looking forward to deal with
Then I became the CFO in two
thousand eighteen
we inherited structural deficit
that was one of the most
difficult phase of my
professional life to deal with
the structural deficit this
impact would bring us back take
us back to that phase
just to give your contacts
thirty seven million dollars a
quilt three hundred fifty police
officers that's roughly one
third of the police officers
that we have right now so we
cannot deal with this and we are
of our budget which we are
working on the right now we
already have
facing issues with almost six to
seven percent increase in all
the expenditures because of the
inflection
of our last year's the G. R. T.
growth rate was five point four
percent for Albuquerque this yes
growth would be two point four
percent so I already have.
Any issue with that he cutting
expenditure higher than the
cutting revenues and this will
this will would do lasting for
Albuquerque I urge you to
consider other alternatives
perhaps reducing the tax across
the board that will help
everyone the state is flush with
the cash the cities are not and
I think this will be up.
I huge financial issue for all
the municipalities but
especially for Albuquerque
because all this professional
services actually seventy
percent of them are based in
Albuquerque so proportionately
speaking we will take the
highest it and we have we will
be back destruction of efficent
thank you for your time.
Thank you for joining us this
morning next.
Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyists for the city of
Farmington Aztec and Bloomfield
I won't repeat what everyone
else is set up talk to the
sponsored we respectfully oppose
the legislation thank you thank
you got it what else.
Yes Sir.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee aged forty three
just fully.
We we understand the intent we
appreciate the intent of the
bill our concern is our revenue
is different the state as oil
the state has federal funds far
in excess of what we receive is
local governments to revenue
streams are different.
As you've heard from our cities
we operate on the bare minimum
right two months of reserves as
what we have.
We don't have the twenty five
thirty percent reserves that the
state has so for us it's an
adequacy issue we understand the
state has the revenue to do this
and we support that I understand
what the representative wants to
do and what the governor wants
to do.
We've heard this year over here
we have the revenue to do it at
the state level we support that
our local governments they don't
and our hundred six cities towns
and villages are all very
different if you're Carlsbad and
Hobbs they're still dealing with
digging out of the hole from
destination sources.
That's still going to be a
challenge if you're in the C.
we're trying to figure out how
to buy right we're looking for
grant money to do it.
If we're lost almost have the
revenue and they're supporting
communities around.
They recognize the need their
revenues are so different if you
request a we have one officer we
love that too we don't have the
revenue.
So we understand the intent we
support the intent we just don't
have the revenue to do it equal
amount this state.
Our preferred option would be we
we appreciate the quarter
percent reduction that's on the
state side where there's the
revenue to support if there was
another eight for sixteen
in addition to the quarter.
It still benefits all taxpayers
not just these these categories
of the bill currently frantic
pyramid.
That would be our preferred
option.
We would absolutely partner on
the Google in our Revenue we
understand because of oil the
state will have more revenue
than the locals for the
foreseeable future if there's a
way we can partner in the Google
our revenue stream so the state
can make these investments we're
all for that we understand
there's a shared responsibility
in doing that there's a cost of
doing.
Mr chair of the committee thank
you but we do have to look at
creating peace and we look
forward to working on those
other options thank you thank
you anyone else in the room
opposition House Bill three six
seven.
It does look like we have one
online thank this on.
Representative online they.
Sam good morning you with this.
Good morning Sam Cobb the more
fobs good morning everyone Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
I concur with the comments that
have been made that the other
individuals this morning you
know and I think first of all.
Representative Harper and what
he's trying to do we agree with
the with what's going on in the
comments that were made by A. J.
we want to level the playing
field because of our proximity
to Texas we see some of the
Anticon competition issues that
our state suffers with as we try
to expand our economy here that
you know Hobbs and Carlsbad in
the cities of southeastern New
Mexico certainly are the poster
children of some of the
unintended consequences of HB
six and I appreciate what this
body is doing both those that
represent our area and does it
have come from other parts of
the state that have come
together to try to solve some of
our problems associated with
destination sourcing but this
particular aspect of this bill
that Mr Harper's proposing does
have another negative fiscal
impact on our community a
million dollars we're probably
between seven fifty and one
point four million dollars a
year from this revenue source
that represents ten police
officers eight or ten or twelve
fire fire me and it's it's a
huge fiscal impact for us and as
we continue to I struggle with
how we maintain our level of
services in our community
especially with the destination
sourcing issues that we're
having we must respectfully
request this committee oppose
this legislation thank you.
You Mr mayor it should be with
this morning.
What else online.
Okay every every one of you was
to text.
The water I appreciate all of
you coming in making the jet the
sentence morning that's what we
will work with the bill the
access to funds are needed to be
getting but I that is not how
the businesses that those
problems as you can fact that Mr
tell this issue that people for
these here that while they're
here today and so at this point
we do not go to the committee
for a debate if you're ready so
we'll start with the
Representative chat.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Sanchez really appreciate again
having another conversation
about your meeting.
Something we also talked about
over the summer New Mexico so
does this bill Mr chair and
representative yes to the pier
omitting aspect defer from the
bill that was carried in twenty
seventeen by Representative
Harper in terms of business to
business Germany what's if
there's a difference what is it.
Yeah the German manager thank
you great question I've been
Cherry essentially this bill for
the last six years or so there
are some minor differences
between this version and last
year's versions they are minor
we there were a couple
professional services that were
in last year's version or not
and this year's version one was
financial services another was
temporary services
and if I could chairman and
Representative just talk about
that for a moment.
thank you so.
also we I sometimes hear people
say
you're taking the G. R. T. off
accounting you must be want to
give your dad a tax break my
dad's an account and and I just
I internally when I hear that I
say to myself.
This person does not understand
our tax code.
Because the accountants the
other professional service
providers in this bill.
Whether they charge to your tier
not it doesn't affect them.
What impact is the small
business.
That.
They are charging the G. R. T.
on.
It's so just just so that we
understand.
The reason why we have these
professional services insurers
because these are the ones that
affect nearly every small
business in the state of New
Mexico.
Right we've got two or three
people right you contract out
for H. R. for for for for
payroll you contract health
fertility contract also legal
services you contract out for I.
T. in engineering right if you
have a bigger company those are
internalized you don't you don't
get the G. R. T. penalty because
there your twenty two so.
That's what the basis for what
is.
Was taken out from the prior
bills because you know we
should.
back after speaking with the
secretary in the tech walked Tax
ones without okay rostrum you do
this
the three services that were not
in there were
at that Roger that we're the for
financial temporary and each are
left in payroll to H. R.
services we we took out so those
are the main differences
chairman and madam chair madam
chair and I mean Mr chair and
representative and terms of the
twenty seventeen bill do you
recall what you defined as
professional services and that
bill.
The chairman and the manager I
don't have it in front of me and
I I apologize to you have
entered no and I'm not trying to
be trick here anything.
Yeah Mr chair and and
Representative the reason I'm
asking is in part the fiscal
analysis the fiscal analysis and
other other peer amending bills
that we've looked at often has
of actually a pretty broad range
that the tax department
identifies Mr chair and
representative at some what the
possible it is and I'm a little
concerned we don't have a range
and and in.
just maybe I'm looking at the
wrong one okay so there's and
the fiscal just sort of chairman
representative maybe I have.
Not only a yellow one but maybe
it's been opting.
Well maybe I'm wrong maybe I
misunderstand.
The reference
that water.
Want that as a reference number
one is on the others.
Four years okay maybe I can
maybe Mr chair the secretary
could clarify where the ranges
chair Mister chairman and
Representative Harper at the LFC
that was very good the LFC
affair I think has a slightly
different range than ours by
they're within the same
neighborhood but that for
reference
I think we're we're in line on
the estimate to reduce the G. R.
T. statewide tax rate and the
anti permitting deduction we
have a range in FY twenty four
for the state revenue reduction
of between sixty two point nine
million and ninety four point
one million and for locals all
combined we have a range of
forty one point eight million to
sixty two point nine million.
Mr chair thank you and thank you
for that clarification I was
looking at the G. R. T. cut but
in the past indeed I think it's
fair to say Mr Chairman
representative ranges have been
provided Mr chair and
representative as a technology
meant K. very hard to estimate
what revenues are lost as a
result of pyramids and I could
share some information that was
in the twenty seventeen metal
that are W. secretary wrote when
he was the chief economist for
LFC
that that memo analyze the
fourteen House Bill for twelve
which was a bill Representative
Harper sponsored and it was an
omnibus bill they had lots of
things.
The estimate for the peer
meeting piece in twenty
seventeen for professional
services business to business Mr
chair we need to maybe do a
comparison comparison was two
hundred and sixty million to
four hundred ninety million jobs
so I think we really need to
take a look at our numbers Mr
chair have a better
understanding of what the what
accounts for that difference
because that's huge relative to
what we're talking about so we
are if this is substantially
different from top twenty
fourteen to twenty seventeen
that may be an issue but that's
a huge difference in the memo
itself underscores the fact that
it's very very hard to know
what's going to be lost yeah
chairman and Representative
Chandler what was the bill
number for twenty states for
years twelve so I know that bill
very well well I thought I asked
about that Mr.
Maybe this was the five hundred
page omnibus yes.
Three different provisions in it
and actually percent of that
bill in this committee over
three days with ten hours of
testimony.
And in that bill we eliminate
alternating.
well Mr chair and and and and
let me require I'm sorry signs
done chairman and Representative
Chandler the professional
services portion of that bill
was much much broader than what
we have here.
so when you look at our total
tax base
The last I had these numbers are
couple years old but our state
GDP is about ninety billion.
But our tax base was about a
hundred twenty billion in so
that tells you something about
appear meeting this is about a
third of our economy we've
chairman on.
And and so what we're looking at
taking all turning out that was
a much much broader range and
and really what we're doing here
is we're we're targeting really
the most egregious forms that
really make a stand out in the
business to business especially
we want to keep services in the
thanks a lot of the state to try
to add services to their their
sales tax base you know you know
what when we go to NCSL
compasses and I talk to the tax
folks like.
We have some services right and
and so we're not trying to take
services out because that's
where the economy's growing
should taxes but that's the big
difference this is this is
extremely narrow.
Mr chairman thank you for that
clarification I actually thought
it was pretty clear about trying
to understand what the
difference between house bill
four twelve and this bill was so
it will be interesting for us to
go back and take a look at what
the differences are in terms of
the paramedic for but cautionary
note which I think cannot be
underestimated Mr chair is
during the meeting is very hard
to estimate that has been
acknowledged since time
immemorial and I I think we need
to be very careful in terms of
relying on the estimates that we
are receiving Mr chair I have a
few more things like dress if I
might Mr chair.
very concerned about things that
might be interpreted as what
suggestions relating to hold
harmless
in some cases there was a
lesions but not actual
terminologies like that Mr chair
representative in one case the
actual word hold harmless was
used and for those of you who
were around when that the Bakul
started in what perhaps Mr chair
Forward it was it's been on our
plate for quite some time and
Mister chair I have to say I'm
very disappointed we don't have
a solution now the
Intel until just recently began
to have a conversation about
solving the problem and I find
it very disappointing this
should have been part of any
Representative anti presentation
to us Mr chair in terms of if
we're gonna have a problem so it
should be presented as a package
not something that is going to
be taken care of later Mr chair
and I would ask that if there is
a solution to this which I'm
very curious to see it be
brought back to this committee
not be put in a tax package that
we later on on the floor in or
later on in the process but that
we all get to take a look at it
Mr chair and fully that it
because it is something that's
going to have to be done very
carefully otherwise we're gonna
be coming back every year Mr
chair trying to create a fix
that we didn't get correctly
this time around just like we
did with all that horrible hold
harmless stuff that we suffer
through for many many years now
so with that I think I've hit
the high the high points of my
concerns Mr chairman thank you
for the time in your intelligent
Mr chair for the yes thank you
and I and I appreciate the madam
chair your last home especially
Thailand something that has been
a really is kind of the four
from online recently which is
you know we look at a house bill
like for twelve right in this
package we can look at all these
things together how we work
together.
you can see that everyone on
everyone really wins to some
extent to another you know think
when.
But here because we're
introducing
a standalone bills and parking
them here until we put a package
together you can see the the
good the bad and the ugly right
and a great example is
part of house bill four twelve
was
putting on taxation on internet
sales.
That was something that I had
championed made some great
friends and it's a great help
from tax policy once for several
years was a huge help to the
locals right because the at that
time the state was only getting
their questions not to local
chair.
Also champion part of that bill
was giving locals they're
compensating Tax excellence
locals don't have accomplishing
tax relief it was only the state
portion there was another great
help to them also do your
working the vast majority of
their G. R. T. increments.
So that their hands were tied
they can use their revenues how
they want to.
Right these are things that I am
in this committee together
champion and actually we pass
those piecemeal over the last
few years all right help to the
schools.
if we had task this is part of
that same package.
I think we would have seen the.
to the folks in the rural here
opposing it because it's able
you know all in all and still to
be coming out ahead because
we've separated out.
You know and and we're we're not
taking into account all the
other great things you've done
recently we're just looking at
this kind of an isolation.
And so I do agree chairman and
madam chair with your comment to
you know it's very challenging
to look at these things in
isolation I think it's why is
that we as a committee.
Alright everything here the
decide what is a good policy to
roll out this year so thank you
chairman thank you for the
response.
Sure miss Mister chair and
Representative Chandler ticket
just add to on the remarks that
sponsor Harper just maybe I I
agree entirely with the sense
that.
We know that a package will come
together and that standalone
bills are likely to come out of
the committee for example a
standalone bill containing just
these two provisions and it is
not lost on the administration
that the issue with local
Revenue impacts the issue of us
all sharing the goal of wanting
locals Act cities especially to
have sufficient funds to hire
police and firefighters and and
deliver all these critical
services to their constituents
so that's that's not news and
and it's the the committee is is
well received two Representative
Harper is points about looking
at these proposals in context
when you add up together.
All the legislative changes that
have affected local revenue
since twenty nineteen in total
local government revenue is up
about three hundred million
dollars recurring as a result of
legislative changes not changes
in the economy but you know a
lot of that is internet sales
it's also hospital G. R. T.
reform it's adding a local
option compensating tax to mimic
all the local G. R. T. and also
locals have kept that twenty
five percent of the state
compensating tax rate that
but that said the reason we are
in this position to be
considering such bold recurring
tax relief this year is
primarily related to oil its oil
it's G. R. T. it's incomes being
up as well but you know we do
recognize the state is in a
different fiscal position than
municipalities on average and
and then this policies on
average don't capture all
municipalities either so I look
forward to working with the
committee and leadership to come
together figure out what it's
going to be in a in a package
and I am committed to making
sure that we address the
concerns of the committees for
today thank you secretary of the
COVID let's uh go to
Representative Eli.
Thank you Mr chair
as a small business owner I'm
I'm all for the concept here.
That's some of things that that
hurts us as a state.
As a more.
And as there are several other
mayors in this room I'd like to
know how Gallup got a permanent
full term.
Because we're all going to ask
that question as well.
My concern is.
The small communities we at
eagle listed here Cuesta those
small communities how are we
going to be made we don't have a
lot of inner selves.
Tax that we can get that and
work together how how we can be
made a hole in this.
Yeah so so chair and
representative Duncan I
appreciate the question I would
criticize the syntax.
maybe hold something off what
like hold harmless
And and also just a note here to
I mean really every year this
committee puts out a tax package
that affects the locals.
but we don't put
hold harmless provisions and all
those things we do it
because citizen budget
benefits to the economy and we
are hopeful that these changes
actually provide a positive
benefits.
but I understand why folks up
here today because this is much
higher than the impact of taking
the G. R. T. off of diapers
right so I understand I
understand that there's a
recovery from.
That said.
I want to make sure that we
understand really what's going
on here right yes what we're
saying is if this provision
becomes law.
If there is a lawyer in your
community.
And they do work for a private
individual help with like a
divorce or something like that
they're still gonna charge your
tier.
Because we want services to be
in the tax base.
But we don't want to be in the
tax base two times and three
times and four times and so
that's a business to business
transactions were that costs
would get rolled into.
It's a business input cost right
would do well to the cost
business make them less
competitive make it harder for
them to compete.
Business to business
transactions would not be taxed.
So when you look at your
community the first question to
ask is how many lawyers
accountants engineers except for
a part in that community.
And what fraction of your G. R.
T. right right so it's probably
zero for most of our small
communities right I agree that
Albuquerque's trying to win this
year if you structure but for
what it is it's what we mostly
zero but even if there are a few
the next question is what
percent of their work is
actually a business to business
transactions versus a business
and a private individual
transaction.
So.
So it's it's.
It's not her percent of those
services it's it's gonna be some
fraction this goes back to
chairman and
Christine that settlement that.
German chancellors question you
know how do you define that
providing we've got so we've got
some pretty good waste estimate
but it's not perfect so I hope
that answers your question.
Thank you Mr chairman
So if if S. small communities
then you know we might have one
or two of that feel like
category.
But I'm still going to be well
I'm now I'm gonna talk
Albuquerque that so I
Albuquerque Mr Chairman then I'm
still going to lose.
Thirty percent.
Of the staff to be able to G. R.
T. that is coming in.
Yeah maybe your maybe yes German
and Representative thank you I I
I forgot the last part your
question that's a that's a great
example so so Albuquerque Los
the
I forget the number that was
given but something around
seventy percent of their G. R.
T. is the estimate
That's that's probably the right
ballpark it might be a little
less and that's probably just
assume that's right
what would you.
And and chairman and and
Representative Dawkins
You know we are open to
discussing options.
Right
Not just the letter we're open
to discuss options.
I am concerned with hold
harmless.
So I think the options we would
like to consider are not that.
And we also should again like
the secretary said remember that
there has been a lot of good
that's on the recent years and
and to me.
the vast majority the comments
we got today from those folks in
the room were saying we agree
with the tax policy but please
don't.
us with our revenues.
And to me that the best analogy
I can come up with the same.
You know if our tax code is is
like a living breathing
entities.
We've identified a cancerous
tumor.
And we're proposing to excise
that.
But what we're hearing is that I
don't want to go through the
pain of the surgery.
To take up this to her.
Thank you Mr so I'm gonna follow
up question on that so let's set
up a project bonded out to
capacity and this takes goes
into effect July one of twenty
three.
Secretary.
Okay so I wanted out to twenty
thirty five save twenty thirty.
How.
I just have heartburn with that
right there yes that's you know
several years of getting beat up
really that and having to adjust
our budgets accordingly thank
you Mr so yeah yeah Chairman
representative that's it that's
a great question right that I
guess I'd ask
the last.
I mean you the official for a
very long time I think probably
more than any of us here maybe
Tell me how do we handle ups and
downs we use in our budgets.
Put another hole in our bills.
Yeah and and and chairman
Representative that's exactly
right I've been here only eleven
years and I've gone through two
crashes.
Right and and those were those
are painful.
but we we do we always do which
is.
The bills.
And
Like what my family does we have
a hard time.
Thank you Mr thank you
appreciate that.
Representative Greg.
Thank you Mr chair and
Thank you for your presentation
this app Representative Harper
and.
deputy cabinet against six two
three thank you so much
I'm a small business owner and I
would love nothing more than to
pay less taxes because it would
really be to help my bottom line
and every time I have to pay my
taxes it's a little it's a
little tough you know and it was
really really tough and I have
to remind us that we are still
not out of COVID technically we
are out of Covidien possibly
April but that could if you if
we kind of go back in time to
March twenty what is that March
of twenty twenty one COVID began
and no one has mentioned any of
this and it's important to me
because
I served as as a counselor but
more importantly I served as
council president and we have
to.
balance of billion dollar
budget.
And I'm gonna tell you what that
was the one of the most
difficult times of of our lives
and if it had not been for the
hold harmless and the American
rescue act coming to help us and
coming to our aid our budget
would not have been balanced Mr
chair and representative and I
think that goes across the board
to many municipalities many
counties
I do appreciate that this bill
is bringing to light our issues
with G. R. T. and how it funds
the coffers of many of our of
our governments
the credit but I also see it as.
We're like robbing what is it.
Robbing Peter to pay Paul I mean
I think it's the same Mr chair
and
Yes you're right this is
definitely bringing to light
issue that needs to be addressed
in our state.
however
one of the issues that I have is
that this bill is talking about
professional services and
respectfully it's been brought
Mr chair and representative
that we are going to provide
professional services architects
six cetera.
Lawyers and so on but at the
expense of basic service.
Basic services like police and
fire and things that we need on
a daily basis our trash picked
up
all of these things that are
basic and I let me remind is Mr
Chairman representative these
are the people who worked during
the COVID regardless of what day
it was what time it was and and
I think that this is something
that we need to consider that we
really seriously need to tell
you know.
Think about because how we
ultimately.
Whether it's this bill or
another bill we need to think
about how we move forward with
this
I think.
The other thing that I want to
mention is
Give me a second because I made
some notes here.
I want to mention that our bond
rating.
Especially for.
And I represent only a county so
Albuquerque alright that our
bond rating would be negatively
impacted with these lower I mean
with these amounts being removed
from our but our budget the
other thing that I want to
mention is that G. R. T. has
gone up.
And expenditures have gone up.
Higher higher by percentage.
Higher and higher.
Percentage then revenues and I
think that's also important many
of our employees and I'm not
with the city anymore but I
retired from the city
you know.
I haven't seen a pay raise in.
It's probably the for comment.
So Mister chair
no I don't know I don't have the
answers are just reason seven
issues that I see and I do
support private industry I do
support and I was a I started my
own business in twenty eleven
when I retired from the city and
I was a contractor.
I did development in land use
and I understand you know what
it takes to be a contractor and
get paid and all of that but I
also see it from the other side
in terms of having been a city
employee and and then of the
city councillor and looking at
how R. G. R. T. affects our our
budgets and I don't have the
answer Representative Harper Mr
chair but I think these are
things that somehow we've got to
come to some.
Level ground.
To not impact our cities.
Counties even our state budget
across the board.
But to find some find what are
the what are the right formulas
for impacting these problems
that you.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for the time thank you for
indulging my my thoughts will
next two of Representative
Townsend.
Both.
I think
You probably haven't been given.
To do.
And I think it probably.
The administration David the
representative is where we need
middle ground all of the.
The state that are here today do
you have a.
Do you have a.
The trick up your sleeve I mean
you gotta you gotta plan.
Well
pretty.
Yeah.
So
so so chairman and
Representative Townsend thank
you for that great question and
I think it was mentioned
this was in the commerce and
economic development committee
wants to.
flattered me and and reminded
the members there that to when I
was in Africa helping with
people basically.
I have spent my free time right
we writing or tire Tax Code.
And the I will see there are
several.
Six by the.
And and and these are and let me
clarify that these are not
tricks these are structural
changes.
That will make a huge difference
for everyone in the state
including the municipal
counties.
and and I'm.
I'm excited where this could go.
Chairman and gentleman if you're
gonna go anywhere you better
call about usually
I I think of because I think
what I heard from and I've had
more options my district in the.
As they.
They all agree with the bases.
Tax policy to.
Probably many of us here as
well.
The issue is is offices building
for.
I mean as long as.
The state is awash the finances.
Many of these more source.
Why should I why should I be
strips of the amendment here I
am being affected with the.
The impact of inflation.
With higher wages I mean Dr Mike
foster will not I can't think
yeah.
And and I think the state I
frankly think that.
This committee.
Is to.
The LFC tax policy.
The administration proposes.
We are.
And we pass.
And I don't think anybody
including you
Gentleman what we want
Representative would want to be
have a.
Too many cooks in the kitchen
mainly on a thank them tax
policy that's that to us.
And and we want to be on the
front lines of.
I
I'd like to see.
And maybe Mr chairman but I do
if there's a way to bridge the
gap we have the right now
regarding the.
Or you're going to have we're
going to have.
Problem doing what we really
want to do and that is.
To develop a more.
Business friendly tax policies
of tribes what businesses to.
To flourish more jobs and all of
those things that.
I I would think it's kind of
Jemia out of the bottle.
About.
That thank you Mr chairman thank
you Representative there's got
I'm sorry secretaries thank you
Mr Chairman representative towns
in a vacant just briefly add to
that
you know what I what I don't
want to see at this time we're
the state has this
responsibility and opportunity
to make historic improvements in
our tax code in our budget and
and everything else we do as a
state I I just would hate to see
us paralyzed
From taking the step that would
be good for our business climate
with it like excising the two
were if you want to call it that
of I appreciate to where I think
it was the City of Albuquerque
CFO madam well you know you
could just do a larger rate cut
and that's true it would be
simpler and we wouldn't have
said to have dialogue if we just
did a larger rate cuts for the
state but one year later two
years later five years later
we'll still be here talking
about peer meeting it'll still
be a problem in our tax code
that makes R. G. R. T.
especially onerous and
regressive
and then will be asked to remove
Karia meeting from a lower tax
base so that's my hesitation
with just substituting the
pyramid in deduction for a a
larger rate cut
as far as as the tricks of the
sleeve that the possible
solutions I'd rather call them
to this issue you know we we
just can keep in mind that there
are dozens of revenue streams
that come into the state and are
distributed by statutory formula
in our tax code
Many of them right for
adjustment in in terms of
balancing out concerns in the
room here today.
Just chairman to that thank you
Secretary.
So I I just want to call this
committee's attention to.
What the debate has been on
today.
It's been on loss of revenue to
the locals.
That's kind of heartbreaking to
me I really believe the debate
in this committee should be on
to the tax policy of purity and
whether we should continue to
move in the direction of
removing the most egregious
forms of pyramid.
if I was intending to pass this
out as a stand alone bill it
will look very different.
I don't intend to pass us don't
know and I expect us all the
table at the end here like we do
I think we did it.
That we don't want to harm the
local especially when the state
is doing well.
What's the.
We as the tax committee focus on
tax policy.
Thank you chairman thank you
let's move that Representative
Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative Harper over the
last eight years.
It made me a disciple.
Dr.
That's.
More Sam called Sliq my next
door neighbor.
Working Mr Chairman
representative for several
months to.
To develop some kind of a
solution to the consequences
that the southeast New Mexico
communities got.
From the.
Our nation source change.
Mr Chairman representative I do
not believe.
We have revenues.
It's been my approach to solving
this.
On the distribution side.
Now.
Mr Chairman representative
whether you call for this.
Of
course.
Or fundamental right direction
of our G. R. T. is is allocated
to various governmental entities
in the state the fact is the
state is floating on the ocean
of money we are looking for
places to spend money our cities
and counties and local
communities are not.
Mr Chairman representative what
we have to do is change that
helps.
So.
We have to develop a
distribution scheme that.
Which.
Local communities to allow them
to participate in this oil and
gas.
We have experienced at the state
level.
And if we can come up with some
screen Mr Chairman
representative to do that how
the completely.
Point of this and.
Our meeting but we can't do that
on the backs of the local
communities.
Thank you to compares to.
Representative Thomson.
Los crucis is not.
Everybody.
Thanks to the participating M..
This this budget to state to
state.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I just got reminded by the way
that we go back to the floor
eleven AM this morning we have
one cleanup bill Representative
have data so we will continue to
the less the discussion of the
full debate regarding this
matter but I see no one else
with their hands up so you know
I've Representative Harper I I
appreciated secretary Preciado
The presentation this morning
again we move forward with
intent that having a room full
of mayors and elected officials
and those representing their
respective communities that that
we want to take advantage of
them being in Santa Fe today and
and for more profit doing this
online thank you for utilizing
the access via the internet I
think that's a great option as
well but none the less we we
decided to have this most of
these these hearing none the
less at at at the costs of you
missing the first part but you
certainly caught up at the end
and yeah you know it baby to to
the point of many of the members
on on on your side of the table
or at least members of this
committee stated that you know
if if there's a time out to all
those tricks I use the it may be
it now it's so I will consider
you the modest magician at this
point if you want to say that
you have tricks up his sleeve
and that you can make it happen
that did it we can figure out of
our time is limited though and I
am not a fan of of trying to
develop tax policy with in the
next thirty days to try to push
something that will affect of
folks in the audience and across
our state in a very negative
fashion so that being said I see
giving me that the okay of the
clubs up knowing that this type
of policy needs to be developed
that maybe in the in the interim
again eight to consider you as
saying that the cat down the
road to build good tax policy as
you mentioned secretary but none
the less you know thirty days
left or even less than that now
maybe in this session is is I
don't think enough time but
maybe it is in your mind and
maybe you guys can come up with
something and work with the the
folks in the room that have
stated their opposition and so
if you can do that by.
All means please consider doing
so I'm open I'm never one to
just kind of just pushed things
whether we say states not
possible you know I'm always
hopeful that that we can do
things so with that being said
is there a motion to table every
table motion made members of
Representative Roybal second by
Representative yes the I don't
any opposition to that motion.
Thank you thank you
Representative the general
secretary of joint issue thank
you all you more as a
representative of the tabs
across New Mexico for joining us
this morning.
All these folks that we still
have House Bill.
Three sixty eight it's that
quick amendment that the.
That part was able to run
upstairs and get change really
quickly so yes thank you
Representative folks in the
audience if you could please
okay if you can move because
that's as we continue with the
last bill today.
Really appreciate that thank you
thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Harper in your
absence we had a quick
conversation and thanks to chair
Chandler for catch on our
amendment remember we're talking
an amendment point two two five
three three eight point three
mark ran upstairs in lightning
speed he was our real back
within less than two minutes our
proposal now on that amendment
on point a point to the
amendment where it says on page
fifteen line nineteen strike
quote forty percent and insert
in lieu thereof less the amount
so striking percentage from the
amendment replacing with the
amount of leaving the rest the
same so that's the amendment we
bring in front of you today Mr
chair very good thank you
Representative Chandler no it
this is your concern as you said
that I'm satisfied and thank you
for your the accommodation thank
it would also questions on that
amendment this point.
Signals are watching to that up
the amendment.
There's been seconded up very
well a opposition to that
amended bill seeing no need to
have an amended bill house bill
three sixty as amended any
questions then on the amended
bill at all.
State not as a motion to now.
Move house bill three sixty
eight as amended.
I think as a okay at.
The motion and the but again was
second that motion any
opposition to house bill three
sixty eight as amended.
Seeing that here at your bill
passed thank you.
Really quickly folks regarding
the tax package right I've I've
had some conversations and and
Representative Harper has been
in the office that we talk a
little bit about it I showed him
the matrix regards to what I
have in mind regards to what we
will be looking at as a
committee I have it a matrix
based on the subject matter you
know if it's if it's
Gross receipts are still or
taxes or or child tax whatever
it is we have a about that so I
will be giving that to all of
you likely hopefully by early
next week middle next week
because not knowing that bill
introduction is over we will
know pretty much at this point I
I tomorrow of the extent of what
that looks like so we will have
an accounting of the house bills
that have been presented in that
we have heard over here soon
what may be attractive to some
of you and then also we will
keep an eye on what's going on
the Senate side so that we can
keep an eye to make sure that
whenever they get here we know
that there's a place for them if
in fact we have that appetite to
do so as well as okay so that
being said we will see you for
