All is possible ninety nine.
X. as well and that's one of the
art school one that we can
really table and so
You can have in your Mr chair if
we could just disregard that
amendment we have an another
alternative for this okay.
Well that's that's that's making
a claim that because we don't
need that amendment my committee
members I'm not a lot of that
doesn't have to be for our yeah
we're just what we what we need
to do Mr chair on this bill is
just strike out the
appropriation and keep our dorms
language.
So this we're working on getting
this into the budget in fact we
have a commitment from the
governor on on being able to do
that so what we have to do is
basically get rid of the
language that this committee did
not like
right out the entire
appropriation so basically
section one Mr chair okay so so
that means that the people that
call make a motion to full house
bill nine nine from from the
table and and make it a next
item of discussion of there is
that that.
But by Representative Harper
that being said okay so
if you want to revisit I want to
go to the whole hearing again
but I recall that this there was
not an appetite to to move any
further on this house bill which
we did earlier in the year and
so at this point what you've
done to satisfy the committee's
concerns is that you've
completed the steps.
A legislature.
Mr chair so what we're doing is
essentially the creativity are
you done local yeah once.
Okay.
Representative Garratt go
present.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chandler here
that I have done camp your.
Representative guy it goes here.
Representative Harper your.
That I've ever heard on this.
Representative at speaker
Martinez.
Representative Ortez here
Representative Scott.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Townsend.
Check it and then.
Chair land there.
Thank you so please proceed
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair so house bill
ninety nine what we're seeking
to do is strike section one
which was the language that gave
everyone heartburn on taking
funds out of the early childhood
fund so what we're doing is just
going straight appropriation are
getting this into the budget but
we do need the policy piece in
section two that ensures that we
can funded the statewide school
dormitory so we just need to
keep this going through the
process but there's no
appropriation now in this bill.
Very good I think question
departments for the that.
Yeah this is that that part of
because of your of your party
affiliation by this committee
and and and the chair to try to
work with.
They have a matter on their
ability to work with them and.
We'll get a lot of that.
Committee the question
Representative thank you Mr
chair so we're removing the
appropriation that's what I
heard you say when we do
eventually but what happens with
this bill if you don't get it
through.
Creations so essentially we
still would like to continue the
policy piece for setting up a
former Tory Fund so what we're
looking at is getting the budget
into it getting the budget for
the dormitory into the house
bill two
on the Senate side working with
the governor's office on that
whether come out of house bill
two or three that's essentially
where it's it's stuck but we do
need to set up the fund.
What about us.
This remains so you're taking up
to two million dollars on
picking out all of section one.
All of section one that's
correct money stuff you just
need is that that's how I
process things okay sorry about
that.
Okay and so you're setting up a
fund that at which point we
don't have Mr chair I apologize
with.
for which we have no money at
this point at this point is not
injured okay.
All right thank you Mr chair
thank you any other questions or
comments for the docket.
Representative what is what
keeps any other school from
doing the very same thing you're
doing now working with governor
together
that in the HB two.
Mr chair representative so this
going back to original
discussion this is the only non
SCG funded statewide school the
dormitory again it is specific
to the attachment of the school
and so this is basically a one
of a kind unicorn that we're
trying to get funded and so.
It doesn't prohibit any other
school from seeking after
putting together a state funded
school and and seeking after
funds for dormitory but this is
today the only one like it in
the state madam chair Mr chair
Representative and.
Sure thank you thank you the
question the cost of the
committee.
You know what what made.
I know that we.
I move that we approve.
Yes yes.
Possibility that.
As amended amended as amended.
Your question.
so.
We are just we have amended it
yet but chairman the amendment
that I have.
If I understand correctly
sponsor does not want number
eight.
The appropriation that's correct
no no no Mr chair representative
all of section one for us to
know so.
That's in our binders yes the
original bill disregard the
amendment sent because of the
appropriation we're not talking
about appropriation we just want
to talk about thirty fifty which
is the dormitory Fund.
We just want to funds and we
cannot move out of this
committee to do that until we
get about.
So.
Okay let's let's let's take a
step back and does this
he feel comfortable enough that
to.
That was provided for four
hours.
Right but at this point isn't
working on the fly do we want to
go you up but this is this I
mean that is my committee is the
one.
As a more comfortable.
Request the sponsor them to go
back to give us of that do
amendment.
Verses doing this on the fly you
to the committee.
That be more appropriate.
The.
It's much appreciated as so you
would please what about that and
they come back on on Wednesday.
What are the other chair we will
can I do a hundred management
because it really is just
removing section one have
recognize that budgets intact
there's a commitment made with
maybe that I want to.
And so the two days
appropriation is scheduling but
I mental health public debate
that you wanted.
I think we have a couple of
these this one if you want to.
Make that amendment get back to
our that they will have you back
faster.
Okay thank you Mr chair
representative.
Yeah so I mean that I think that
would be here for four
committees and again I just
wanna make sure that we're we're
treating everyone at this point.
I appreciate the discussion
and I will take the lessons on
that if.
If I if I did something wrong on
that so they that that's going
to house bill two twenty
Medicare Medicaid.
Modification gross receipts
Representative paste.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
committee members I'm
Representative Kathleen Cates
here to present House Bill to
twenty.
Individuals with disabilities
have
a big goal is for independence
it's the dignity of risk if
individuals are able to stay in
their home it is
a cost savings for Medicaid
assistant living programs
hospitalizations independence is
key to their
To there a long term health of
this bill currently Medicaid and
allows for a five thousand
dollar allowance every five
years this is extremely Meeker
to do home modifications if your
home was built before the
American disabilities act you
may need to widen your doorways
you'll need to meet might need a
player live to be able to lift
you out of the chair to the
toilet to the bath tub zero
entry to put your wheel chair.
If you are hard of hearing me
one switcher doorbell to a light
instead of the sound.
And you can imagine five
thousand dollars doesn't go very
far so if we also have to take
anywhere depending where you
live in the state three hundred
and fifty to five hundred
dollars out of that budget for
G. R. T. it becomes virtually
impossible for the individuals
to be able to modify their homes
so they maintain independence ID
here today have Stacy Johnson
Davis as my expert witness who
is the co owner of a
organization that does provide
the sort of home modifications.
Thank you Representative at
thank you.
He's the one that we do have a
statement but yes thank you Mr
chair thank you so much and
representatives I'm yes I am
many Stacy Johnson Davis and I
am one of the co owners of home
modification solutions and we
are blessed to be able to take
care of Medicaid lives
throughout the state of New
Mexico we service the entire
state of New Mexico and as
Representative K. mentioned the
G. R. T. as part of the five
thousand dollar budget that
these Medicaid lives get every
five years for home modification
and so at if we were able to
eliminate that G. R. T. which we
don't keep we pass on these
members would be allowed to have
some additional work environment
modifications such as an eighty
eight twenty eight
widening doorways and other
things so it really just helps
improve the amount of money that
they're they have available to
be able to get the services that
they are and able to allow to
get with Medicaid.
Thank you thank you very much Mr
chair committee we stand for
questions.
The committee audience as well
as those that are online House
Bill to twenty all favor signify
reason here that.
It started in the back yes
ma'am.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm going to win
Gallagher aging a long term
Services Department this
proposed legislation ultimately
benefits home and community
benefits services recipients and
this includes much of the
population served by aging long
term Services Department New
Mexico is ranked fifth highest
among the US states for poverty
rate for persons with
disabilities further twenty nine
percent of New Mexicans age
sixty and above have difficulty
walking or climbing the stairs
are available New Mexicans face
economic language and cultural
barriers taxes re resources that
permit them to remain safely in
their own homes so therefore
they really need items such as
grab bars and accessibility
ramps H. house bill two twenty
provides economic incentives to
eligible providers there for
aging long term Services
Department sports hospital to
twenty thank you.
Anyone else in the room support
House Bill to twenty.
If they want to live.
Okay what are you with us
online.
Good morning Representative
thank you very much.
Can you hear me.
You.
Okay.
My name is Juana rob I am the
parent of a special needs
individual who participated in
this program to do home
modifications about three years
ago and
I agree with with Representative
Kate's that having to pay the
tax on this particular
transaction of made a difference
in what we were able to do
we could have gone and and we
did a bathroom modification and
the only thing we could do in
the bathroom was replaced the
tub with a standing shower.
So that we can get a wheelchair
in there and be able to widen
are not widely but at least
offset the hinges on the door
if we had another four hundred
and fifty dollars or so on the
tax that we had to pay then we
we could possibly even replace
the toilet at that point so I
think that this ammendment are
this change to the to the tax
and Representative.
Process is is wanted.
Thank you thank you joining us
this morning.
All of.
Working check Jackie good
morning.
Thank you Mr chair in committee
member's name is Jackie Cooper
I'm I've Representative with a a
RP for legislative advocacy HB
two twenty is important quality
of life bill that will assist
you Mexicans in living with
dignity within their familiar
environments of their own homes
on behalf of the two hundred and
forty thousand members in New
Mexico respectively ask for do
pass for H. B. two twenty thank
you very much second.
Yeah.
Anyone in the room in opposition
of house bill two twenty.
Is anyone online this is about.
The state of the committee
questions comments on house bill
two twenty.
The representative working.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative who initiated
this bill.
Just districts was is I guess
what I'm asking is did this come
from a R. peed it comes from
aging did come from the
secretary of health or.
Mr.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
my background is it is an
executive of providing services
for individuals with
disabilities and and creating
the looking for bills that
support independence is a
priority of mine thank you thank
you Mr chairman thank you for
this
and I I agree with the lady from
A. R. P.
We see this in in the one of the
companies that I own it is so
important needed and if we can
get them to stay in their homes
is much better for them they
don't go through some of the
state to go through when they're
put into an assisted living home
or.
The those things so
Is there any way.
Or eighties thought
That
that we will be able to.
Hi I'm extremely conservative so
this is gonna sound funny to
people is there any thought of
being able to help even more in
the future as we become older
and older interstate which is
what we're doing.
Thank you very much Mr chair
committee up the yes
Representative Duncan for having
Frank conversations yes I would
like them to have a fifteen
thousand dollar budget but right
now we know we both now
government now needs and and
incremental steps so this is our
first step let's make sure that
they can have a couple extra
grab bars where the appropriate
toilet thank you.
Mr and then are all of these
they're not under CVS guidelines
or contracts or anything this is
not a state contract this is
just.
Going out for bids for the
cheapest contractor I thank you
Mr chair and committee it is my
understanding that individuals
who are modifying their home do
because they're using Medicaid
funds need to use a Medicaid
approved provider but it's it's
it's just insurance to make sure
that their work is done
properly.
Thank you on that a hoping that
we continue to get really good
oil and gas reserves so we can
do this thank you Mr chairman
thank you ever there are pretty.
Thank you chairman services it's
good to see this morning and
thank you for being here.
So I I guess I just have a
couple big picture questions and
thoughts on this.
the FIR from the LFC and the tax
department actually really
really good on on this bill and.
Sort of maybe bring a couple
things to your attention
Chairman representative and get
results on and so on page four
of the very bottom.
She says as noted above the
portion of this bill related to
the installation of equipment
and homes of Medicaid recipients
are already deductible pursuant
to provisions of section seven
nine seventy three point one.
So so chair representative so so
we already have adoption for
installation of equipment to so
what.
What else does this bill do our
our kids help me understand why
we need this thank you Mr chair
and committee it is it now
respectfully Representative
Harper you are the tax tax
expert
but it is my understanding that
that is a deduction at taxes
that means you have to earn
enough money to deduct it
and so many of these recipients
from Medicaid this deduction is
not if it not only does it
become an L. year after the need
it is not always used.
As such I think you Mr I
appreciate the attempt there so
this is a gross receipts tax
deduction is not an income tax
deduction.
Right so gross receipts is like
our sales tax is that we're
talking about here yes thank you
Mr chair representative says we
can have I I if you'd be okay
with the chair a long term aging
it is my understanding that
and all the families are
reserves and had to pay gross
receipts tax on this
we could if you would like to
hear from directly from.
A long term aging they might be
able to clarify why this is in
the air and is it is our
understanding of and my
experience that gross receipts
tax are always charged.
Yeah so so Chairman
representative yes thank you but
gross receipts is not something
that you pay a year later and
you have to have a liability to
deduct from that's income tax
thing proceeds are to
immediately add if there's an
affection that means.
They're not they're not paid.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
correct that is the definition
of gross receipts tax it is my
understanding the gross receipts
tax are still being charged by
the pre approved vendors who are
providing home modifications for
Medicaid in the state of New
Mexico.
Chairman representative thank
you for.
For that hi.
I'm still just a touch confused
Mr chair representative do you
mind if I ask money expert
witness to answer this as that
she will have direct experience.
Thank you Mr chair
representative could you I'm
sorry could you just pointed
directly were in the FIR you're
reading that if you wouldn't
mind happy to chairman and
representative on page four.
The very last paragraph begins
with.
Also as noted above solicit.
LFC referring to TRD some else's
Mrs also noted above the portion
of this bill.
Waited to installation of
equipment.
And also Medicaid recipients are
already deductible pursuant to
this section that's a yes.
And Mr chair representative I'm
I'm not familiar with that what
I understand is that we are as a
provider.
Members allowed a five thousand
dollar budget in which the G. R.
T. as part of the bid that we
submit on behalf of the members
rolled into that I I personally
again I'm not a tax expert but
I'm not aware of any
Portion of the installation that
are ready to drive ball so I
apologize
no worries and.
Go ahead I'm sorry Mr chair
representative I will say when
we were having a bill drafted it
did come back this line item so
we took it to
to the CMS and to that D. O. H.
to find out and dear the
interpreters line differently
and have of.
confirmed with us that yes G. R.
T. is being collected.
As a German representative thank
you for that and I do see also
on.
H. three in the middle HSD you
know mentions here.
Process second paragraph or
significant issues that under
Medicaid programs.
Providers here to costs incurred
for this program you much built
into providers did and
reimbursed and the total
payments to the providers so so
I think.
What I think is happening is
there's for the installation of
this equipment.
Is deductible what's not
included but there must be
something else that is G. R. T.
and that is included in.
The
did and reimbursed here
as part of payments to the
providers of the I think there's
something going on here that I
just I'm not catching so I I
agree with you there are some G.
R. T..
Senator subject active but
there's also some that is
already deductible so I think.
Chairman I'll just
all this more reading and try to
figure out what's.
What's going on here all just
the finish of the comments that
you know.
In general we try not to charge
your T. on sayings that.
Cannot be reimbursed for G. R.
T. right
And.
Yeah and it looks like so we are
getting some reimbursement here
so I'm just.
That we always take a chance.
Thank you for your question.
There's got.
Thank you Mr chairman maybe the
able to shed some light.
Representative Harper is
questions.
Yes the equipment.
Which includes things like hand
rails or showers goals for.
Some piece here.
Going into these all
modifications where.
The actual.
Doorway widening.
What kludge.
Under where.
With that the action.
Mr chair committee I'll defer to
my expert witness thank you Mr
chair representative it is
possible that the language in
there is indeed speaking to
durable medical equipment such
as grab bars bathroom transfer
benches things of that nature
with which currently do you have
a G. R. T. deduction in place
It every piece of equipment that
we find.
Is is subject to the G. R. T.
with F. we have to build it and
with that budget that we provide
to the health plans up excuse me
the quote that we did to provide
to the health plans for those
members and I'd and again I'm
purely speculating on that but
as I understand understand that
a hundred percent of the
services that we are providing
to Medicaid recipients we take
our entire bid and you know the
subject that to the G. R. T.
depending on where the Medicaid
recipient resides thank you Mr
chair representative.
Mr Chairman at appropriations
what we're seeing here maybe
there.
And that the.
What she calls to grab bars the
chairs.
May not be subject to change.
Mr Chairman representative we as
a company if the patient excuse
me member has Medicaid the
Medicaid will build the at get
the DME bars delivered by a
durable medical equipment
company and then we install it
the shower stalls are not
considered a medical piece of
equipment so therefore the
health plans don't.
Pay for them under medical
reimbursement piece of equipment
Transformations we don't provide
those are things that are
provided by the medical
equipment provider's so and what
we are doing is is truly
environmental modifications
construction if you will Sir
Representative is me Mr chair
representative.
So Mr Chairman representative
thanks for.
Representative.
It appears from page three.
The.
It's providing G. R. T.
reinforce its.
For these projects is that.
Mr chair representative yes that
is accurate it is part of the
five thousand dollar budget if
you well so Mr chairman and
explore.
Deal with them for a minute.
To the state.
The G. R. T. payments that the.
For due to you as a consequence
of this.
reimbursement program is that
thank you Mr chair
representative.
Yes the G. R. T. is part of the
five thousand dollar budget
which is readmitted and paid.
We are asking the committee to
consider to where if that G. R.
T. as the budget is already so
meager for these home
modifications to support
independence.
Thank.
Which actually brings me to my
next question Mr chairman of
that part.
Fiscal implications that in
twenty twenty one five point
seven eight eight million was
provided to the monks thirteen
hundred and forty one.
K. clients.
The math indicates that's.
Slightly less than five thousand
all.
Mr chair representative I I do
have a few issues with the the
FIR just because I believe there
is just under fourteen hundred
individuals that are accessing
this budget currently but
they're five thousand dollar
budget is over five years so
they're not all accessing at the
same time.
Does that answer your question
I'm so sorry Representative.
Mr Chairman representative it
doesn't.
I was actually trying to get to
the average cost of the project.
And.
At least a twenty twenty one.
Average cost project is less
than five pounds.
Mr chair representative you were
looking at numbers and it is the
average cost of the project that
is eligible for reimbursement so
we already know it's not
eligible for reimbursement over
five thousand dollars so they
wouldn't have the data it's a
ten thousand dollar job they may
get five thousand dollars
reimbursement and try to find
funding in another place for the
other five thousand and they
would not capture that data
here.
Okay Mr Chairman representative
thank you for your answer.
Still.
Confused here.
All.
The acquisition the rest
conversation thank you
representative that the
representative but I.
My name Representative.
Tate's Mr chair so there used to
be a program similar to this get
the City of Albuquerque
and it was located on loan this
sort of
I Washington.
And they did a lot of this
installation for handicapped
people I used to sit on the
affordable housing board.
So one of the questions that I
have is this is a clue handicap
ramps.
Thank you very much Mr chair
committee yes Representative it
includes anything that would
require modification to the home
to in Hants independence and
accessibility which would also
include ramps I will for the
state for Mr chair
representative I may
many people may think I have a
ground floor home I it's
accessible but they're not aware
that there may be a slight step
up into which would require a
ramp sometimes a substantial
ramp to ensure that the grading
is appropriate for a wheelchair
thank you Mr chair thank you
thank you Representative so if
you all talked with Carroll
here's the director of family
and community services because I
don't know if that program is
still available but it would be
nice to see that you're
coordinating this with that
program if it still exists
because I believe that that was
a state program but it was
it was in cooperation with the
department of family community
services so I would just suggest
that maybe giving her jingle and
talking with her a little bit
about this.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
committee and and thank you
Representative I I am you're
absolutely correct and there are
many ways in which families find
braided funding integrated
resources depending upon their
committee today the bill is
asking so that at least for
their Medicaid budget that
they'll be able to maximize
every penny since it's already
maker thank you very much thank
you Representative
Representative it would also
committee.
That is our motion because we
table this bill.
What was the second second.
Very well.
This is the revelation.
Thing that she presentation.
That's that what a house bill
two thirty they could tax rates
and differential
Senator did do right.
That looks like that that a
number of handout for the
committee as well up.
Discussions with the committee
Sanchez I I would list it should
we have a number of those in the
US for entities opposition I
also realize that we would have
to limit
of COVID two two minutes a piece
so just FY I we get to that
point we will start dates at
that time right.
So Representative when you are
ready the floor is yours.
We are introducing
House Bill up to thirty.
And.
Two thirty will.
Thank you so that we increases
the alcohol excise tax for New
Mexico which hasn't been done
for over thirty years.
In nineteen ninety three.
And.
This is something that.
New Mexico has
Well we're number one in the
nation for alcohol related
deaths.
And people are drinking
themselves to death.
I will
We will be taking the microburst
in the wind Reese exception out
so that all
Producers will be taxed twenty
five cents whether it's twelve
ounces of beer or eighty seven
ounces of wine or one and a half
ounces of distilled spirits.
So we will be raising
some.
Taxes for beer are lessened
handy and most of the
Major brewers are paying for
states that we have
you know different levels for
the wind and for the distilled
spirits but they will all go to
twenty five cents during.
And.
What's really important is that
we are going to not only reduce
consumption by raising that tax
which is scientifically based
and my
expert Dr lord Committee from
UNM we'll be able to explain
that in great detail but also
because we pay over four hundred
dollars a year in taxes each of
us to subsidize excessive
drinking whether people drink or
not in forty nine percent of
people don't drink at all and
thirty two are in the.
Nine excessive drinkers and
almost nineteen percent in the
excessive drinking so.
Instead of taxpayers.
Having to pay so much over a
thousand dollars each person.
And our state whether you drink
or not to subsidize you know
that health care costs and the
loss.
everything racing fan what it is
now to just a quarter entering
will help offset the almost two
billion dollars it costs
annually so with that I'd like
to introduce drive towards
meeting.
Good morning good morning
chairman members of the
committee my name is Laurie
Committee methodology faculty
with the college population
health at the university of New
Mexico I worked in substance use
for nearly two decades I served
as the oncology neurologist for
the state and ensure the
National Council for state and
territorial territorial at the
genealogists
at the national level I'm in in
these roles I've co authored
papers on the cost of alcohol
the impact of enforcing over
service flies the roll of
alcohol and violent death and
are calling kind of liver
disease my comments agency
testimony are my own views do
not resent Representative
official position in the
universe New Mexico and my
presentation provides research
and data and all taxes and their
impact New Mexico but it doesn't
necessarily take any position
are on any proposed or pending
legislative proposals.
According to the department of
health there were two thousand
two hundred and eighty one
deaths in New Mexico
attributable to alcohol this is
more than six deaths every day
New Mexico is a pretty small
state we don't have a whole lot
of people we can't really afford
to be losing six people every
day.
New Mexico has the highest rate
in the nation in this rate has
been increasing and a fairly
alarming rate in the in the last
few years going to the World
Health Organization on the whole
taxes are the most effective and
most cost effective way to
reduce and prevent all the whole
problems a call tax increases
have been endorsed by the task
force and community preventive
services an independent body
that conducts reviews and the
science advises the centers for
disease control on effective
prevention measures.
And although also is very costly
for our state so I worked with
the CDC
on a paper where we calculated
the alcohol related health care
costs lost productivity and then
other costs such as fires
criminal justice law enforcement
property damages are.
And using two thousand ten data
we found that the cost of
excessive alcohol consumption in
New Mexico mounted to two point
two billion which is very
expensive for a state that is is
that you could use that money.
As of this accounts to about two
dollars and seventy cents
project which is about one
thousand and eighty four dollars
per person in the state.
About fourteen point nine
percent of these costs are paid
by taxpayers so this would be
considered to be about a dollar
thirteen cents per drink
and I think that the thing that
really sort of are you know
looking at this taxpayers end up
paying a dollar and thirteen
cents per drink in harms and in
law enforcement lost
productivity and
hospitalizations and treatment
and they're not really sort of
recouping these expenses with
the hi for example four cents
per drink on a typical beer
and then even the highest tax
rate which is fortified wine
which is seven which is thirteen
cents projects you.
So regarding the increase in
this bill as of my colleagues
and I estimated that time a
University of New Mexico and
also Boston University we
estimated that it will lead to a
roughly seven percent drop in
consumption this is really
crucial to seeing reduces and
harm
in include a ccording to one
systematic review.
Well we looked at the about
three hundred forty estimates of
the effect of alcohol taxes on
both I would come or video
mortality so you know diseases
and people dying we found that
even doubling the topical tax
could reduce alcohol related
mortality by thirty five percent
by traffic crash deaths by
eleven percent sexually
transmitted diseases by six
percent and violence by seven
percent.
Okay Texas had the greatest
impact on people who drink
excessively are supporting to a
tool that was developed by the
centers for disease control
our season was developed for the
centers for disease control by a
consortium of a number of
universities seventy five
percent of any increase in New
Mexico's
I'll call tax would be paid by
the folks who are excessive
drinkers so it's not nineteen
percent of our adult population
and forty five she's been forty
nine percent of New Mexico
adults who do not track would
not pay anything this tax the
same to estimates that about
twenty five percent as per
drinking increased in New
Mexico's all tax could actually
increased so even if we to take
into account any losses in our
jobs that we would see sort of
an that increased in employment
in the state anywhere between
six hundred and sixteen jobs to
two thousand eight hundred and
ninety eight jobs if I may I
appreciate all the work but how
close are you to.
Because we want to get this
going.
And I'm done.
You thank you very much Mr chair
one thing I didn't mention yet
was that on the funding will go
into an alcohol harms
alleviation Fund and go directly
into different programs and with
that we'd like to bring in
Shelly Man Lev
will be our expert on explaining
a little bit about that real
quick.
She on soon.
Yes we have a Shelly on the.
I just.
So if you have them if you want
to raise your hand we can call
you.
Thank you so and also if you can
keep your comments brief we
appreciate being get out the
this hearing and and also our
New Mexico and I thank you
judge.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you so much I
will be great fun my name is
Shelly Man Lev and I was the
former director of the Santa Fe
conventional eyes for ten years
and we came before this we
wanted to come for this
committee to address the most
powerful thing we can do to
address alcohol harms in our
community in New Mexico
throughout which is to raise
alcohol taxes and raise this
bill would increase currently
the revenues are forty five
million dollars from the
athletics as tax it's very cross
types of alcohol it would raise
by almost a hundred fifty five
million the amount available to
do the work that's needed to do
so the when when decrease
consumption the alcohol harms
alleviation Fund The aha Fund
which would fund things like
treatment prevention and the
social determinants it would
provide compensation increased
compensation to victims of
alcohol related crime we could
provide support for people
experiencing domestic violence
which alcohol is one of the
largest contributors it would
also through from early
childhood on up through college
provide support for prevention
and early intervention programs
including four unfortunately the
large very significant number of
young babies infants were born
to mothers who have consumed
alcohol who are experiencing
people alcohol affects home
visitation program evidence
based approaches in the middle
school and high school as well
as an upper in a higher
education so again a hundred
fifty five additional million
dollars to use to levy the harms
from alcohol and then to provide
treatment of course so that not
only people who have Medicaid
can access treatment the people
who are not currently insured
for lots of different reasons
New Mexico of access to
treatment and will be able to
supplement to treat provided
including long term treat.
Which is so badly needed by some
of the people who've been
dealing with this in such
intense ways thank you so much.
Mr chair I also like to direct
people on there and I are to
page eight where Dr David
Jernigan along with Lisa.
Ari Stidham and Dr Victoria
Sanchez
the economic you can health
effects of twenty five cents per
drink alcohol excise tax
increase in New Mexico this was
a special report that was done
in twenty fifteen and that also
summarizes a lot of what Dr
David Jernigan as another expert
that we've used which he would
say so we'll keep it concise
with that thank you which is
additional documents say they
also.
Thank you Mr chair.
All of us have heartfelt
experiences
And the we are.
I have a home.
And I just believe there is one
way to change it.
Have.
Tables with.
Program.
Thank you yes.
And then we go to we have people
signed up for public comment.
We're gonna go this way to get a
follow up sure.
So all those in favor of house
bill two thirty.
in the room these.
And I'll call you and those that
are online good reason as well
will call you after we're done
here in the audience so again we
will institute the two minute
per person
That point so on my left hand
side was first.
If you were speaking to.
Jurors in the New Mexico border
with Mexico which is which over
up we stand in support of the
bill we think is important to
it really gets serious about the
hello.
Lost consequences
again in New Mexico and the that
so increase is about though.
Back that all.
is warranted.
would actually be effective
thank you.
Thank you.
Next.
Chairman members of the
committee Charles good marker
for NBC action fund and we urge
your support for this bill as
well Senator Wirth is right
forty nine percent.
Asian doesn't right actually one
seven subsidizing the cost of
the there's
just all.
so we sent direction consumption
that's actually still state or
state.
and you know that the faster the
faster families six Hey.
Something we should already do
not tolerate I know that we're
we're taxed cannabis another
sections that.
The.
Thank you
a much higher rate than awful
that's going to remain true.
Houses and
fifty dollars for the service
option.
Opportunity I don't think this
is awesome thank you very much
anyone else in this other room
which is big in support.
Support yes that that that.
Chairman and members of the
committee meetings and act.
Representative resource center
and the New Mexico names Rights
Project still working on.
None of it.
The right direction I really
reaches for I just want to
mention that a lot of times we
data statistics and research.
Science behind.
Line and I understand your
religious three opposes every
time it promotes responsible
drinking that works really be
sitting here today looking at
how are.
Sure this is.
I teach drug free workplace As
teaching them how to identifying
those like into the employees it
is drug abuse.
I urge your support thank you
for your thank you for being
that.
Good morning my name is Anil in
person five four members of the
White resource center and
because Rights Project I was
here in nineteen ninety three
sitting at the back as the
analyst for this committee with
the last of alcohol taxes passed
I would urge you to similarly
thank
of this as a policy measures not
just revenue projects that we've
done a lot since ninety three
with D. W. offline and many
things have worked however we
need more tools in the toolbox
now and one of them is price.
This bill in particular will
most definitely most definitely
affect young people who are
essentially prevent binge
drinking and also excessive
drinkers will pay seventy five
percent of the cost and so what
you I think you need to think
about is allowing the police to
keep doing their job they're
they've done with you know what
but we also use this is another
tool to get to the root of the
problem thank you very much
thank you.
What's more support house bill
two thirty.
Yes Sir.
Where the chair members of the
committee a fifty million from.
Senate taxes because we know
that in all groups taxes do
reduce use and lead to
reductions in morbidity and
mortality but sometimes I think
there's a thought that we only
think about heavy drinkers and
we think maybe
it won't really Kurt they're
drinking it'll just lead to
greater expenses but I want all
of us to think about the health
consequences of what we might
even consider moderate drinking
and a bill like this that
increases taxes could lead to
real reductions in health care
costs and morbidity and
mortality in this community and
we know The New Mexico's
disproportionately affected
that's all I have to say thank
you thank you thank you joining
us.
Senator good morning.
What the.
At a meeting.
That that.
Good morning can you hear me now
if it's that.
Morning Mr chair and committee
members I'm doctor central lab
of speaking as a private citizen
position and behavioral
scientist I've published over
sixty articles on alcohol misuse
and impaired driving in New
Mexico I support this bill I
want to see New Mexico go from
the worst in the nation for
alcohol related deaths from
cancer heart and liver disease
violence suicide and motor
vehicle crashes to best in the
nation to make a difference we
need many more dollars to
provide alcohol and drug
prevention and treatment
services.
An alcohol tax increases listed
by the World Health Organization
as of yes I policy why because
the people most impacted by the
small price increase are heavy
drinkers young adult and
underage drinkers these are the
very New Mexicans at highest
risk that health outcomes from
their drinking.
In twenty twenty two New Mexico
experienced over sixteen
thousand violent and sixty five
thousand property crime.
The predation and drug addiction
play a significant causal role
in crimes including assault rape
and robbery.
People still are private
property to buy drugs.
Jogger hike alone without fear
of attack the good news is that
studies find that in addition to
reducing the personal health
consequences of heavy drinking.
Substance abuse treatment
facilities reduce both populist
and financially motivated crimes
in our communities.
Some argue that this tax
increase would cause an undue
burden to conscientious drinkers
but a twenty five cent increase
won't even be noticed by the
vast majority of consumers.
With the increased revenues
going to fund more treatment
services and better ones those.
Better access.
Treatment.
Moving there Senator that's
thank you for joining us this
morning.
Trainer.
Good morning.
Good morning Committee members
my name is Katrina lacked the
and I'm the affiliate executive
director of mothers against
drunk driving New Mexico I'm
here this morning speaking in
support of H. B. two thirty.
We at mad support for prevention
component to health care reform
through a substantial increase
in taxation on alcoholic
beverages as a means of covering
the cost to sister the Sox's IT
caused by the misuse all.
Matt support.
Slide increase on the taxes on
wine beer and distilled spirits
Matt does not support decreasing
the excise tax on any alcoholic
beverage this is all to say that
what H. B. two thirty proposes
it's completely in line with
what the data shows as presented
by Dr committee and Dr germ
again this flat tax increase in
alcohol taxes will save the
lives of New Mexico constituents
on New Mexico's roadways thank
you for your consideration thank
you to showing their Shelly good
morning.
Good morning Shelly Man Lev I'm
gonna play testimony by Jenny
Wade was flying she is the chair
of the Gallup alcohol policy
working group and a physician.
Mr chair and committee members
my name is Jenny Wei Education
medicine physician working in
Gallup New Mexico since two
thousand twelve and share our
McKinley County alcohol task
force and I support house bill
two thirty there's no way to
exaggerate the extent of alcohol
related harms in our hospitals
they are far more prevalent and
far more severe than any of us
have seen any other settings and
we providers have practiced all
over the country from Atlanta to
Seattle from LA to New York City
we're facing a public health
emergency and I'm not talking
COVID what we've been fighting
for decades and only getting
more staff there are more
alcohol related deaths in New
Mexico that comment related
deaths last year I never get
used to seeing a twenty eight
year old mother of three all the
liver failure yellow from head
to toe because her liver class
and clear toxins School of eight
with ten leisure extras related
activities.
Shut down her kidneys to I never
get used to telling her children
and her mother that she just
died of a preventable illness
yes the preventable illness but
only if sound evidence based
public health practices are act
like house bill two thirty.
We healthcare providers do our
best to find compassion and.
Thank you.
Okay thank you.
Kelly good morning.
Good morning chairman and
committee members my name is
Kelly wanting sent and I am the
chair of the D. W. I feel it
under New Mexico counties and
also the chair of the New Mexico
D. W. I. grant council which
awards and oversees the current
forty five percent of my correct
size tax or counties first I
want to thank can voice my
appreciation to the sponsor for
attempting to keep our local
programs whole and also provide
a bit of an increase we are not
opposed to this bill however we
do have some concerns over the
anticipated revenue.
The intent of the bill is to
reduce consumption get into the
paid five hundred and fifty
million dollar increase over the
current fifty million.
The way the bill is structured
reducing the W. off on to twelve
percent if we fail to see this
immense increase in revenue it
would be detrimental to our
local programs it would greatly
reduce services we're already
providing in some counties
closed bottle programs all
together these are not new
anticipated services these are
existing effective resources and
they rely on the current amount
of revenue we receive thank you
for your time thank you.
Good morning.
Hello Mister chair and committee
members my name is Merion or
take up.
I am here on behalf of the
health equity council and we
support house bill two thirty.
As a health comes as a health
council we have the
responsibility to identify and
focus on local health priorities
with the ongoing statewide issue
of all call related harms
including under age drinking
being one of them.
We support the legislation
because it is an evidence based
public health strategy that
aligns with our work in efforts
to reduce health related harm
while increasing revenue per
treatment and other programs
that will help alleviate high
burden of disease and
significant social and economic
consequences.
We encourage you to take action
in favor improving the health of
New Mexico thank you for your
time thank you very.
The needs.
The morning here with us.
Good morning chairman and
members of the committee and
Cindy Sokoman I am an evaluator
and also the director and co
founder of the New Mexico tribal
behavior health providers
association our association's
membership includes the health
providers from Apache Navajo and
areas of those major tribal
community members are negatively
impacted by alcohol related
harms even though they might not
sell alcohol on tribal land but
are surrounded by alcohol
industry as an evaluator for
substance abuse prevention and
treatment programs for over
twenty years I interact with
hundreds of people who don't
realize that they're drinking is
seeking consider excessive and
there are harmful the pandemic
has significantly impacted the
mental health of most New
Mexicans we know that all hell
is used as a coping mechanism to
drown out pain trauma
abandonment and abuse people
with lower income have more
alcohol related farms but also
benefit the most from increased
alcohol taxes heavy drinkers
also benefit because a decrease
in any of their consumption can
improve their health detention
centers are understaffed and are
not the solution for substance
use disorder once the change
most can't find employment
housing without the state needs
they can't think about focusing
on that behavioral health needs
recent data shows that over
sixty percent of those in sixty
tension centers want to and have
attempted treatment and those
that were successful from hope
and dignity we have a
responsibility as a state to
address and remedy those harms
what effective prevention and
treatment programs I
wholeheartedly support house
bill two thirty thank you so
much.
That's a very good so that's
moved up to although the
opposition both online and in
the room of house bill thirty
and the real star of that side
it was nice to the state Senate
rules of first yes Sir.
Good morning Mr chairman of our
reserve on.
Very long.
This legislation we do.
Representative goal.
This.
Last four years.
Or tass is that right all jobs
that are.
Local.
Practices.
Where is.
Process.
Or.
Gentleman from farms.
Los.
There are a lot of work on the.
Or as well as a job.
The.
If action.
Right.
Jobs one of the things we want
to.
I also.
One.
Providers are.
I need.
All of our
service.
Legislation.
Seven.
This is the have ordered back.
Your.
that.
The.
Thank you very.
Sure.
Right
here we have
our.
Those indications.
We have usually are.
And.
Opportunities to.
Which is.
Ortiz already generated revenue.
On the street is a registered
letter this is increasing taxes.
With industry over many years
all right last.
Nation our vision of your lawn.
Right.
This is.
Your.
I need.
Increasing all we.
That are.
Yeah right at.
I.
This tax the reason I.
As you over.
Also there is an issue.
Four six houses also have.
Following.
Right.
Members of the.
Hello.
Eight years there anything that
have the potential for data.
Having.
Thank you.
That is that Mr chairman members
of the committee John PTA's and
registered lobbyists are posted
average distributors the
employee opposite thousand
employees all.
In this.
Sure.
Us to raise bills in the
hundreds of potentially
thousands had a hard time.
The numbers and converting it
which I think is our population
LFC tax policy was rescinded
with city of taxation
Your job page five eight the
studies on the.
Act.
Use.
Well as the in our base our
liquor Act.
Three New Mexico still right
highs in the
nation the chairman of the
committee of the of the notion
of higher taxation to reduce
consumption was gonna work.
And work in the past thirty
years Mr Chairman I I think the
the idea that.
Problematic drinkers are going
to stop drinking as a result of
this bill.
It is difficult to understand
the economic principles the last
is the Mr chairman to modify
this from lastly Mr chairman I
would ask members of this
committee considers I have four
pieces of legislation around
this building right now scatter
with someone here again use the
existing liquor excise tax money
which is currently going to the
general fund.
We've been used to fund lottery
scholarship what if I are during
cash balance for years we use
that money invested in
prevention treatment education
and recovery services Mr
chairman thank you very much.
That is a yes Sir.
Relaying the record Mexico wind
river's Association.
At two points Mr talks or the
one.
Funds first one of them
maintenance
hundred regular duties following
a recent.
Our state our members will feel
this has the resources this
differential.
Larger out of state is to have a
budget to reported to our state
for this tax level
disproportionately.
Or some of the small farmers
those reserves option mentioned
you see a generational shift.
Life on.
Decreases
obligating deaths as well as a
decrease in sections of
generational shift
for this meeting the legislature
consider refunding American life
on what those funds back.
Related taxes
Generation we will consider us
all musicians is thank you next
is a.
Chairman members of the one that
we are plans to.
videos and movies.
This this legislation out to
tell you there are alternative
pieces of legislation around.
Audio
files and Side.
Strongly recommend that you look
at those.
Your call at your requested.
Favor them.
This pandemic.
Sensible
what what number they are very
small over so there's reason
element.
Next.
Two one five cents all right I
would go back.
Percent of these that is a
problem.
Thank you Sir in the center of.
The Senators up the back look
right yes Sir that just came in
registered lobbyists for San
Juan County in the city
according to
this bill we're close to the.
Two thirty of this bill would
reduce the level of the white
percentage of a correct sized
Act forty five percent well
percent thus reducing our
distribution allocation of
existing life both grams
additionally multiple studies
over the last several years show
that those who abuse alcohol do
not hurt their consumption in
response to higher prices this
proposed tax loophole in the
federalized responsible alcohol
consumers and we also believe
that Restamax.
Thank you thank you next yes
that.
Mr Chairman representative my
name is Eddie and executive
director.
Hello I always.
Let's protect craft.
Our products general interest.
I come here today to use my
voice Representative members to
stand in opposition of age.
Really recognizing go through
then we were at.
You're listening yes forty one
cents per gallon increased
twenty five cents per twelve
I'm sorry
what is the right two thousand
seven.
Would make New Mexico have
highest state excise taxes in
the nation currently no other
state that is.
Mexico.
We need to help.
Nation.
Again.
Thank you next single yes Sir.
Mr Chairman.
Property watercolor of all of
the religions doing.
President revealed Mexico.
Except.
Thank you Sir.
My name is John makes no mention
I am also a COVID loss.
At one of the board members of
the Mexico is down and it's one
of what was what was the next
this is down
her covert operators
sidetracked.
Also on.
Related to this thank you.
Thanks yes Sir.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Brent for
registered lobbyists from there.
And we stand a respectful
opposition to this piece of
legislation
first and foremost that the tax
increases that are included
within this proposal are extreme
you would know I would note that
TRD in its analysis of these.
Basically as the price increases
Paul product or extremely large
I can do the calculation on the
various percentages three
thousand percent we saw it the
first FIR that six hundred fifty
percent for beer then TRD
adjusted the numbers to five
hundred fifty percent those
percentages are quite large.
Currently the state has liquor
excise tax revenue that it is
not using about half of that the
number ranges somewhere between
two fifty million total for
excise tax revenue.
That means about twenty five
million isn't being used as a as
mentioned previously and answer
questions for responsible
consumption if we need to do
something about the issues that
are there please I would
encourage the legislature to use
the existing revenue to address
responsible consumption
education all different types of
things to try to to check to
promote responsible consumption
the other thing that I would
note and it's in your FIR page
five New Mexico currently has
the fifteenth highest in terms
of tax rate for the there are
various levels for other other
types of elector we already are
injury high state for our tax
rate on future users we stand
respectful opposition thank you
next.
Yes that.
Committee my name is Roy Moore
and my family and I are trying
to bring something into my like
a location processing.
Thank you.
One of the rules not just that.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Argha cigna
president revived a foundation
public policy research
organization based in New Mexico
deal with Mexico tax act as
other policies of its budget
this is regressive to mention
that this is a major tax
increase philosophically
speaking I would just like to
say that we all have been in
school we all hate with a
teacher punishes the whole group
for this behavior of one person
or two people in a group Act
encouraging you to drive that is
that use existing resources to
address the serious alcohol
problems that do exist in the
state of New Mexico thank you
thank you anyone else state Rep.
Opposition they're being that
money online right okay.
this first.
JD will be good morning.
The morning Mr chairman members
of the committee this is JD
Pollock that speaking on behalf
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce we first
want to acknowledge that there
is no question we have a problem
with alcohol abuse in the state
and sponsor should be commended
for helping to put more of a
spotlight on this problem.
However the chamber of commerce
simply believes that ratcheting
up but tax of this magnitude.
Is not the answer to combat a
alcohol abuse because it
needlessly and unfairly punishes
very responsible adults and it
would harm local businesses and
therefore would harm local
economies it's not completely
clear that the proceeds and
shifting of funds at this tax
will initiate will support
evidence based programming to
address alcohol harms but it is
very clear that many of our New
Mexico's distinctive local
breweries wineries and
distilleries will be best put on
the path of trying therefore Mr
chairman given the historic
revenues our state is in the
midst of collecting the chamber
believes we should be
considering tax increases
especially when we can fund with
cash the programs that this
proposed tax increase is aiming
to support thank you thank you
Sir.
At.
Good morning Mr chairman and
thank you to the committee
members for giving me the
opportunity to speak today my
name is Adam Hoffer I'm the
director of excise tax policy at
the tax foundation I hold a PhD
in economics with the career
publishing academic research on
the effects of excise tax
increases also realize my
comments today on three major
points they're intended to be a
supplements to the fiscal impact
report that was done adding to
the research that was conducted
and presented in that reports
first the behavioral response
that this tax is likely to
encourage I want to recognize
again repeat what many others of
raise the this this tax rate
increase is not a marginal
effects like what most of the
tax rates are studied in the
literature is not three percent
or five percent or ten percent
it's hundreds of percents it's
points increase the tax rate as
such this is what we do have a
significantly larger effect than
many of the previous studies
would necessarily have indicated
things like cross border
shopping for alcohol while not
common for three percent
increase may be far more likely
with something like a five
hundred percent increase for
alcohol.
Also.
The burden of alcohol taxation
falls disproportionately on
lower income residents the
increased revenue presented in
the bill in the fiscal analysis
relies on people continuing the
drink we recognize that it's
alcohol taxes are regressive and
that the additional income will
come directly from low income
residents via a regressive tax
of the lowest income drinkers
are also the most susceptible to
switching point a more dangerous
form of consumption such as
things that are higher plans or
binge drinking.
Lastly the substitution effects
empirical changes compared women
suggested it's hard fixed rate
taxes encouraged consumers to
switch toward more potent forms
of consumption in more dangerous
forms of concern consumption in
order to stretch their dollars
the substitution effect is most
commonly referred to as the
third law thank you very much
this morning thank you.
Do with that good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee of can hear me
okay for FY twenty.
Right my name is same with state
government affairs chair for the
brewers association five oh one
C. six national trade
association dedicated to
defending and promoting
America's craft brewers first we
wish to thank the sponsors for
looking at solutions to the
issues facing New Mexicans
however we must oppose H. B. two
thirty Representative New Mexico
crafted beer industry are still
recovering from the effects of
the pandemic our producers are
small unable to sell it scale
with the larger brands from
members H. B. two thirty can be
devastating pricing them out of
the market place small birds in
the state of already raise
prices due to increased labor
materials and transportation
costs HB two thirty to deal a
death blow to craft brewers
already reeling from the
significant issues additionally
excise taxes as with all
consumption taxes are inherently
regressive sin taxes to have a
look elevated regressive effect
have used the fact found on the
bottom fourth the population by
income if director prices go up
Custer's customers may look for
a less expensive alternative
simply can't absorb this
additional cost without raising
in house and wholesale prices
rather than passing this bill we
hope the Legislature reallocate
monies currently being directed
to the general fund and uses
them for treatment education and
prevention I urge you to vote no
on H. B. two thirty I appreciate
your time and consideration
thank you for your service K.
that.
We level.
There's two more on that later.
Warning you with this.
It I think we're good.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Li Lin bowls and I represent
the New Mexico petroleum
marketers our members are small
business owners in every city
county and municipality in New
Mexico the majority of our
customers are lower income New
Mexicans the challenges our
customers have faced over the
past few years have been
extremely difficult they've been
dealing with the pandemic
inflation at a forty year high
interest rates to the twenty
year high and now you the
increased taxes on these New
Mexicans and indexing that rate
to inflation which basically
penalize some every year we
believe this in legislation
targets and penalizes those New
Mexicans that can least afford
it for those reasons we oppose
house bill two thirty thank you
for your time thank you.
Hello.
Hello.
Thank.
Mr chair members the committee
my name is Rebecca less calls at
one of the owners less
competitive energy sector wide
a New Mexico's largest craft
beverage employer with over
three hundred employees five
cities I speaking out in
opposition of this bill as of
the as others have noted state
amount of this tax increase is
exorbitant The New Mexico craft
industry rates are placed
increased fifteen full for New
Mexico wine and thirty two full
for New Mexico beer even out of
state parks are faced with the
doubling of excise taxes we also
doubled excise taxes in eighty
three and again in ninety three
which is not alleviated our
problem with our problematic
drinkers we already have the
fifth highest excise tax for one
in the nation this bill would
make R. Y. listening tax a
hundred fifty six percent higher
than the next highest state with
similar results for beer and
wine and spirits second of the
New Mexico wine industry is a
vital part of tourism and
agriculture sectors affect this
legislature recognized last year
by creating a buying funds
establish more vineyards in our
state to support the wine
industry to limit the wine
excise tax differential for New
Mexico wineries the gates the
positive impact of these new
vineyards will have these new
vineyards will not come into
production for another three
years at which point the market
may have declined enough to meet
this investment of the state
worthless thank you for your
time thank you.
That all right they get thank
you all for your public comment
at this point I will come back
to the committee the first on my
list
back to the committee at this
point okay it.
Representative yeah
thank you Mr chair so
Do you all agree that the rate
of increase at least aren't
let's say brewery or beer
somewhere in the neighborhood of
five hundred percent increase.
Mr chair and representative or
go
The current tax rates.
Excuse me of course in.
Perjuring.
The new tax which.
Right.
It's forty one cents a gallon
and a gallon or ten sixty seven
of the current tax for drinking
is less than four cents and if
it went up to twenty five cents
would be three hundred ninety
percent off and that's the
highest wind would go up two
hundred twenty five percent and
distilled spirits two hundred
eleven percent but that's only
because it's so low.
And states across the country
are increasing their tax rates
also.
Okay okay so for could you
explain how it is you came to
these numbers.
Let drive to media whose team I.
Produce this chart.
And I don't mean the map that
you just recited I mean the tax
increases that you decided what
was I'm sorry.
Collagens for not being clear
yeah I don't.
actually no I'm trying to
understand what effect this is
going to have on consumption and
understand better why your you
know proposing these numbers as
opposed to perhaps lesser
numbers because.
Over the years we've seen that
tax diminish over with
inflation.
Raise it up to something that
would happen the impact also you
know to reduce consumption
and instead of going twenty five
cents increase.
We wanted to make it so that it
was equitable between all the
different
Alcohol levels at at the twenty
five cents per level of.
At twelve ounces for beer seven
ounces for wine in one and a
half ounces for spirits okay.
If you want to.
With that Representative
Chandler needs the permission of
special over the country and the
state there are thousands of
questions about his handout
Alice's of the impact of tax and
includes would have on the this
so this wasn't just paper over
here there were extensive
discussions and equity in terms
of all of the industry thanks
for.
I did want to say very to what
is that the other states all
over all of.
Texas tech.
Thank you Mr chair so in terms
of of limiting the differential
between small breweries and
wineries and I guess you might
call national.
I drugs
what's the rationale there.
Mr chair and Representative
Chandler the reason is because
alcohol has the same.
Excuse me effect on people where
we still have the same amount of
debts and.
Excuse me.
It to have it where people.
Contribution.
Okay.
Thank.
The the effects of the alcohol
on a person is the same whether
it's from the craft brewer your
friend you know major producer
thank you.
And so eight the brewers have
had over the years you know the
lower again sometimes it's less
than a penny of what the local
brewers and wineries are paying
so we want to make sure that you
know is critical and that the
contribution is the state and
twenty five cents to drink isn't
seeing many people as being
something that you know isn't
affordable and if that.
We have that we are people who
are excessive drinkers
With the twenty five cents a
drink will only see those with
an income of less than twenty
five thousand would only see a
fifty four dollars four cents a
year increase in their costs and
these are people who drink a lot
those with the twenty five to
forty nine thousand income would
see an increase of only forty
seven dollars.
And those with fifty in seven up
to seventy four fifty dollars
and those who drink with them
income of over seventy five
thousand we only see a sixty two
dollars and seventy two cents
increase.
Mr chair and representative
that's based on what you think
it's average drinking capacity
or whatever have it search and
try to understand how you get
numbers like that because we
know some people are at the
extreme possibly and some are
are not very modest drinkers
either excessive drinkers okay
which would include having okay.
Okay to
you will not agree that that we
have a very DC aunt.
Winery the effort and Rory
effort.
And that this would affect them
much differently than on.
National brands you know but
wiser and all those colors that
are multi national companies.
Hello.
Mr chair I'm sorry your.
I presented Taylor
ordered to bring like I was
saying in the income levels
isn't showing a drastic increase
for people who normally just go
and don't drink excessively so
they wouldn't even probably
notice.
Okay
Well just a my reaction on a
couple of these things I think.
Some increase might be warranted
but I'm concerned about.
I we could just talk about the
five hundred percent that some
people think or your three
hundred percent that you all
think they're still extremely
high numbers even on your
account.
And you know I think that kind
of a jump at this point is.
Too much I'm willing to I would
be willing to consider something
more.
Not just and would love to hear
about the proposal that is along
those lines I agree that we
should look at earmarking more
of the funds to prevent cell on
and I think that's a good part
of your proposal I am very
concerned about the small
breweries and wineries there was
a reason why those differentials
were created and it really
wasn't that long ago I think we
just passed that alcohol level
two years ago so I have you know
I think it's premature to be
pursuing L. equity between the
longest companies and little
companies because I think it
will have an effect on on
people's choices I think people
will start to be buying lower
cost alcohol frankly if they
start seeing a price that's what
happens when we were in the
recession people are buying
generic cereal not you know the
catalogs or whatever you know
that's what happens you just you
downgrade your purchases and and
site I don't see it as a one for
one in terms of
dissuading people from excessive
drinking and my last point is
and this isn't directed at you
guys but I'm really happy to
hear the business community
point out it's a regressive tax.
Good to know because it's
important I'm assuming you all
agree that progressive taxes are
good the inverse so look forward
to hearing your input what we're
talking progressive taxation
thank you very much.
Yes Representative you are
respond yes please.
This is not a regressive tax
because all of the funding will
go into
funds for the different programs
and those who are in the lower
income will receive the most
impact from those services being
provided so we go to two hundred
million dollars going into the
different the programs will not
only not seat decrease in jobs
we will see an increase of
almost three thousand jobs plus
six hundred sixteen your help
here so state it is really a
progressive tax and the only
reason it's such a high
percentage is because of the low
amount that it is now it will
only be increasing from what now
is the current price drink of
the dollar eighty six to two oh
seven per drink.
So it's not that great of an
increase at eleven percent and
the last city at the
Having it so that it does its
research base that you the rise
in in taxes reduces consumption
and that's what we need to do
besides get the funding into the
programs that will help save
lives thank you let's go to
representative about the.
Thank you.
You Mr chair thank you
Representative for rain for this
bill I really mean that I think
it's we have been discussing the
impact of all the whole in our
state in particular for a long
time and what I have is it's
just a comment and I think in
general I I tend to lean towards
where Representative chair at
Chandler chairman Taylor M. S.
as it's going but I do just want
to say I was looking into these
numbers and over the summer I
know a lot of us were these
conversations
and just looking at the price
elasticity of consumption and
price elasticity on restaurants
and the impact of this I want
this to be the solution I wanna
be able to raise this tax and
not have to think and put it
towards exactly what you're
saying exactly how you're saying
it and to see that decrease
happen because they are so
tightly tied between drinking
and and and the tax together
however on restaurants they will
see that happen directly because
as soon as prices go up a dollar
and you look at the like the
elasticity online over numerous
sources added they they just get
hit pretty hard by that as
recovery happens that's a piece
of that and it's and the reason
that and I want to say that but
also to be clear.
We have a significant issue
attacked and one piece of this
solution is raising.
At some of the consumer will be
affected by that I had knowledge
that fully.
The summers of looking at this I
asked Alan LCS to you include
some of their thoughts as well a
lot of what they came to words
seven recommendations and really
comes out to a package drinking
which I think you are talking
about your you will responding
in that which I think is
relevant we get to to respond on
this issue thank you want to
make sure that we're looking a
lot of other pieces about what
people are accessing all call
and all elements of that but I
need to do think we need to we
need to start this conversation
somewhere and I think this is
that starting point so I thank
you for that but because of just
looking at how the numbers
actually will affect.
The behavior of individuals in
our state just surely by how
connected prices to behavior
popping to me looking at the
twenty five cent increase I
understand because we want to
reduce reduce consumption that
you're talking about you have to
raise about high because of
because it has such a the impact
is so.
It's not as tied to prices I
want to so thank you I would
respond to the drinking and
anything else you want to say
thank you really appreciate you
giving us a place to talk about.
Representative let's move that
to present this.
Thank you chairman thank you
Representative drive Senator to
issue this morning.
I'm.
My comments very brief I just
want to start off by saying
thank you for bringing this bill
forward are actually a few parts
of it that I like
and I'll just say that
You know I have never had a drop
of alcohol in my life I've never
smoked a cigarette lever to
tobacco and I never will.
and and when you look at the
effects of the different drugs
that we have in society and and
the impact they have on families
and individuals.
By far away alcohol is the
greatest one more than federal.
So I get it
And and I respect you for
bringing this bill forward I do
like the start of new fund
I think that's something that we
can we can talk about.
I.
But I do think there are.
Two issues here that just want
to bring up the first is looking
at the data and talk about you
just to see.
Mr.
so this is a handout which
received.
The bottom of page two.
References some studies that
talk about.
Increasing out all prices and
their effect on consumption.
Yes your there's a.
The guy that says.
We're gonna estimates ten
percent increase in the price of
beer please to a five percent
decrease in consumption.
When you look at the a couple
senator another study says
roughly the same thing a ten
percent increase in price least
about a four point six drop in
beer consumption.
Okay that depends on where
you're looking at the current.
Right if we just took this one
data point register the mass
here if we wanted to eliminate
your consumption of one hundred
percent.
Then the simple math your says
we are we need to do is increase
the cost by two hundred
seventeen percent using the the
worst case or four point six
percent drop in consumption.
So I guess my first question
chairman and Representative
drive is is that true if we were
to increase the cost of your by
to a seventy percent we a
limited consumption in New
Mexico.
you madam.
Mr stating seven Representative
so we are the data is presented
here by the community guide was
reviving viewed by an
independent third party reports
to the CDC so they used a number
of different studies in
different communities there are
all sorts of communities across
the nation increase throughout
the whole tax and then looked at
how much the increase was and
then how much this on a decrease
in consumption and so I think I
like the word that you said was
curve right so we have well I
would love to have a crystal
ball to be able to tell you this
is exactly what what happened I
don't and so what we do is we
look at other committees that
have increased their tax to see
how much how much was the tax
increase and how much was the
decrease in consumption and then
how much was the decreasing harm
so what we have found more
reliably is that in almost every
community has increased their
tax that the more they've
increased their tax bill more of
a decrease in consumption a
sophomore in decreasing cart
especially in chronic liver
disease which is something that
is a particular particularly
large problem in New Mexico.
So to your question of whether
we.
Went up to you know.
Thousands and thousands and
thousands of percent would we
cease with the similar dips and
consumption I don't know there
it has are you know I think that
we are we we just have to sort
of these information that we
provide to you as the that like
the most honest and forthright
information as possible based on
what other communities.
So it's no so to answer
questions no community has
eliminated beer consumption to
this day.
And this Mr chair and
representative harbor it's not
so much that we're raising the
tax by three hundred ninety
percent but we're raising the
price from a dollar eighty six
hundred year two two of seven
which is an eleven percent
increase and so we would see
elasticity and.
I.
Five percent yeah so so chairman
and doctor and Representative
yes I I understand that point
completely but my point is when
you take the results of this the
studies.
They don't show you the entire
Kirk releases not presented to
us what we're seeing is yes as
you increase the price you
decrease consumption and so it
looks something more like this.
We actually region Assam attempt
for it doesn't really matter.
What the prices people are still
gonna find and consume Act you
don't have a one year line.
It's a curse depending on where
you look at that careers
particularly different slope
which is what is here these are
slopes right and that's that's
really my point and and we do
know.
That this looks like that
because Washington just increase
the taxes on their spirits to
something like three five
dollars it's a huge out water I
guess what people in Washington
didn't stop consuming spirits
they drive across the border or
they purchase them online right
so but the point I'm trying to
make here is.
We have to be careful when we
look at where we're at with her
right you reach a certain point
and you're not gonna start
making a difference.
And and I believe that's about
where we're at in New Mexico.
Because you look at where we're
at in our taxes we are fifteen
ties to nation on beer.
Our fourth highest in the nation
on wind R. six our nation on
spirits.
And so.
I guess my my first point is.
I think we're all for the curve
we're not gonna start making a
big difference in consumption
behavior we're gonna start
driving behavior as to where
they go to get the alcohol.
Adventure novel plus for your
response thank you Mr chair and
representative Harper
studies have shown that people
don't go to other states if they
do we have very few.
Small population on the borders
and also the consumption
decreased for beer would be five
point six for one two point
three and four distilled spirits
nine point nine four so the
overall average of seven percent
reduced consumption.
And we've lost the effectiveness
even though we might be in the
middle of other states other
states are looking such as
Washington to raise their we
need to be doing the same thing
and we need to save lives we
need to
Make it so that we aren't
harming that breweries and
wineries because it's only a
quarter during but it does help
consumers with just that
difference of a dollar eighty
six to two of seven or four one
nine five dollars to five twenty
two and took by twenty five.
And for I shot is only a dollar
forty two price and it would
only go up to a dollar sixty
but.
Having that small increase will
reduce consumption it will give
us the funding we need to put
into
more health care more other
types of jobs prevention
and also it will make sure that
we are saving the lives we need
to and also reducing
consumption.
And making it so that people
will
be healthier and doesn't cost
our country our state one point
eight billion dollars a year of
peace on people who don't even
drink alcohol which is half
percent cap of our.
Adults.
So so Chairman representative
thank you for that and
you know all all finish up your
quickly I know your hearts in
the right place I just
respectfully disagree that this
tax will actually.
Decrease consumption by even
seven percent what I think is to
do is change behavior finish
with this last point
it was looking at the those of
the alcohol the the billion
dollars that you've talked about
that this costs the state the
families are destroyed.
We're talking about is making it
more challenging to obtain by
raising the price.
Well this country is forty tried
to by making it completely the
legal.
it's pretty hard to obtain it if
you've made it completely
illegal.
What we saw.
Was that alcohol consumption may
be decreased among the law by a
citizens but what happened was
we had a huge criminal element
spur and and start and it was so
bad in fact that Congress met
and repealed the abolition.
And I'm just thinking about
young people were mentioned here
and binge drinking right young
people are legally not allowed
to buy alcohol.
Binge drinking does not incur in
our micro breweries right these
kids are getting this bill
legally.
And they're participating is
acting as a legally.
And if we make it that much more
expensive to obtain I mean it's
in Arizona has a sixteen.
Cent tax taxes as a twenty cent
tax because eight percent tax on
ours right now is forty one.
If we increase that by five
hundred percent.
I mean it's not too hard to
think that some option occuring
gentleman or the lady is going
to cross the border and pick up
a truckload of pure the
consulate to the jets
so I I just I see a better
approach is to start this fund.
And start diverting excess tax
going to the general fund into
this fund and start working on.
Making it not cool to venture
that is what really work with
cigarettes we made it not cool
to smoke.
And so I know your hearts in the
right place
Representative chairman but
those are my thoughts thank you
Mr.
By the Canadian that we have up
another bill after this that's
your bills so
is this and then also.
Alright and if we want to get
your bills we will be for the
picture at and to those of
questions and comments of
quickly so that's that's going
to you the process to this and
what's going on the line here I
will keep my Mr chair I will
keep it shorter.
Mr chair and
Representative I I really do
appreciate the idea of creating
an alcohol arms litigation fund
we all know what including in my
own family the alcohol.
Problems that we have in our
state my question mark my first
question is why is why
Did you guys think of taking the
current excise taxes and
creating the funding for.
Taking some of the surplus that
we have currently and and start
fund instead of putting it on
the backs of the the local
brewers.
Sure.
Thank you Mr chair of thank you
Representative Hernandez
The the Legislative Health and
Human Services the interim
committee talked about this a
lot and in fact you will see
another bill brought by Senator
Ortiz the penal that is going to
divert funds I don't think he's
created like this that play like
this so there are several
approaches this approach was
most attractive to us because of
its impact on behavior it is
documented in impact on
behaviour also I believe it was
stated that it costs the state
and we're just talking the
absolute class of the state two
dollars and fifty cents to track
and so twenty five cents to
drink
seems important because it would
likely affect behavior because
you kept the you don't have a
crystal ball it is very likely
affect behavior and it would
create this I transformative
Fund that that would go toward
the harms of alcohol which is so
devastating in our state.
Mr chair
Okay I have more questions about
that but I can provide you guys
after this.
So okay I want to direct you to
the bill on each for.
Lines twenty through K. five
eight six
You get the bills completely
strikes out spirits liquors
manufactured by craft distillers
all.
Summarizes for time it covers
canton premixed cocktails
which are becoming.
Existing in the bars are used to
run bars and restaurants we used
these
it's a big thing that for based
on space support based on over a
place that about over pouring
issues in the past the bodies
premade or canned cocktails and
that's how the services that you
can't over service someone's but
by taking this completely out we
have several places here in New
Mexico that we actually just
gave legal funds to like the
little toad creek
in Silver City and rolling still
inTaos that that we just get rid
of funds to to create these or
to build out these manufacturing
plants to do this pre mixed or
canned cocktails by taking this
out actually talked with them
and their estimates are that
it's going to take their current
six pack cost of canned
cocktails from eleven dollars
and ninety nine cents.
On the store shelf to twenty
dollars and eighty three cents
per because you're charging
because you're you're you've
taken it just come Pleasley out
it has a huge increase what
they're estimating seventy four
percent instead of the twenty
five cents because it's just no
longer in here and there do it
it's now being.
See if.
Out
Okay so it's going to be
handled.
As craft spirit for one and a
half ounces per so that's a
whole slew of amount of the six
packs what's gonna actually go
quite a bit
It's just I don't need a
response you guys don't want to
but that's that to me is if
we're giving me the funds to a
business to create something
that over taxing it and making
it.
No longer competitive to do that
here that.
It that bothers me I mean the
increase is one thing but just
taking it completely out have
such a increases is a different
thing.
Mr chair and representative
Hernandez appear is only going
to be charged twenty five cents
this is not appear this is
spurious liquor is like a
premixed Margarita let's say
with a spirits liquor can't so
it's a twelve ounce can sense as
this one has spirits liquors in
at.
yet so it's the.
The way that it says it is
Up to ten percent A. B. V..
Which is what the most of these
and then anything over.
Is how it is currently in
statute Mr chair and
representative Hernandez it
would most likely just tap one
and a half shots of distilled
spirits in it the whole key and
would not be charged correct so
it would still be just a quarter
of.
If it's one shot if it's two
shots you know or three well
we're also talking about.
Something this size its pre mix
that you can then pour into
a Cup in a restaurant
this is definitely not gonna
have one and a half ounces of
spirits liquor in it so that's
just going to the tax on that is
going to keep getting bigger and
bigger
which is and will become a lot
and.
And that's Mr Chairman
representative that would be a
lot of alcohol in act three one
person during that that would be
likely equal to a whole six.
Now we just want this something
I would like to talk with you
guys if this gets out this
committee
at all one one more question to
keep for time's sake
If we raise rates on alcohol to
such an extreme level.
Is is there any data this is
more for your expert is there
more any data that.
Heavy users who are looking for
that fixed and have that that
disease will go and try to find
something like.
Cannabis or harder drugs or
something to that effect that
would be cheaper
to get that fixes there any data
that shows that they'll leave
alcohol because it's such a high
price and go to something much
worse for their.
Mr chair and representative no
but we have seen young people
go from here to.
Distilled spirits because they
were taxed at the applicable and
so they would drink cheaper
vodka things like that so we
don't want to see that but
alcohol is alcohol related
deaths are more than all the
other drug related
Causes put together.
And we're over twice the
national happen I know that part
of like we yeah like I said I
have the I have alcoholism in my
family and I know what this does
to families but I'm really
worried about you know our craft
distillers to provide thousands
of jobs throughout the country
are facing are barely making it
out for comment facing record
inflation these are the guys are
worried about I agree with you
that we need to do something
this because this is a this is I
mean it's.
It's awful to see how many
families effects in our state
I'm just not sure that this is
the key so thank you for that Mr
chair representative the chair
got that this move on page.
Thank you Mr
is everybody probably in this
room knows or well known a
minute I have no love for all
calls.
But I have less love for taxes.
I also represent one of the two
counties with serious problems
in this state.
and efforts to make any manager
that forty five percent that
drops down to twelve percent of
the he asked me the question how
my gonna make up that from my
local D. W. I. programs so that
Representative Senator do you
have any Mr chair and
representative Duncan there is
not going to be a decrease in
the D. W. I. programs we lowered
the percentage because the two
hundred billion will give them
even more money to use for their
local programs plus that they
can be augmented by other
prevention of programs and
treatment programs in their
community thank you Mr chairman
with that come out of the two
hundred or the hundred seventy
eight million that sign that it
will come out access that yes of
the total two hundred million
because we won't be putting
money back into the general fund
but there is funding that isn't
expended each year.
The fund will not grow.
It will just go back into the
general fund and then it will.
In you that next year with the
about the two hundred thank you
for that I appreciate that.
Our system to to stick show in
our part of the county that
we're making and cross state
will be germane issue right off
the bat.
That happens right now and it
will happen.
Again when this if this bill
goes into effect.
That some of the concerns I have
with that
then the last question I would
ask you is.
Mr chairman and representative
Senator will we see a bill next
year on big macs.
The reason I ask you that is
because big Max pro.
Jose probably as big or bigger
problem that the alcohol
industry does for health
problems State.
So and and that's not the sort
of question I just I just wonder
how far we go down this line to
tax those things and where are
the responsibilities of people
in this in this so thank you Mr
chairman Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Some of the other troops
provided a all.
Mr Chairman representative
appears there were.
Reference to your seventy eight
stood.
Effectiveness of increasing
alcohol taxes for reducing
consumption only thirty eight
close.
You've been reported.
Elasticities so less than half
of those studies.
A request for each.
Any impact at all from rising
price and I can see from.
Data points here that we're.
The top ten their top choice
for.
All wine and spirits one and
yes.
We have this horrible problem.
So sure we're.
We have our lost the causation
courting correlation.
The twenty.
Price.
The problems with alcohol.
Joel address that concern.
Mr chair referred to doctor to
meeting is extensive studies.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative Scott I know you
guys are any items on it I just
make sure that can you pointing
to exactly what it is that
you're concerned about your.
All the rate.
Okay.
Change where she.
And
when what was it that you were
concerned about.
Between Mr Chairman and that's
what I'm concerned.
That is not sufficient
correlation.
Because.
Us to believe that the price
increases would have a
significant effect on
consumption because forty of
these studies couldn't find up
the last is the.
Thank you avid avid chair and
representative I I'm glad that I
can explain that for you the the
actually all phones decreases it
was just only thirty reported
elasticities so there's
you know we all I think
scientists are much like all of
us and that there you know we
have different things that we
like to report peepers and some
people will require what we call
as an elasticity which is if you
increase the price of our call
this much used to this much of a
discussion of a decrease and
some don't however as reviewing
this the seventy eight studies
at the almost all studies have
found a decrease of for example
there was a Alaska has had
similar issues with alcohol
related harms they have raised
their tax multiple times in the
in at the I believe I'm I looked
up there your taxes currently a
dollars and seven cents and so
they've documented
So one of their just one of the
many many many papers that have
come out showing that this
decreases Harmon decreases
consumption.
In Alaska they did not funds
that there was a significant
increasing and again they have a
very similar kind of world
demographic that we do a lot of
border towns and they found that
there was a consistent decreases
and harm region from eleven
percent to twenty nine percent
reductions in deaths because we
all the whole related disease.
I hope that that clarifies.
You Mr chairman.
Right down through this just a
little farther into the program
it would appear as though.
The percentage increases are
proposed.
This legislation and they are.
Factor in the thousands of
percent in some cases would be
enough to draw attention to the
local to see.
Is that.
One of the.
Mr chair and Representative
Scott no consumption expected is
ten percent nine point ninety
percent decrease in alcohol
consumption and
We would save fifty two lives
prevent three hundred six I want
access after that twelve
thousand three hundred seventy
six cases of alcohol dependence
or abuse and our and our state
it's not going to reduce
consumption to zero we wish but
we don't want to do that we have
an industry that wants to
survive we want people who are
moderate drinkers to be able to
enjoy we want people to come in
as tourists to be able to enjoy
you know when they go to the
restaurants or buying at the
store we.
We see this as something that
will help reduce violence in our
state domestic violence you
know.
Gun safety you know violence
with guns you know all the
things that alcohol is part of
the and
I.
Yes domestic violence is one of
the top two sexual assaults so
this.
Moderate reduction in
consumption will make a big
difference also providing the
funds for the prevention and
treatment and especially for
under eight under H. binge
drinking is because they have to
pay so much more to get someone
to buy it for them your having
this effect in.
Increased amount will make it so
that users are less likely to
start and the sooner dating well
the leader they start drinking
towards being twenty one the
less likely alcohol will be a
problem in their life.
Mr Chairman representative so
what we're doing here this.
Analizan that act she.
A true please.
That provision towards programs.
Would be a more effective
approach thank you Mr
Representative but.
Thank you Mr chairman
Many of us have addicts in our
family especially in New Mexico
and I and I'm having to first of
all having trouble seeing Mr
chair the correlation between
reduction.
The increase in price and
reduction in use I'm having I'm
really having a hard time seeing
now and I've gone back to your
information so I need to have
that.
A lot more
establish and I heard you talk
about Alaska but you know
Alaska is a long way from New
Mexico
so that's one issue
secondly I would like I am very
concerned about penalizing
addicts.
People who have addiction
problems especially off hall
addiction.
I have dealt with addicts in and
my family and friends who Mr
chair and representative that
It didn't matter how much the
liquor was they just have to
have.
And the more and longer they
have that addiction the moral
had to have because they
couldn't get a high because I
mean they would drink and drink
and drink and they couldn't get
that same high over time so they
had to consume more alcohol so
I'm concerned that we're instead
of up and I understand your fund
probably not as well as I'd like
to but I think that
you know we need to talk about
this addiction issue we have I
haven't heard a word about it
yet so Mister chair I mean
I am concerned that especially
people who are addicts are going
to find it they're going to go
out and get it and they will not
buy food they will but not by
the basic necessities in order
to buy a higher cost of liquor.
So are we really dealing with
this issue.
You know I mean.
I'm only hearing about the
people that are going to
restaurants and people who are
are I'm talking about the people
who are out there on the street
and who are coming home to their
families and you know they're
stealing for their they're going
without heating or they're going
without basic health care
because we are not and I say we.
State is not providing the
addiction treatments that they
need in order to get the help
that they need.
And I don't know about you all
but I have Mr chair and I have
taken people to get help Matt in
Albuquerque more than once I've
taken on to the emergency room
more than once and and you know
I'm so I'm having a really hard
time seen that we're not
penalizing addicts in order to
You know how do we deal with
this and I'm and I appreciate
that you guys brought this up
because it thanks for the
conversation
but.
You know I just I just need to I
need to see these correlations
and right now I'm not seeing it.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
chair we have our expert just
briefly.
Hi to that but thank you Mr
chairman and Representative I'm
I'm so sorry to hear about your
family struggles that I think
all of us but definitely sees
very similar struggles I think a
really important part that
you're right we didn't present
here we presented to the interim
Health Human Services interim
committee was so we we did
actually a study here in New
Mexico and then it gets funded
national study that was that New
Mexico I would between six and
CDC and both on the same thing
that among it's a little bit
different than for example top
tobacco all the whole if we look
at people who excessively drink
ninety percent of them do not
exhibit any symptoms of alcohol
use disorders so when we talk
about sort of binge drinkers
heavy drinkers would be paying
you know sort of larger amounts
of the tax compared to non
excessive drinkers ninety
percent of those folks are not
do not meet any of the criteria
for a whole use disorder I have
for the ten percent who do meet
the criteria for a whole use
disorder you're actually correct
all the whole taxes are
incredibly very very effective
our public health strategy for
that ninety percent it's that of
excessive drinkers however for
that ten percent hesitant to
need interventions that are much
much more into the need
inpatient treatment they need
medications they need therapy
those things are very costly and
one of the sort of one two punch
things the public health
officials have found throughout
the nation is that alcohol taxes
are very effective in decreasing
consumption harm among those
ninety percent of excessive
drinkers who are not dependent
on alcohol but then it generates
revenue that can be used for
these metro costly interventions
like inpatient care very
intensive therapy medication for
the folks who you're correct are
are you know we turned hand
sanitizer to to other forms of
of alcohol that you know our
dinners and a different one Mr
chair yes please and I am going
to get a little bit further to
this realized only have ten
minutes but I want I.
I think this is an issue that
bags you know I have seen people
drink mouthwash I have seen
people do very extreme things
like drink alcohol rubbing
alcohol
and you know this is an issue
that
you know and I I don't know
exactly the fund.
Chair of the what are the
increments that you're.
Using in that fund but I mean I
think that this is an issue that
the state definitely need to
look at in terms of
providing the services I mean
providing addiction services I
think it's it really needs to go
a lot deeper and I have I have
had the pleasure and the
privilege of working an active
Bernalillo county working with
maps working with the county
working with these turquoise
lodge the services
But I'm thinking about places
like the nasco and places like
the you know Mescalero and
places like that we're people
like that who are within the
group that you said ten percent
I probably beg to differ that is
higher than that because we're
also need dealing with drug
addiction
And it usually there's dual
diagnosis in these issues you
know other people that have.
Their addictions have brought on
a lot more issues
but they don't have the access
to travel hundred miles to
Albuquerque to gain the the
access for these programs and so
Question that comes in with a
lot of that up or maybe another
health related issue
Mr chair I thought I'm gonna say
this because it's important of
people who have failing health
and use this as a
as a way of sort of met self
medicating so I mean this this
whole discussion is something
that needs to occur.
It's not as simple and I and I
respectfully you know respect
all of you
but it's not as simple as let's
raise the the right to decrease
the conception I mean we it it's
a very complicated issue Mr
chair thank you for that time
and thank you for doing Mr chair
just real quickly you know at
that point I mean.
Really.
As we're at this point and so
this bill will take the last but
the next bill will have to do
all that we can respect the
people's time hearing about four
that for the business but
I have a couple of those and one
of them the consequences
committee.
And then all the allow you to
have a final word but in your
presentation I have checked up
on a few key words that you
would mention a lot it's only
it's only twenty five seconds.
I understand that and and I
respect that and then we just
say also that I respect each of
you because your heart is the
right place I respect each of
you because all of you care
enough to bring this whole piece
of legislation and the taps and
the hopes of changing a behavior
that plagues our state our
society and it's unfortunate.
And I come from a community and
I are not just try to stay we as
much as possible my comments
from the help portion because
you already you could that we've
done that you succeeded that.
We're gonna talk a little bit
more about about the taxation
the the fiscal impacts of it all
but when when when I heard
the discussion in regards to.
What Representative Harper
talked about during the changing
behaviors it'll change behaviors
by way of which people that
begin to acquire alcohol whether
that's going out of state
whether that's going online.
And I thought of that maybe
wonder.
In regards to the people that
are within my district and
specifically in this case the
Navajo Nation that has banned
alcohol sales alcohol on the
reservation correct.
And and when I think of them.
And and and still the the way
that they are plagued by this
problem about the whole is and
then you look at.
And if you look at society and
and the state types out there
about maybe of American and
alcoholism the almost go hand in
hand unfortunately and I hate
that that statement that that my
people live under and it's
unfortunate and and and there's
been ways of of tough love tied
to.
Reverse that that cycle of
alcoholism and whether it was
the tough love of that's been up
on the reservation or just the
tough love of that's that that
send we have orders of tough
love do something like this I
think of of your tough love
measure that's the the imposing
of additional tax on this and
what that really means.
And when I thought of it more
and and and we we can agree to
disagree with the debate about
it.
Publicly or or in person one on
one but.
The people that it it almost
seems that this would affect
most are those on the
reservation on tribal lands that
don't have access to go.
There were other places to
acquire the alcohol because one
the isolated islands that that
that they don't have the
transportation of the means to
go to a place to purchase
cheaper alcohol so then that
forces the discussion up are
they drinking up also they did
consent as are they so that
those discussions further more
because of the discrepancies in
technology many tribal nations
don't have of internet and so
they they would be able to
acquire online either at the
acquired online with the Senate
do because most of our I don't
have peel boxes there or or
formal addresses and so it makes
me think that okay that they
they're likely going to hitch a
ride to the to the neighboring
town.
And and.
Don't go to the to to the to the
to the corner store that will
pick up the cheapest product
available and how do I know this
because my family has been
plagued by alcoholism as well
and I don't think there's
anybody in this room or on this
guy's today that can say that.
Their family hasn't been
impacted or they know somebody
that's been impacted by this by
this plate right and so they'll
go to the local corner store and
they'll select the cheapest
alcohol possible.
And is that worse for them I
don't know but it's cheaper for
them.
And if it's cheaper for them
they will buy more of it because
then they can speak the map in
that is a walking by more by get
this much and then it's cheaper
and then we'll go home and and
and to do what do we got to do
so.
You know it it's it's a it's a
discussion that is worth having
absolutely without a doubt is it
a discussion and a possible with
developing more in regards to
how do we affect assistance to
those that need that help
internally at the whole.
Absolutely is there a mechanism
in a vehicle within this body
within this within the state
that has the money already
available but maybe with the re
prioritization of how we can use
that money affected we should we
have that conversation Albers is
then having the discussion
publicly about raising taxes to
the point of what we already
have that money.
In our bank account so it it's
been a difficult discussion
because it brings up I think a
lot of emotions and and and and
so many people but it also
brings up the possibilities of
will this you.
Were brave enough to bring this
to this committee you are brave
enough to write this piece of
legislation and go do the work
and work in the trenches to be
at this point the data and so I
do not at all what do this.
Right were you pop but at this
point in time it's obviously
with a discussion worth having
and is there a mechanism that we
can all work together on
absolutely and if that mechanism
is working through the inner up
to the
Through the revenue
stabilization and policy.
But aspect of it all I will be I
will be first in line as they
you know as the chairperson of
that committee let's talk about
it or is it more of a discussion
of this to begin the tap those
those coppers that already have
this money available for that I
don't know what it looks like
that I'm going to have a
conversation with each of you
about that because it's that
important.
And so as as I.
As I and my comments all I can
say is that the practice of this
committee is that whenever
there's a fiscal impact any of
of any legislation on the
general fund or to the to the
taxes it's going to be to table
in this committee.
And and at that point because
this would have an impact on the
general fund that will follow
the same but I want again just
make those comments with the
state thank you thank you thank
you for your bravery for your
mindfulness to bring this to our
attention and not sweeping it
under the rug and hope that it's
going to go away because we know
that it won't and so I
appreciate you coming before
this committee this this morning
but if you have any final
comments we love to hear from
thank you Mr chair and can
committee members
this I wish our other sponsors
Representative wanted Johnson
who has of of out Gallo that
they'll call policy group that
has been bringing this forward
along with other committees our
communities around the state
the importance of reducing
consumption by having this
twenty five cents a drink
charge.
That isn't even seen when you
know restaurants or breweries
you know have an increase in a
product they sell like of.
Chips or anything else the
twenty five cents.
Will not deter people from
buying their products but it
will deter people especially
under age and especially heavy
drinkers to not consume as much
that loss of consumption.
Will make it so that we can use
the funds to get
more treatment and that things
needed besides a discussion I
would hope you all would be
brave enough to pass this and
put it in the on the net in this
tax bill.
Hi now is the time we have lots
of the general support it's been
it featured in Ted Alcorn in New
Mexico in depth it has generated
a lot of support around the
state by community groups and we
need to do something now now is
our chance to get this started
and to make these the difference
in people's lives.
I lost my knees two months ago
to alcohol related well there's
a lot of people in a young age
one in three deaths are in that
age group of eighteen to forty
nine our costs by alcohol we
need to do something now and we
need to all be great thank you
Mr chair you thank you for your
presentation morning is there a
motion by the committee.
The table that are non day is
the second part of this is about
the idea of this is that motion
saying that thank you for your
