Of townsend
madam vice chair
mr chairman
have ever
core getting down to business
our first presentation for a
house for senate bill eighty
eight yet to arrive so we will
move down to senate bill one
forty eight tax and the
administrative fees we have with
the senator I be sort though and
representing lane and your
expert so gentlemen and expert
lawyers was never ready
thank you mister chair good
morning committee
so cynical one forty eight six
to phase out
what is currently a three
percent fee that's assessed on
local governments for collection
and distribution of gross
receipts and compensating
jacksons the few costs are local
governments around fifty million
annually in that number is
expected to grow about to about
seventy million by FY twenty
eight.
And uniquely that figures
directly into the general fund.
It does not go to.
We believe that those few should
stay in the local governments
where they are being assessed
and so this bill seeks to fees
out those fees over three years
starting in fy twenty seven it
takes it down to two percent for
fy twenty eight it takes it down
to one percent and then it
repeals the fuse effective.
And again because these fees go
directly into the operator into
the journal find it doesn't
impact the operating budget.
And this bill passed the s.
Think mr members of the
committee so
see has been looking I think
it's correctly at a lately at
the ways in which the state
subsidizes local governments but
I think it's also fair to look
at the ways which local
governments been subsidising the
state and nineteen thirty seven
with their the big matter tax
cut one of things that we
realized also we didn't have
enough revenue is with recently
get more revenue of from local
governments and so what we did
was we assessed a three percent
fee this this three percent fee
on local government charities.
So what's happened since
nineteen seventy seven as a way
of subsidizing the state general
fund.
Is when people in a local
community are vote for
an airport.
That's what they voted for was
an airport in their community a
weekend three percent and put it
to stay turned.
When people look at community
vote for a zoo and that's what
they voted for was the zoo.
We can three percent put it to
the state channel
by the way I contrast.
When the honey treasurer collect
once.
And distributes funds.
At a property taxes they
distribute a hundred percent of
the funds
that's a job.
And so and so we think that's
exactly what should be happening
as well at the state level
we don't but at same time will
still want there to be as as
little and said we don't want
there to be a shock to the to
the system by doing so so we're
doing the face out.
Thank you very much.
And the mister
thank you mister chairman
members of the committee going
running my name is also nichols
with the leg and with the sorry
municipality thinking of the
sponsors for bringing this bill
as it is the sponsor said we
think that this money belongs to
the local communities that's
what voters are voting for
and some of these numbers are
large right alba pays about ten
million dollars and fees a year
center pay two point five
million but I think the the
bigger hitser are really to the
smaller communities the numbers
are relatively smaller but you
know and in many cases that's a
big chunk of money for them for
example last vegas paid two
hundred twenty thousand dollars
netflix twenty three that's
three percent of their general
fund grocery seats tax revenues
two hundred twenty thousand
dollars in las vegas higher
several police officers several
several firefighters so again we
think this money really blonds
well the communities and thank
you.
And you which you'll have a
church that tells you for your
that for each person's district
on this committee what the
impact is reached city and each
county in your district what the
impact is said you can see.
We could ever question arrives
then go to the audience those in
the room in favor of senate bill
eighty eight
one forty
ordered me as well for you and
if we could send her cell phones
please raise your hands on the
salary yesterday.
Lobbyists or eighty county
cities across better hobs as
leader lane
we support the one forty eight
these three defeats do not hurt
or directly in fact your des
operations they do directly
impact.
All of the communities of
southeast
for that recently worked force
in the building thank you thank
you coming up today on the
seller yes ma'am
good morning my name is john
thank you for coming out anyone
else in the room support for
senate bill one forty eight
anyone on my.
No one online anyone in
opposition of senator bill
anyone online.
There are being then it's come
the committee members
in a scott and mobile life.
Thank you mister chairman
senator
later playing.
Do we know what it actually
costs to stay to administrati.
The servant and.
At mister
representative.
There are class that the
that does have.
That are related to the problem
that they have to do every year
add to the gentex program
and
as a result of the tax package
that we do every year and and
and and how things get moved
around that in terms of local
governments i'd distributions
and they they distribute to over
two hundred different local
local governments
and there are some cost
associated however none of these
fees go to the so there's
there's no relationship between
these fees and the budget of of
the because these speeds all go
straight to the general fund.
Missed chairman said further
I thought this was an initial
slabeled and administrative fee
or cost to administrate
that apparently is not case
mister scott there have been a
couple of times
when we were in the appearance
whim we dedicated some of these
funds directly to trd.
However all these funds are how
to present these funds but it's
the general fund right now none
of these funds remain in the
tarity budget
and mister chairman senator de
effects of general phone can
stand that hit right now.
This chairman I represent of
scott
it might absorb
mr chairman senator I
could current last time thank
mister chairman that's all thank
you representatives god it's
going to represent duck
mister chair i'm going to put on
my mayors hat for just a second
I assume there's a cost with
this and I was wondering if I
might ask the sectory if that do
you know what the cost is to
administer
this.
Thank you mister chair and
representative dunkin I have
back at the envelope math that
i'll share with you but it's you
know we don't have to a portion
of share of our cost to this
because it doesn't stay with
that so we don't do that
exercise formally but if you
looked at tax and rev's current
operating budget and you took
out mvd which has nothing to do
with tax administration and you
took out property tax division
which also has nothing to do
everything you'd be left with is
about sixty five million per
year in the current year and
this fee currently is generating
about fifty million per year so
i'm in dollar for dollar we
distribute about forty percent
of great income tax to local
governments about sixty percent
to the state and elsewhere i'm
so in terms of dollars in our
budget the administrative fears
outside if you look at it in
terms of complexity of
distributions then the
administrative fears undersight
is the senator mentioned a
minute ago that
we distribute two hundred and
nine different distributions
from the grten comptax every
month and ninety four percent of
the distributions benefit locals
then that's just regular local
option that it's tax increment
development districts and soon
to be emeras and and a couple
other special districts so
depending on how you look at it
and in addition to the cost of
distributions that tax and rap
funds everything we do related
to collections I did legal
representation to defend the tax
code
you know tax evasion prosecution
all of that kind of stuff hits
all of her tax programs
including grt comp as well as
pits and everything else.
Think was turned and I have
sector so I mean is there did
you say it's five million
dollars to take to administer
this
mister terror and represent i've
done can no I I think it just
depends too much how you look at
it but you know if the roughly
sixty five million of tax
administration budget.
It I think it depends on what
metric you want to use if if you
took forty percent of that
that's the amount of the
guarantee revenue that goes to
locals that could be one way of
looking at it if you look at the
distribution complexity ninety
four percent of that although
i'm not advocating that that
should be considered the cost
but
you know we're we're basically
centrally administering the grt
and come taxes so that one
businesses don't have to fill
separate returns in every
location like they do and for
example colorado and then where
representing
an enforceing the tax code on
behalf of not just the state but
all local government so some
portion of that cost of the
benefits of the locals but it's
hard to say what percentage
thank you
sector and and that's what I was
trying to get out is you know
you you have a you have a budget
and you have people that are
going to be doing a number of
other things and and I do agree
with the senator on on this that
this is probably hit your
department can take and and so I
am all in favor of this uh just
simply for that fact it i'm a
small community and and you know
that that does help the small
community so the bigger cities
mean after may not fill it as
much but they certainly will
fill that much coming back in
what they're able to do with
that so thank you mister turn
and family thank you that's good
to represent the harper
thank you chairman
of senator secretary thank you.
Being here this morning so I
have a few questions.
So.
First what
what is the
purpose
why do we have.
A centralized
collection and distribution of
gross receives.
Chairman and representative
robert there's account missing
scale
there's simplicity.
There's a bright of different
different reasons to do it that
way it's as the same reason why
we have centralization property
tax through the county treasure.
Chairman and senator thank you
that's a great answer.
So so chairman and a say
representative are we proposing
that we have local governments
now assume this respo.
And represent her work were not
wasn't that at all and I do want
it and and that the secretary
and I were
just one would make sure that we
clarify something with
representative and where dunkin
which is that that these funds
don't go to the thirty budget so
it's not a hip to the trd budget
it's ahead of the general fund
which is a distinction and the
but likewise then as as we have
the centralization a property
taxes when the kind of treasure
distributes to fast the kind of
treasure does not.
So chairman and senator so I
appreciate her or not asking the
locals to take this one I think
there will be a complete
disaster and go contrary to the
streamlined sales
which we are members of.
Um but going back to your next.
Point
chairman senator does the
receive any funds.
The chairman and represent their
operational budget cuts for the
german.
So so chairman of senator how
much of their operating budget
comes from the general fund that
miss chairman representative of
the sixty eight million dollars
of their operational fund sixty
million d.
So so chairman and senator one
hundred percent of their budget
c.
For up mischairman and
representative harbor for text
administration.
So chairman and senator I don't
buy the argument that.
These funds are just
going into the easter I mean it
sounds to me like.
We can make a direct connection
between the general find and
these costs in the revenue are
going to the general site would
you disagree chairman.
The chairman and represent which
will repeat the question.
Certainly so chairman and
senator.
To me than a direct connection
between this three percent fee
going to the general find and
the general funds going to the
tax department to find their
administration.
Would you not agree mister man
reps in property but not
actually the the
the three percent it was set
in nineteen seventy seven with
no relationship at that time to
what the budget the the tax
administration budget was with
their d.
It is in fact your coincidence
today.
That there is any home nexus
between the amount of the three
percent overall with holding.
Right now.
The attacks ministry budget of
trd
those two have never been linked
I was chairman and represented
herper
and those two have never been
there's never been in the
attempt.
To pair those two either in
terms of the influence or the
alcohol.
So chairman in center I
agree or not
linked
in as an airmark and statue but
I disagree that the
not linked at all as the
apartment receives
essentially percent of its
budget for the administration
from the general finance
possible funds going to the
general sign.
Um I would much rather see.
Uhm a coupling
that airmark specifically go to
the department or a study to say
how much does it actually cost
and should we adjust this
percentage and your market.
Exactly to the the cost but
german I
every local government every
business in the state benefits
from the centralization of the
department
administering our gross receipts
tax and a.
In the secondary also mentioned
that every time they go to court
with regards to the finding our
gross recease tax
the locals also benefit from
that
so
i'm i'm having a hard time
understanding why well I guess
i've done that
I mean I understand the locals
want to keep more of their their
groceries tax revenue and the
status doing well right now
across the seas tax revenue but
this is a
substantial benefit that has
value.
And and I believe the local
should have some skinner
beginning.
For this value.
Um
chairman and reserve an senator.
When you were
planning to spell and putting it
together for this session was
there any discussion.
That benefit
and our assistance and why.
Instead of your marking and
looking at what it should be
we're just gonna remove it all
together the chairman and some
infected the first direct bill
was addressed that uh that i've
tried to pick it to the estimate
of actual cost
to the department but then we
realize that didn't make any
sense because the money was
going to the general it wasn't
staying in the apartment
was chairman and represented if
the money if the funds were
staying in the apartment
then picking up to the especial
actual cost would have made
sense.
I might also add was chairman
representative.
That when you say that the that
the local should have skilled
again.
Um.
I was asked myself the question
when we have that discussion is
difficult ask for this structure
or is this a structure that was
imposed upon.
When we went to the big mac tax
cut
we should be cut back the
ability of locals to have
profit.
In fact prior to the big mac tax
most of local government was
funded through public taxes.
It was the state mister chairman
and represented herper who made
the decision for the locks.
To curtail
taxes.
It was the state mr chairman
representative
the locals these soul ability
i've raised funds through to
your tea.
For most operations.
And so for the statement of
you and the game again you
number chose to play.
Again you never
we forced you to win
but now you have to contribute.
Candidly
chairman representative harper I
think that's all of it.
So chairman and senator
I think virtually everything to
said has no
no bearing at all on our current
conversation
chairman senator
I agree what happens properly
tax was a bad decision.
Um we are the only state at the
state level that has essentially
no property tax.
Right now the county governments
and unions to some extent are
the only benefactors of property
tax in the state.
And to see that skinner make
asking for skin and the game of
is offensive I think is a little
ridiculous.
I see if we ask any of the
unions right now if they would
like to administer the g r t
themselves and got a court
themselves when there's
AAA challenge.
I think all of them would say
will happily give up our three
percent not have to do that.
That's.
I think well we should have done
was.
The.
Probably what you considered in
the beginning which is that your
mark this revenue for the tax
department.
And to determine how much it
costs and if it only costs one
and a half percent instead of
three
make that change and I would be
told in support of this
legislation.
The.
What I see here is
uhm
not that at all but
looking at how can we.
Take advantage of a good money
situation and help the locals.
But then take away from the
value.
The good purpose of of the
centralised administration.
So for that reason mister
chairman I won't be sporting
this bill
in harbor let's move on then to
represent a borrell
thank you mister chairman
good morning senator senator
and cabinet.
I see this a little different
my colleague and uh I
respectfully see that see your
point as well
having served as the albert he
said he council president during
covered
you know it was a challenge to
balance our budget of a billion
dollars and we were able to do
that with federal money thank
god as only about two years ago
that I had that I was served in
that role and
you know
I guess my question on this mr
chair and senator and
representative is um these are
truly administrative fees that
basically the state has been
collecting from
property tax correct my correct.
Chairman and representative real
incorrect this is these are fees
that are collected on gross
receipts on gross receipts tax
okay so then that actually makes
my argument a little more
relevant
because as I think about it the
gross in and I bring covered up
occurs you know we had so many
businesses that went out of
business during that time and so
many businesses that were
struggling
and it was really it was really
very difficult for
municipalities and probably
counties as well to really meet
that bottom line in terms of
their budget and the reason that
I bring that up about coverage
is because I know that I think
this has been looked out for a
long time right mr chairman and
a representative of senator
from the time of filter genetic
I think he was cause I kind of
remember at one time going to a
conference and he he addressed
this issue it a cat conference
and it's been a while probably
five or six years
but I remember him bringing the
sub at that time and that was
err pre covered and you know the
reason that I bring that up is
because of the loss of revenues
to cities and counties and if
this is true a administrative
fee that the state is
collecting.
From gross receipts than
mister chairman and to my car
league it just seems to me like
this is money that that you know
businesses basically are.
Funding
and so technically this this
money and then remember mr
chairman and representatives
just a couple I think it was
last year the legislator also
raised the the minimum weight
and so businesses had to absorb
that as well and so we're you
know every year it seems like
we're putting more and more
sort of sort of the onus on
survival one i'm businesses and
and so to me it seems like
there's should be a way that.
You know we can refuse our
economy a little bit more and if
this is an opportunity for them
no mister chair I I think that
you know
a lot of a lot of municipalities
and governments have not
recovered from covered yet and
they're still trying to recover
and what I really like about
this mr chairman and and
representative is that you sort
of have a tear effect here on
the bill search visa two percent
twenty twenty seven FY twenty
seven percent fy twenty eight
and then repeals the effective
fees so you've actually thought
this through in terms of tearing
that in my correct in and that
assumption applies german and a
representative that is that it's
correct we weren't we're tearing
it down and and by the way I do
I do want to plan out that it's
it's actually a little bit worse
than what you were just
describing because think about
it as a as when you are
understood a council and I will
grow.
About currently would pond
money would take along
you with them you would both
against your team
so you'd have a grt that people
are paying to pay back to the
low but three percent of that
your tea the stake keeps taking
and putting in the state channel
you tax people to get a grt to
pay back alone but three percent
of that keeps getting taken put
in the state job
but that money wasn't but but
the purpose of that tax wasn't
for the state general fund it
was to pay back alone
right right and so absolutely
that's a
would be others this is a
you're you're correct so mister
chairman representative and
senator is my understanding that
albuquerque and i'm just going
to take alva kirky as an example
the the amount that alba cookie
would initially
nine million dollars and then it
starts hearing from there is out
about from my understanding this
is properly with german and
representative
for it last year for five twenty
three the admin fee was was nine
point nine million dollars
actually by the time this kicks
then it'll be over ten million
over ten million dollars a
battle that it will impact
by the time it faces full.
Err you know mister chairman in
in terms of kind of where we are
right now in terms of our budget
it seems to to me like this is
an appropriate time for us to
really help our small not just
our small but all of our
governments are this penalities
and our
counties earn for that reason mr
chairman I I just don't think
that a lot of these cities have
actually fully recovered from
covered and I think this is an
opportunity to help their
budgets so for that reason I
would be supporting
thank you representative that's
good to represent our towns.
And must have also endorsed this
unfortunately the executive
graduals called away yesterday
and was not able to be here this
morning but they have their
board has as well.
Chair.
Mister chairman representative
thousand to my knowledge it is a
unanimous vote about the
minister believe and.
Not only
everyone.
Yeah.
That's what we're here to do.
Mr chairman and representative
when this.
The state.
It was done in the way that did
not have a specific.
I mean typically whether.
When I feel as imposed by an
agency as for a specific purpose
and this wasn't first specific
purpose other than fuelling the
general fund is that it
mischairman and literatures are
out mister.
The.
Representative I understand my
colleagues.
Entities paying for the services
that they're p.
But I also understand that
condition of
not only the state that how this
was imposed in the past.
For me it's just perfect clean.
When everyone ever counties and
every one of our cities come to
us and ask yes who are we.
Thank you towns and let's go to
vice geramic dinner.
And mr chair members of the
committee has this.
Understanding that the delayed
implementation takes us into fy
twenty seven
how have you all proposed moving
this into HB two or the state's
general but.
Yeah been fed through the
appropriations committees
whereas the.
Mister chairman and and
restaurant this has been this
has been discussed are
throughout the interim other
representations about this to
the lfc
there has been there's been
this this did go through the the
senate finance committee.
Um before it came to the house
and so there's been there's been
lots of discussion on the on the
financial
of.
The fact that this this will be
coming in effect again there was
an early version of this that
that simply had a one year delay
the fact of date and and in
conversation with with the with
the finance people we actually
pushed about two years and then
tiered it down instead of simply
doing a one year and then
getting rid of it all together
precisely at doing that in
conversation in order to be able
to have it worked well with with
regards to the impact.
Committee so just to confirm and
clarify
that's the political strategy or
legislative strategy to walk
through the capacity question
over several years instead of
just happening one year from
now.
Mister and representative
that is that is the
that is both the legislative the
political as was the financial
strategy.
Although think.
Okay any other question to come
in for the
presenters.
Now what's the world the
committee.
Second s by representative towns
and second lives in borrow it's
called the rule please.
Representative brego yes
represent if casting on yes
representative channel
representative dunkin yes
percent of gagas
representative harper
representative hernandez.
Speaker martinez
representative or turns yes
representative scutt
representative serato
represent of townsend.
Man investor
yes mister chairman
yes.
If you can still hear me
in the one on these two percent
of bill one forty eight thank
you for your presentation
chairman members of the
committee thank you for the
discussion.
Okay let's move them back to
research two percent off eighty
eight electronic drivers license
credentials and see
representative or see when this.
Representative in your expert
whenever you're ready to floor
is yours.
Thank you members of commercial
sorry and running date this
morning but it was it would
break crazy
anywhere german
my experience to this secretary
of taxation room name and
director of the.
Anyway mister german and the
members of the committee and
hopefully the
interpretation enhancing the
chronic credentials act to all
other taxation and revenue
department to issue electronic
credential for driver's disease
and identification cards I will
drink my what was our questions.
In the office of your experts
mister chair and committee no
will stand for questions as well
very good thank you let's move
to the audience for those
support of the committee
substitute eighty eight anyone
support please raise your head
off.
Yes mister chair definite cheap.
Great thank you deputy chief
anywhere else in the in the room
in support anyone online no one
online anyone in opposition.
In the room.
Anyone online opposition no one
anyone on the committee
questioned the comments.
They're being questioned
yesterday reps
thank you mister representative
I did not know that you were the
it gay in the in the house I I
think this is common sense were
in the twenty first century and
and you are I have grey hair and
so I I was abrupt this through
because I don't know enough
about it but thank you for doing
it
representative hernandez thank
you mister charles I just want
to speak in support of this you
know apple rule th.
Super excited than it's been
picked up by what nine or ten
states now and
twenty six airports tsa all
everything you would ever need
a ninety four on a federal level
that
has picked this up I would love
to see new mexico pick this up
so hugely supportive
and yeah i'm glad that the old
guy picked it up
as they were now on
representative
representative thank you mister
chairman representative of the
chair
to whister left carrier plastic
drivers licenses for sound
circumstances
yes you do you have to do this
with this just a good you have
to have a driver's license with
you at all times and then all it
does secretary add on to that
yes mr chair and representative
scott their specific language in
this bill that if you're driving
a motor vehicle you still have
to carry with you your regular
plastic credential the concern
there and the reason that we
have support from law
enforcement in the room I
appreciate suit police is we
don't want in a traffic stop for
me to have to give my cell phone
and have the officer handle it
and we don't want for example an
unimposed error and unfortunate
mandate on law enforcement to
carry with them a scanner or any
in any way distract them from
keeping themselves in the public
safe so it's possible that in
the future technology will
change and you know that it
might be compossible but for now
we're keeping law enforcement
safe keeping the public safe by
saying when you drive a motor
vehicle you still carry your
plastic credential.
What what we're trying to do I
think is
the technology in the future
catching up to the whole quick
and we wouldn't want to be
prepared.
Down the road in case it has
come to that that we are
prepared we're not massing this
in the country will try and do
what everybody else is already
trying to do if I would leave me
to turn there's bobby eight days
to have done it already and I am
not for sure the number of I
think ten state ten more in the
process of doing it and we want
new mexico to be
in the bloop were when it does
happen
thank you mister chairman
representative in a conversation
this morning.
I appointed it would be hard for
me to get my phone in that.
Vacuum to to go to the bank.
When they ask or identification
cash check so I can appreciate
it there's still some issues
left required
physical court fatima mister
chairman is true thank you very
much they're downside.
Commission
representative does this mbd.
Identifications.
That.
Mr chair and representative
towns and yes no matter what
type of credential new mexican
has from it will be able to show
on your mobile device as that
type of credential so if you've
got a real id or a standard id
or just an identification card
for a minor maybe it whatever it
is it'll show up on your devices
that and there will also update
if it's been suspended or
reinstated anything like that
will happen in real time.
Thank you for that.
The.
Does this at that information.
Has not.
Mister sharing representative
towns and no the same laws that
currently apply to personal
identifying information pie for
mbd will still apply.
Thank you represent towns anyone
else question the comments of
the commitment representative
mr chairman
representative my neighbor is it
true that you're related to bill
gates
i'm sorry
is it true that your related to
bill gates.
Mr chairman representative thank
you for bringing this forward
you know in sort of are in term
committees one of the things
that I that I saw and I was kind
of appalled to mister chairman
and representative was
when the department I think it
was a department of corrections
was
was presenting to us one of the
things that I saw as that they
still have
file folders that are
you know manual
and having worked to the state a
few years ago I was just I was
just taken that some of our
departments have not been sort
of come into the the new century
I guess and so I I really see
this as as a really positive
thing for the state in terms of
coming into the new century
and i'm sorry that's my phone
but anyway thank you for
bringing this forward mister
chairman representative thank
you represent this go anyone
else in the committee if not
whether the pledge of the
committee
do pass my representative ego
second by represent dunkin
any opposition to a due pass
motion which has two percent of
bill eighty eight
seeing none you have a due pass
on your committee substitute
percentage of eighty eight thank
you for making out this morning
thank you mister apologize for
running it this morning you know
just an inconvenience to her but
no worries thank you and thank
you secretary and thank you to
your expert let's move on there
let's move on to senate bill two
thirty six metro development
project grt increments that are
to hambling and represent bottom
whenever you are ready
to put a horn in the new expert
the floor is yours.
Thank you mister chair and
members of the committee today
we are here to present senate
bill to thirty six which is
a fixed to senate bill fifty one
that was passed last year as
senate bill fifty one
essentially allowed metropolitan
two fifty one sorry essentially
allowed metropolitan
redevelopment areas to use and
access tax increment financing
as specifically to access state
dollars when doing their tax
increment financing err and so
this year's bill does for things
just to keep it brief one is it
cleanse up the language in
determining what the base
revenue tax rate from the
metropolitan redevelopment area
is a two it allows tax and
revenue to create a special
location code for that
metropolitan redevelopment area.
Three it helps in the
clarification of the
distribution of where the
funding goes and in according to
with tax and revenue and the
metropolitan redevelopment area
and finally it moves the start
date back from this year january
this year in july two january
first of twenty twenty five
mister chair members of the
committee i'm here supporting
this bill because I worked with
the city of albuquerque for
several years and had a front
row seat are to see how our
metropolitan redevelopment
agency was working to solve
housing and homelessness are
specifically this year or
metropolitan redevelopment
agency is set to build three
hundred and twenty three units
of housing and so adding this
war with the state funding
dollars adding these
clarifications will really help
insolving our homelessness
crisis which in the city of
albuquerque were missing thirty
thousand units so every amount
of housing that we can do helps
with that i'd also like to
introduce my expert learing her
ran from the city of last
crucials.
Thank you mister chairman
members of the committee larry
horand richard lobbish for city
of us cruises the representative
covered well just a couple of
points to make when you passed
cynical two fifty one last year
that just allowed gross receipts
tax increment financing for
metropolitan redevelopment areas
which included legislative
approval this doesn't change any
of that when tax and rev tried
to implement the legislation
primarily because of destination
sourcing we had to figure out a
different way to come up with
the gross receipt tax base rate
and so what it will do is create
a location code for a
metropolitan development area so
tax and rep complete data for a
year so they actually know how
much revenues generated in that
ink in that area and then going
forward if the the city count
your state dedicates gross
receipt tax increments for
metropolitan development area we
have actual good data and so we
did work with the secretary and
mark shaken we appreciate their
efforts on the legislation to
come up with a way to implement
it that actually works
out the question thank you
that's moved to the audience all
those in favor of said it built
two thirty six please raise your
hand okay start the salary is a
scott scandal and register
obvious heritage hotel in
resorts and albuquerque and
across the state we stand strong
sup.
These this program where the
salmon area specifically.
Appreciate the certain work.
Thank you on this terrible
support
it's on raise your handset
nobody I don't okay all right.
You had this were night up
anyone online nope he went in
opposition of senate bill to
thirty six in the room anyone
online okay can be members
questioned comments of their
towns and welcomed on the way.
Thank you.
Can you tell me do ever do you
have any idea of my I see the
senate oppo.
Mister chairman representative
thousand
last year the bill passed
unanimously in the senate and
passed the house with only one
opposing vote there was a
strange vote and it may have
been because
the spots are on the floor
indicated that that senator
brand had been a cosponsor last
year and so then it's once she
said that they got about mine
opposing boards so it was it was
one of those were not exactly
sure why who has where it came
from this build truly as a
technical clean up fix.
But really you know as a
freshman you need to really.
Thank you
thank you
towns and it's good
representative or does you
mister chair thank you
representative for bringing this
important clean up bill can you
tell me a little bit about how
TRD has been involved i.
Cleaning this up and and
clarifying what we need.
Thank you mister chairman
representative where there's so
tax and rev as they tried to
implement in the fall I am
started having conversations
with the city of our curtain
then we got brought in because
we'd worked on the legislation
last year and we sat down
attacks and rev went through the
all the issues of the bill
they proposed the language
because it's very technical
and trying to figure out i'm how
to do it and so they were
involved the whole time i'm gave
us the language that would work
the only thing that we really
have to kind of have back and
forth on was to make sure that
the reporting code location code
was the way to collect the data
so it was a collaborative effort
we appreciate their work and the
secretary in both secretary and
tax policy director their work
with us and the governor's
office helped for so.
Thank you mister thank you.
Representative and thank you to
your d for participating I know
it was complicated in something
that we just for disclosure this
was my bill last year wish it
were perfect last year but i'm
grateful for the perfection that
is coming our way in them well
close to provision it's really
important that we that the
communities that have an
american this
extra funding to do the
important work of.
Housing in.
It's good representative harbor
thank you chairman
of our home has good to see you
here
also going to see you
this is good
important legislation to miss
what we passed last three.
There are some things that we
did not
just foresee was regards the
implementation in the impact of
destination sourcing on that
such.
So i'm i'm very grateful
chairman representative to hear
that the department.
So
german representative
so this is specifically with
regard with reverse the match
political redevelopment code but
there are impacts and
tins with a tids
can you just speak to that
thank you mister chairman repson
of harper I think that's exactly
written we did have a brief
conversation on that was with
the department I think what
we'll see is probably in the
sixty day session we're going to
have to do the same thing for
for tax increment development
districts because you're going
to have the same problem trying
to figure out what is the base
and an incurrent law with the
tid you actually it's an
estimate now but I when you have
a location code going forward
with now actually know what the
actual basis because you'll have
a year's worth the data so I
think we're going to be back
there's a couple of things to
fix in the tide legislation so
probably beer of a fixed coming
and mister chairman members of
the committee there is a
difference between the
metropolitan red remote areas
and the tide
the tests the tax increment
financing can be used for in
both
but specifically as it pertains
to the
to the governance of the tide
versus the metropolitan
redevelopment area they're
different
yeah
chairman representative and
where you thank you for that
yeah III just bring that up for
for the very reason that you
mentioned that.
You know often we will have
legislation force for the tax
improvement development district
states.
Add its confusing and people you
know start you know what it what
is this all about are we giving
someone a sweet deal and just
wanted to tear up next year that
no these these are there's our
good tools there there's a
governance that a structure they
have to go through many steps of
approval.
Because of this change we're
making here
which I think is a good change
based off of destination
sourcing we have to look at that
again next year for tide so I
just wanted to make sure folks
were aware of that and we can
talk about doing
I think that is alternate thank
you thank you I was in arbor
let's go representative whatever
thank you mister chair
representative and your guest
and by the way I miss your dad
so I ran the redevelopment
office in alba kirky for about
eight years and so i'm i'm truly
glad that my colleague asked the
questions about the difference
between tids and health because
tids are generally districts and
and tif are generally projects
and so it's you know I don't see
the information and here that
would tell me like how much
money would be generated may be
over time for
the tip or a tiered
so I just wondered if that's
something and I guess you're
going to be bringing this back
next year mister chair to
clarify some of that
and I did see a map in here
which looks like it's pretty
inclusive of all of our
area are metropolitan
redevelopment areas but and you
know I just wonder like how much
money is are we actually talking
about over time does any ideas
mister chair and representative
because we don't have the
baseline calculation yet because
of the location code the data is
expected to be gathered over the
course of twelve months and will
have a better idea about that
the city balboa cricket there
metropolitan redevelopment
areas generate a ratio
investment of one to nine so one
coming in nine coming out
and a lot of if you want to add
anything to that.
Mr chairman representative this
legislation is just to clean up
the the enabling statute for the
format falcon development area
when are actually going to come
with with a project or specific
financing will have to bring a
separate bill to the legislature
will have to prove and that's
when you would see the actual
dollar.
And we'll follow up that mister
chairman and and representative
without be for the university
area probably the newly created
tile
possibly manager ripped in a
break or know that I was
separate that was an actual tid
you approved last year attacks
increment development district
this is for that separate tool
of metropolitan redevelopment
areas though that would be that
would be a separate project
thank you thank you mister chair
thank you representative canada.
By sterling
thank you mister money.
The.
Thank you to my colleague here
for inspiring me to speak of it
this morning at least for myself
I haven't felt confused about
where the tip policies are
landing but actually just.
Getting with questions about how
the governance actually works
and what kind of voice.
And so mister chair committee I
when I saw this piece of
legislation thank you for
checking in a couple of days ago
representative I did go back to
the legislation from twenty
twenty three and admittedly I I
don't remember I don't remember
the conversation we had on that
piece of legislation they saw
that it came before the house
tax committee on march fifteenth
so it was done in the last two
or three days of the session and
as it happened at it looks like
I was chairing because most of
our democratic members of the
house tax committee were excused
that day.
So I got to vote in a bipartisan
way with our friends over here
so admittedly like that
sometimes what happens whether
it's a thirty air sixty day we
have conversations that may not
be a substantive or that for
some of us where ticking these
votes quickly
with that being said I
appreciate that this bill is
technical cleanup.
But I just as the colleague
mentioned did have questions
raised about where that.
Moving forward but looking
closer to stuff I are in this
map and admittedly not knowing
much about the metro development
areas.
The conversation today has all
focused on albert cookie mister
chair.
Are there other parts of new
mexico that also have areas like
this and can you speak to those.
Um mr sharing vice chair women
yes there are other areas across
the state that have this and all
that
my extra witness from list
curses talk about his I did want
to address
yours specific question of how
these how the maries are formed
because they're the bill from
last year doesn't include the
whole metropolitan redevelopment
code and part of the
metropolitan redevelopment code
is a metropolitan redevelopment
plan that is created with
community input
and the metropolitan
redevelopment area cannot be
formed unless the members of
that community consent for its
formation.
Mister chair made a vice chair.
So city of los cruises has two
metropolitan redevelopment areas
already designated
last year I I believe the number
I don't have them the hand out
we had from last year there was
up to thirty throughout the rest
of the state including in
communities to house silver city
last crucials so so to tool that
available for any metres to
determine harmington.
So so there are mister chairman
of ice or so they are throughout
the statement the tool for all
the use in part of it last
crucials with our lift up
program where you where we've
had good discussions with city
management and you medically
share about community input with
it it's an important piece of
how to effectively use these
tools mr chair thank you and
representative thank you I
appreciate you bringing up the
left up example and I appreciate
a representative of your trust
in a process that government
would run and that that would
mean it was a process with there
was actually consent consent
based in.
The project that my city is
taking on over the city i'm
honor to represent less cases
left up is the pretty powerful
example of where sometimes those
gaps and short falls can be so
in last cousins in one of our
redevelopment areas and of
course I say that because they
just get frustrated I I ask you
where else the arts they get
fresh do in all of our materials
are only referencing all the
cookie when other parts of the
statement have implications to
to clean up like this or the
original bill but in that
example and lift up last cousins
there was some of the historical
assumptions we make about lower
income communities communities
of color communities played with
higher levels of violence.
And
when we say we're going to
engage with what it looks like
to left up.
Pockets of the places we call
home sometimes we're still using
tools that are outdated that are
based in discrimination and
stigma so when I when I see an
act like this that is long
standing I see all work to
continue to fix it and take me I
also express an invitation
especially to you representative
to keep looking closely at the
mechanisms that we've
standardized to say that we have
community input certainly when I
call home we are know that the
folks showing up at city council
meetings are county commission
meetings or responding to a
survey that gets mailed out with
a gas bill don't reflect a lot
of the folks that are holding
the most and struggling and
really immense ways so I
appreciate that this is clean up
language I don't know what I
would do if I had a chance to
rebuild on that last year
looking at this conversation um.
But then a land and and they
voted against the unm t last
year and so i'm sure i'll have
more to see them but I think you
for your engagement today and
let's keep working.
Thank you anyone other questions
accommodate from the committee
every now what's the pleasure of
the committee for senate bill to
thirty six
past by reserve an end is taken
by representative dunkin let's
colour please.
Representative yes
representative customer
yes.
Representative channel
representative dunkin yes
representative gogos
representative harper
represented hernandez
speaker martinez representative
or text yes
representative scott.
Representative townsend.
Madam vice chair yes mister
chairman yes you and if they
ever do passenger bill to thirty
six thank you for your
presentation
right
hernandez.
We have house bill to seventy
five high weights job credit
determinations representative
is.
The floor is yours in every
year.
Thank you mister chair I do have
my expert on zoom his name is
ron sibby.
And he all introduced him over
doing that is a partner at axium
cpa.
So mister chair and members of
the committee i'm here today for
a house to seventy five
it is a bill intended to clean
up the statutory language within
the highways job tax credit to
simplify the administration and
clarify definitions to increase
their predictability of the
credit for economic development
purposes I do have a committee
sub that was sent to the
committee on friday.
Cleans up the sub for discussion
motion with the serve when you
do whenever and gets it with you
explain there's no
two number.
Mr chair two two eight
the number is 22
that's what I have
is we all receive it and I think
we are we're going to go awesome
thank you mister
so would this committee subdoes
it takes out a few of the
sections from the original bell
what I think it's easier to.
Describe what is remaining
in the changes so the first
change would be to remove the
time constraint on the
department's review of the
credit because the time limit is
already addressed in the tax
administration act and number
two clarifying jobs are eligible
once occupied for the required
forty four weeks of a rolling
year instead of a calendar year
the existing threshold job
definition precludes new jobs
from qualifying if the job is
created after february of the
qualifying year.
And with that.
Thank you representative that's
move
to the eyes although the favor
of house build two seventy five
yesterday.
This is one of the.
This language does make.
In the room anyone on my.
Yeah.
Book good morning mr chairman
inconvenient number you can
always be that we not only want
more jobs
that I believe is just the wind
win in the mind of it around the
chamber of comma the business
honor
employee these are truly
highways
in urban areas forty k rural
area is the context of the
income
year.
Just only find about bringing
more agreed jobs to update and
keeping more great workers here
and we get around the previous
chamber of commerce or get
together.
Thank you anyone else online
seeing no one else anyone in
opposition of house build to
seventy five in the room in an
opposition online
see none of their questions are
comments from the committee
again this is for
at this point in time of the tax
packages already left this this
train station so this is at this
point information.
By removing
one of the portions there is now
no longer fiscal impact doing
this already as then correctly
so let's move then
mr don't get a jerry head up or
is it hard
to have my chair.
Yes thank you chairman
representative
together there were there are a
lot of portions in this
legislation before and and I
know that there are some.
Just questions the fire that I
think.
I think saving us for next year
when we can talk these things
through and make sure folks
understand I think was a great
idea.
So so this understand this
chairman and representative the
highest jobs tax credit has a
sign
in fy.
Twenty six
and so chambers and by striking
the pushing out of that sign set
this bill should not have a
fiscal impact mister chairman
committee yes
originally it would have um
moved it to twenty thirty one
and there would have been a
estimated six million dollars.
I will bring that the extension
of that.
Right true representative thank
you that was my next question
because this is an effective
credit want to make sure that.
We have an option to push that
sunset out of folks still
believe that is an effective and
and good credit so so then all
those buildings is two things
with the committee so all does
the two things the first is
right now in the house jobs tax
credit act there's some language
about.
Time frames for when the
administration has to review and
approve the credit.
But chairman representative
was actually been a licerate a
couple years ago that working
wisted apartment.
To change how all of their
credits are ministered time
wise.
How much time they have an
apartment versus.
The person applying for it you
know uh and and so all of that
is already covered and so the
first thing this bill does is
just strike that.
That uh
I don't think it's in conflict
but maybe duplicative language
mission members of the committee
so number one currently in the
tax credit it says a hundred and
eighty days and in the tax
administrative act which has
passed since then
says that it's a hundred and
twenty days so we're getting rid
of the hundred and eighty days
in the credit to have it kind of
be streamlined.
Updated number.
That apartment actually
was wonderful working with them
compromising that bill a few
years ago you know brought that
into a hundred twenty days but
they were also given some relief
in other areas so
I I think this is a good change
just to say we're religing all
of our credits to match the
overall behaviour
in the tax administration.
The second thing this bill does
which I think is important too.
Is right now in the highway
strokes tax credit it says.
There to be eligible and
individual has to be employed
for forty four weeks of a
calendar year.
And chairman representative I
understand why we put it in
there we don't want someone to
get hired and then two months
later find another job or or or
whatever and the the company
gets this credit for someone
who's only been there for a
couple months can you chairman
explain to me.
What this is changing about that
and why it's needed absolutely
mr chair and members of the
committee so currently the way
that it works as it has you
essentially your employees have
to be
there have to be an employee by
the end of february to at the
forty four weeks of the rest of
the calendar year this would
make it on a rolling basis so it
would be from higher date they
have they need to be employed.
And it doesn't matter where in
the calendar year it is now
based on a rolling.
Calendar year.
And representative thank you for
explaining that because the
attention is that this person
will just be employed for a long
time not that they have to be
employed in january or february
right if I hire someone in
october
then i'm not eligible even if
they stay along for a year that
just doesn't make sense so
changing it from called her
you're till rolling fifty two
weeks I think makes a a ton of
sense.
Mrperiod chair and
representative of absolutely
I think that the forty four
weeks should just be you know if
they're there for forty four
weeks not they have to be hired
by.
Can apply for the credit
okay.
Um the hue representative and
thank you chairman.
Thank you representative harbor
anyone else questions comments
from the committee
representative dunkin
street representative can you
tell us what the median wage in
the mexico is.
Mister chair and
representative I can't I have a
bunch of numbers in my head I
don't know what the actual one
is I think it's around thirty
four thousand year old k
I could be very wrong and that
one okay thank you mister
representative just wondering
how this salary on the highway
journal comparison with that
think that's all questions
thank you represent duckin other
questions comments from the
committee.
So representative harper on on
this bill particularly with the
committees and then this
is both rear engine that's my
excuse I get it there's an
uncanny similar something in the
water that really water
so with the committee substitute
for your house building or are
you looking to push this
conversation into the interamer
you look at what what what do
you want to have now I mean mr
chair were
what this really was was yes I
conversation starter belts had
no to to let you know to get the
conversation started that this
all of the stuff needs to happen
next year
you know I would love to get
gone at least a few of them
through this year but you know
where what four days from being
done here
so yeah this was this was let's
get it started let's get the
convo with committees you know
going
and I think that I was actually
really important there was a lot
of you know conversation about
some of the definitions in here
and some of the changes so it
was it was important to get that
done but you know next year
we're kind of we're gonna be
putting up against the sunset so
you know we will need to take
some sort of action to get the
you know to to have the
conversation about getting
sunse.
All as a body deem that this is
a
good thing for our state going
forward so that was really those
really the beginning of this was
just let's get it started let's
get it on people's minds and you
know let's work towards it next
year okay well I appreciate it
we appreciate the introduction
in the conversation and so will
get to it introduce the next
year during the next session
thank you sir let's move on then
to
assuming their temperate
situation with house bill one
eighty seven is amended school
solar text credit representative
from.
And the floor is yours in
everybody.
Thank you mister chair and
committee members
i'd just like to
introduce the committee
substitute and just briefly all
it is is
changing the amounts that are
needed each year it's broke it
down from being a two hundred
The.
Twenty million the second year
and years twenty six and twenty
seven thirty million so it was
kind of gradually over twelve
years just asking for the
funding to read broken down to
those.
Section so it wasn't so.
Large and ask at one time.
And that would allow the schools
to then be able to make their
arrangements into
apply for the um.
Funding
but just to get back to
the bill representative yes so
you have a committee substitute
for this bill yes is what you
just mention that can be
substitute
okay since thirty please move.
So now and it can be substitute
so good thank you mister chair
so what the school solar income
tax credit does it will enable
all the mexico public schools to
get complete solar electric
over the next
four years at zero cost and the
schools can reduce their
electric costs by four times the
amount of the state tax credit.
The bill provides forty percent
refundable and transferable tax
credit to companies who install
solar and on the school property
and to provide solar electricity
to the school refundable credit
is needed to get federal tax
equity funding to invest in the
projects and historically very
few schools have gone all solar
but with the bidding incentives
and this incentive all public
schools can participate and it's
expected at seventy percent of
the new mexico schools will
convert to complete solar
electricity in the next four
years and this is once in a
forever opportunity for school
solar.
Now
for us to get that now and
implementation is that the
school discretions can issue
competitive articles and the
baseline costing came from the
state ces twenty nineteen seven
contract and that's clear energy
solar there the contract low
builder.
For solar new mexico and they
state that with this new mexico
tax credit they can provide the
resources to build all the solar
for all the new mexico schools
to go a hundred percent solar
within the next four years at
pricing that will save the
schools again four times the
amount of the tax credit.
The.
So if the seventy percent of
their mexico schools go solar
within four years of the bill
passing based on this clear
energy solar low bitter prices
and in equal competition
there will be credits taken of
twelve million in twenty five
twenty million and twenty six
thirty million in twenty seven
in twenty eight and between
twenty nine to thirty
and twenty twenty thirty six the
balance for a total of two
hundred and four million dollars
and the programs return on
investment the forty percent tax
credit means that two and a half
dollars of private money are
required to get one dollar of
new mexico tax credits and for
companies providing a commitment
that they're
projects will save the schools
the school district at least
four times of the tax credit
amount so this means the two
hundred and four million dollars
of tax credits will return at
least eight hundred and sixteen
dollars of reduced electric
costs in the state.
And we did have an urgency we
were trying to get into the
tax omnibus bill but with that
passing we're going to try and
get other funding to get this
started for this year with the
twelve million from other
resources so for the year's
following we will work on the
interim and bring this forward
and this has especially a great
savings for the rural area
schools that are more difficult
and expensive to provide solar
projects and there is currently
bonus
tax credits through the by a
solar incentives that will
provide extra incentives in the
role areas that aren't available
in albuquerque last truces in
santa fe.
So that the rule areas will be
able to achieve the same four
times lower electric costs from
the ces solar supplier at the
larger cities that the larger
cities enjoy.
And with that
the chart you see on that first
page shows that the public
school students there's three
hundred and sixteen thousand
seven hundred and eighty five
eight hundred ninety schools so
there's an average looking at
other schools that already have
solar and it's approximately
twenty three hundred dollars per
student and that gets you to the
seven hundred and twenty eight
million six hundred and eighty
five.
And thousand five hundred so the
cost of the forty percent new
mexico tax credit is two hundred
and ninety one million so the
thirty year electric savings
will be over a billion dollars
so with that i'd like to
introduce my expert mister
rockie balcus from last creases
and um he has been working on
this and talking to a lot of.
And also are there the.
Projection of this.
The other slides that we.
The ones that we have passed out
the members have them I think we
can buy work again those
projected up on these screens
but please go ahead with the
time permitted left in this
thinking
thank you mister chair thank you
committee
if you would look at this slide
that has information on it
there are.
About nine school districts that
we've done extensive evaluations
with gotten their electric bills
run the analysis for their
actual rates with their actual
utilities and then run the
numbers with the federal tax
credit and with a state tax
credit and so what's what is in
that table is for the first
seven years commitment from the
low beater that they would price
initiate seventeen percent below
what they are currently paying
to utility and not all of the
utility bill is able to be
offset most of it is but not all
you have a customer charge you
have demand charges and things
that don't get offset and so
you'll see a column it says
this is a pm example for diming
school district their bill last
year was nine hundred and thirty
two thousand dollars their solar
payment would be five hundred
and eighty five thousand dollars
the utility bill continuing with
pn would be a hundred ninety
thousand dollars so it's not all
being offset there are portions
of don't but they would save a
hundred and fifty six thousand
dollars but because the solar
price is fixed.
For the first seven years that
saving grows as there's using an
inflation factor of three
percent which I think is a very
reasonable factor in today's
world
that they would increase sale
savings each year but then in
year ate the contract drops the
price by seventy percent the
investors have recovered their
money and then it's just
maintenance and.
Keeping it monitored and
controlling system so there's a
seventy percent drop in your
aid they continues on for the
next thirty years people ask
about the light of solder which
is now estimated the warranty is
thirty years and the life
expectancies is beyond fifty
years by most evaluations it's
also graphed the graph next to
it is the same as the table
she's grapping the second drop
in your eight and so what you
wind up with is an initial
savings of seventeen percent
that grows to seventy two
percent per year and the average
price it starts out with was
fifteen point oh five nine since
per kilo at hour for the
district because in a total
killer white hours by the total
price paid version starting out
at nine point nine four for the
solar which is a thirty four
percent initial reduction but
again there's cause it don't get
eliminated so you save actually
about seventeen percent but over
time there's a huge savings
amount
the second slide
I would like to mention to the
point on the first satisfied is
that there's a six hundred and
forty five percent return over
time to diming school district
if this had been done with this
incentive and all jobs all solar
projects create jobs they create
economic development all of that
is common for solar programs of
which the state has a number the
school's program is you need
into returning an actual savings
that everyone in the state
benefits from soft all the
schools or seventy percent was
our estimate of the schools go
to solar for their electricity.
Then the entire community saves
because the school these less
money and it it has more
available funding the second
slide which is this picture if.
Everyone has that
and the question in the topic is
what don't you see.
I don't want to point out what
you don't see his kids on this
playground for nearly half the
year in dimming where it reaches
a hundred and ten degrees in the
summer.
The playground equipment gets so
hot kids can't be on it they'll
get burned and so they need
covers and so if you look at the
people that you see standing
around there
this is very much local and
involvement fred parker the
deputy superintendent of
operations and strategy or he
allowed the director of
construction and facilities
management babsed offer the
district project manager george
words the facilities plant
manager and benny has so the
director of safety all of these
people came together to say this
is what we want for our school
this is where we want it it's
much more effective when you
have the local people involved
which happens better than if you
have a program from on high this
is okay do it this way
none of the schools that we met
with wanted anything on the
roofs all of them were very
concerned about roofleaks and so
while roof installation is the
cheapest it's considered to be
much more expensive because you
have people walking on the
rooster to service or
maintenance or whatever and then
roof life changes and so
ultimately the schools view as
that was more expensive even
though initially it's cheaper.
So the the point from both the
school board for diming school
district and for these leaders
of diming school district was
that they want to sword to aid
an education if you can have
kids with covered play grounds
which they they have a number of
and this is only one I think
there's thirty two sides for
meters not thirty two schools
but thirty two meters for some
schools have multiple meters
they want to covers for parking
they want it covers for
playgrounds he's reimportant
things to them and having them
in the ball gives you a much
better result much better
activity and with we've talked
to people it at at least one of
the way blows we've talked to
people around the state and I
think this is a great program
but the people that put up the
money to get this done
wanna get a feel for okay if we
invest in more time and in
designing all these in
engineering and around the
state.
Will there be a way to get the
funds from the state to match
because the issue is that the
utilities consider all this
competition just to be realistic
and if the utilities none of the
utilities are going to offer
schools or anyone else that I
can i'm aware of an am a long
term rate expert both in
california to bottom last ten
years in new mexico
their job is to make a profit
for their owners sir if I can
ask you to to wrap it up i'm i'm
almost finisher.
Twenty seconds of most if that's
alright
but the rate structures that are
designed mean that these schools
need to have a large amount of
battery systems in order to be
cost effective and so that a
higher cost but then they also
can become centers for
emergencies where they can
operate with no electric power
automatically transferring the
power over and these are things
at the local people of expressed
and that I think are greatly
valuable but having feedback
from the committee was very much
appreciated to know which
reviews are so
i'd very much appreciate their
to be able to pay back and and
every there there was a handout
giving every school district of
what they would be looking at
and so forth which has been
handed out as well mister
chairman committee minutes thank
you very much what what what
your name is again in your role
my name is rocky back and
senator consultant okay
consultant for who
i've been consultant for the
california public utility
commission's word a number of
different clients got thank you
anywhere because this is an
information session
the weekend we can go the
audience for for those in
support of of this bill is for
formality and we've cleared out
there the room almost but anyone
in support of house bill one
eighty seven
no one online support no one in
opposition here in the room or
no one on line in the opposition
either other questions are
coming from the committee on
these yesterday representative
are thank you chairman I have
just two quick questions.
So the first is
where we're trying to leverage
kind of a short window of
federal dollars for putting the
solar systems in.
Do we need to have state money.
To take advantage of this
federal program.
Mr chairman of harper
the state gives me the federal
am too close sorry i'm sorry oh.
There are multiple incentives
that are available it starts out
at six percent then it goes to
thirty percent in forty fifty
and sixty the.
Instead of four low income
jurisdictions is a competitive
national competitive deal that
has to be filed by approximate
april or may whenever the
department of energy releases
that if it's not filed by then
you lose that one the others
have window that's about ten
years there are energy districts
which certified by the federal
government it's not something
that we choose most of new
mexico qualifies for that except
for santa fe albert turkey in
los cruces so must the world
districts qualify for the energy
and senate but it's a matter
mainly of getting the investment
from the companies that will
take those federal incentives
and feel like okay they won't do
a project unless the school
district saves money because
it's it's just been their
history that it's bad results if
they don't create savings so
it's more a matter of getting
the federal tax equipment the
company to do federal tax equity
as well as would do state
financing
to be involved in i've been
interested enough to do the
projects
yeah so so chairman
representative
but the question is.
Do we need to use state money to
take advantage of these credits
and I believe the answer I just
heard is
we're trying to help these
groups with state money but if
damning schools the saturday
wanted to do if they could buy
themselves.
Mister chairman representing
harper
dimming could certainly do it on
their own
but I have yet to come across
the school district that if they
have to put up any money will do
solar
joint chairman representative
yes thank you I just wanted to
make sure I understood that
properly and then my last
question chairman is we already
have a community solar
statute that the schools are
eligible for I could take
advantage of can you help me
understand the difference
between that program in this one
community solar is a two hundred
make a what program out of about
three thousand five hundred
megawats in the state that was
mainly for companies to use
whatever properties and set up
generally five megawater systems
that they were then sign up
participants in the take the
power from.
In that system.
At most they can save about
sixty percent of the electric
bill because
the transmission costs are
excluded and other costs are
excluded from that programs of
this program would save the
schools a whole lot more money
and the schools based on her
evaluation of all the would be
about two hundred and forty meg
was by themselves and the
community solar required at
least thirty percent to go to
low income folks and other
specific designations.
Thank you chairman
thank you represent harbour
anyone else qu.
They're being done we appreciate
presentation this morning thank
you very much appreciate your
time and consideration thank you
thank you representative
folks that are committed we've
come to the end of our agenda
for the session so far unless we
get some other senate bills
referred to our committee then
we may have something on on
wednesday and third we are
wednesday but it seems a little
bit short time frame if that is
the case but will keep everybody
abreast and just check your
emails and text or whatever
we'll make sure everyone's aware
but I really appreciate all the
work that everybody has done on
this committee this as session
you know I i'm sorry that we
never got around to scheduling a
dinner for this committee I feel
I feel that about I really do
but I think at the same time I
