Thank you.
Representative Stansbury.
Hi good morning Representative
Strickler there.
Here.
Chairman Martinez and I'm here.
Have a quorum.
Thank you Elaine good morning
members good to see all of you
although the through the screen
we have a pretty packed agenda
today just those a reminder we
will not be competing on Friday
we we do have floor sessions
Thursday Friday so this
committee will not be a Friday
this committee will reconvene on
Monday
I had a good conversation
yesterday with the with the
ranking member are per we don't
have a whole lot in our docket
at this point so there's really
no need to meet on Saturday.
I'm sure you've all seen the
scramble of committees trying to
meet on Saturday in in trying to
avoid as much as possible that
conflict between members serving
on numerous committees so we're
not gonna have that problem if
you've got other committees on
Saturday that's you're good to
go we will reconvene on Monday.
On the agenda today we have
house bill thirty six.
We have house bill ninety two.
We have House Bill.
One of five and then we have
house bill one twenty two you
like a a goes small and
Armstrong.
First on our list we have house
bill thirty six Representative
Eli are you ready to proceed I
am on a chair members the
committee this is actually a
Committee substitute for House
Bill three six I requested that
bill ivory be moved as an
attendee he is a specialist in
bankruptcy having practiced in
since nineteen eighty four I
appreciate the committee's
indulgence on this we did move
this bill over because we've
been trying to work with some of
the financial institutions with
Jerry Walker and John Anderson
so I think I hope that we have
worked that out with them there
is an amendment it should be
before the committee it is
number two one nine seven three
seven point two what this bill
is intended to do is to put
frankly keep more money in the
pockets of people just are
facing insolvency foreclosure
bankruptcy so that they can
support their families you know
kind of keep their businesses
going it increases the homestead
exemption and so we have some
real negotiations to you don't
make this work and what I've
told The Sanchez is I'm not sure
not Sanchez the advocates is
that in order to get a bill
through you really want to reach
consensus and so that's what we
tried to do there's no fiscal
impact this is strictly
for those people facing
financial distress and in the
time of COVID it seems like the
right kind of bill to bring and
with that I'd like to turn it
over to Mr ivory.
Representative Ely before we do
that do we want to move your
amendment consideration at this
point or or do you want to go
through the bill first no I
think our sure it's up to the
committee but if it were my
preference I would want the
amendment from the committee at
the same time as we're
discussing Mr chairman I think
at for discussion purposes
Committee substitute presented
by Representative every day.
Second okay thank you some SS
thank you for the second can you
read the number on the bottom of
the amendment Representative B.
lack.
Yes two one nine seven three
seven point two.
Okay give me a sec here.
Everybody have that in front of
the.
Yes okay.
Good explain your amendment
senator elect.
Here I'm doing double duty I
would like Mr ivory to explain
it since you Miss directly
involved to go she Asians and
these are pretty technical so
I'd like him to do it Senator
very well Mr ivory welcome.
Thank you muted.
You still muted Mr either.
We can hear you Mike is not
working.
Yes some problem and all.
I I was able to
vote in the other committee are
you being in two places at once
I think the biggest change to
this bill is set exemption which
you'll see is is that and and I
know John Anderson and Jerry
Walker or in the audience or at
least I hope they are and I'd be
happy to have one of those speak
to it as we go to well as we got
out audience participation but
the real question was what with
the homestead exemption be
in originally of the proposal is
three hundred fifty thousand and
that's been reduced to ninety
per person one hundred fifty per
couple
I think I'm right about that I'm
looking at the amendment
and I I know John and Jerry can
talk about that as well but the
whole idea you.
Yes I do I'm gonna get the
either Mister Walker Mr Anderson
yeah I portion one of them could
talk to it because I I know that
they were seriously involved in
negotiations so what okay let me
see let me see who is on here I
don't I don't see them so far.
Mister Walker or Mr Anderson if
you're here which I would assume
you are please raise your hand
that I can see you.
Okay there's Mr Anderson Mister
Anderson Elaine can we bring
amid please as a as a panelist.
Jerry might be the C. N. B. A.
N. M. all of the ICBA amendment
yeah okay what what we are when
we bring both of the many lane
please thank you.
This is where the Sanchez says
help please.
All right it should be on their
way in.
Shortly.
Mister Walker as an attendee can
you raise your hand again please
Sir.
Under the A. C. I. B. C. A. N.
M..
Yes in.
Not present but I I.
I'm here and president needed to
speak for the ACA.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can hear you Sir welcome
and please state your name for
the record.
Chris one of the ICBA of New
Mexico and at the the amendments
that we're we're discussed with.
On the to the bill really dealt
with the
homestead exemption so the the
original bill had an extension
built in for a hundred fifty
thousand personal person and
three hundred thousand for
couple of the amendment was
changed to ninety thousand for a
single person and one eighty
four very helpful or or joint
ownership of the second part of
the amendment was to increase
that exemption two hundred and
twenty thousand for a single
person and two hundred forty
thousand or individuals over
sixty five for individuals with
disabilities over the I.
Very well thank you for that
explanation Representative Eli
and think that there's a lot
then she Cutler could err is
also an attorney with the New
Mexico Center for long poverty
and she could be let in and she
can explain the other side and
instead of the mistrial.
That's right and I'm sorry about
all the confusion chair Mister
it's okay the time I have a
question about the.
We got you Mr speaker.
Good morning miss Cutler welcome
I think.
To to to speak today Mr chairman
members of the committee as Mr
Stewart said that the amendment
primarily deals with with with
updating the homestead exemption
but they're also a few technical
fixes and these are
You know just for finding a few
things making sure that the
garnishment is is the
garnishment update as pertains
to where wages were earned in
providing a bit more deal to
detail to that a fact and uses
all this is all the response to
feedback from from the previous
committee.
well thank you Mr there we
appreciate it Representative Ely
anything else before we go to
the committee on the event now
Mr.
Okay first on the list reviews
speaker Brian Egolf.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Ely can act if we
may I'd like to.
I'm.
Yeah the last committee the
conversation we had was about
this that that I participated in
was about the size of the
homestead exemption and we.
Word I was questioning why it
wasn't
higher or why it wasn't
unlimited I'm like in other
states and I actually
him right prepared and
very thorough memo for me about
what it would look like if we
were to.
Go with the higher amount.
We talked about you know in the
millions or you know completely
eliminating it.
Mr Chairman representative I in
a panel of experts we yeah I
also recommendations with
Representative neighbor.
And he was asking about impacts
on for closure.
And
I.
Okay this with I I actually
don't have a complete
understanding of how.
I'm.
This bill interacts with
mortgage foreclosure process and
procedure and I think I need to
understand that better before I
could have an opinion on the
amendment with regard to the
homestead exemption this year
only one I'm I'm asking about
and so the the question is and I
don't know if this is Mister
Moore I don't know if we have a
lawyer Mr Chairman on the panel
who does banks who are I think
it's I think Mr ivory is I know
over the years I've been given
his name to refer my clients to
in they needed bankruptcies
service I don't know if we've
ever actually.
Is it I know I've sent many
people to.
So when there's when there's a
bankruptcy trials is there's an
ongoing bankruptcy.
In the home owned by the
petitioner in the bankruptcy
case.
is not fully it when there's a
mortgage in place.
Mr chairman Mr ivory explain
what happens to the note secured
by the mortgage in a bankruptcy
proceeding Representative you're
right Mr chairman I just that Mr
ivory.
Hopefully if his microphone is
working a little isn't working
earlier described very can we
try again.
Can't hear you up Mr Chairman
speaker in addition is color
hi the other person that I did
talk to about this issue
specifically and how it might
have adverse impacts on people
that we're trying to help is
John Anderson and I I just got a
text from him I know he's the
panelists you want to call on
him but I think this cover might
be able to answer as well.
that Mr chairman and members of
the committee and I I do
apologize I'm not a bankruptcy
expert but my understanding is
that these exemptions are in
their plan to bankruptcy
proceedings and that we this is
not and I do believe we had
specific conversations with the
bankers to the fact this is not
intended to fact
Effective foreclosure proceeding
yeah and so Mr chair Mister
speaker this is the first time
we are in the problem of
technology and it's not on our
end it's on striders hand I'm
gonna be helpful I think to your
premium but it looked at
I guess.
We have somebody or we can hear
from strangers because I did
have a lengthy conversation with
him about the downside of having
kind of the unlimited homestead
exemption sure in the Mr
Chairman representative Mr ivory
if you can hear me down in the
bottom left hand corner of the
window next the microphone icon
there's a carrot that little you
know little care simple if you
click that it lets you select a
microphone sometimes if you
collect if you select Stewart
says same as system.
There you go are you can you
hear me yes we can offer a
chance I so sorry for this I'm
I'm a full service speaker of
the house tech support you know
amendment appropriation would
review with my.
No bankruptcy but I don't know
anything I'm a technological
ideas so I I apologize.
the.
I'll go ahead welcome hi how are
you thank you committee
so do you want me to just a
mistake egolf question or.
Or just generally talk about the
bill are chairman as regards
provided this is what happens to
the note it is secured by a
mortgage in the event the
mortgagee is the petitioner in a
bankruptcy proceeding.
Well secured creditors which is
what a mortgage company is would
have their rights in the
exemptions that you would not
come into play in a foreclosure
proceeding someone always.
Three hundred thousand dollars
no.
And there is a small the bank
were with files were closures
there.
And if they win the foreclosure
get a judgment they would get
the property and they would sell
it for.
Whatever they can up to the
value of your note if they
happen to sell the property for
more than what they're noted is
than the general the access but
that rarely happens in a
foreclosure kids with the bank
wants to sell up so the property
to discounts or whatever their
notice.
So this exemption moderate come
into play as far foreclosures
where it comes into play is.
Is that someone files
bankruptcy.
And they have a three hundred
thousand dollar house.
And they have a two hundred
thousand dollar note.
The bankruptcy court.
the data can claim exemption
currently it is a single
person's sixty thousand dollars
so the bankruptcy court would
you be able to sell the house
Hey also mortgage rate the
debtor sixty thousand dollars
and using the access to pay the
creditors.
If we increase the homestead
exemption that protects the data
more so if it's ninety thousand
for individual are hundred
eighty thousand for a couple.
Thank basically we
a data warehouse as always the
keep making the mortgage
payments yes there are it's the
equity in the house is less than
on.
Either ninety or a hundred
eighty thousand depending on
whether they're single or
married under the new law that
were proposed under the dollars
sixty one Twinings exemptions
gone up fifty percent.
But the bottom line is
that would be and up asset not
what's the value of the asset is
but what the equity in the US.
Okay so Mr chairman and
distribute that is being that is
perfectly helpful that answers
exactly my questions to this
said exemption with regard to
for to mortgage you might might
I to concerns Mr one I don't
want to disrupt the mortgage
market I want to make it harder
for people to be able to get
mortgages by discouraging
community banks are from off
remortgages so this bill should
have zero impact on access to
mortgages
are from community banks or any
other financial institution with
regard to the homestead
exemption and the other
exceptions to that.
So that takes care of the
mortgage piece as far as I'm
concerned.
Second question the only other
concern I've heard from the and
all Mr chairman I will say I am
and I yeah I have been for many
many many years and I'm not
ashamed to say I am a very
strong supporter of New Mexicos
community banks
it's so many of our communities
community banks are the only
financial institutions that
extend credit to small
businesses extend
you know barring opportunities
to individuals who are you know
in order just regarded by you
know the wells Fargo's in bank
of America's of the worlds are
community banks are incredibly
important asset in New Mexico
and I I just want to say that
you know I'm not.
In barrister Shamim proud to be
a supporter of our community
banks it is in our CAF eyes
which I understand are different
but yet they do very similar
mission.
This respects.
The only concern I've heard from
community banks with regard to
the home state exemption Mr
Chairman is.
In the event that a homeowner
wishes to use the equity in
their home to take out a loan to
support a small business
investment or to use the equity
in our home for a remodel work
basically you to access the
equity in the home for some for
some of the purpose.
is that.
One is that the only concern
here in two.
If a homeowner worded take out.
Home equity line of credit.
To make investors small
business.
Could the exposure of the
community banks.
B. so the first question is is
that the only concern that would
be to I. C. D. A. N. M. Mr
Chairman second question is if.
The homeowner we're use equity
above their first mortgage.
To take a loan for small
business investment.
Can that loan itself be secured
by a second mortgage.
In there I protect the community
bank.
In other words because they just
we're closed on the first and
second mortgage to do they
become a secured creditor and if
so then why are the other
community banks concerned in
that in that service.
Mr Chairman representative all
in regards to that in our
concern really
Live in the evaluation of risk
when.
evaluating our.
A small business owner that may
be applying for credit
so what are based you when
they're looking at the overall
networking calculating the
outside network of a small
business owner are they they
take assets are are able to
liabilities minus equity but the
the take out whatever exemptions
are in regard to calculate that
out that network so no listed
stocks and bonds people from the
party.
A hundred percent retirement
accounts
moves that exemption off of the
value of the home and so as the
exemption creases it it
decreases the valuation on that
net value a calculation and
that's really to assess risk now
the first part of the other part
of your question was if they
took out a second mortgage on
their home to finance business
yes the the the that this
exemption what part of that that
would be a mortgage or note
secured by the whole but it's
really in the assessment of risk
to we are so
you know as the exemption
increases the homestead
exemption increases the risk
aversion for small business
owner and talking about non
corporate hi small business
owners where their personal
that's the business that for one
thank the greater the exemptions
are the less risk for that
person is to to policy makers
you so there is a disincentive
on bankruptcy so that's really
really do our concern in regard
to the overall risk profile
developing this profile about.
Okay so Mr Chairman it's not
really a.
I guess it's not really it so so
madam Mr Chairman it would be N.
M. it.
As the impacts is the homestead
exemption increases.
You're saying that you the risk
the U. perceived from a our work
goes up.
It is in also to Mr chairman
that.
If the indebtedness is secured
by a second mortgage on the
property would that concern go
away.
As you become secured creditor
has to that portion.
Mr chair representative but you
got he was secured by the moral
order just home yes that would
that would eliminate that but
for small business owners that
may own their home free and
clear they may not want to
Hi in our home or boards are
home on that they need to take
more small business loan out on
other assets but their overall a
version to risk especially a non
corporate small business type
owner increases as exemptions
not on the homestead exemption
but other exemptions increases
the risk aversion to bankruptcy
hi increases
there's a there's a of a white
paper on the southern economic
journal that study this it is
stated for every every increases
in homestead exemption the
overall prevents the operators
also increases with that so it's
really about the risk aversion
thank you your this profile of
our server.
So it Mr chairman it seems like
this is a.
Balancing equities right that is
you're gonna we need to.
Strike the appropriate balance
between.
Your homeowners to don't ever
wish to or don't have any plans
to you know me take out a loan
for small business right which
is I would imagine a larger
group of people in New Mexico we
need to balance that against
those who would want to use the
equity in our home for small
business rather purpose right
and.
It.
I'm.
Yeah I.
Yeah it was use you.
More from Judiciary you know
when we have the hearing there
you know I actually had a an
amendment drafted up to make
also exemption
two million dollars in which we
thought would.
Covered in the vast vast vast
majority of homes in New Mexico
bit be protected against people
you have liquidating other
assets and putting it into ten
million dollar luxury requests
for something like that to show
assets in bankruptcy
I I just worry that you know if
we're going from sixty thousand
the plan was to get a hundred
fifty thousand us to back down.
Two ninety.
I.
I'm not I'm not certain that it
that it's striking the right
balance.
you know because if there is a
bankruptcy.
In in we have a family
that.
It is going to be entering the
bankruptcy process.
And they're not in their family
that it works it you know
traditional job in the year
don't take out money for small
business loan with this
amendment what would have been a
three hundred thousand dollar
homestead exemption for their
family house.
You know is now gonna be coming
down.
Two hundred twenty thousand.
Is a hundred eighty thousand
dollars difference and we have a
long conversation Mr chairman of
the Judiciary Committee about
the purposes of the bankruptcy
statute.
The need to give people not your
fresh start but also a fresh
start.
With the resources that they
would need to make good use of
that fresh start to have
something left over to read
again
you know their financial life
you know following a bankruptcy.
So I Mr chairman and
Representative Eli.
I'm not you know I'm not really
falling in love with the
amendment you know and I said I
I have an amendment that we
could do with the two million
dollar in four million dollar
exemption drafted that's more in
line with what I was thinking
but because of that you know
concerns I I thought that it
reflects the on over the last
couple days I thought that
probably went a little too far.
I'm so you Mr chairman and our
Representative Eli it I don't
need to belabor the point but I.
This is the districts using a
pretty big decision that yes it
is going to potentially have
impact on many many many many
people are and I wanna make sure
we get it right now I thought it
was important have conversations
to.
I'm Mr Chairman representative I
don't have any thoughts on it.
But like I said I don't want to
I want to draw a lot of or
believe it point that.
This district is a pretty
significant
Mister speaker I'm sorry Mr
chairman Mr speaker I don't mind
rolling this until the next
meeting on to continue
discussions I did get a call
last night from yet another
lawyer that was concerned that
this went too far my concern but
I think it is a legitimate
debate is that you know what's
the old expression
don't let the perfect be the
enemy of the good we have to do
something the session right and
all the the least resistance I
can get to get this bill through
and get people in financial
distress additional protections
I want to do.
But I think it's worth it to
slow down a little bit
you know see what we can do have
discussions again given your
comments I'm happy to do that
but I I am concerned about the
delay but my view is are you
know what will take your
comments
into consideration and see
what happens I my understanding
is is that the advocates on both
sides are really these were kind
of hard negotiations kind of
came to that balance but I I'm
happy to consider rolling it
until the next meeting and we
see what happens but I I would
appreciate some thoughts from
the committee I obviously want
to do the right thing
but I know this point I don't
think there is a right answer
there just has to be an answer
we've got to get a bill for and
so that's where I'm at Mr chair
Mister speaker.
Well Representative Eli thank
you for for those comments Mr
speaker and and
Mr ivory and Mr Moyer thanks for
an agency color thanks for
providing some some expert
testimony.
Representative Ely
if if you continue working on
this for the next few days it's
pry be helpful if you could get
a a committee substitute perhaps
just to make sure it's easier to
track and follow and our next
meeting is Monday so you know if
you give it to us the sooner the
better just to dig in deep
I would also ask if you could
possibly work with the bill more
from our staff who you know race
really good points and and is
analysis as well just to make
sure we get it get this right.
Members will will roll this over
and we'll we'll have you back
first thing on on Monday
Representative Eli all right
thank you Mr thank you the
committee.
Thank you.
Representative
guy eagles and representative
that house bill ninety two
welcome.
Good morning Representative
Gallegos thank you miss the
committee good morning I think I
like it a lot of members today
I'm I'm Committee jumping so
glad to be on pretty quickly so
with that I'll get started Mr
chairman Mr chairman and members
of the committee I am pleased to
president and co sponsor the
same drinking water testing go
house bill ninety two that will
ensure communities across New
Mexico continue to have access
to clean drinking water the best
way to protect our communities
from contaminated water is to
test the water regularly this
bill will ensure.
The fund used to pay for
restricting water testing in New
Mexico remains solvent without
cutting testing services to
water systems large and small
urban or rural over the past
twenty seven years the water
customers they should fund has
benefited hundreds of public
water systems throughout the
state by supporting their social
work to provide safe and
reliable drinking water to New
Mexicans essentially this bill
does three things it increases
the current fee for the first
time in twenty seven years from
three cents per thousand gallons
of water produced to be a five
cents per thousand gallons of
water produce this translates to
an increase of about forty cents
per month on an average New
Mexico household you too you
water utility bill less than
five dollars a year.
The second thing it does is it
requires the environmental
Department should prepare and
make public and annual summary
of revenue and expenditures and
the third and final thing it
changes the name of the funds
from the water conservation fund
to the safe drinking water
testing fund so that the name is
reflected to the services that
the fees provides the drinking
water systems across New Mexico
at this time Mr chairman I would
like my co sponsor to also say
if you were.
Thank you Representative a let's
welcome Senator to.
I thank you Mr chair I to miss
the tax and revenue committee I
can tell you that it's much too
polite over and probation I a at
I grew up in a family of eight
brothers and one sister and I
must admit I like the good fair
fight and you get that in
Jackson.
So I do this all the only only
once only once in a very long
line yeah yeah okay yeah okay
thank you I'll go I'm not going
to like my colleague I am proud
to co sponsor this bill I
believe our communities deserve
to have a government that is
committed to do everything it
can to ensure that they have
safe and clean drinking water I
if you read the newspapers watch
national news or local news you
go online and you see what's
happening in the states of
Michigan in New Jersey and
they're currently dealing with
contaminated drinking water in
their communities yes health
issues have been down with the.
In the people living in the
community especially young
children and the large financial
impact already tight budgets are
just to the most visible and the
ramifications of not ensuring
safe clean drinking water I want
to thank the neatness of the New
Mexico municipal league the New
Mexico association of counties
The New Mexico rural water
association the real communities
assistance corporation and the
New Mexico environment
department making sure safe
clean drinking water for our
citizens is a priority in our
state and now Mr chair I'd like
to introduce some of the three
experts that will be joining us
this morning and includes a
Rebecca Roose she's the director
of water protection division at
the New Mexico environment
department Asia I see more at
the director of the audit and
compliance division in New
Mexico taxation and revenue
department and AJ port the
executive director at the new
mint Mexico municipally.
Very well thank you present a
ghost and welcome experts please
introduce yourselves to.
Say your piece.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning morning members of the
committee this at the pleasure
to be here with you this morning
and talking to you about this
really important bill this is an
agency built for the environment
department and as Representative
Herrera said I am the director
of the water protection division
at the department and focusing
on and drinking water delivery
and safe reliable sources of
drinking water along with many
other water quality issues that
affect our states and our state
our communities every day this
bill as a private such a huge
priority for the environment
department the session because
it is essential that we address
solvency of this fund and I will
will be happy to to elaborate on
this during your questions as as
we go forward but I essentially
the funds fee has not been
changed for twenty seven years
and we simply cannot continue to
maintain delivery of all of the
testing.
Paying for the task collecting
samples in the labs for the
analysis unless we adjust the
feet so that the consequences of
not succeeding with this fee
increase that I'm we're proud to
have so much broad support for
across the communities that
would be affected by the feet
the consequences of not moving
for with it means that the
environment department will be
in a position going forward of
having to reduce the coverage of
water quality testing that we
provide for public water systems
and that doesn't mean that they
don't test the water it means
the costs the burden of paying
for those tests just back on to
those water systems including
water systems in many of your
districts that are incredibly
small financially strapped I'm
really have have on going
challenges day to day week to
week to cover their costs and
not at a large customer base to
help encourage additional costs
so that trade off here is really
clear that we we need a fee
increase to ensure fund solvency
and continuation of reliable
consistent service from the
environment department for
testing and our and we
appreciate your time and
attention this morning and I
look forward to your questions
coming up thank you.
Thank you ms Russo miss mora
welcome.
Good morning committee members
thank you for having us this
morning my name is actually
gonna the director of the
Ottoman compliance division at
the taxation and revenue
department and our
responsibility top of the of
this fund is to make sure that
all the tax payers are
registered and are filing
properly we have launched over
the last eighteen months a
campaign to ensure compliance
and we are actively working
those accounts to ensure that
they are properly registered and
they are properly paying their
fair share we also work with the
office of the state engineer to
monitor water usage to.
Impose some of those assessment
on the the entities so we're
working very closely to make
sure that enforcement is in
place for this fund.
Thank you for joining us and and
just before I go to the next
expert for the audience members
we should speak and supporter
against this bill please raise
your hands on the you know next
year name just raise your hand
there so that we can call on you
at the appropriate time.
Good morning Mr for good to see
you.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee educ forty minutes
fully.
You this bill and I should touch
on it eighteen months in the
making.
And I will say and I need to
brag a little more Tax Rav
in the pharmacy department
they've had dozens of meetings
with our environmental quality
association really working the
bill to take into account our
resolution of the agency will be
passed over that into the
statute.
This really is.
The system working this is a
true partnership between the
executive and local governments.
The way Environment runs this
it's a more efficient way to run
it then individual
municipalities running their own
testing insolvency is is
impaired because they don't have
the money that just means we
have to do it on our own in an
efficient manner.
So the system works it's this is
just an update
that's the way we look at this
is something that constantly
needs to a ball in this is this
is the next step making sure we
funded correctly and also you
know truth in taxation right
historically this is being
called the water conservation
and we all get on our bill right
most water systems just pass it
along.
Now we're actually calling it
what it is right clean water
testing at yes this really is
been a wonderful partnership and
it's been really encouraging to
see.
Tax and Representative doing
their part not in compliance and
as far as the water bureau is
these are the people you want in
charge so thank you Sanchez and
thank you tax revenue and the
migrant Department Mr chair.
Thank you for being here we
appreciated Sanchez anything
else before I go to the
audience.
Very well of those in support of
house bill ninety two again
we're on house bill ninety two.
Please raise your hands.
Okay let's go to a Mr Brian
Moore.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee I'm Brian Morton
Mexico counties.
We had a chance to preview this
legislation before the session
and had a good visit with
Environment Department basically
this bill adjust fees to reflect
the program costs are going on
today and allows for better
testing from remote sites for
operators and and the ability
for us to to send our folks to
do these kinds of things without
having to big cities and spent a
lot of money so Mr chairman we
think is a great move by the
department Papen and the tax
department and we stand strong
support thank you.
Thank you for being here miss
more let's go to the doctor mon
to settle.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee on the regional
field manager with the rural
communities assistance
corporation we provide technical
assistance to public water
systems across the state of New
Mexico
and we stand in strong support
of the bill that we would like
to really thank the sponsors or
for bringing it forward thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you.
Next let's go to no end so be
yes cuts.
Sorry Mr chairman this is not
that we are I want to speak on
again my all.
Got it got it no worries thank
you it's got a bill Connor.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
My name's bill Connor and
executive director of New Mexico
rural water association we stand
in support of this bill as
several people have said
in this hearing today.
The original raid on this fee
was three cents per thousand
gallons that is not changed in
the last twenty seven years.
well expenses have gone up
drastically.
We support the bill in an effort
to keep that funded language and
sustainable and to keep it in a
position where it will be ready
to fund additional says things
that will be coming down the
river next few years so we
support this bill thank you.
Thank you.
Anyone else is support of house
bill ninety two.
Anyone in opposition.
Anyone in opposition to safe
drinking water.
Yeah Senator Laughlin
Representative Harper okay
members of the committee
Representative Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members Representative guy goes
no for bringing this forward I
just a.
Couple of comments and maybe a
question.
Seems like the crux of the bill
Mr chairman as page five page
five eight seventeen and
eighteen were very changing
three cents to five cents that
correct chair representative.
Representative Davis.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Maestas that is
correct what does it and then
and then I love the the changes
to the wording.
You should always every time we
see a section on front of us we
should definitely.
We wanted because our as we know
our our laws have not been
compiled we compiled since
nineteen seventy eight along
this stretch in our state's
history so do some great.
Some great stylistic changes
And and just accuracy notes that
the water.
The water fee but just a couple
questions and some to think
about if you go to page six.
Line eight.
It says you know test public
water supplies for the
contaminants.
provisions of the federal safe
drinking water act and rules
promulgated by the department.
Pursuant to environmental
improvement act I think I know
what department but.
Does it say in the bill of what
department stands for Madam
chair representative.
It does and I'm scanning really
quickly because I should say but
I referred to mistruths
for clarification.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
Representative Maestas in that
the relevant statutory language
department here is defined as
the New Mexico Environment
department contested and then
the same same concern you don't
just I would just ask you to
double check it as this bill
winds its way going to the red
box on page seven.
Line twenty five page eight.
Of line for you know it says
By November first of each year
call of the department and.
Department we refer to their
lives and that is generated.
And and Mr chair representative
once again it would be this and
Amanda is
Mr is indicated that no thank
you and I I just realize that
uses the word department on a
seven line twelve but that's
such an also
Talks about in in paragraph D.
on page six line eighteen the
taxation and revenue department
so I think that's what it does
when it's talking about taxed
rabbit names Tax and
Representative when it does
second one of our many just says
department so no I just want to
make sure but one final comment
Mr chair the
There's a lot of a dollars and
cents in our tax code
we talked about twenty seven
years since this is been raises
been
Twenty.
Twenty nine years since the gas
tax has been raised and that's a
dollar amount seventeen cents so
I think we need to as we review
of tax credits tax deductions
every five to here to see if
they're working you really need
to review all of the dollars and
cents in our tax code because we
do adjusted every ten years or
or figure out a way to go to
percentages of that nature
because you know.
If this fight is not of the
political will to adjust those
figures at it
It creates a lack of the
services that that tax was
intended to do and when and and
this case clean water so what
you're bringing this forward
Representative I go some
And I just want to make that
point maybe maybe we can make it
a regular.
Part of the culture of rest of
the summer and fall to look at
all the dollars and cents taxes
in New Mexico thank you Mr.
Thank you representative.
Representative Jason Harper.
Thank you chairman
Hey goes to her parents right to
see you both this morning
I miss you in this committee
always have great comments and I
really enjoyed
Are you Sir with us
so god just you.
It to see if.
So.
So a couple questions and then
I'll maybe share comment at the
end
So it looks like if I'm reading
the in Alice's correctly here
that.
expenditures from the funding
source.
Exceeded annual revenues.
starting in fiscal year
seventeen
or through eighteen ninety.
I'm
sure how much the expenditures
have.
Seated revenues
hi the average these last
several years.
Thank you Mr chair
And so that it's the cost of
living index auto just months is
my understanding but I will
refer to our expert witness once
again Mister is.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
Representative Harper that that
years the as you know from just
starting in FY seventeen where
are expenditures are really
started outpacing our revenue
revenue was staying pretty flat
I in terms of the three cent fee
per thousand gallons that water
systems were paying and
meanwhile are expenditures
started to climb up around that
time due to a number of factors
relating to the cost the cost of
testing the lab the lab fees for
testing the samples
our staff that go out and
collect the samples and manage
the program salary changes
around that time the average
eight for those years seventeen
on of at extra expenditures
beyond our revenue was around
six hundred fifty thousand
dollars a year there are one or
two years that were above that
so that is an average because
the required sampling and
testing analysis fluctuates from
year to year so it's not
consistent along those lines at
but the average of for that
outpaced expenditures was six
hundred and fifty thousand a
year.
Mr chair representative miss
Bruce thank you that that's
super helpful and I know it was
interesting you say that the
revenue is been flat over the
last several years
I know that there's been a lot
of effort to reduce water usage.
and so a lot of
fees and such for maintaining as
water systems I'm if you if you
have been flat or going down as
we decreased water usage but we
all know that the cost of
materials and labor has been
increasing so it's it's it's a.
Kind of interesting you Yang
yeah I would like to use less
water but that means there's
less
dollars to help maintain the
system performance tests.
Okay so the bill the bill does
really two things to help
address that Representative
Maestas brought up the the two
cent increase which is projected
to generate an extra one point
four million dollars so that's
good that helps you get above
that six R. fifty K. loss and if
you a little bit of a question
perhaps but the second thing it
does and I'd like you to address
Mr representatives it's now
stipulating that a public water
system is in violation.
It is now responsible to collect
and analyze samples and enter
that expense is my understanding
is that a change
from the from the status quo and
and how much savings you
expected generate from that
change.
Thank you Mr chair
representative again I refer to
my expert witness.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Harper yes that
is a change to the status quo in
terms of how the department
would be the environment
department would be required to
manage the fund currently we
have the ability to make
decisions like that on a case by
case basis in terms of how we
deliver services with the fund
balance that we have and this is
a change that came about in part
because of our extensive work
with the municipal league and
their environmental quality
association about what the
concerns of the municipalities
are I'm to make sure that we're
making as much of the funds
available as possible to water
systems that are doing their
required minimum sampling
requirements when there are
violations of certain
constituents the underlying
regulations and require more
frequent sampling and so here if
a water system has fallen into
violation and have to sample
more frequently for a period of
time before they can return back
to that normal frequency they
would incur those costs as
opposed to just paying out of
the fund in terms of how much we
project that is save in in
expenditures annually it's hard
to say it could be in the tens
of thousands it could be a
bigger number it could be six
figures depending on how many
systems are having compliance
issues and and we have lots of
other work that we're doing
outside of managing this at
testing fund to help water
systems return to compliance and
stay in compliance so that there
are fewer violations that
trigger this provision in the
first place.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman represents
Mr Reuss that's very helpful
again
So so looking at your your two
send increasing the funds are to
generate.
looks like you're going to.
You know.
There probably could be an
argument made to you only need
to raise a by one cent to really
come to be breaking even and
have you have even a little bit
of caution but I don't think
your proposal to census out of
line and especially since it was
how many years since this is
been increased you know setting
yourself up so that this fee can
cover you for the next you know
ten twenty years maybe
I I think this is a reasonable
ask.
Wirth you know being on the
fiscal conservative side you
know I hate seeing fee
increases
but the same time the cost of
testing is going up this number
of things have to test are
increasing.
and this is just the the cost of
regulation and and really the
cost of having safe water.
This all just finish by saying I
very much appreciate the clean
and safe or that we have here
the United States I want to
drink the tap.
When I was in Africa I was sent
there twice and the defense to
help with Ebola outbreak.
And we are we had to use bottled
water for brushing Ortiz for
drinking we keep our eyes closed
during the showers that water
one goes through archer docks
and and my first time there my
first my first two months there
I made a mistake one day I
accidentally ran my toothbrush
under the tap.
And and I got I got sick I got
pretty sick and
I don't know it was the first I
got sick but in the two days I
noticed something peak growing
on my toothbrush had.
So and and then
the team before me rotating out
every for every few months the
team before me they actually got
bottled water that was
contaminated.
So they had to dump all their
bottled water get new bottle
water interest.
You know we we we often take for
granted
Those things that to.
No just simple things like
knowing you can take a drink out
the tap and it's not going to
sect so
I'm gonna.
Of this measure thank you for
for bringing four.
Thank you chairman.
Thank you Mr chair
representative.
Thank you president Harper thank
you Sanchez I don't have anyone
else on the list and other
questions or comments before the
twenty built.
By your Chandler Mr chair may I
make a motion to do pass of do
pass please.
Absolutely.
So we have a due passed motion
by by your Chandler and a second
by Representative look on his
that did I get that right.
Okay.
Is there any discussion on the
motion.
Elaine please call the roll.
Representative.
Yes.
Well yes.
Representative Parker.
Yes.
Representative members.
Representative the one.
Yes.
Representative my SS yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Scott yes.
Representative Stansbury yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
Representative Adventist.
Vice chair Chandler yes.
Chairman working
working.
Yes thank you.
We have twelve in the
affirmative.
Okay thank you bye voted twelve
to zero unanimous you have to do
pass representatives Gaydos and
at thank you for bringing the
bill forward.
I floor next so good good luck
good fortune State.
Thank you Mr.
He.
Thank you come back to each TRC
members I'm gonna pass on the
I'm gonna pass it on to my vice
chair.
Because I have an unstable
internet connection so I've got
to go
maybe disconnect some devices.
So that I can be back in
stability buster Chandler taken
away we have a House Bill.
let's see.
One of five all right thank you
Mr chair we are on house bill
one oh five is Representative
small amongst us.
Madam chair I am here great.
hi Committee.
Good to see you representative
small would you like to give us
a short synopsis of what your
bill is all about yes thank you
very much madam chair I'll be
very brief I'm joined by two
experts including the robber
Paul who works with Sandoval
County formally served in this
body
madam chair committee members
house bill one oh five is that a
technical fix to legislation
that was passed in a bipartisan
manner through this legislature
last year this legislation.
Will allow transmission projects
to access the same industrial
revenue bond I. R. B.
Status currently enjoyed by the
distribution and generation of
other energy forms as well as
many other industrial projects
madam chair committee I will
conclude and then turn it over
to Mr Burpo for any additional
thoughts by saying the
amendments that have been
brought to in house bill one oh
I insure that counties can if
they voluntarily choose access
this approach utilize industrial
revenue bonds without being
penalized financially while at
the same time looking out for
and supporting school districts
to ensure that they receive fair
compensation from these projects
and further that the most rural
school districts who can often
be the most are for revenue
are given an equal chance and
are actually given an equal
share in this technical fix.
Of any voluntarily chosen I R.
B. projects with that madam
chair I very much appreciate the
opportunity present house bill
one of five if Mr Burke well
cool service who is the
technical expert and perhaps I
will very likely be directing if
there are questions to him
there's any additional thoughts
and then we would stand madam
chair for you and the committee
thank you madam chair.
thank you very much
Representative small Mr Burke
did you have a.
Brief COVID to maker
Representative presentation
thank you madam chair
Representative fallen in the.
Representative two thousand to
the legislature allowed electric
generation facilities the
ability to use I. R. B. the one
of the components was to make
sure that the school districts
that maybe in impacted because
of all the new students that
would be coming into these new
gas fired generation facility
would not be negatively impacted
so legislation was created in
two thousand two to address that
fast forward to two thousand and
fourteen fifteen industrial
revenue bond became really
important component of the
renewable energy industry in New
Mexico and it's been used.
A dramatically in two thousand
and
Twenty last year amendment was
put into the bill that basically
said that the school districts.
Would would would have to get a
hundred percent of what they
would have gotten in property
taxes get the higher B. had done
but the project was the and to
be real candid it mades IRB's
fiscally.
They can't be done let me just
give you two very quick example
Torrance County a project that
they just did a few minutes a
few months ago if this
legislation that we're trying to
the man was in place for the
first eleven years of the I. R.
V. E. pour County would have had
to give it a hundred percent of
the payment look taxes to the
school districts what.
Another eight million dollars on
its general fund over the first
eleven years.
Then the next eleven years it
would take and to recoup what
they paid out the first eleven
years of the county would only
net revenue.
For the last seven years the
project in years twenty three to
thirty.
Sandoval County whichever you
members are or Representative.
Recently did a for farm with the
PNM if the statute was in place
not only with a hundred percent
of the revenues gone to of the
school districts but the county
would have also had to pay
another six hundred and thirty
four thousand dollars out of its
general fund over the twenty
five year life for the county
would never have made any money
with that language in place as
it stands now I don't see any
local governments ever doing
another hired me for renewable
energy so what the language does
now basically it's a formula
based on the New Mexico taxation
revenue department tax
certificate that says.
Whatever the mill rates are the
the counties the what will share
that equally with the with the
school districts all school
districts and their
In their jurisdiction
municipalities they really don't
change except the formula
instead of them and argue with
the school districts over how
much you're going to share with
them it's based on a formula
they still The Little Miss
probably still have the majority
of the of the flexibility that
the county don't have and with
that is Madam but you're what.
very
I see the chairman is back with
the chairman like to take the
gavel or shell I proceed.
Please proceed vice chair very
good I understood Representative
small to say that you have some
amendments is that correct for
this committee.
I apologize madam chair no there
are no amendment apply this
committee there are amendments
that will put a previous yes
very good okay so I think at
this point in time we're ready
for public comments let me see
are there any attendees
interested in offering Madam in
support of this legislation.
Okay the hands are starting to
come up Mr Jeremy Turner.
Yes madam chair committee
members appreciate the
opportunity to speak this
morning I'm I'm German Turner
I'm the director of New Mexico
project development for pattern
energy I don't has about five
hundred forty four megawatts of
wind already operating in the
state with a broad view great
projects we're in the middle of
construction on an additional
thousand fifty megawatts which
would represent the largest
single phase construction of
renewable power build in the U.
S. history we're working on our
next development which is
another thirty two hundred
megawatts and that will actually
be the largest build in the
western hemisphere so we are
investing billions of dollars in
rural New Mexico higher bees
have been a critical tool in our
financing of those developments
they've allowed us to locate the
state they've allowed us to work
with the local community and
build our relationship with the
communities and the schools and
for these reasons we stand
strong support of this
legislation and ask for your
support thank you madam chair
thank you Mr Turner Larry heard
and please.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Larry heard and
registered lobbyists for
Sandoval County Mr Burpo
described the problem and the
solution very well and the
reason for this legislation
Sandoval county commission
passed a resolution in support
of the fixes that are contained
in house bill one of five and
our current county manager
Andrew Johnson has significant
experience dealing with
renewable projects from his
experience in Torrance County
and so we think that this is a
good fix that will help help to
counties be fair to the school
districts and then also help
expanded the use of these
renewable project so we support
this legislation in order
support thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr her and Lorenzo
bila bila.
Alaska's and I'm sure I I just
mangled her name so please
correct me.
Lorenzo are you are you
available to speak I'm sorry I
want to apologize and I'm gonna
let him do what will my computer
but I'm not I want to speak on
another bill I apologize thank
you no problem we're all
learning and we're all making
mistakes.
Thank you we'll look forward to
hearing from you on another bill
at Ashley Wagner.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Ashley Wagner
director of public policy for
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce we support this bill
because it ensures local
financial support for schools
while ensuring were able to
continue to build our renewable
energy infrastructure thank you
for allowing me the opportunity
to speak today.
Mr Brian Moore.
Mr Moore thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee
at this point more with the New
Mexico counties and course we've
been involved in many of these
are being built over the years
we have not done a lot with this
particular bill we are released
in strong support because we
think the six is a little bit of
the problem from last year it
allow local governments to work
with renewable energy developers
around the state to build
transmission lines that we need
to sell renewable energy in the
state and around the other parts
of the country this will help
local governments especially the
state and private landowners are
helping generate these valuable
resources thank you madam chair
thank you Mr more Kevin McCall
please.
Kevin McCall.
Can you hear me now yes thank
you are just came out of the
county commission meeting here
and this is hello
discombobulated coming from you
from a different location.
Torrance County commissioner I
just want to reiterate the
The imports to fix this I are
B. process it is a it is helped
us here Torrance County just
find the most basic services to
our constituents and our
citizens here Torrance County
I can tell you that for the
first time we're looking at
career EMS first responders
and then with our to our
volunteer fire department
it's something we're really
proud of that we've been able to
do is to increase our rents
researchers from three twelve to
five twelfths
during this crazy in pandemic
that times and so I'd like to to
just tell you how important it
is to to fix this small
technical fixes and I'd like to
say I say here Torrance County
that the wind and solar is our
oil and gas and
and this is very important to us
to this committed to this
community and the school
districts so with that we stand
strong strong support.
Thank you very much miss McCall
Deborah Condit please.
Deborah.
Yes.
We now.
Representative Interwest Energy
Alliance and we are trade
association representing thirty
of the largest renewable energy
development.
Manufacturing companies in the
nation we're headquartered right
here in New Mexico and also work
in six states across the
surrounding region interested
here today to support house bill
one of five as it will restore
critical functionality to
industrial revenue bonding in
the state when we talk about the
renewable and transmission
projects coming to the state
we're often thinking about the
energy transition act
requirements for our utilities
to bring on more resources
states across the west meet with
New Mexico in passing both
energy clean policies all of
their utilities are looking to
buy renewable energy generation
as well and that means New
Mexico projects are competing
with projects in Colorado Nevada
Oregon and all across the west
to win these competitive
solicitation.
Recent studies show that in
order to meet the laws on the
books today will meet to build
nine gigawatts of new renewables
per year for the next twenty
years New Mexico projects can be
part of that picture without
this functionality IRB's are
being issued without that key
tool we will see projects move
to other states and regions this
call helps us make sure that the
renewable projects needed in the
west are developed here in New
Mexico and that are counties and
school districts receive those
benefits we ask you to vote yes
on house bill one of five thank
you.
Thank you ms Kahn that are now I
see no hands in other hands in
favor are there any members of
the audience who are in
opposition please raise your
hands.
Opposition I see no hands raised
in opposition we can now go to
the committee on Representative
Harper.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative small.
Welcome welcome back to house
tax Representative how you
doing.
Doing well madam chair grace
Harper.
and it's great to see you as
well Mr proposed thanks for
joining us today.
so.
So I have to minutes
this bill is bring back lots of
bad memories.
From last session of there's a
small you know you and I had and
I I've of course have lots of
respect for you Representative
small you know that we we had
some some live session on the
house floor and this committee
on this bill last session
which which are strongly opposed
do you remember.
I suppose this legislation in
the first place.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative
You I don't with specificity
Madam chair representative I'm
excited to be here
to discuss this technical fix
which Mr Burke on others have
put a great deal of work and.
Madam madam chair representative
I'm I'm I'm dropping it here
that you don't remember all the
things that I said that about
your bill last time
And I understand this is a
technical fix I understand
thanks for making that that
we're.
But.
I just.
There's maybe two two reasons
why I think this is just bad
public policy what we've done.
The first is.
IRB's.
for for those of you who are new
to the committee or might not be
familiar ideas industrial
revenue bond.
It's really a strange mechanism
I think we're greater the FIR
even calls it a fiction.
that we created and and what it
does is it's essentially in
agreement between business and
government entity that's usually
a County.
And this agreement that's a make
what what's actually sign off on
it is that's a County the
government entity will be the
owner of this infrastructure
project that's being
developed because they're the
owner.
They are not subject to gross
receipts tax because gross
receipts tax
you know there is a governmental
gross receipts tax but
that's going to mourn the weeds
but essentially the private
entity does not have to pay
gross receipts tax.
And then also because the
property is owned by the
government.
They don't pay property tax.
And so it's it's a it's a great
your call economic development
tool to allow private private
industry to not have to pay tax.
And and then the government
essentially leases a back
to the private industry to use.
and so that's that's how they.
that's what a structure of an
IRB it's and
Madam chair and Representative I
did I get that right.
Yeah.
Okay so.
I really don't think this is a
good tool in the first place the
second is
We're.
We usually use this tool to try
to attract business or to get
business to expand but in this
case the business's captive.
That transmission line is going
to go through those counties
because it's going from the
supply the source of the
generation to the demand and
they're not gonna go around
different counties like this you
know to save money to go through
these counties anyway.
So in my mind it's a complete
giveaway.
that they would have.
They would check their bottom
line and they were maintenance
of essence anyway and most of
this money goes to schools.
And so that's why last session
we had an amendment on the house
floor to try to hold schools
harmless and I understand that
it wasn't drafted in a way that
we understood would have these
unforeseen consequences.
But when you look at.
How ARE Tax Code treats have to.
industry it's very different.
I heard one of the numbers on
the the the audience say that
women solar is our oil and gas.
Well I've I've read the tax code
I've gone through it all it's
very interesting to note that
there are lots of.
Emptions duction credits that
have specific language
excluding.
the extractive industries from
this particular credit.
And the rationale as well this
credit is to try to attract
business and their captive we
don't need to attract them
sorted excluded.
That's the rationale there's
dozens of these in our tax code.
And so if we are to treat one
and solar.
In the same.
Equitable way when it comes to
the captive part of the street.
Mission.
it doesn't make sense to me that
we would be giving them this tax
benefit so those those are the
two two big reasons why I oppose
legislation last year
chair representative
So I understand the the fix is
you're trying to make here I'm
so going to the actual substance
of the bill I have just one
question for you
So looking at the changes to I'm
trying to hold school districts
harmless can you explain.
and the rest equity approach and
how your higher structuring that
change.
Thank you madam chair I'll turn
to Mr Burke vote for additional
input the one piece that I'll
add madam chair and
representative is that the
proceeds will be divided equally
amongst the school districts
that are in counties where the
I. R. B. is voluntarily agreed
upon to ensure that those
proceeds are are shared
equitably and again that the
most rural districts actually
have that equal seat at the
table Madam chair representative
I don't know if there's anything
that Mr Burpo wants to add but
thank you very much for the
question.
Mr Chairman Representative
Harper we look at several
different mechanisms on how to
do the at the money we look at
for example allocating based on
property tax assessments and we
looked at for example student
population of but we use that
weather is in Sandoval county or
curry county or Dona county
whatever the big screen got the
most of the money and the little
schools who I think most people
provided me talked to they will
take care of the rules will they
got the short end of it so what
we did instead we went in to
look at the middle that the
various County totally imposed
and then we looked at the middle
of the school districts
themselves posing for their
operating.
Mills there debtservice mills
your capital outlay mills and
then we added to increase the
the benefits to the school
districts and decrease the
revenue to the county we added
into the formula with the
amendment that was put on the
previous committee the state
that mill levy which is one
point three six and just give
you an example of the impact of
that it is substantial on in
Sandoval county for example
without adding an extra one
point three six the the county
would get twenty eight point
eight percent in the school
districts would get twenty eight
point eight percent.
By editor one point three six
that jumped up to thirty two
point seven eight in Torrance
County for example why adding
that extra little bit of the
state mill to the formula money
went from twenty eight point
nine two percent going to the
school districts in the county
of the thirty four and a half
percent so that's the that is a
logic behind the the the formula
that was our way of getting the
money to the we're Donnelly
rural schools as opposed to
heavy ending it to play the
bigger screen to.
madam chair and her
Representative small a miserable
thank you for for the
information that that was that
was helpful help me understand a
little bit better we we did
have.
our analyst to empowers did have
a concern about how this was
structured and not sure if it
will be appropriate I perhaps
enlighten Mr powers to share his
concern because although I don't
support legislation I wanna make
sure that we get it right.
what would that be appropriate
that would be fine
Representative Harper.
Thank you so Mister powers if
you're able to you share your
concern I appreciate it.
Mr Chairman
Yes my my concern was was
primarily with the.
Equal sharing provision in this
of legislation that all
districts would share equally
within a county
It's I I think there's
some cases where you might have
a facility that was located
entirely in one school district
in the county.
and it seems to me that.
that's school district school
districts should benefit from
from that project
especially if.
Other school districts there
there may be minor pieces of
school districts in the county.
In a completely different part
of the county I'm not sure that
it makes sense to have it shared
equally so that that was my my
main concern.
Thank you Mr powers you was to
continue Mr Representative
Harper.
Yes thank you madam chair and
and Mr powers you you gave an
example of of a few different
school districts was.
If you share that example if if
you if your call it.
Yes madam chair Representative
Harper
The
The one the the the county that
I was thinking out of
specifically is Torrance County
where you have stance you
Moriarty are the major school
districts in the county but then
you have some other school
districts that have little
pieces of of assessed value in
that county and and it's it's
seems to me that that would be
one of those cases where you
might have a school district
that is had a little bit of
property in a few students in
that county that would end up
being part of that distribution
so I I think there there could
be some some inequities and
that.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr powers thank you
Representative I assume you wish
to continue.
yes thank you madam chair
appreciate that so.
Representative Mr purple I know
this is complicated it's not
simple
you know and and Torrance County
we have a little piece of a
Bernalillo school district in
there may be
you know I just.
Have you.
Was this consideration or was
this scenario consideration when
you're putting together your
forms.
and if you on it thank you madam
chair thank you representative.
Going back to last year's ill
fated amendment.
We have worked to make efforts
to that that help local school
districts and now with this that
Madam chair representative look
out for the smallest most rural
school districts who widely face
some of the most significant
challenges supporting their
operations that is why there is
this equitable approach.
that that has been settled upon
and given that that.
The ill fated amendment from
last year has had for me and for
I think million the legislature
the
I'm friendly a fact of stalling
I R. B. projects that has as
we've heard harms rural counties
and inhibited their ability to
take advantage of this tool
You know we we we know it's.
We want to make sure and be very
careful not to do that as we
move forward.
Yes so so madam chair
Representative small I I
appreciate that but what I'm
hearing is that your equitable
fix is not equitable.
Thank Madam chair representative
appreciate very much the concern
there is a strong reason why
this is included in the
legislation and was worked on
with I part is with other
members who aren't on this
committee.
as a way to look out for and
support the most rural school
districts while still allowing
counties the flexibility to
voluntarily enter into this
approach.
So madam chair represents small
I'm I'm still looking for detail
perhaps Mr purple you can
answer.
Thank you madam chair
representative are for I'd like
to address Kevin's it example
because he he hit right on where
I want to go with this.
Torrance County just recently
did a very large higher rate of
over one billion dollars.
Where the turbines were located
were in the very far southeast
corners of the county.
Where in that particular area
the Public Education Department
boundaries for the corolla
school district up in Torrance
County and they do part of the
following school district up in
the Torrance County there's not
a single student.
From Torrance County that
attends either one of those
school.
Any of those rural districts got
a hundred percent.
A hundred percent of the entire
be paying a little taxes on that
transaction Moriarty didn't get
any money stance you get any
money out there didn't get any
money it wouldn't really want to
nobody got any money except to
school districts outside the
county just because where they
were located so we met with
Representative Townsend and
others it was their suggestion
that we usually even language
that's where that came from and
I'll give you another example
you would both of your home
Representative Harper
Sandoval County just recently
about a year and a half of the
appeal of for project with PNM.
Now it was about fifteen fifteen
actually nineteen miles from
city center.
You know about forty two miles
as the crow flies to eligible
to.
But because PED the district it
was actually an invalid school
district even though if there
was a if they're going to be a
student there's not going to be
a student on a four there's not
gonna be a single impact the
school.
Percent of that revenue with the
hema springs school district and
zero with the Rio Rancho.
So this is trying to even out is
it perfect I'm sorry I loans I
was up there there's never a
perfect bill this is I don't
want to call rough justice of
years of the new the F. I. R..
What we're trying to address
some of these issues that.
There.
The consequences with all of the
but the problem is.
We have seen very hardcore
examples of injustices to
schools and point having in in
in Santa because of the weight
PED draw the borders everybody
is subject to the vagaries of
where the public education
department also borders
irrespective of where the
students are worthy of students
the but I might be so that's
what we're this legislation you
is trying to take that.
That unfairness that exist now I
know you think even.
We might not be fair in your
particular case even actually
helps out your where district so
the for what it's worth.
Yes so chair and Representative
and Mr both thank you for that
explanation of that's this is
the detail on going for.
And.
And all up to disagree I've seen
some perfect legislation.
It hasn't just been money.
but
if you could elaborate a little
bit on your example Torrance.
R. B. that they just did and
the.
School districts don't have any
students not County benefiting
how does this proposed change
how would that have changed that
picture.
Mr Chairman representative are
for this particular transaction
now what would happen is the the
payment of taxes that what the
formula put in the division that
revenue would be shared between
the Corona school district the
Bantul district now in their
school district the state is
cool District and Moriarty
school districts.
Even as opposed to a hundred
percent of it going to Bantul
district rules will.
Okay.
Right so so madam chair Mister
proposed so so I agree this is
several steps in the right
direction if I'm understanding
this correctly.
Even though there are still no
Torrance
County kids going to bond and
and I forget the other school
district wrote yes thank you
Corona
they would still receive a
percentage but
it would be a lower amount and
districts that do have students
in Torrance would benefit
Representative.
Okay so so that helps me
understand this construct better
did you consider.
changing that constructs so
there would be only school
districts.
That have students from the
benefiting County.
The.
madam chair Representative
Harper the the issue we deal
with is is this.
A lot of times the department
ranch location and you never
know when there's going to be a
student in the one student.
Justify that tool that you're
getting all the money to go
there one PM so it I mean I
understand what you're gonna we
actually looked at for example
will be allocating it based on
the student population.
In the problem with that is in
the case of Sandoval County
play with the numbers real quick
in case the Sandoval county Rio
Rancho a school district would
get eighty two percent of the
money Kerala's would get sick he
would get almost four he was
pregnant only get one point
seven and for a little school
districts get six point five
three if we use that based on
student population so we we did
look at that Representative
Harper and it just it that
particular formula creates some
real inequities and and quite
frankly for rural school my.
So so madam chair representative
and Mr both thank you that see
that's exactly the information I
was looking for what were the
others scenarios that you
considered.
And and what was the outcome of
that consideration and yeah
looking at population I think
that was the right thing to look
at and then after looking at
your analysis I think I would I
would agree with you that your
small roast our districts even
always and equitable percentage
per student.
If we're deciding that is good
public policy to help rural
districts more than doing this
kind of rough justice approach
might be the the best
alternative amongst all the
alternatives I'm so I'm.
So I.
I'm I'm supportive of your fix
that you've chosen thank you for
taking the time to explain to me
you got there that's that's very
helpful
Chair and representative thank
you for for the time.
Thank you very much
Representative Harper
Representative Montoya.
Thank you
you madam chair and
Representative small
before we go too far beyond that
discussion was just now going on
as I say fairness is in the eye
of the beer holder.
Currently in in San Juan County
because of the ETA and the
shattering of the.
Of the us out one power plant
and coal mine.
Which is.
literally half of the tax base
that goes to central
consolidated schools.
the other half approximately
coming from the Navajo coal mine
and four corners generating
station with the shuttering of
that we've had since we do have
transmission lines in place for
electricity we do have several
folks who have come into
Farmington and San Juan County
looking to put in place a solar.
power plants and working with
two of them right now in San
Juan County.
but the with this fix that's
been put in place.
Senator consolidated schools
which is losing a huge portion
of their
of their property tax base.
if this it is San Juan County
were to accept to to put in
place and our B. which is being
pursued by
Does by by these are solar.
Developers.
the folks who are losing all of
their tax base.
What then be sharing that we
would have the exact opposite
effect affect in in San Juan
County where this the city of
Farmington school district the
Aztec school district Bloomfield
school district Blanco school
district.
Would be sharing.
In the
in the tax dollars in that
instance.
J. would
it would be it would
detrimentally harmed the single
school district.
That should receive all of those
dollars so I think this fix
fixes it for for a a lot of
places but it definitely we're
talking about unintended
consequences be very devastating
to central consolidated school
district and and just for the
members who are on on this
committee to understand central
consolidated school district is
the second largest school
district in population next to
the Albuquerque school district
and it's it's a very very a big
sprawling school districts so
I'm just wondering
Representative small and and Mr
Perot if if there's not.
Some way to fix what at least
for them would be.
and gregis.
The cost to bear.
She.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
The this tactical fix is most
applicable in the areas where
developers are building
transmission.
And in up in San Juan County of
there is significant
transmission already constructed
making it of course very
appropriate for additional
generation and so the the
examples that Mr Burpo work
through.
Really drove the on the ground
consideration that hosts inform
this technical fix.
Representative Montoya if you're
speaking we can't hear you thank
you for that yes thank you I'm
trying to mute when I'm not
speaking so as not get.
The the echo so thank you for
that manager Representative
small
the problem is we're putting
this in place.
And.
In a section of law where we
have amended in transmission it
already talks about generation.
We've added in.
Transmission so even though this
was meant to only affect
transmission it will affect.
and and so it will affect a.
It will affect any utility that
is built so I think you
unintended consequence here
could be pretty big that would
mean if they if a.
Our plant is built specifically
in one county.
And with multiple school
districts that that that that
school district would be most
affected by that a property tax
increase.
I would now be distributed
whether it was just a utility
itself a power plant.
For transmission as if the
purpose was to to fix this based
on transmission going through an
area.
maybe the fiction of just only
applied to transmission do you
have any thoughts on that
Representative small.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative I think in many
of the specific instances
especially covered under the
replacement power scenario that
you may be outlining according
to the energy transition act
there are specific requirements
that
the property taxes continue
apply to apply to the new
generation so I think there
there is a fix in other parts of
law that will apply especially
as it relates madam chair and
representative to central
consolidated school district and
madam chair representative
broadly so much of our both
renewable energy and the need
for transmission are in fact
located in very sparsely
populated parts of New Mexico in
rural New Mexico
or that impact.
For rural parts of even more
populated counties Santa may be
an example of that that may
apply down and my home
counterfeit Dona Ana County and
so given the solution as Mr
Burpo explained that was and I
appreciate deeply him go into
that explanation want to
publicly apologized
Representative Harper for
not going into as detailed of an
explanation
that we're actually that this is
a an artful technical solution
that looks out for and supports
the most rural school districts
where much of this power in
transition is located and or
needed and who will benefit
substantially from this tool.
I appreciate that explanation I
understand what the purpose was
but Representative Burpo are
former president but mentioned
how it
How this was meant to protect
rural schools but I am giving
you a very concrete.
Example.
Projects that are going forward
that would be very definitely
hurt.
A specific school district then
I'm.
Sorry if I could responses
civically to that madam chair
madam chair and representative
as it relates to the replacement
power for San Juan generating
station that is connected to the
energy transition act the this
would not supplant the
requirements there that require
those local property taxes to
remain in place some
Representative small your
misunderstanding these other pro
these other projects are not any
part of the transition act these
are separate projects for
merchant plants this is not
replacement power for for the
publicly regulated utility so
this would not a year you
mistaken those are merchant
plants looking to sell
electricity out of state back to
two other states so that.
So I. R. B. as in this case
would not be under the TA so it
would definitely harm that
school district up.
Representative Montoya I believe
Mr Burpo has been just dying to
jump in on this to the leading
conversations.
Ask him to do so.
One of the solutions and I
understand what you're saying
about the inequities of for
example aspect and what have you
getting money to go to a single
consolidated a solution to that
could be instead of the county
being the issue of the higher be
the city of Farmington for
example the to the I. R. B. and
that would limit the the the the
players you get the share of the
revenue.
Mr.
Chair and and representative
that really is not an option
here because outside of the
taxing area of the city of
Farmington it is it is in county
property so the county would be
the only one to be able to issue
that and city of Farmington
should receive any portion of
tax from that so that's that's
the problem saying this this is
just one example I'm sure that
others will come up and just ask
of we have to cough it costs
clarifying question on this
point because I haven't heard it
come up I think we're missing a
really big piece about the R. B.
process state your point
speaker madam chair that is
maybe a prize from the smaller
reciprocal to talk about the
payments in lieu of taxes that
go to school districts we hired
these are issued right me that's
part of the IRB process
every time and higher be is
looked at with it in the county
or in the city.
There's an association with the
government and the effect of
school districts the rest of the
approvals granted in payments in
lieu of taxes are included in
the industrial revenue bond
process to hold school districts
harmless when Iraqis go forward
I'm so that's this party
internet that's part of the
industrial revenue bond statute
that happens with all industrial
revenue bonds and so this idea
that somehow this is going to
have a negative impact on
revenues that flow to school
districts I believe as.
Hi.
Because of other R. C.
industrial revenue bond
authorizing statute that is in
place some maybe Mr Burpo
Representative small manager
could address that is I think
that directly addresses the
concerns you're hearing from
Representative Montoya and we
see these in industrial revenue
bond agreements and in the bond
adventures that are issued how
the bonding entity that is the
the business is going to make
those kids.
Taxes payments to the school
district so madam chair and I
continuing on that point if you
look on page three.
Item
The.
It states in here that not less
than the amount due to school
districts in the prior tax year.
So that means prior to
improvement.
So I I believe any protection
for that school district is
taken away in last year's
legislation which stated that
the
school district could not
reasonably deny.
the approval of an I. R. B. so
they they are almost written out
of this that's the reason madam
chair the the technical fix that
was was stated several times at
the beginning was really more
than a technical technical fix
it wasn't it wasn't a specific
amendment which I do believe
caused unintended consequences
that those unintended
consequences have because the
stalling of projects.
but.
I'm looking at this as the
unintended consequences that can
arise have not all been
addressed and I and I do is I
think it was stated that it
might be in perfect I think it
is in perfect solutions and I'm
suggesting that as this bill
which I fully expect to pass on
this committee
and move on that we try and find
a way to fix.
What could be.
Very inequitable because we're
moving.
We remove protections in last
year's language and now to try
and put back what what happened
we tried to put back in
protections for the schools I
believe now by saying that.
Piece of property that is worth
a hundred twenty five dollars
taxable that we're not causing
any harm to them by keeping it.
Hundred twenty five dollars
taxable no less than and that
they couldn't reasonably now
because an IRB from being issued
when in reality as
representatives Harper stated
earlier that.
The
I'm gonna let his to his
statement stand alone but but
the the idea that we that.
That this fix is going to fix
all problems I don't believe it
does and I'm and I'm concerned
that those who are going to get
hit potentially gonna get her
really hard so I'm looking for
some sort of fix along the way
because like I said I expect
this to move on but
I think I think we need to.
Make sure that those schools
that should receive all of their
funding do that will be.
And kind of a secondary point
and and represent a small it the
the question I have for you on
this is we've been talking about
transitioning.
From fossil fuel economy.
To a green energy economy.
And
it's been stated that IRB's
generally going to place because
we're looking for other tax
sources so we might give a the
business that's coming and going
employ fifty people we want to
encourage them to settle in our
community so we offer up an IRB
because we're looking at other
tax sources some of that being
G. R. T. from the.
New employees the new tax base
from those employees New River
they're they're they're actually
gonna buy a home so there's
proper property tax base from
those new employees but at the
end of this project is but but
either one whether it's a
transmission or a utility.
There are there is no severance
tax there as with the as with
the fossil fuels there is no
there are no jobs there.
After initial construction has
been completed just like a road
project.
So what's left is.
property tax and so the
improvements that property.
before let the county.
go out there and negotiate that
and the only protections that
are in place for the school
districts is that.
Their tax dollars can't go down
than it was when it was
unimproved land and some of
these communities and as a Mr
purple stated our last committee
it may be worth a hundred and
twenty five dollars taxable.
To to the
To local county assessor I just
don't see those protections
here.
And so.
I understand the reason we're
trying to fix this is because
the projects are stalled I think
that we this is an over
correction.
And now the schools are are back
in the same place they were work
which is a.
If this were a transmission that
if this were a.
They are
natural gas wind going through
or even a water line going
through that that.
That improvement.
To that property would those
dollars would go to the school
district uninterrupted and so I
that was the that was the reason
for the amendment last year.
Was because Israel school
districts have very few
opportunities if you live in the
metropolitan area or a city
there are many higher beings
that are issued and to bring
people to come in and and work
there but.
we're talking about rural
communities that don't have that
many opportunities for improved
property tax or a increased
property tax.
I I think this is going way
backwards and I and I think the
the school districts are
disproportionately harm if we go
forward with this and language
particularly those who are in a.
Very secluded school district so
with that Mr chair madam chair
and Representative small I I
just can't support this thank
you very much Representative
Montoya it are we Representative
Strickler and just a reminder
we're talking about an amendment
to a bill that was passed
previously and we could try to
focus our questions and our
expansive comments to the actual
amendment I think that would
facilitate the discussion thank
you very much Representative
Strickler thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
small you know we we heard this
extensively and and in the
energy committee and and I guess
my question is this this is
optional counties don't have to
do this.
Right I mean it's an optional
thing I think in in San Juan
County just to follow up on
Representative Montoya these two
big solar projects that are on
the drawing board they're taking
advantage of existing
transmission.
They are located in the central
consolidates Mexico District and
they're not seeking any are
based and and I don't think the
county would grant them anyway
for the same reason
Representative Harper which we
sharing with this their captive
you know there's and we need
that we need to have tax we need
that tax base I think they are
the solar projects they are
seeking some relief from the
state compensating taxed so the
state will you know will take
that hit but getting back to our
and we're and we're and sunk it
we're and solar country so you
know I'm excited about these two
projects
and with but they are merchant
power they they probably will
end up selling their energy to
Arizona and California as we
discussed in the energy
committee
In in the eastern part of the
state it's a it's one country
yeah we got we write like
eleventh and and wind resource
official very good I think
sewers number two which is
excellent and we're and you know
we're get solar country
these counties
You know this is.
Yes are they jumping at you know
are they jumping for with these
are base I mean if I was a
county commissioner Torrance
County why what are you know why
would.
You do this in a you know why
would you enter into an R. B.
when this is a golden
opportunity for Torrance County
for example to capture G. R. T.
and property tax on on a on a
project this they have nowhere
else to go I just like no gas
their captive so how often I
mean.
half is does this come about and
and and maybe.
Representative small you can
help me on on that.
I thank thank you very much
madam chair thank you
Representative Strickler
For this specific tool related
to transmission they amendment
from last year has discontinued
any or or stop in the use of
that tool I don't know yeah and
so it's effectively shut out the
counties and those school
districts from any of the
revenue available under this
tool Madam chair representative
Strickler if Mr Burpo I know
perhaps Jon Ryan is on if there
is anything they want to add to
give a little bit more light and
I know.
Commissioner McCall from
Torrance County who testified in
support of this.
If they wanted to add specific
testimony but.
To the point Madam chair
representative of this technical
fix being brought forward
specifically by the counties
that will allow them to to
better consider this voluntary
tool.
At.
Strickler you have any other
questions well I would I.
I'm just maybe.
I'm I'm having a hard time
for example a and in Lanier
county you've got all these
drilling operations to drill and
complete these wells are captive
they pay the full G. R. R. J.
and and it's it's been a.
Quite a revenue source not only
for the state but also for those
counties and and this this would
be an opportunity for these
rural counties to capture the
same benefit because I've I've
heard numbers at these went
these went projects
I mean they're going to be
billions of dollars and which is
I mean that's that's real money
and to give up the property tax
and and and G. R. T. makes no
sense to me because there's no
production tax there's no
severance tax so this is where
these local counties really.
you know make it out I mean it's
a it's a it's a wonderful
opportunity
so I I.
This model if you can answer
that are Representative Burpo
Madam chair representative go
thank you very much for the
question there is
The best I can answer with the
specific number of I. R. B.
projects but madam chair
representative referencing back
to commissioner McCall who is
said noted the number of IRB's
that Torrance County entered
into specifically for
generation.
The funds that they have
received from that the recurring
revenues he I believe he
testified have added.
They've been able to add to
their EMS service they've been
able to add to their reserves to
get through these type of
Financial Times so I think there
testimony using the IRB's
specifically for these wind
generation projects has brought
significant revenue to the
county in addition to the the
payments that many of these
property owners came from the
placement of the turbines
they're on their property so
that's the I don't know the
specific number of fire bees but
he did testify madam chair that
they have entered into a number
of them he also testified to the
benefit to the county both in
terms of their services they
offer to their residents as well
as to their financial reserves
thank you madam chair thank you
represent a small.
If they're giving up their
property tax and their gross
receipts tax.
and yep.
Where's the money coming from
I'm a course a revenue source
coming from
Thank thank you madam chair
thank you representative
with that it's coming from those
payments in lieu of taxes in
these very flexible agreements
even pertaining to some of the
previous lines of questioning
there are these always these
payments in lieu of taxes that
do represent significant new
revenue that voluntarily
negotiated between the county
and that for in these are.
Helping the county and
will be helping the other
Local government subdivisions
that are seeking these voluntary
I are please thank you madam
chair and Representative small I
believe that
Representative Burpo had his
handout I make a baby he can
shed some light he's he's such a
good expert I really appreciate
your your testimony
Representative Burpo.
Thank you madam chair what a
point of order he tells like
Representative Strickler just a
demoted Mr.
Thanks agency issues a clerk I'm
trying to be respectful well you
know I think
we should try to keep the
conversation brief here Mr Burke
and.
You Mr madam chair I.
Can't hear you about can't hear
you.
this usually real quick the the
Torrance County could you what
real good point.
The existing property taxes on
the locations where the two most
recent solar farm for bill or or
winter reform for built in in in
in Torrance County.
Over the next thirty years of
the project is that develop will
generate a total of a hundred
and nineteen thousand one
hundred forty five dollars in
property tax which is like
thirty nine hundred dollars a
year and then assume the one and
a half percent three year
inflation on the value of the
land.
So basically without.
You can make thirty nine hundred
seventy one dollars a year for
the next thirty years that Mr
Madam chair representative or is
one of the prime reasons why
they look at doing this are
taking land that otherwise is
not generating and by the way I
just a reminder a lot of these
projects are built on on the
specially in winter in
industries are built on State
Land Office land.
And as a result they are getting
bumps in their rants as well of
the county not particles
discussions don't have anything
to do with them but we know a
lot of this land is on state
legislative plant this plant
they are getting bumped to that
also end up going back into the
school system so that your
question Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
represent a small that that
concludes my questions thank you
very much Representative
Strickler.
I see no other hands up.
Is there a motion.
And chair I move it to pass.
Chair Martinez needs to pass to
have a second.
Second.
Of second by Representative my
S. does a lane would you please
call the roll.
Representative.
Yes.
Well yes in blue now.
Representative Harper.
No.
Representative and then this
pass.
Representative.
Yes.
you representative.
Yes thank you.
Representative I just.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Romero yes.
Representative.
No and I would like to explain
enveloped.
Representative Stansbury yes.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative technologist no.
Vice chair Chandler yes.
For Martinez.
Yes.
In.
And poor and the negative.
We're missing someone.
Representative Montoya I'm sorry
we missed Representative Montoya
spoke okay and one absence.
Good thank you we are now on
house bill one twenty two I
maintain the gavel back to the
chair I'm about to run off to
state government or swivel to
state government
thank you Mr chair for the
opportunity to share this
meeting that meeting that bill
thank you thank you thank you
vice chair and thanks for
passing on the the gavel
wherever that gavel this I will
take it from you.
We are on to house bill one
twenty two and we have
Representative Armstrong on deck
and the reason I'm sure welcome
to taxed revenue I believe
you've got a couple of experts
as well right thank you Mr chair
yes I do superintendent rust
hole.
And a book Estrada.
And calling bio.
Okay well what are you proceed
with a presentation but we allow
your experts and all right thank
you thank you Mr chairman thank
you committee members I don't
often get to come in front of
tax so I I appreciate the
audience and Representative can
you I'm sorry can you give me
one second I need to explain for
our audience the interpretation
feature and I I apologize I
forgot to do that here but there
there should be and Elaine I'm
not seeing the interpretation
button on the bottom of our
screen here I don't know if
you've got a click a button on
site.
A little it looks like a little
world and I don't have it reach
that interpreter yet so I don't
see how many attendees I'm in
the process of doing that right
now.
Got it okay well if if you all
don't mind let's let's wait
maybe a matter.
Thanks for your patience and Mr
chair there Russ told the
superintendent is in your
attendee list is our toll.
well okay I will I will bring a
man now.
Thank you.
Okay in the book because they
are did you say somebody else.
Colin bio I think you have
everyone else Colin yes his is
in thank you all right.
Representative Harper do you see
the globe on the bottom of years
in screen.
Yeah I don't see it either.
I've got a text into our IT
folks see if they can help us
resolve this I know there's a
lot of people on the in the
audience who will be meeting
interpretation services.
Okay
once.
I have folks the interpreter is
tied up in another committee
doing interpretation so the
reason we can see the glow but
the bottom of the screen is
because that interpreter is not
logged into the system and
apparently that's when it that's
when the triggers it so
for all the folks watching at
home our apologies you know
there there there's not a whole
lot of interpreters available
of this particularly for the
steps of hearing so the one that
we did have scheduled is tied up
in another committee
interpreting that committee so
we will go ahead and move
forward we will try our best
ring public comment to
accommodate everybody and you
know we'll we'll just keep keep
rolling that then as is and and
Spanish but I've done this take
as delicate as a threat to get a
that's what this team one you'll
it is for them and the lame that
but it didn't always studies
twenty really is staff interpret
them doing all that out of the
NCAA.
He was in and that but that was
not blameless.
Sadly there but if the zoom zoom
with Daniel get em with us and
in us is given almost operas a
year Bonelli one million seven
inning less easy but also that
that of it they limit let me put
my apple seed in the the the
they give us what the Senate's
with us that we.
Okay Representative Armstrong
apologies for the delay please
is going to present your bill
thank you Mr chair I I
understood technology all works
good when it all works good
and the interpretation service
works really well when you when
you have it.
house bill one twenty two is the
health care affordability fund.
And what this is is the federal
government under the affordable
Care Act of assessed a fee to
health insurance companies that
see one away
this it and and it's gone now
but and what we want to do is
try and impose roughly the same.
That the federal government was
imposing on insurance companies
and impose it as a state and the
easiest way to do that is to
added on to the
surtax that the insurance
companies already pay so they
currently pay one percent and
we're adding
on a lot we're adding on two
point seven five.
Percents under that surtax.
Which is on the bottom side of
what the range was on the
federal side which is two point
seven five to three percent.
And.
By doing so we are creating a
fund some of which will go to
the general fund and because a
surtax already goes there and to
cover
some additional expenses of
state are requirements under
Medicaid for this and the rest
will go into a health care
affordability fund.
And that frontier has the major
purpose of helping individuals
to be able to afford to purchase
and keep insured.
And the first a group of people
were looking at if you will is
on the health insurance exchange
which already get some federal
subsidy and we want to be able
to
add more subsidy and potentially
expand that so that we.
Can get more people insured and
we estimate that the size of of
the health insurance exchange
could increased by almost fifty
percent of by making it more
affordable to people who
currently are not getting
insurance on the exchange I
including some folks that once
the pandemic is over will roll
off of Medicaid as Medicaid had
some additional we couldn't roll
people off Medicaid and so there
will be folks that will be no
longer eligible who are
currently on Medicaid and so we
want to make this an affordable
leap if you will on being able
to purchase insurance through
the health insurance exchange.
Secondly we then we want to be
able to move on to folks off the
exchange and and see what we can
do to get more people insured
and there are a lot of reasons
why people are not eligible for
insurance on the exchange
including
doctor so there are folks that
are maybe here legally are
present but to
cannot purchase on the exchange
by by federal law and can't get
subsidies there's others who
can't get subsidies on the
exchange for various technical
reasons.
So we wanna create a system
where we can also help support
those who are barred from being
able to get insurance through
the exchange.
And and our so the funds can be
used for those efforts to
address affordability on the
exchange affordability an
opportunity for those who are
uninsured off the exchange.
Are also to be able to expand
some funds in being able to
design and plans for how we even
go further to address the
uninsured.
a lot of these efforts include
including how we put together a
system off the exchange will
take some work on planning and
designing that and wanted to
also make it clear that funds I
don't have to be that that's
within the purview of the or
allow ability in of and the
story of the use of the funds
would be for planning and design
these additional programs and
for administering them.
All of this has to be done
upon planning led by the office
of the superintendent insurance
and the superintendent is here.
Out with public input and formal
public processes and presented
to the legislature because the
legislature will still have to
appropriate from this fund.
So
That's it in a not show it will
generate
I can't remember the exact
number all get help from my
experts over a hundred million
dollars a year.
Into the funds that we can use
to help support people to get
coverage and maintain coverage
that's affordable.
And with that Mr chair I'd like
to turn it over to the
superintendent to to add
anything more.
Thank you representative
Armstrong at superintendent told
welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman and I want
to start by.
Much sure you the speaker and
members of the committee.
There's nothing in this bill
that has anything to do with
IRB's.
Whether their institutional
review boards are independent
review boards Representative
industrial revenue boards none
of that is impacted by this
bill.
Mr toll not yet there is an
amendment that resent Harper
juicy mailed me so we'll we'll
discuss that later.
I'm the second thing I want to
start with is.
Sure you also that this bill has
nothing to do with the Health
Security Act that you have seen
in previous years it's not
relevant to this is not
addressed by this it is not part
of what we're trying to do what
we are trying to do is to take
advantage of a very unique
opportunity.
To replace those federal tax
with the the state surcharge
there were generated as the
sponsor noted over a hundred
million dollars forty five
percent of which would go to the
general fund.
And the balance which would go
into the health care for the
portability fund for the sole
purpose of trying to
lower out of pocket costs
whether their premiums or
whether there are other out of
pocket costs such as co
insurance deductibles and all
the rest of that.
So that we can make it more
affordable.
You know New Mexico to the
legislature's credit has done a
lot in the spending Medicaid in
other ways to reduce the number
of people who are uninsured but
we still have a
Very large number of people who
cannot.
four health insurance on the New
Mexico health exchange.
are enrollment in the exchanges
gone up at all the service that
have been done in the research
has been done hello this there's
the least fifty thousand people
of those uninsured who could get
benefit from their health
exchange that was affordable.
For many people even though we
find significant subsidies are
ready per the federal rules.
Moving to a state based exchange
through the passage of this
legislation
We would dramatically increases
the Representative Armstrong
noted and Roland when the
exchange I hopefully fifty
percent or more.
Now there the surcharge we're
talking about your really is a
small amount the server one on
this committee knows most of
health insurance premium is made
up by the actual medical
expenses I'm not by the
administrative costs in the the
federal state law on our
regulations say that eighty five
percent of the premium has to be
spent.
On the health insurance have to
be spent on medical expenses.
This I think some of you know.
Despite the increasing costs on
a unit basis this year we were
able to successfully lower the
premiums that are being offered
on the health exchange
and we intend to continue that
effort.
You may hear some people say
well.
the premium tax would be among
the highest in the nation but
what they don't mention is that
taxes applied to premiums which
are the sixth lowest in the
country for individual or small
group.
Her in the lowest quartile so
the tax.
Surcharge we're tracking that is
going to be applied.
To a much smaller number that is
true in the other states.
Vantage's offers.
To our health care community is
it this would reduce.
Medically the amount of one
compensate care.
Have to find.
And as you all I'm sure
understand.
When a health care provider be
it a hospital position whatever.
There rates have to reflect the
loss to them for one compensated
care so we could help reduce the
compensated care by.
Significant amount.
Then also extend coverage to
families and individuals who are
desperately in need of that
coverage.
The other
point I want to make here is
that.
Unlike last year's version of
this bill.
Where are excuse me.
Where.
Money was put into a fund for an
undefined purpose the sponsor to
her credit is clearly defined
the purpose here to help people
get insurance get private
insurance.
This is not a opportunity to buy
into a public funder to be
covered by public funds this is
giving them the means that they
need to get access to private
health insurance on the New
Mexico health exchange thank you
also offer because it's
something we all support
certainly are distressed.
And we're committed to being as
transparent in this process as
possible making sure as much of
these monies that go to support
individuals and small businesses
as is possible.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Sponsor Armstrong.
Thank you Mr told thank you
superintendent all thanks for
being here Mister strada.
Either Mr chair members of the
committee my name is because
strada the coverage innovation
officer at the Human Services
Department.
As was mentioned you know the
affordable Care Act help expand
health coverage to hundreds of
thousands of New Mexicans it
brought about a pre existing
condition protections created
our health insurance exchange in
New Mexico which we we know as
BeWellNM and it also provided
financial assistance to to
reduce premiums and and costs at
the point of care including co
pays and deductibles.
And while we've taken some major
steps forward under the ACA
there are New Mexicans who still
struggle with the cost of health
care coverage and that's
reflected in a couple of
different ways that's through
the uninsured population for
those who lack the security from
having health care coverage and
we have two hundred fourteen
thousand New Mexicans under age
sixty five or currently
uninsured in the state.
That struggle to afford health
coverage is also reflected
through what we refer to as the
under insured population and so
you know these folks might have
the ability to quote on quote
four a monthly premium but the
plan itself does not provide
adequate financial protection
due to high out of pocket costs
I'm at the point of care so by
establishing the health care
affordability fund New Mexico
can increase access and
affordability of quality health
care coverage for both the
uninsured and under insured who
purchased their coverage The New
Mexico's health insurance
exchange.
We would see several budget to
New Mexico by providing such
assistance in a recent study
done by the urban institute and
led by the Human Services
Department we look at several
different scenarios for
providing premium assistance and
cost sharing reductions.
What we found is that up to
twenty three thousand New
Mexicans under age sixty five or
under uninsured could enroll in
the program within its first
year and thousands more who
already purchased their coverage
through the exchange would
benefit from increased
affordability.
And even those with incomes who
are too high to qualify for
assistance would see some
benefits as well as we bring in
more individuals into the risk
pool who are healthier we're
able to spread the risk a little
bit further which means that
we're able to bring the premium
down across the board even for
those who don't qualify for
assistance and what the urban
institute study found is that
they could see a reduction of up
to eighteen and a half percent
in their annual premium costs.
And then as referenced by the
superintendent we would see a
significant drop in
uncompensated care urban
institute estimated that over
forty million dollars annually.
From just providing this type of
assistance and in rolling the
number of uninsured that they
estimated which would help you
know alleviate a lot of the
strain on a health care system
that is fighting so hard to keep
us are all healthy during the
cold global pandemic.
And so Mr chair and you know H.
B. one twenty two makes all of
these benefits possible really
placing New Mexico at the
forefront of investing in its
residents to improve access to
quality affordable health care
coverage thank you.
Thank you Mr Statham Mr bio.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I I
don't think I have anything
additional to add but I'm here
to answer questions that they do
arise thank you.
Excellent thank you for being
here and again for the record
you are with who.
sorry Mr chairman with the
office of the superintendent of
insurance.
Thank you let's go to the
audience
we have quite a bit of.
Attendees many many activities.
If you're in favor of house bill
one twenty two please raise your
hand CSS I will order the laptop
with the sea and doing deals no
one paid nominal the twenty
four.
Quite a bit of public comment so
please try to keep it non
repetitive and keep it to the
point we do have another
committee several other
committees that began in just a
couple hours so please do is
that favor a let's go to Mr
David Roddy.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is David Roddy
I am a health policy director of
the Mexico primary care
association primary care clinics
Sir will before hundred thousand
people in New Mexico and almost
half of the uninsured we stand
in support of this bill and
thank the sponsor you can do
great things to help provide
improved access and increased
access I clinics serve people
regardless of ability to pay but
we cannot afford them the
availability of specialized care
full prescription coverage and
and tertiary and ancillary Care
so we think again the spots for
bringing this we urge the
committee to support it.
Thank you thank you thank you
very much for being with us we
have a secretary of taxation and
revenue secretary Stephanie
Schardin Clark.
good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Stephanie starting Clark the
secretary of taxation and
revenue.
Secretary we've lost you.
Secretary let's try this again
I'm sorry you got
caught off thank you Mr you are
I.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Stephanie started Clark the
secretary of the taxation and
revenue department and in
addition to the comments that
you've heard from the expert
witnesses and sponsor Armstrong
I just want to add related to
the taxation and revenue
department that this bill offers
an efficient way for the tax
department to administer this
revenue source because the
premium surtax already exists in
our Jen tax system the
department will simply change
the right and the distributions
and TRD can implement this bill
on time and without additional
resources thank you members of
the committee.
Mr chair think you're on mute.
Thank you Mr style appreciate
that.
Let's go next to drive and eight
and a half.
I don't see you here okay let's
go to let's see Cutler.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Lindsay Cutler and I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty
Senator stands in strong support
of H. B. one twenty two
you know as mentioned
affordability is a significant
period for New Mexicans when
seeking health insurance in
ninety percent of New Mexicans
believe that it is so important
for the state to make health
care affordable H. B. one twenty
two does this by making
affordable health care a reality
for tens of thousands of New
Mexicans this bill would also
drive down costs for for a
stated twenty three thousand New
Mexicans in because more people
would enroll in plans on the
exchange costs would go down for
everyone R. H. B. one twenty two
would also promote equity in our
healthcare system by extending
health care coverage to
uninsured New Mexicans who don't
qualify for health care coverage
at all using the money raised
through H. B. one twenty two
would towards expanding health
care coverage to New Mexicans
who can't access it right now is
absolutely critical and that is
especially during this pandemic
when everyone needs access to
healthcare so it Mr chairman and
members of the committee at H.
B. one twenty two is a win win
win you know first insurance
companies are are we'll be able
to get more people plans a
second providers will be able to
get more costs for their
services compensated by people
who are not covered and and
third people more families will
be able to access affordable
quality coverage in our state
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr alert Mr Dick
Mason.
Yes Mister chairman members the
committee my name is that it
Mason I'm sure the I actually
committee of the league of women
voters of New Mexico and I
represent the league of women
voters on the stakeholders
advisory committee of the health
insurance exchange I'm not
authorized to speak I the
advisory committees take but I
have seen the data about
affordability each state setting
on the advisory committee for
the stake holders of the State
goes by three committee for the
health insurance exchange and
the whole question of
affordability is a big barrier
for people's Act.
To get obtain coverage on the
health insurance exchange and as
we had to add creating our own
state based exchange it gives us
a lot of opportunities to cover
more people in in New Mexico for
those reasons out of the league
of women voters of New Mexico
stands in strong support of this
legislation and thanks of
sponsor for bringing it forward
thank you.
Thank you Mr Mason is Jackie
Cooper.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members and thank you
Representative Armstrong for
bring this forward A. R. P.
stands in support of H. B. one
twenty chair that works expand
access to health care coverage
for more New Mexicans thank you
very much.
Thank you.
Mr Romero.
Thank you Cherry committee my
name is generator Medan I'm a
fellow with forty together
action this bill is vitally
important to ensuring the health
of our communities and families
now more than ever it is
essential that we ensure all our
fellow Mexicans have adequate
access to affordable health care
I personally know what it's like
when health care is not
affordable or accessible as
working college student I am
currently trying to pass a
medical debt from unnecessary
emergency room visit two years
ago
this has now impacted my
economic future I.
The question trying to improve
economic circumstances the harsh
reality is that my health care
needs and now impacted my credit
my economic future health
insurance is not always
affordable are possible and New
Mexican families do not deserve
to be punished with medical debt
because they cannot afford
health care private insurance I
urge you to please vote yes on
house bill one twenty two thank
you.
Thank you Dr Angelika.
Thank you chair and members of
the committee my name is Anjali
to Asia I'm a family physician
and the executive director at
because of the Saluda clinics
serving many folks with Medicaid
and folks who don't have
insurance in South though it all
pretty I also work in the Navajo
Nation.
I'm a member of the health
committee of the governor's
council for racial justice and
grateful to the governor for
creating such a council on that
council our health committee
strongly recommended that this
bill this concept move forward
and the whole governor's council
was in favor of it and we're
excited that it moved to a
governor's bill also this is a
really important bill puts New
Mexico at the from the line in
terms of forward thinking states
and is not expensive for our
state and works to help cover
folks who don't have insurance
we see so many patients right
now who are.
Really delaying care because
they either are in the family
glitch or make too much money
for Medicaid or are really
trying to make ends meet right
now or don't find any other way
for Medicaid so this is an
amazing sophisticated wonderful
bill and I stand in strong
support thank you.
Thank you doctor teenager for
joining us.
Is Rachel Biggs.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Rachel
Biggs and the policy director
Albuquerque Health Care for the
homeless federally qualified
health center serving
approximately seven thousand
individuals without homes
throughout Bernalillo county.
Access to affordable healthcare
is really a primary structural
cause of homelessness and
poverty and we see the impact
costly medical bills and lack of
access to care has every day in
our clinics and on our streets
Medicine Hat reaches throughout
the county too many vulnerable
New Mexicans are either in
eligible for coverage or have
been driven into poverty and
homelessness by a medical debt
the urban institute research
reported that as many as twenty
three thousand uninsured New
Mexicans could gain coverage if
we just made it affordable
health implications from COVID
nineteen will be far reaching
for years to come and this is
one of the smartest investments
we can make to ensure the health
and prosperity of our state
moving forward we urge your
support H. B. one twenty two and
thank the sponsor for bringing
four.
Thank you ms big Miss Erin bolt.
Hi yes our minds and votes I'm a
registered nurse in favor of
house bill one twenty two to
reduce the cost of health care
for those most in need as a
nurse and in my previous role
the community support worker
I've worked with many uninsured
and low income patients who
avoided getting health care due
to fear of incurring
insurmountable costs and only C.
treatment once the conditions a
medical emergency I've also
worked with uninsured and low
income patients after they've
already incurred crippling and
life altering medical debt for
attempting to meet their health
care needs.
The vital need for accessible
health care is exacerbated by
the pandemic we're facing so now
is exactly the time to access
the federal funds to improve
access to health insurance and
health care thank you for your
vote for the one twenty two.
Thank you Mr.
Dr Barbara mac in any.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and I'm by rimac
Committee I'm a past president
of New Mexico Medical Society
and of the American medical
association and I am a
practicing cancer doctor at New
Mexico cancer center serving
Albuquerque and Gallup.
This bill is a brilliant use of
a phased out federal tax on
insurers which is the most
profitable part of the health
care system and uses that money
to.
Pretty much eliminate copays and
deductibles the affordable Care
Act which we supported strongly
expanded coverage however as a
cancer doctor I saw patients who
had waited to see cancer care
until they had insurance one
woman I will never forget had
watched a lump in her breast
grow for months until she could
afford the lowest premium on the
exchange.
And when I saw her and explained
that her five thousand dollar
deductible Matt that she was
responsible for that first five
thousand dollars of care she was
speechless and burst into tears
the average person has under
four hundred dollars to pay for
an emergency how are doctors and
hospitals and other care givers
to provide chemotherapy and by
those drugs it cetera when
despite the fact that she had an
insurance card she truly does
not have coverage this bill
house bill one twenty two will
fix a gap in the affordable Care
Act that have left many New
Mexicans out in the cold this
will help them get real coverage
that implies real health care
thank you.
Thank you to thank you doctor
Mack in any we appreciate you
being here with us.
Mr Felix.
Mr chair committee members my
name is still takes on the
intensive case manager with the
City of Albuquerque and classes
and clinic and I'm here to speak
in support of H. B. one twenty
two I have several clients that
work full time and make barely
too much to qualify for Medicaid
and are not offered affordable
coverage by their employers so
the insurance exchanges often
their only option for finding
health insurance in too often we
see these plants are
unaffordable for example I have
a client that makes slightly too
much with this and what
employment benefits after losing
his job because of the pandemic
as he's not employed he doesn't
have access to employer offer
health insurance and as using
attempting to seek mental health
and substance use services that
he so desperately needs and once
he's being asked to pay nearly
two hundred dollars just for an
initial assessment he is stuck
in a situation that so many of
our community member states too
poor to pay for out of pocket
Services make too much to
qualify for assistance this is
contributing to the systems that
perpetuate poverty and poor
health outcomes in our community
if we can lower barriers to
accessing the insurance exchange
an entire group of uninsured
patients will be able to say the
care they need to keep our our
entire community C. for thank
you so much.
Thank you for being with us here
Mister X. Dr Jessie Barnes.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Jesse
Barnes I'm a primary care
physician in Albuquerque's south
valley the community health
center and a member of a group
called primary care advocates
for healthy communities we're
here to stand in strong support
of this bill as primary care
providers we see every single
day how patients inability to
afford an access health
insurance affects their care and
harms our communities I don't
want to repeat some of the
points that made before but I
strongly urge you all to support
this bill now and as it moves
forward to ensure that we build
equity into the appropriation of
the funds and ensure that
prioritizes patients were not
able to afford or access
insurance thank you.
Thank you for being with us
doctor Barnes.
Miscarry robin brindar.
Hello Mr chairman and members of
the committee Kerry robin
brindar the registered lobbyists
for the New Mexico Medical
Society in the interest of time
we will not repeat the comments
that have been made but we do
strongly support this
legislation as physicians we
understand how important it is
for people to have access to
care and access to affordable
insurance before their medical
issues become emergent and for
those reasons we strongly
support legislation and urge
your support.
Thank you ms Robbins render.
Let's go to Mr Bill Jordan.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee Bill Jordan
representing New Mexico voices
for children some of you may
know the before joining voices I
spent eight years running a
state wide council that was
funded by the department of
health to do public health
planning on prevention of
infectious diseases.
This pandemic has been deja vu
all over again for me.
Here we are in the middle of the
pandemic seeing devastating
racial disparities and still
learning the lessons of the
importance of public health.
The importance of maximizing
health care coverage for the
benefit of the public health
none of us is safe and healthy
when some of us are not safe and
healthy and the biggest barrier
to obtaining coverage is cost.
In the last few years of the
federal government chipping away
at the affordable Care Act it is
critically important that New
Mexico take every action
possible to maximize health care
coverage for our families by
making it more affordable this
bill this bill is clearly one of
the best most innovative ways to
do that and I want to thank the
sponsors the superintendent of
insurance in the lead advocates
on this effort for their good
work to keep New Mexico safe and
healthy thank you.
Thank you Mr Jordan.
Liz Lopez.
Good morning Mr chairman in the
committee thank you for allowing
me to share my concern you today
my name of blood Lopez the
number case manager from the
federal in the south valley.
I would like to show the
struggle burdens I have seen
first hand of many clients who
do not have medical insurance
let alone fund for basic
procedures that may cost
thousands of dollars.
Many are left with very high
medical bills and the payment
plan may end up taking years to
pay off there are faced with a
difficult decision of whether
they need to pay their bill or
pay their medical debt and hope
that they will not be sent to
collection impacting their
credit our other light sources
the case manager who see that
first hand and fielding meant
alright and I am in support of
HB want to thank you.
Thank you miss Lopez Mr
Blackwell.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Pamela
Blackwell and the director
Policy for the New Mexico
hospital association some have
over forty six hospital members
we stand in support of house
bill one twenty two would like
to thank representative
Armstrong and superintendent
told his staff for taking the
time to discuss with us headed
time concerns that we had prior
to supporting this bill we feel
that this bill will help more
New Mexicans access are
essential preventive in acute
care services that they need
that are provided by our New
Mexico hospitals and our
provider partners I'm sure this
bill passed and we hope it does
we look forward to working with
OSI and others in developing the
regulations necessary to achieve
the aims at this legislation
request your support of house
bill one twenty two thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Miss Erika eagles.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Eric today listen I am that
policy director outlay.
what.
We stand in favor of health bill
one twenty two and you it as a
racial justice issue lack of
access to healthcare
disproportionately affect black
indigenous and people of color
those risking their lives at the
front lines of the pandemic are
majority black indigenous and
people of color and positive
COVID test they're also mostly
coming from these communities.
These communities either
struggle to access health care
coverage or racked up medical
that this act will expand
coverage equitably giving
priority to low wage workers and
those most in need that that do
not currently have access for
these reasons the standing
bureau and urged members of the
committee to vote in favor of
help the lunch thank you thank
you.
Thank you this time it James.
Hello chairman and committee I'm
Tania James from Gallup McKinley
county with four together action
I support H. B. one twenty two
because I'm Navajo and I have a
C. a B. but my daughter she's
half way and she doesn't have a
C. A. B. so students don't get
cut off because I just demanding
proof that she has Indian but.
My husband works full time at
KFC and I'm a stay home mom.
We don't make enough to pay for
health insurance for all three
of us I believe every human
deserves the.
Please support H..
Thank you Mr answered for being
with us today.
Miss Karen Witt lock.
chairman members of the
committee Karen Witt lock with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter thank you so much for
care we'd like to thank the
sponsor different hearing this
bill
Representative Armstrong has
always been a champion of health
care for everyone
and we don't need to repeat
everything that's been said
because there's been wonderful
things said about the school.
but we do stand alone support
thank you very much have a good
day thank you ms went thank you
ms with lock.
Mr Kirk raiders.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Kirk record on the director
of Lutheran advocacy ministry of
New Mexico within advocacy also
speaks on behalf of New Mexico
office of churches I too am here
today to offer strong support
for H. P. twenty one twenty two
I want to thank attended by
express our gratitude
Representative representative
Armstrong for again bringing
forward this important bill we
do believe that health care is a
fundamental human right and it
all New Mexicans should have
equitable and affordable access
to health care services I do
concur with the previous
arguments in favor of H. B. one
twenty two budget bills expert
witnesses and the previous
speakers and that's will invite
urging your support for H. B.
one twenty two thank you.
Thank you Mister maker
stabilised at a.
Good morning Mr chairman of the
committee Steve you said a
lobbyist with the New Mexico
Academy of Family positions
economy represents in excess of
five hundred fifty practicing
family physicians across the
state want to thank the sponsor
for bringing this bill and we'd
like to urge your support also
thank you.
Thank you Mr to settle we have
says Seattle have a last name
Cecilia.
Thank you.
So your friend thank you Mr
chair in the committee.
I'm with for together and
McKinley County my name is
Cecilia Fred I am at this apple
person that the special court
and tree I would like to support
H. B. one twenty two because I
use a lot of supplies daily
living I fortunately do not have
to pay out of pocket for the
supplies to be more because now
Medicaid pays for these items
other people can use the
restroom but I can't I have to
use a catheter to use the
restroom I have to pay pocket
for these supplies when people
cannot afford their supplies it
is not safe for their bodies
because they can and that with a
bladder infection and also at.
So these what this is why
support funding expand health
care to create more access for
people and thank you to Deborah
A. Armstrong for Karen to bills
thank you.
Thank you for joining us and
making time for this meeting.
Mr JT Bollington.
Thank you Mr chairman JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce to does not oppose
house bill one twenty two
however the chamber feels very
strongly that amendment should
be added to the bill that would
sunset this new state health
insurance premium surtax if the
federal government re imposes
the premiums are tax that it
next a couple of years ago a
sunset provision will help of
what it double surtax situation
health plans at the state and
federal level thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Mr Billington so the
chamber lightly supports this
bill.
The chamber is neutral on this
legislation okay.
Thanks this not only to just
just clarify for the record well
I had to sleep somewhere this is
the best boss.
Thanks for joining us Mr
Bustamante Jeffrey with some of
the.
Good morning committee members
I'm Jeffery Bustamante CEO of
the New Mexico health insurance
exchange the same sentence part
of this legislation for
instability to address
supportability expand enrollment
and help more New Mexicans get
connected to coverage without
repeating all of what's insured
already I just like to highlight
a few considerations first
affordability is the primary
barrier to obtaining coverage
for many Mexicans second larger
enrollment in the exchange does
support long term agreements
stability and finally not only
with this bill how many New of
the uninsured get covered it
would also benefit those who we
already have on the exchange the
greater affordability to current
enrollees on the strange would
allow them to use those savings
to obtain more comprehensive
coverage we're to use that money
to address other needs thank
you.
Thank you for joining us Mr
Bustamante next we have a my
idea.
Hello.
Hello money at that we can hear
you.
Yes my name is Nadia or
expanding and I'm from San part.
In the internet accounting and
I'm in favor of the bill.
One twenty two because I
personally have an experience
when I was some.
Going to the hospital.
They they do want to service me
because they wanted four
thousand dollars up front which
I do have and
I.
But.
I know that there's a lot of
people that are facing the same
problem with myself.
Report of a.
Yeah we've we've lost you we
lost the connection for those
folks who are interested
interpretation the globe is now
on the bottom of your screen we
have an interpreter on the line
now but it does appear is going
to get into the print in
different they yeah yet that it
was a bit but then I myself but
if you look on that one bill
global about eleven thank you.
I'm gonna go next to Ellen Ellen
pines.
Thank you Mr chairman Ellen pine
speaking on behalf of the
disability coalition and in the
interest of time I'll simply say
that we support the bill for the
same reason sentence stated by
the sponsor her experts and the
many eloquent speakers who
commented before me thank you.
Thank you very much response
appreciate that.
C. Quinn Lopez.
Mr chair committee members thank
you my name is Quinn Lopez some
vice president western sky
former us I general counsel a
western skies a health plan
would primarily working Medicaid
Medicare market place in our
mission is to transform the
health of New Mexico communities
will present a time to freshen
innovative coverage and social
service Aleutians we stand and
stand in strong support of house
bill one twenty two to assist
people and being able to afford
marketplace coverage and lower
the uninsured rate in New Mexico
and to ensure that success of
achieving that goal we strongly
support the that that the
maximum amount of surtax
revenues gets into the hands of
New Mexico residents for premium
subsidization and costsharing
assistance for marketplace
coverage not re directed to
other initiatives
three years three issues that
state lawmakers should be aware
of one is the increased surtax
will affect premium rates paid
by government employers and
individuals part of the
calculation to New Mexico will
have a high total health
insurance tax rate will be from
six point seven five three
percent to four point zero zero
three percent and this tax
burden could be exacerbated if
Biden administration
reintroduces the federal hit
taxed so we strongly supporting
the amendment to address that
issue so there's not that
compounding the fact and it has
language similar other states
finally you know the bill
focuses on individuals but a
real true solution to deal with
the uninsured and affordability
issues must also consider
employer based health insurance
coverage market place shop
coverage you know so many small
medium size employers had up
faced double digit increase in
cost you to medical inflation
they should be considered as
well as part of it to look at a
comprehensive view and solution
to the uninsured problem but
again western sky strongly
supports this bill and stands
ready to assist legislators and
regulators and ensuring that we
achieve these recent.
Pourtant public policy goals for
New Mexico thank you thank you
Mr Lopez said Mr us identical.
Yes good afternoon Mr chairman
and committee members thank you
my name is Serra so they'll go
and I am an insurance biller
because of the saloon I am
commenting in support of house
bill one twenty two every day we
see our New Mexico communities
coming to classes of with
massive medical debt or having
avoided seeking treatment
entirely for sometimes
outstanding medical conditions
for fear of accumulating medical
that Oliver New Mexico
communities deserve access to
medical care without fear
medical conditions and ailments
can be scary enough to navigate
without the added anxiety of not
being able to seek the care one
eight for fear of destabilizing
amounts of that.
The exchange could be an
affordable place access for
communities have private health
insurance reducing costs for
health insurance plans on the
exchange would increase the
likelihood that our patients
have access to health care and
there for quality of life that
is a right and not a privilege I
urge the committee to support H.
B. one twenty two to provide
more accessible health care
options for all of our New
Mexico communities thank you.
Thank you let's go to I'll see a
mixed.
Yes a.
Hello.
Mr chair members of the
committee committee my name is
out there because they have I'm
with for together action.
And I was working with New
Mexico together so health care
campaign for four years fighting
for affordable health care for
New Mexico families.
I believe everyone deserves
School forcible Health Care.
Their last year our family was
hit with the COVID.
And my mom and my brother were
both
Hit with it so now that they're
medical bills are coming in for
being flown out to Albuquerque
an ambulance bills.
It is hard for families like us
and for us native families to
get on with the for rural health
care I have seen families.
Try not to go to the hospital
even though they get scared
they're afraid of the bills that
they're going to get I've heard
families that don't even want to
even get tested for the comment.
I've heard families that are
sick but.
Want to go and I support this
bill H. B. one twenty two thank
you.
Thank you we appreciate you
being here the needs.
Hello chair and committee
members thank you for taking the
time to listen today my name is
in the Senate last and I make
clinical coordinator because I
look I'm in support for Bill SB
one twenty two mainly because
it's important to augment and
work towards bettering the
social and racial disparities in
my community where patients are
limited on a daily basis from
accessing basic care with
patients every day at the clinic
who have to decide between their
house mortgage an appointment
with the special test and I
think four I think expanding
affordability is crucial when
we're battling to a pandemic we
need to consider people who are
outside of any medical coverage
for all humans and we're about
to get sick so I ask that you
consider your position ality to
empathize with me in my
community when considering H. B.
one twenty two because we can
work towards a better system
that acknowledges marginalized
populations and work towards a
more inclusive inefficient
system thank you so much.
Thank you.
And it's.
When I was sharing committee
members my name is Debbie and
I'm this and I'm a community
organizer classes of New I'm
here in support of H. B. twenty
one twenty two for two long my
mother sister and yes have live
without access to health care
like many many families there
and essential workers who prayed
to not get sick because we know.
The consequences but even worse
we are inferior we live in
constant fear of the thousands
of dollars a medical debt many
times my family let many yeah
many times my family has has
chosen between pain medical
bills or paying utilities this
has happened before and just
continue to have been doing this
pandemic please support H. B.
one twenty two because every New
Mexican families should have
access to health care thank you.
Thank you
our land are you alone.
Good afternoon chair and members
of the committee my name is Dr
Lonnie all I am an obstetrician
and gynecology resident working
here in New Mexico I worked
across the spectrum of health
care settings during this
pandemic and seen the way it has
destroyed families and
communities as a physician I
have sworn to provide quality
and equal health care to all
patients without discrimination
based off of one's ability to
pay or four their care by
providing our community members
access to affordable health care
we help keep all New Mexicans
safe and strong as we fight this
pandemic and I urge all of your
support for house bill one
twenty two thank you.
Thank you Rick Madden.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee appreciate you
having me I've been practicing
for over three decades in the
land as a primary care physician
and family physician and I just
want to echo the stories that
we've been hearing from the
other testify years about how
this affects.
Our communities our families in
my patients those the same
stories that I see I think this
bill is really important I
appreciate Representative
Armstrong bringing this forward
and I support this
wholeheartedly thank you again.
Thank you Health Action New
Mexico.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Barbara
Webber executive director of
Health Action New Mexico Health
Action stands in firm support of
of house bill one twenty two in
October of this year we did a
statewide polling by GPO pulling
firm and the two top concerns
that New Mexicans across the
state cited work jobs and.
Medical care do this funding.
So we strongly support one
twenty two we think that
affordability of health care for
greater equity in New Mexico is
going to leave our state
stronger as we approach the
recovery economic and health
wise from the pandemic thank
you.
Stay with them I don't I am I
must.
I'm sorry I let the we can hear
you I apologize I apologize Sir
I got kicked off and I got back
on I may have to be reassigned
as a translator.
Okay I will make that happen
thank you so we're.
We reassigned let the is an
interpreter please.
Have you have you been
reassigned let the.
Working on it right now
chairman.
Okay thank you.
We should have.
Thank you Elaine I'm gonna take
one last one.
Testing one two can you.
I can still hear you let the I
apologize Sir.
That I didn't show I didn't get
a screen for I accept being at
translator.
Okay I think we're gonna we're
gonna do is meet you let the
while the well the lady I need
to work that's fine we're just
gonna keep moving thank you
thank you.
Can I take one last one legion
make macabre but lost it go
ahead.
Good afternoon.
At
and chairman and members of the
committee my name is Liam
McLaughlin I am from McKinley
County and I am also a leader
of.
Together action I'm I wanted to
say that I support house bill
one twenty two and I really urge
you
But for house bill one twenty
thank you.
Okay thank you opposition please
raise your hands here are in
opposition to house bill one
twenty two.
Mr Brett Miller.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Brent
work I'm a registered lobbyist
for America's health insurance
plans and we are in opposition
to house bill one twenty two and
I will be very clear from the
outset that the goals that the
sponsor in the office of
superintendent of insurance have
in mind are very admirable goals
we don't have any issue with
people trying to get coverage
and trying to to seek health
insurance search health care
those are very renewable goals
and we're actually in support of
the art issue with the bill
though is the approach that the
bill takes in terms of trying to
get that coverage to folks
because to be clear this is a
tax increase it's a tax increase
on those who are purchasing
health insurance currently and
that that those taxes will go to
pay for some of these ideas and
that's some of the greater
concern from the health insurers
because it raises the price of
the drugs in justice at the the
the framework so that the
committee fully understands.
Currently in the state of New
Mexico there is a base a premium
tax rate of three point zero
zero three percent and then
there is a surtax of one percent
which means that all health
insurance products eight point
four I mean sorry four point
zero zero three percent on
health insurance that makes New
Mexico second in terms of the
highest rate in the United
States with this proposed tax
increase it will take the tax on
health insurance products to six
point seven five three percent
on health insurance products and
that is a cost that is not borne
by the health plans that is
actually included in the cost of
the coverage so New Mexico would
be the highest would be number
one in the nation in terms of
our tax rate on health insurance
products in that tax rate is
something that will be borne by
small businesses individuals
large groups we realize that the
bill also includes a Medicaid
leveraging but you were applying
a new tax that would be the
highest in the nation to the
folks who were purchasing health
insurance we think that that's
just the wrong way to go
especially considering the fact
that the pandemic is going on
and people are struggling to pay
for health insurance right now
along with other costs of a tax
increase in this environment
doesn't seem like the right way
to approach solving this problem
and I want to be clear because
when they talk about the the
federal fee that was there that
she went away into in twenty
twenty one so folks are paying
that now it would be
reinstituting increase and
making it a surtax within the
state of New Mexico of the other
part that I would note Mr
Chairman in the semi final.
He.
The the uses of the funds raised
some real questions for us and I
would point to page five lines
four through nine of the bill it
says of the funds can be used
for planning design
implementation looking at health
care coverage initiatives that
term is not defined within this
legislation and it raises the
question exactly where is this
money going to go if it's just
for the exchange that's one
thing it could be other uses of
the funds and that that open
ended nature of that term is
very concerning to the health
insurers we look forward to
trying to work with the sponsor
in the offices superintendent of
insurance on trying to increase
coverage really appreciate the
opportunity to provide testimony
today thank you very much thank
you Mr Moore Mr market on.
Mr chairman members of the
committee mark RAF registered
lobbyists with United
healthcare.
Mr chairman members of the
committee we oppose house bill
one twenty two
essentially because that would
be opposed imposes a substantive
tax increase on small business
health plans in New Mexico at a
time when small businesses are
suffering more than ever because
of the pandemic.
Of several items from the FIR Mr
chairman to take the order of
one hundred and fired rounds
that additional federal
subsidies for exchanges are
included in the current relief
package Congress is currently
working on us so there may be
coming money coming to the
change exchanges and.
Very likely and seconded of the
few states that have raised the
health insurance premiums for
tax at least one has excluded
small business health plans from
the tax we feel that should be a
consideration given up a small
businesses have been going
through during the pandemic
there are other concerns in the
FIR with regard to earmarking an
appropriation of funds of Mr
chairman members of the
committee this is a significant
tax in taxes small businesses
heart of the worst time money
man is likely on its way from
the federal government for
exchanges this doesn't feel fair
or right to small businesses at
this time so we stand opposed to
the bill thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr Nate banks in
opposition.
Yes Sir thank you Mr chair and
an honorable Committee for
having me my name is Nate banks
a registered lobbyist with
concerned veterans for America
New Mexico we have our thousands
of members and activists across
the state and without getting it
too far into what's already been
said we stand opposed to this
bill energy committee to vote no
on house bill one twenty two
thank you so much.
Thank you.
Miss more layups.
Mr chairman members of the
committee while shows registered
lobbyists for Blue Cross blue
shield of New Mexico we've been
working with the sponsor on some
of the provisions within house
bill one twenty two there are
concerns regarding an increase
in taxes what that result would
have on our memberships premiums
currently New Mexico has one of
the highest premium tax rates in
the country well it will be said
that we have some of the lowest
healthcare premiums in the
country I would argue that those
premiums are based on the socio
economic conditions in New
Mexico we still have a fragile
small commercial group market in
New Mexico that bears the brunt
of these increases we appreciate
and support the intent of the
bill.
To decrease the uninsured
population that stabilizing the
insured market we have expressed
to the sponsor and appreciate
the superintendents
clarification with the planning
and design language on page five
light for house bill one twenty
two has no correlation to house
bill two oh three Health
Security planning and design at
and what the cost of a single
payer healthcare system would
have a New Mexico's economy we
look forward to our continued
our discussions with the sponsor
and superintendent on this piece
of legislation but currently
stand in opposition of house
bill one twenty two as written
thank you.
Thank you Mr Jason Espinoza.
Hi chairman members the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director with the national
federation of independent
business and we do stand in
opposition to the legislation is
right and even before COVID
nineteen the cost of health
insurance has been a top concern
for New Mexico small business
owners in fact according to one
of our studies the cost of
health insurance remains the
most of your problem for small
business owners unfortunately
house bill one twenty two would
make premium taxes on health
insurance products the highest
in the nation the bill imposes a
new a hundred and sixty million
dollar tax on health care
coverage purchased by New Mexico
small business owners and their
employees and families I'm and
as with all taxes we know
someone will end up footing the
bill for these added costs well
this taxes directed at insurance
companies you heard Mr more you
know openly admit the tax will
be passed on to their customers
meeting the financial burden the
land at the feet of our small
business owners not only would
house bill one twenty to make
health insurance less affordable
for small businesses it can also
cause some business owners small
business owners to forgo
offering health insurance all
together simply because they
cannot afford to do so anymore
I'm you know instead of helping
small business this tax would
reinstate the state tax federal
tax that was repealed through
bipartisan efforts in Congress
as a way to provide a reduction
in premiums for all small
business owners their employees
and others upon passage of that
bipartisan congressional act
speaker Pelosi stated that the
call was to protect quality
affordable health care for
millions by permanently
repealing the health care taxes
as small business owners ability
to provide goods good benefits
most importantly health care
allows them to compete for a
talented workforce with large
competitors unfortunately more
often than not small business is
operate on razor thin margins
and already given what they can
to help compensate and take care
of their employees an additional
costs would make offering these
benefits much more.
hard I'm so similar to what Mr
Duran stated earlier to I mean
we certainly are welcome a small
business exemption an exemption
on the small group plans as we
to really help small businesses
from this tax increase thank
you.
Thank you Mr Espinoza let's go
to a members of the committee
and experts and and presenters
please keep the the responses
concise and members please keep
the questions concise.
Members of the committee.
Representative Strickler.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and and thank you Representative
Armstrong
I have the same concerns for
small businesses I received a
phone call this morning from a
restaurant owner hoping and
praying that the governor will
will relax the restrictions on
and and you know it House
dining.
He had to close one of the
stores and he just received a
paycheck in about six months and
what he's doing with his his his
paycheck is paying his employees
skeleton crew and I think an
exemption for small businesses
it is in order this this
pandemic K. really clobbered
small businesses and I think
those points are well made I
think it's a good a good
suggestion I also like.
The suggestion that the to put a
sunset maybe some of sunset it
be a trigger if the federal tax
comes back into play then this
would this would expire or you
know go away I think it's good
insurance policy I think it's
reasonable
you know I appreciate all the of
the proponents of this bill
you know I.
You know I have a lot of doctor
friends in in our community
family docks and and that they
released me a lot of them spoke
out in favor of this bill in the
concept so those two changes are
critical to make this bill
unworkable especially with the
pandemic especially with the
government shut down so I hope
you'll consider that.
Representative Armstrong and I
really don't have a question I
think those are two very valid
points this bill is much better
than last time because it was
open and it you've got it
targeted to certain funds
another some
you know there some logistics
that have to be worked out for
those so at the present time I
can't support your bill but I
hope that these amendments would
be considered and that's that's
how that's how we might get
legislation so thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank.
Okay that was that was my
mistake present Representative
Stansbury hit the wrong button I
strained me myself and I meet
you apologies now thank you
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you madam chair chairwoman
Armstrong for bringing this bill
forward I just wanted to take a
brief moment to say how
appreciative I am for this bill
and for your an Indian efforts
to make health care more
accessible more affordable and
more universal because that is a
basic human right and I was
moved to speak this morning
because I heard several of the
members of the public president
from custody just a loop which
is that a clinic in the south
valley which offers health care
to people who don't otherwise
have access and as a former
patient of costs that that's
something and my mother whose
life was saved by a doctor from
that clinic when my mother did
not have health insurance I want
to say thank you for what you do
and just say that this is a
deeply personal issue for so
many people including myself and
a lot of legislators who grew up
low income without health
insurance before the affordable
Care Act this is life or death.
Truly life or death for families
to have access to health care so
I want to say thank you to the
sponsor for bringing this bill
forward thanks you.
Thank you Representative
Stansbury for sharing that
story.
Any any other members I move the
president of the German.
Okay we have a due pass motion
by speaker egolf.
Is there a second.
Well before I take that second I
have a hand up for
representative on.
Thank you wanted to to to say
basically the same things that
Melanie was aimed and and thank
the sponsors thank you thank you
Representative.
We have a two passed my speaker
golf your second second.
Second by Representative
Stansbury.
Thank you Representative
Armstrong it's it's an honor to
be able to co sponsor his bill
with you you know and
representative Stansbury shared
her story very personal story I
I I have the exact same story
with classes and that and
uninsured mother whose life was
probably saved by those good
folks at that at that clinic in
the south valley so this is the
deeply personal issue for me it
will always be thank you for the
work that you put in over the
last gosh two years on this
thing and I'm I'm glad that it's
moving in a positive direction
so with that we have a due pass
motion by speaker egolf and it's
been seconded by Representative
Stansbury Elaine please call the
roll.
Representative.
Yes I'd like to explain my vote.
Speaker Igor yes.
Representative Harper.
Is.
Representative at this.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Stansbury yes.
Representative Strickler.
No.
Representative Harper.
Representative and then this.
Representative Montoya.
No.
Representative Scott.
Vice chair chamber.
Chairman Martinez.
Yes.
We have seven permitted and.
Two in the negative.
Okay by a vote of seventy two
percent Armstrong you have a do
past present and I wanted to
explain your vote yes Mr chair
representative Armstrong I just
wanted to quickly appreciate the
conversations you all have been
willing to have about The
impetus for this important
legislation that clarifications
that you brought from the last
effort which I valiantly
supported before but I think
what you've come up with this
year is targeted focused I also
just wanted to say out loud I
had concerns that this might be
used for the Health securities
Act and given the reports and
studies we've seen there it's
not of half I want to pursue
anymore when I continue to say
is as so many others have our
New Mexicans deserve urgency on
this issue people are literally
dying because they don't have
access to affordable health care
including undocumented people
and others so I appreciate that
I've been able to check and both
with you representative
Armstrong and superintendent
toll for the clarity I needed to
continue supporting and building
our efforts in this direction so
thank you for your openness and
transparency about all the ways
we're going to move this
important work forward thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you and I would like to
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and particularly
the audience who spoke up today
I I appreciate it.
Thank you Representative
Armstrong and that thank you
experts superintendent toll and
mistress that Mr bio for for
your your work on this bill
members with that we are
concluding for the day we don't
have a meeting on Friday we will
reconvene Monday morning at nine
o'clock the agenda will be
posted well ahead of time I hope
you'll have an excellent rest of
your day and the next weekend we
are adjourned thank you.
