Speaker you got.
Representative Harper.
Here good morning.
Representative and that.
Good afternoon I'm here.
Representative Lujan.
Representative then.
Here.
Here.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Romero.
Your good morning good
afternoon.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
By
are.
Madam chair.
Here.
So we are now online.
House bill one fifty three the
general obligation bond projects
bill this is a bill that
typically passes through tax
before it hits the floor I do
have with me Linda T. hello as
my expert witness and as I'm
sure many of you who are more
experienced numbers on the on
the committee are very well and
know that she knows this package
and the theme the package inside
and out so she's going to be my
my my I'm gonna re relying
heavily on I'm Linda for that
kind of support so I do have a
statement that with the help me
with I hope you'll bear with me
So.
House taxation revenue revenue
committee substitute for house
bill one fifty three authorizes
the issuance of general
obligation bond capacity
totaling approximately two
hundred and fifty eight point
two hundred and fifty eight
point eight million capacity
main maintains a flat mill levy
including the costs of issuance
four three bond issues.
The three bond issues contained
in the bill contract and include
twenty four point two million
for code compliance meals and
other equipment vehicles
renovations and construction for
senior citizens center
statewide.
Nineteen million for academic
public school public and tribal
library statewide.
And two hundred and fifteen
point six million for higher
education special schools and
tribal schools for
infrastructure improvement
improvements statewide.
The chart before you and it
should be in our share file list
projects in order of the bond
issues including the project
title and amount the major
projects include.
Forty five million for a center
for collaborative are in
technology at the university of
New Mexico.
Thirty six million for a
children's psychiatric center
for the health sciences center
at the university of New Mexico
twenty two point five million
for college of engineering
facility at New Mexico State
University.
Ten point five million for
department of agriculture
building at New Mexico State
University nine million for a
student academic services
building at eastern New Mexico
university.
Eight point three million for
Kelly hall and apply just
research and training center at
New Mexico institute for mining
and technology fifteen million
for trades and applied
technologies facility at central
New Mexico community college and
with that.
I'm happy to entertain questions
after we go to the public.
There are I see one attendee.
And I see one attendee with the
head with.
His hand up in this is on the
bond issue so if your hand is
raised to discuss the bond
package I'm happy to call on you
mark so they dress.
Yes thank you madam chair can
you hear me OK yes yes so for us
once a thank you madam chair and
thank you for sponsoring a bill
thank you members of the
committee my name is mark
bedrijven the director of the
New Mexico council university
presidents and I stand in
support is on behalf of our
seven four year universities I'm
really would appreciate the work
with from this Lynda Keogh and
the staff TLC I with the
leadership of the speaker and
and the address the members of
the legislature the inner work
this and then also the committee
has put together for higher
education we support all three
professionals and all three
professionals including higher
ed does not increase property
tax cuts and that's something
that we work really hard on
those like me in terms of the
capacity to sit down a fight so
with that that council members
present to stand strong support
of this legislation for teaching
facilities for our students and
faculty and staff throughout New
Mexico thank you madam chair you
for sponsoring thank you members
of the committee.
Thank you very much Mr survey
dry I don't see any other hands
up we'll go back to the
committee and then second.
All right
I do see.
Representative Harper's hand up
Representative Harper and I do
have window Moquino with me and
I'm happy to turn the camera on
a range when she's prepared to
speak.
Thank you madam chair I I'm
gonna be very brief I just
wanted to say thank you
to you and to Linda and everyone
who's involved in this process I
know it's a.
The this doesn't just magically
happen a couple weeks before the
end of the session that there's
a lot of folks that go and visit
the cities across the state and
develop a prioritized list of
needs and and of course you know
two hundred and fifty eight
million dollars is a lot of
money but it.
is not sufficient to cover all
the needs so there's a lot of
prioritization.
and and consideration and I
appreciate that Miskito on the
team you know do their best to
be objective and nonpartisan and
and you can see that in this in
this bill word there are dollars
going I work across the state
not just focused on a particular
regions that maybe our.
Have a legislators was heavy
influence so I want to thank you
for that and then also I just
want to say madam chair.
Thank you to a our analyst Kevin
powers who
Spent a lot of time
yesterday the temperature member
but going through the bill line
by line and making sure that
everything was correct and I
just want to report back to
madam chair that to this the
substitute is is good to go and
and when you're ready I'm happy
to a makes a motion to a adopt a
substitute and pass it out here.
Thank you I am going to turn the
chairs over.
A representative of vice chair
Herndon my my mistake I should
of done that before I started
present so I'm turning the the
chairmanship over to vice chair
Herndon as we move forward my
apologies.
Thank you for you guys know
that.
Thank you madam chair I am are
there any other questions from
the committee.
Madam chair I mean Madam
representatives I have a one
question for you you talked
about the total number of funds
that were available for special.
Schools and projects my question
to you is does that include
charter schools within the
within the state of New Mexico
are included as part of this
funding.
Madam vice chair I'd I'll ask
the expert my expert Linda key
how to answer that question.
Representative no they did not
include of charter schools what
they do include is
constitutional school for ages
the school for the visually
impaired the school New Mexico
school for the deaf and the New
Mexico military institute.
Thank you madam Representative
and madam medevaced expert
witness so do the.
Does the use of the bonds
prohibited from being used in
any way for charter schools as
they are built around our state.
Madam Representative from from
the school may be prohibited
from getting into the GOP but I
would add that there are some
charter schools that are being
considered in the severance tax
bond bill which would allow them
to get funding.
Okay all right well thank you
very very much I just know that
there's some of these charter
schools that really do work well
for the education of our
children and I just want to make
sure they are still being
considered in some manner so are
I'm not seeing any other quote
any other hands up Madam job.
The chair Representative
Chandler would you like to wrap
up stating close now I just I do
want to commend the staff of the
LFC for their hard work on this
and in particularly Linda key
hole and a great mentor to me on
this process is as the committee
members now I'm brand new and
this was a learning experience
for me and I hope to get better
and more conversant in it as we
move forward so I appreciate all
the support that you've given me
as well as Miskito she's been
fabulous and she knows this this
bill but like the back of her
hand so thank you very much for
your attention and look forward
to a do pass.
Right now except a motion on of
this bill.
Madam.
Madam chair I would move a do
not pass on house bill one fifty
three but I do pass on house
taxation and revenue committee
substitute for house bill one
fifty three.
Thank you we but we received
the.
Most of the do not pass of the
bill of a do pass on the
substitutes I see
Representative.
Thank you and seconded.
Thank you so all in favor
indicate by saying by.
Roll call just so it's a clear
record if I may madam chair if
that's alright I think it's
quite alright so.
Mr is would you please call the
roll.
Yes Representative.
Sorry.
Sure.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative mess.
Yes.
Chairman.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Strickler.
Yes.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
We have a.
Twelve zero both so
Representative Chandler chair
you have a do pass thank you
thank you so much and thank you
for your attention we have one
more.
Our agenda and I'll just give my
expert amendment to electors
things and
get on whether we can I hold you
can relax a little bit and LFC
staff and relax a little bit
here before estimate right now
she's not she's our work STV's.
So thank you ladies appreciate
it very much take care all right
we are now on Health spill two
thirteen
it's a generic bill in which we
placed a child income tax credit
provision I believe leader
Martinez and Representative
container will be presenting I
believe Representative today and
I will take the lead in
presentation just a couple of
things we do have translators
here to assist in the and the
public comment and I'd ask
individuals who are speaking and
I'll remind them again when we
get to the attendees to try to
speak slowly so that translate
translation Committee done thank
you so the floor is yours
Representative Cadena.
Thank you muted.
Madam chair ideas coming in a
little bit scratchy I wasn't
sure if you went to meet yes I'm
sorry yes the floor is yours
Representative Cadena.
Yes.
A little robot voice so let me
take you there had been spent a
sounded durable and more.
I guess I can take my mask off
notices I don't have any thank
you madam chair I think it was
just a my technology and my aunt
madam chair committee this
morning I'm excited to present
House Bill to thirteen this
looks very similar to
legislation that myself and
madam chair ran in twenty
nineteen what we're attempting
to do here is established and
you establish in New Mexico
based child income tax credit.
So we are grateful to have
considerations moving through
this legislative session we
certainly believe in agree that
policies like the child tax
credit boost economic
opportunities and of course the
stability for families as they
navigate high rates of childhood
poverty and of course connect to
the improved outcomes for kids
and their families across
multiple social determinants of
health so with me today madam
chair I have amber Wallin from
the New Mexico voices for
children organizations but I
will turn to our expert for a
few opening remarks thank you
thank you.
Ms wall and are you elevated
Kimberly we need to probably
elevate ms Wallin.
Yes I just promoted a panelist
okay great.
The floor is yours miss while
in.
Madam chair members of the
committee thanks for having us
here today my name is amber
Wallin and and the executive
director New Mexico voices for
children and we thank the
sponsors for bringing this
important bill because studies
show that credits like the child
tax credit like this credit is
considered can have really big
benefits for a family they're
linked to improvements and
things like improved child and
maternal health to better
education outcomes and reduced
hunger and poverty because the
credit amounts are structured
according to income the credit
will also make our tax system
more equitable by putting money
into the pockets of families to
spend that money quickly and
locally also benefit our
businesses and our economy to we
think this policy is really
crucial right now because we
know that so many of our
families with kids are still
struggling last month nearly a
third have little confidence in
their ability to make their
housing payment and forty two
percent were having difficulty
affording basic necessities such
credit is especially important
at this point in New Mexico's
history it'll take just a very
brief moment to walk through the
bills sections in section one
a that creates the new child
income tax credit that resident
taxpayers can claim for each of
their children section one B.
sets out the adjusted gross
income levels at which different
levels of the credit applied
ranging from three hundred fifty
dollars per child for filers
under twenty five thousand
dollars to fifty dollars per
child for filers making over
three hundred fifty thousand
dollars section one see notes
that filers must claim this
credit on their tax return
denotes that the credit is
refundable he clarifies that
married individuals who file
separately when they could file
jointly can you to only claim
half of the value of the credit
as again has to do with TRD tax
forms G. requires importantly a.
Reporting on taxation and
revenue departments part on the
number of claimants in cost of
the credit each year section III
defines qualifying children and
that's according to federal IRS
definitions that the child must
be a minor dependent and section
two outlines of this credit
applies for tax year twenty
twenty two forward and again we
just really appreciate the
Sanchez on this bill in the good
work of this committee over all
these last few years and making
New Mexico really a leader in
tax policy that helps all of our
communities thrive and we think
this is an important next step
thank you again.
Thank you ms Wallin leader
Martinez or representative
Cadena did you want to say
anything else before we go to
the audience.
Okay thank you are all right
we'll go to on our attendees
will first go to people speaking
in support each individual get a
minute and we're going to limit
public comment to about ten
minutes or so
and again I'd ask people to
speak slowly and clearly so that
our translator can insure to
translate you accurately so here
we go.
I now is Rio.
I know.
Thank you.
We hear you.
Our but.
Thank you for that what what
when I get up again
thank the number of illegal but
thank.
Thank.
Valuable medical care will be
one of the members of the fight
against the.
Well that that both the funds
out of the.
And then what a lot of you know
what the cap on the ticket with
the work that.
Well I think what they are or
not thank them you probably have
not been on the call.
What the middle of the day in
the level than the state would
have a vote on it.
Well what does that money go
more faster level of the New
York okay when you create a
mother with okay.
Do that and it will our legal
demo we will not be done with
one of the thank you okay you'll
be doll or for work reading
act maybe both
thank you
in one of the if you want to
handle that yeah I'm not you
know thank you if you're going
for a walk in now we are your.
Comment below but I think you
thank you Mr Adams thank you.
Nate next Nicholas Cordova.
Yes Madam can you hear me yes.
Hi madam chair members of the
committee my name is Nicolas
court of a The New Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty we thank the
sponsors for bringing this bill
forward and we stand in strong
support of it every New Mexico
family should have enough funds
to support their family as we
saw with the federal child tax
credit twenty twenty one.
State credit will benefit all
New Mexico families and advance
economic equity in our state and
in our tax system.
New Mexico has made considerable
progress over the past few years
and advancing tax fairness to
support our families and this
bill is a vital next step.
We stand in strong support
because our families deserve the
peace of mind that the child tax
credit will provide.
Thank you and we urge you to
pass.
Thank you Mr court about Richard
Mason Mason.
Madam chair members the
committee my name miss Mason I
am chair the action committee of
the league of women voters to
Mexico in here to speak in
support of the H. B. two
thirteen they have one voters of
New Mexico believes that our
state has no resource of greater
importance as children programs
that promote and encourage the
child foes Development must be a
high priority within state
government.
This does make also believes
that tax system should be
progressive and this state this
staff
Does because it's it's graduated
does make got tax system more
progressive so we stand in
strong support on both of those
positions and we are to do pass
on H. B. two thirteen thank you
thank you Kurt right
You madam chair members of the
committee as director the
director of listen apps in
ministry of New Mexico with our
advocacy also expresses the
position of the conference of
churches today in both
organizations fully support the
passage of HB two thirteen and I
think of all the reasons
previously mentioned support by
Representative today at miss
wall and other proponents child
tax credits are wonderful
opportunities to support our
families New Mexico the
temporary expansion of federal
child tax credit is been
incredibly impactful to families
across the country with those in
great danger continuing HB two
thirteen is it simply a small
step in the right director Jim
to offset this potential loss we
urge your support for H. P. to
thirteen thanks for the
opportunity to speak to this
this afternoon.
Thank you Bill Jordan.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee on Bill
Jordan with Mexico voices for
children we also stand in
support of the legislation and
want to thank leader Martinez
the other Sanchez the chairman
Representative Lara Cadena who
sponsored this legislation in
years past we hope this is the
year our families are still
struggling a rate of poverty is
still much too high and most
importantly this year we have
the opportunity for
transformational change not just
in the state budget but in the
tax expenditure side of the
budget as well.
This new child tax credit makes
a bold statement that our
elected officials are serious
about tackling New Mexico's
persistent poverty and
inequality and it's a commitment
to our families that they will
feel when they sit down at their
own kitchen table budget.
Really want to thank you for
stepping up in a big way this
year thank you.
Thank you Karen Witt lock.
Karen madam chair members of the
committee Karen will lock with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico.
Chapter we and we stand in
strong support of this tax
credit when families thrive
children.
If basic family needs are met
and children are better able to
be prepared for school and
better to learn this progressive
tax helps families in many ways
we thank the sponsor for the
continued work of this on this
issue.
Thank you
More of less laws Connell.
I'm not saying that any
uncommitted because members and
when they talk about how to get
into that.
They may not know if you did
that is the most members of the
committee on the committee that.
That means investing is one of
the COVID lady they would look
at them to make a comment that.
This is assumed to the committee
that was disconnected.
The that on the initiatives are
in the Mr chair Senator in the
last year so this is going to
was going to do that I'm going
to be in this event how is.
But I think as an industry
leader but is not limited
medical but I'm of the opinion
okay looking at the legislative
building in.
Posted at thank you but I think
policy given the limited
canonical even more so than the
content that we're gonna have
the needs of developing this is
the fifth.
Outcomes for children.
The credit would would also
apply to grandparents raising
grandchildren if they are just
dependents for tax purposes the
credit would apply to all New
Mexico children be fully
refundable and Taylor to family
income such income would
particularly benefit lower
income families.
Lastly this bill provides
fairness in our tax system and I
urge I do pass thank you thank
you more is the so Morano.
Martha.
Well yes.
The last of this president of
the COVID and the number is not
someone I don't name that is
sent out I'm is the again if we
are any of these gardening is a
place that I can in those days
and and as the funding at in
most annual running factor is
DELLOSO most of our model if I
medium a you know somehow less
trust says what are the of our
home.
Yes yes but that'll must must I
say be that economic that is not
just with travel and get us
across the most part I mistrust
are with us equally this
assistance Alice called
medicamentos farms are familiar
like you that gonna make up a
lot something that on a familial
so you know what you file impact
the policy P. one five million.
Is that the one you're going to
be able to sell a handful of the
book is important the state up
we on the list of from yes on a
high note as the staff makes
does yes I almost was does it
cover how most people do we must
look on yeah this this battle
when I started this thing which
is just.
Thank you so much Martha right
yes and this is our last
speaker.
Martha Ramos.
Martha right yes.
I need yourself on your and.
Martha.
Thank you members of the
committee thank unemployment
member center anyone that NHS so
madam madam thank you that I
have is intended with this and
would and then look at yep
Committee one branch.
And then you make a meaningful
impact on the finance and I'm
and thank twelve one of the most
of application that would mean
this is something that but the
most Mr Saddam's innocent you
can unsettle press is that the
main thing and we're not gonna
take us and then also that I
looked into many kinds of Saudi.
The Democrat yeah honestly maybe
most of the other another
serenity tobacco settlement of
the cost of the building.
Those units and we stress on the
bottom coming in Canada.
What is the best Iraqi I don't
see it listed both in state and
not your mental status.
Good agencies guns some in
warning Messiaen and assess
going that money that is you're
a startling us so most of hello
this is New Zealand I'm asking
questions
what about you from you just
want it we in what turned up on
a man and a woman.
Thank you Martha
anyone in attendance who wishes
to speak in opposition to bill
please raise your hand now.
Okay I don't see any hands
raised in opposition we'll go
back to the committee
Representative Cadena do you
have any words if anything else
you'd like to add before we go
to the committee no madam chair
ready get ready for the
committee thank you very good
Representative Lujan.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this forward it's really
something it's needed
But really just a quick question
did the child tax credit right
now when is it going to affect
madam chair.
Madam chair thank you repeat
that question you hear me I'm
sorry Representative get and
when does it go into effect for
what what Tax Year.
Madam chair representative of
the provisions of this act would
be applied to taxable years
beginning on or after January
one twenty twenty two.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I'm just.
Yes I'm just kind of and just
the other looking at the economy
right now and the need to the
pandemic and considering those
that haven't got and everything
that that others have got and
and and you working on something
that really create create some
equity I really appreciate that
and when the state thank you and
I support this this legislation
would I appreciate appreciate
the answer and I just think we
need to work.
Court this type of equity that
you were looking to looking to
do direct tax code thank you
madam chair appreciate the
current thank you Representative
Lujan Representative Scott.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative could data.
If you say in the.
I believe this was presented and
rest staff this past summer have
you saying.
The income support.
Document that was prepared.
The legislative finance
committee this past summer for
presentation to restive.
Thank you madam chair
representative Scott I'm not
sure exactly what document
you're referencing but I did
participate in most of the
interim committee meetings this
summer and have some
recollection about these
conversations as they showed up
and and the edge of.
What Madam chair representative.
I mean this was this was really
a bit of an eye opener for me.
And up and I'll just read one of
the chart state.
Not got a document here in my
hand families for.
The mom dad two kids.
With so one minimum wage jobs.
Participating in all of the
support programs that are
available to them.
Which admittedly.
Many families did not
participate in all of the
programs but if if one if this
family for participated in all
the programs.
The total revenue stream is
estimated.
At one hundred and four thousand
three hundred and ninety two
dollars.
Okay.
Madam chair representative do
you.
Do you.
The accuracy of that is is
seems.
quite generous to.
Would you.
Madam chair representative I
don't have that data in front of
me but I would also just make a
note that.
That's not I would not consider
eligibility and recesses coming
from the state that hold
families together and provide
foundations for families as a
revenue stream for example I
might imagine that this family
has Medicaid eligibility and
what it means if those little
ones and even that parents has
access to high quality health
care than actually is a cost
savings to the state to make
sure we can get young people
into the preventive health care
that they potentially need
instead of showing up later for
for higher cost emergency urgent
care so just what the listening
audience to know that does not
mean a hundred thousand dollars
are going into the bank accounts
of families but it means that we
as New Mexico have made a
commitment and follow through on
a commitment to provide to
provide stability is to families
in particular those living with
kids little ones.
Madam chair representative none
the less this is a.
This is a really good job even
in the southeast corner of the
state.
We're.
Truck drivers routinely.
Working fifty sixty hours we on
over a hundred thousand dollars
a year but those folks are high
in for the services that the
state is providing.
And
And again.
The same flight a lot please.
Madam chair representative these
tax credits would be refundable
so in fact if your tax liability
was not.
The refund amount the state
would in fact be writing you a
check is that accurate.
Madam chair representative that
is accurate and certainly part
of the intention of this bill
the first time myself and madam
chair introduced this
legislation we were responding
to a change in federal tax
policy that actually a limited
did limited and eliminated a
different way that families
could claim this credit on their
federal taxes and in turn the
impact was that New Mexico begin
to increase collect roughly
fifty five million new new
dollars into our general fund
and and frankly that that was on
the backs of families with kids
so from their original inception
on this legislation through
today we know what it means to
to provide stability and
consistency an opportunity to
thrive to our little ones
because that federal tax change
significantly adjusted the
landscape in which New Mexicans
were filing their taxes and and
able to bring credits back home
this is a proposal we first came
up with in twenty nineteen but
if it remains potentially more
relevant today but yes it is
intentionally a refundable
credit for folks listening that
means that someone has a tax
liability if they taxes on their
personal income returned it
would lessen the amount of taxes
they owe for someone that does
not have a liability that means
that this amount would become
part of their tax refund.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for that
explanation again.
Going back to this reported it
appears as though.
The benefits available to
families in New Mexico or.
In in some cases very
significantly more generous than
the.
So similar.
Similar situations similar
financial situations in
surrounding states so I guess.
I guess my question mark my
concern is.
Madam chair representative when
when is enough when will we say
that we have.
That we have sufficiently
provided for these folks that
are.
Not capable of fully providing
for themselves and.
And really that's all ahead of.
I'd be interested told to listen
to the rest of the conversation
and and thank you madam chair
thank you Representative for
your thank you thank you
Representative Scott I see vice
chair earned.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you.
To the sponsors for being in
this program forward in this
bill for and madam chair
representative Cadena just for
clarification I I'm looking at
the at the.
At the fiscal report so the
maximum benefit and we can get
is three hundred and fifty
dollars if their income is
twenty five thousand dollars or
less is that correct madam chair
representative I think we'll.
Thank you madam chair madam vice
chair yes if we go to page two
of this bill we have there's the
spreadsheet outlined here and
you're correct madam chair madam
vice chair for someone filing
that has earned less than twenty
five thousand a year they will
receive the three hundred and
fifty dollar credit per
qualifying child
as as their income as a filers
income goes up the amount of
that credit goes down in that
way we feel it's an equitable
tax policy making sure the
families that could potentially
need this most would receive the
higher amount of the credit and
families that have more economic
security and stability would
receive that credit at a lower
level topping off or or at the
lowest level of fifty dollars
per qualifying child.
Madam chair representative
Cadena how many years it will be
covered by this.
By this act in terms of the
number of years in which the
credit would be applicable you
said it first began and taxable
year twenty twenty two how many
other taxable years after that
it's covered by this by this
bill.
And madam chair and madam vice
chair we don't have and and to
this at this point.
We don't have a sense that on
that.
So thank you madam chair
representative had been as I
look at your impact statement it
is hot so that it would fiscal
year twenty twenty six and so I
just so it looks like that may
be approximately twenty maybe
four years of taxable years that
would be applicable so that if
we just look at this as a
practical matter let's say Madam
chair representative Cardinia
but if we're looking at a family
whose I think it's twenty five
thousand dollars or less and
then if we look at this even be
applicable for a total of about
four years if that was a number
of years that was applicable
we're looking at.
A total of one thousand four
hundred dollars over a period of
four years without looking at a
hundred and four thousand in the
family so it's really important
to break down and then to stand
what exactly would be happening
with the family is that correct
madam chair representative
cutting.
madam chair madam vice chair and
yes that that different amount.
If you're referencing what was
brought up earlier is the M. the
value potentially the monetary
value if we were attempting to
put a figure on it of the of the
services and stability stability
and benefits that come through
New Mexico programs like health
care eligibility like child care
subsidies for our families that
are working to get degrees or
were making sure they have
somewhere safe to leave their
little ones when when they are
out on our our work force this
piece of course would depend on
how many that how many
qualifying children I kid a
family had or if either had but
yes you would just do that it
would just be simple math if
they had two kids at that at
that lowest income amount they
would be getting a seven hundred
dollar credit for filing here.
And as we look at and madam
chair Representative cutting and
looking at the cost of living
that seven hundred that three
hundred and fifty dollars seven
hundred and fifty dollars is
really very demand of us in
terms of the overall cost of
making sure that a family is
taken care of is that correct
madam chair representative
guarding Madam chairman of ice
here yes I I would agree to that
important point I would add
madam chair we have recent data
that says approximately twenty
seven thousand and and
potentially more grandparents
raising grandkids would benefit
from this credit a very recent
study shows that over thirty
five percent of Latino families
in New Mexico have less than one
hundred dollars in their
checking account I've certainly
been there madam chair madam
vice chair as I was working to
get some college degrees raising
my little and I'm my own support
from incredible both families
issue was born born into a
chosen family there were still
moments where I had to look
ahead and figure out what the
love is going to pay what I was
going to bring home for the
grocery store how I could
imagine like getting through
with with with the with limited
dollars in those accounts and
and lastly we ought we also
recent data that shows over
forty percent of all parents in
our state have trouble affording
the basics so when I think about
what kids need to thrive beyond
as a stable and safe place to
live beyond access to healthy
food I also think about the
things that my kids get to do
like play soccer or be in sports
and and so I I first hope that
something like this for some
families would just mean they
could put I have a couple more
healthier meals on the table
that year for others it might
mean for the first time ever
they have that thirty five
dollars to register their kid
indicate kids soccer league
something like that that could
be transformative and they're
all a little in the New Mexico
certainly deserve.
Thank you madam chair Madam
based here thank you madam
chair.
Representative Representative I
didn't get you know I'm looking
at the total tax credits that
are given across the board and
the how these tax credits
actually will affect and be
beneficial to low income
families is absolutely important
and so those types of things
that things to look at and and
that as we look at how do we
help make families and lift them
out of poverty and madam chair
representative are doing it just
for my insight in terms of
looking at this because there
are a number of families that
would be that make twenty five
thousand dollars or less and how
do you envision making sure that
these families know about this
credit what do you think the
process is gonna look like.
Madam chairman and vice chair
certainly I will be working to
get this proposal considered as
part of the tax deposit package
that comes out of the house but
then what's really important
here is that we just got to make
sure New Mexicans through
incredible organizations our
partners like voices for
children and others potentially
have some resources to energy
around leading New Mexicans know
this often madam chair and madam
by your particular you're you're
really familiar with tax policy
New Mexico sometimes this
families that don't file because
they're not aware of what
potentially might come back and
how these refunds work so for
families that potentially have
in the last couple of years
thank you it would be important
for community advocacy
organizations to talk about this
and then it will be standardized
it's my understanding so that if
this does become law and a
family fills out their filing
information and they're shown in
the system as having a
qualifying child then that would
be an automatic refundable
credit over that filing here.
Thank you madam chair
Madam Representative one of the
things that I hope will happen
is that because there are
families who made that file
because they don't have to file
that if they go to a tax filers
to help them to get this tax
credit they they won't be
charged a fee so that the
families can't get the benefit
of the full three hundred and
fifty per child because that is
important for it will be and and
and that's social will be in for
the family and that's just one
last question and I don't know
if you know the answer to this
but in the presentation that was
and it misli may it talked about
this tax credit being.
Your available to families where
if they are married filing
separately that each for each
each person would only get one
half of the credit but my
concern is what it even if there
married filing separately but
one parent has the sole
responsibility for the children
are there is a provision in
there that will not have bad
what have.
Of a credit applied because it
should be going to the person
who is responsible for the
children so I bring that up
Madam chair representative are
they.
So with that madam chair I thank
you very much and thank you
again for for moving forward
with this with this piece of
legislation and helping out
families and lifting them out of
poverty a state that has some of
the highest poverty in the in
the entire country and thank
you.
Thank you vice chair Herndon
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair and
Senator Martinez appreciate you
bring this forward.
Our our vice chair heard and had
a couple comments I just wanted
to make sure that we understand
clearly exactly what this is
doing and then I have maybe one
comment so chair representative
Cadena this is not a four year
bill right the way it's
structured it starts this year
and it goes on there's no sense
that it goes on forever.
Is that correct Madam chair
representative yes it just as as
we look at the F. I. R. there's
a certain number of years they
go out but yes this is a bill
that's drafted and as as of now
does not have a sunset on it but
it applies to fight one filing
here after the next.
Yeah and and chair well I
apologize yeah chair and and
rejecting a that's that's right
and yes our FY ours we look out
so many years I'm if if they've
looked out you know for the
duration of the bill a lot of
our FY ours would be really long
to to have you know.
Years and years and years so
that just make sure we
understand that and also going
back to I think representative
of Scott's comment about the you
know hundred four thousand
dollars and and where that comes
from and it was a COVID male
this is only you know seven
hundred dollars or or whatever
but.
You know so much like you
representative Cadena when I was
newly married
And and and going to school you
know my wife and I we made a
whopping you know twenty
thousand dollars a year I think
By eight even last
and and we were we actually
qualify for several programs and
we took advantage of them we're
grateful for
we.
We're on a section eight
housing.
So we don't have to pay rent
When my wife got.
It was our first son the most of
her pregnancy was covered with
that Medicaid.
and when she was born you know
and and before you know we also
are on page.
And and we're very grateful for
those those programs they helped
us and and now we we pay way
more in taxes that we got out of
those programs and that's that's
really what you want right you
want to be of help people help
them climb out.
And so when we say a hundred
four thousand dollars I mean
you're right I mean part of that
probably is the calculation of
you know Medicaid.
But just not the time I had the
programs we have the state we
have a lot so I already
mentioned section eight housing
Medicaid and which.
there's also the lowincome
comments of tax rebate which we
just updated and actually
indexed to inflation.
we have tennis which helps
people who are looking for a job
you know.
In order to close in those kinds
of things.
We have the working families tax
credit which has there's a
federal level that we've also
significantly increase the state
match.
We we have a child tax credit
already and I think this is
going to you know we had some
form of this semester Tax Court
your package will strengthen
that.
And then if you just look at
the.
you know those who make
essentially forty thousand
dollars or less you know they
essentially get a negative
income tax we have.
Because he's a refundable
credits many people
go and file their taxes may come
home was four five six seven
thousand dollars and then you
add in you know Medicaid.
The COVID stimulus that's been
coming through.
And so that's where you can see
that wow you can really add up
and get you know perhaps close
to that hundred four thousand
dollars.
And you say that okay we we
wanna help families we want to
have kids able to go to soccer I
I totally get it that's great.
But we don't but we don't want
to do is put folks in a position
where they're discouraged.
From climbing the the taxonomic
ladder and I worry I I just I
mean there are lots there's lots
of evidence that we do have that
from here in New Mexico this is
the COVID one.
I've talked about close the
facts before.
And and these are real
I have a very close friend who
had an amazing staff of lady on
his staff.
And she came into Monday and
said you know I'm sorry this is
my last day of work if I make
any more money I'm gonna lose my
benefits.
so so this is a real thing.
And and so I'm maybe just adding
a finer point on Representative
Scott question you're not maybe
not so much you know when is
enough enough but when is it
actually hurt for.
And I really would love to see
and it's not too hard to put a
will now still to look for where
are the closest facts and making
sure that when someone actually
gets a raise or a promotion.
That their budget don't just
fall off but that it's tapered
so that they continue to use the
receive benefits.
and they're encouraged to climb
the ladder
instead of you know these
different cliff effects causing
people to not be encouraged so
Madam chair of seconded I'd love
to hear thoughts on.
Madam chair representative this
is certainly something that kept
me up at night and they
certainly real and warranted
concern I remember madam chair
representative when Los crucis
was one of the municipalities
that raised the minimum wage
above what the state right had
been that there were real life
situations in which for example
folks that had been working and
earning a child care subsidy
with that couple of dollars that
was coming through and each
paycheck lost child care subsidy
which was worth several hundred
dollars so so the net loss was
actually pretty significant and
set them back and and monumental
ways again madam chair
representative this is not every
family but this is certainly
something that happens if we
don't have sort of provisions
and off ramps built into these
kind of programs one of the
things madam chair
representative I've talked about
with our New Mexico Medicaid
director is thinking about how
folks might maintain eligibility
eligibility for Medicaid over
here so that once you know once
once we have someone eligible we
think it potentially look at
waivers or other programs to
make sure otherwise there there
is right requirements in every
of these programs include
especially so when we get so
many of these dollars from the
fed's that say something like we
need to a change in reported
income every thirty days or are
and and that can really set
families into these moments
where they were eligible they're
starting they maybe got a
promotion at work they're making
a little more but then somehow
we don't want to sync them back
by having their health care
costs for that twenty five cent
rate every hour
blow up to the hundreds of
dollars because now they are
looking for health care on the
exchange for example so I
certainly think it's a
conversation worth having I hear
that the most I think innovation
happening in the health care
spear and specifically want to
shout out like the health care
affordability funds that we
established as the legislature
last year.
with the possibility of using
some of those dollars to
increase the state subsidies on
the New Mexico Health Care in
exchange above what the feds
already paying specifically to
catch those folks coming off of
Medicaid that really don't have
it in their budget to to buy to
pay for those plans that right
but I think we should continue
asking that question it's not
just a scare tactic that that
folks used to get in the way of
of these changes there are
circumstances in which it
happens and those can be
devastating thank you madam
chair and representative Madam
chair representative thank you I
I so appreciate that you
understand these issues and of
course this was you know happen
personally just to when I was in
a no later on we were in college
and we had our first kid
You know we had a little stipend
from the university and halfway
through we all got a little bump
and all the graduate students
right yes you know a little bit
more money we you know we don't
have the rice and beans every
everyday but we had a real scare
there was about twenty dollars
away from the limits in the
particular state Rio and to kick
us off of Medicaid
and of course I I I was on a
call I got my wife and my son
did and and that that little
raise kicking off Medicaid would
cost us way more.
so I appreciate that you
understand and you also
mentioned the child tax.
Special tax the.
Child
Madam chair the child care
subsidies yes thank you the
child care subsidies so so we
have we have lots of amazing
programs and and of course it's
almost almost free to go to the
university here or to a you know
C. N. M. community college so we
do really have a lot of.
Good programs out there to help
people climb but I just want to
I'll just finish by saying madam
chair and representative Cadena
I do worry that most of the
changes that we've made these
last few years have not been
data driven and have not taken
into account cliff affects their
your the kind of the low hanging
fruit things that look good on a
mail piece or a you know.
The campaign ad.
But I really fear that in some
cases were making things worse
and I would very much support
and and I ask for this but very
much support real conference of
look at all of our programs.
And including cliff affects
those programs that are not
effective we can get rid of them
those are effective we can
strengthen them and make sure
that we're not discouraging
people from
being the best that they can be
and I think that right now our
our system does to that
thank you madam chair thank you
as of today I really appreciate
the time this afternoon.
Thank you very much
Representative Harper are there
any other Representative
Representative wish to speak on
this point on this item.
I don't see any other hands
raised
I'm happy to enter Tain a
temporary table motion.
Madam chair you're gonna make me
do it as bill.
Well
Madam also before leader all
over for it for gentle to.
Well seconded madam chair
although it.
But madam chair if we take that
we take that boat Pueblo
watching as maybe the CS and
we'll groggy they should know
that Representative Harper and I
hosted an all night party last
night.
The flaps.
We have a seven AM still in
forty one is yeah thanks you're
welcome thanks for your
attendance
any opposition to the temporary
table let's see.
I see none the item house bill
Two thirteen is temporary tabled
and I I just want to say a
couple things before we adjourn
on Monday's agenda I'm planning
on talking about our proposed
sub for House Bill six what I'm
sorry.
One sixty three sorry I'm having
a mind our our tax package for
for the year.
And there may be a couple Senate
small Senate bills that will
also add to the agenda so just
an FYI hi and lastly I do want
to thank all of the members of
this committee for your your
great attendance today I know it
was a rough night last night
before up till six AM we started
about eight PM so it's amazing
that we had such a thoughtful
and engage conversation over a
very important policy issue and
I I thank all of you for your
attendance and attention to all
that so with that we are
adjourned unless there's
anything else we need to discuss
today okay very good thank you
so much get some rest before the
floor session later today look
forward to another party
tonight.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair thank you.
