Senator standards.
Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez.
Us because Martinez.
Representative Ortez here.
Representative Scott.
Representative Serrato here.
Representative Townsend.
Vice chair Cadena.
Representative J. Lente yeah.
We do have a quorum the first
congratulate centers and this
winning last night's game.
Have the bruises to.
We will have that effect of
writing.
Four centers.
Senate Bill four seven four as
amended school district in lieu
of taxes payments closures thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee Senate Bill endorsed
seventy four addresses in
inequity that was created back
in the couple years ago from the
legislature a change help in the
in the tax payments were
distributed to school districts
I counties or municipalities
that issue the I. R. B. bonds
for renewable projects prior to
the twenty twenty one the law
required that the two payments.
It is true the hundred percent
to the school district was the
project was geographically
located in the twenty twenty one
which is the law of.
we which part of the counties
and.
Just about a counties required a
propane is to be divided equally
among all the school districts
that are located in the county
so that one size fits all
approach the global work well it
created more inequity for
example my name is bill valley
school district which that
product will project was on is
that again thirty eight thousand
now get seven thousand
Albuquerque public school that
has the smallest footprint gets
seven thousand because now it's
all equally so so in in my step
in our school situation of we
have Cuba school district we
have him as well as school
district with rents a school
district or the school districts
and APS so we divide that.
Among those school districts
that have various footprints
of us because our district
almost half a million dollars or
more than five hundred thousand
dollars over the life of that
project so this particular of
bill was brought to us by your
the most ghetto of school
district and with me here is a
hand approved the superintendent
was get option however soon the.
Questions please.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee
the Senate before seventy four.
ms the industrial revenue bond
at the county industrial revenue
backpacks to address three
issues the bill clarifies the
mills that are to be included in
the calculation to determine how
much money will be distributed
in the school district it makes
a more equitable formula and
then there was a little bit
cleanup as far as clarify.
The amount of tax revenue that a
school would receive
Thanks so that wasn't less than
what was received the previous
year so first of all the bill
clarifies the mills to be
included in the calculation that
all mills imposed by a school
district within a county or
agency permanece polity will be
included there are five ways
that schools can school males
can be imposed.
We have the operational half
millimeter SB nine two mill levy
HB thirty three ten mill levy
and the educational technology
levy and the debt service
millage and so the current
language can be interpreted to
either include or exclude
particularly males this bill
will ensure consistent
interpretation across the state
secondly the bill sets forth the
more.
Distribution
As he already discussed the
heinous valley issue I won't go
into that but in the case of
Klay County
thirty three and a third percent
of the tax revenue generated in
Harding County and one very
small school district and sends
it to quite County who has a
much more significant tax base
due to the lake and various
other increased assessed
valuation opportunities that
they have within their school
district so the bonding capacity
to engage in capital projects
for school improvements is
significant significantly
hampered and Harding County
because we're sending thirty
three percent of this revenue
two quick County because their
school is on the other side of
the county boundary even though
their district has four percent
of the footprint of of Harding
County.
So the one asset that schools
like miss Caroline Hemas valley
have to generate additional
dollars for proving our schools
is our land and if we take that
away give it to other school
districts and municipalities
without a mechanism for those
school districts to share what
their Avenue might be it seems
very inequitable and further I
believe that the state recently
established with the help of the
lawsuit the Yazzie Martinez sued
the taking credit for funds
generated for a district when
the property is removed from
assessed evaluation is not
equitable for those schools and
that's part of the reason they
quit taking credit for impacting
so this is a similar issue for
example in him is valued the
assessed value is removed from
the tax roll and the state is
sending it to neighboring school
districts that have a
significant tax base which is
APS or other school districts
when I only have a portion a
very small portion in that
county.
So just before seventy four
eliminates the language that
requires.
The split up the pill people
read to all the school districts
that have a footprint in the
county and instead it takes the
first fifty percent of the film
and it gives it to the school
district for the project is
located the next forty percent
of the bill is distributed based
on the the US footprint that the
school district has within the
county so it's proportional and
in the last ten percent is based
on the school's student
enrollment and it's distributed
based on that so
We we felt it seems based on on
where we've gotten to this point
that that that it seems.
Very requirement that's a more
equitable solution to this.
I think that's.
Several questions think centre
thank you to
Jonathan Fritz thank you the
statement ditions warning let's
go to the audience for all those
in support of Senate bill four
seventy four in the room and
online these major head of your
support in the ribbon online
will start on this that first
this or don't.
Yes reasons for this.
Thank you.
Yes.
Yes members of the committee my
name's retail I am the co school
board president also what
happened look three of the more.
Zero.
As you know a small rural town
which would like to get on all
these other small.
The school is not just a school
K. don't just go to school
there.
It is a life.
So.
I don't have funding you don't
have programs for people to go
to because we don't have.
Other very other reasons other
venues for people to go thank go
to two things all we have is our
schools so I am support this
bill thank you thank you with
the other one is that.
Just happy to hear Wiseman
payments valley and you know.
And same thing I support this
bill you know small school.
Help for us and we don't have
the money that you know should
be there we have to look
elsewhere it's also.
Thank you for being with us
today anybody on the other line
anywhere in opposition.
Senate bill for seventy four in
the room for online.
See nobody first on my list back
the committee is Representative
Harper.
Thank you chairman and
Chairman and this is Johnson
John of route two hundred thank
you for being here thanks for
the presentation.
I want to personally I I I
support legislation I think
This we saw an earlier version
of this early in the session
those kind of a little bit wonky
and I think this one is
in a better place.
And I think it is more I could
will distribution of of what I
refer to as the crops.
and and this is really what I
just wanted to madam chairman so
what we're talking about here is
the distribution of hoped which
is a payment in lieu of tax.
And how we got here was a couple
years ago
the legislature passed a bill
which I opposed that allowed
for.
energy companies to essentially.
receiving are being summer we
talked about industrial revenue
bonds early in the session it
essentially allows them to.
build purchase to not build
purchase all this equipment and
it's now government equipment so
it's not taxable so we see a lot
of money.
On property tax.
And in a strange twist they make
us a payment to the school
districts.
Right well as.
Is obviously a benefit to these
companies because they're paying
less tax.
what.
Nothing much tax at all and to
make up for that they're gonna
make a little payments to the
school districts and so that's
why I say we're we're arguing
about crumbs here we should have
passed that bill.
I voted against it
the school districts and the
counties and whatever city these
might be and would be getting a
lot more tax revenue for these
projects which are essentially
captive projects because they
have to build here where the sun
is where the window is in their
nearby California where the
demand is for this this energy.
so
that said chairman get off my
soapbox I think this is a a a
good fix to something that we
should have done the gentleman
Representative Harper
Representative got.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Senator sure issue that.
I ask this morning.
About the aerial extra
components and appreciate a
reply.
From.
All right the members of the
dish flex time she was.
Which was very helpful.
So curious about the
very which component is
calculated.
By the very low wage too of the
project as.
Percentage of the.
Ariel extra school district I
was.
Yes.
Chair of defer to well John I'm
sorry.
Mr chairman.
Representative of the way that
that is is calculated it is it's
a square area whether you choose
to use miles or however they
want to to calculate the square
area I'm able to take the
proportion of the school
district that is within that
county so that will eliminate
expanding funds.
Outside of of the county.
For a school district that is
that have some square area
within a county but most of it
resides with half of those
numbers are visited with county
assessor actually Santa Fe
County assessor's office and
several other a few other county
assessors about generating that
information and the availability
of it is is is that what you're
asking is.
Maybe I need to clarify.
Okay.
Mr.
It was we've got a this using.
I've got a wind important that
so the forty square mile.
And.
We'll show that when important
decisions.
One school.
Two counties.
So as the.
Calculation.
Adjust.
Well it's going to depend on who
issues the Arby's so if one
county issues the R. B. ideas on
behalf of another county I'm not
sure where that scenario exists
I don't I am not familiar but
that the county or the
municipality is who generates
and and the higher beings
they're the ones that sell those
industrial revenue bonds and so
F. F.
the school district goes across
two counties and the project is
it within those that the
scenario will be the same
basically the the funding will
be split fifty percent of where
the project is located so if
that school district has.
Property in another county it
won't matter only two percent of
the school district is located
in the county the issues the
IRB's if there is one portion of
that project.
And included in that school
district they will receive an
equal share of the first fifty
percent because they have even
one term or one powerful or one
whatever so they will receive
half of that first fifty percent
but that's within.
Okay and then the forty percent
component the forty percent is
is divided proportionately based
on explicitly the amount of
square area the school district
has within the county so if you
have three school districts that
make up the entirety of the
county one school district makes
up fifty seven percent another
one makes up forty percent and
maybe the other one makes up
three percent
it will be distributed
proportionately based on their
square area.
At this point thank you Mr
chairman thank you we just got
the representative Duncan.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
the.
Commissioner one of the things
we always try to do is make us.
How do we take it.
Awesome try to make the school
will this like it's a better.
That wages are.
I would encourage every county
office of the school districts
out the cards have.
With the county there sure so
this sounds like a better.
So thank you Mr.
Can anyone else questions
Representative.
Morning Senator.
Mr chair.
so.
In Albuquerque mentioned that it
was just a small amount and I
mean there's a lot of school
area so I'm just curious about
because you mentioned that it's
based on also based on the
square miles so which is it yes
ma'am so that Mr chairman
members of the committee
specifically for Sandoval County
the break out is not we're not
Sandoval County it's Bernalillo
county in this example the the
concern is with the proportion
with the portion of Albuquerque
public schools that is in Santa
Fe County I see so based on the
current law even though they
only have one percent.
Of the county square footage.
In Santa Fe County so APS square
area representative of the one
percent Sandoval County it's all
the county so we statewide but
but in this scenario they
receive an equal share even
though they represent only one
percent of Santa Fe County
within their school district and
the project is a hundred percent
and payments that we thank you
Mr chair I now I understand why
you said it's just a small area
I was trying to figure out what
that was thank you you it would
also question the cost.
House budget committee.
Yes Mr chair should do as a
project Janet signify a
significant others take the
rules.
Representative right okay yes.
Representative Castellano.
Representative yes.
Representative Duncan yes.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Act speaker Martinez yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Scott.
As
Serrato.
Representative Townsend.
I think you're good enough.
Chairman thank yes.
Number eleven yes.
Given that is yes thank you for
your presentation thank thank
you members of the committee
thank you.
All
members of the committee if
you'll know that Representative
are set up that has raised the a
lot of stuff to take over as
chair this morning fortunately
Representative I showed up and
then not the state again so in
Hershey place should you.
That five year.
Chairman you and she's experts
and fifty percent of bills
absolutely I can introduce my
experts have a slew of them
today I have to let the need and
the key hope who is perform
capital outlay for this
institution for the past.
Twenty five years plus.
Twenty five years yeah and then
we also have Callie hello.
Google adwords to the LFC to the
capital outlay of director and
analyst and then we also need to
use it with us units have is if
you wanna come close you're
welcome to she also works in the
capital outlay of.
Department at the LFC that we
also have with me from DFA with
us with the lesson was going the
and once you know was the was
the one to DFA and the that we
only what we're missing is the
David Abbey David Abbey is with
this for the most part
throughout this whole process as
well so
Madam chairwoman of before we
begin I do have a committee
substitute.
Thank you we get a motion to
move the substitute for
discussion.
We had a second.
Representative I'm sorry what
was what was the first however
this.
Right in the second.
terms comedic you referenced the
committee substitute is two two
five nine three one point two.
That's what happens that's what
we should all have I thank you
madam chair thing committee once
again I want to say as as first
time chair for this committee
what an honor it was to have the
opportunity to participate in
the process that is to create
this capital outlay process
along with my colleagues if you
recognize the way that we
process this this committee and
and the things we've done here
the process with exactly the
same in regards to how we
creative proposals in regards to
how we came to this this capital
outlay package I do want to
recognize those members that sat
with us and those but a month
long discussion with the house
the Senate and the governor's
office in regards to how we came
up with this number this package
want to.
Recognize on the house side
major weaknesses Spence the who
helped us with within a go she
Asians as well as Representative
Doreen guy goes chairwoman guy
goes thank you for your help as
well as ranking member decent
Harper was also with this during
these discussions on the Senate
side we had senator Nancy
Rodriguez to help us with these
negotiations as well as senator
Bobby Gonzalez Center Benny
Shendo and senator Pat Woods and
throughout that process again as
I mentioned we were guided by
LFC staff and all that they know
which is an immense amount of of
knowledge that they were able to
find us and helping us stay on
track and within budget in
regards to what was allow for
for us this year the meetings
regarding this capital outlay
process started the second week
of the session lasted about a
whole month we met first off
with that just simply members of
the legislature which was the
house and Senate team for of
about sometimes three times per
week for the first couple weeks
that we expanded it to allow for
meetings between the governor's
office as well and that's where
we finally came to some
consideration as to where we
were going to be with this
package and who's going to get
what the governor staff of.
Their team was comprised of Dan
Slagle who is that the chief of
staff for governments along
Grisham Diego are going who is
also with the governor's staff
as well as a secretary when
props who is the DFA secretary
and we finally came to an
agreement on February the tenth
twenty twenty three.
And so at this point ladies and
gentlemen madam chair and and
committee members the process
for determining provided a
capital outlay shares and the
overall size of the capital
outlay package is very over the
the various years some years
funding for state owned in
higher education facilities is
taken off the top with the
balance divided among which
amongst the chambers and the
executive in other years the
capital capacity was divided
three ways between the governor
the house and the Senate.
This year the overall size of
the capitol package was
determined in coordination with
the Appropriations Committee to
meet several goals one was to
increase the total each chamber
would receive above the LFC
budget recommendation well
maintaining thirty percent
reserves and capacity for up to
one billion dollars of tax
reform which we saw earlier this
week and about one billion
dollars in transfers to
permanent funds.
Health taxation and revenue
committee substitute for House
Bill five oh five appropriates
approximately one point two
billion dollars including one
point seven billion from the
general fund and a hundred and
sixty point five million from
other state funds for capital
projects statewide.
The appropriations include four
hundred forty eight million
dollars for state agency
judicial and higher education
projects included in a statewide
framework three hundred fifty
million dollars for projects
sponsored by and would
individual house and Senate
members hundred thirty five
million per chamber at two
hundred thirty five million
dollars for project sponsored by
the executive including a
hundred million dollar tribal
infrastructure package the
hundred dollars hundred million
dollar tribal infrastructure
package in this bill it has been
a priority of this executive
administration that was shared
by the legislative location team
in twenty twenty to the
executive share with about
thirty million dollars three
million dollars higher than the
chambers share for similar
tribal tax package in twenty
nineteen the executive share was
about a hundred million dollars
higher than chambers shares with
projects sponsored by the
governor including majority
appropriations for meal energy
projects medical facilities
transportation projects and
numerous tribal projects
throughout the state the chart
county by county that is now
before you lists all the
projects in amounts included in
the bill maybe appropriations
from all sources include forty
point nine million dollars for
judicial courts twenty seven
point five million dollars for
code compliance meals and other
equipment vehicles renovations
and construction for senior
center statewide including three
million dollars for interim
emergency needs.
It includes thirty million
dollars for awful for recovery
on the lower Rio Grande two
eight two promote settlement of
the Texas versus New Mexico
lawsuit.
It also includes twenty two
million for department of
correction facilities include
seventy five point nine million
dollars for department of health
facilities.
Twenty six million dollars for
the P. twenty five radio system
as well as a hundred and five
million dollars to school
districts for career technical
education programs
prekindergarten facilities
general maintenance and school
security.
It also includes twenty million
dollars for kitchen renovations
and equipment to support improve
milk quality for public school
districts throughout the state.
Final two twenty million dollars
for tribal libraries educational
resource that there's as well as
a hundred and forty three
million dollars for higher
education and special school
facilities at this point madam
chair and committee members we
Stephanie questions thank you Mr
chairman would you like are your
experts any restrictions or I at
this point and they here to
answer any questions I can.
All of the folks in the audience
and on zoom creation of hands of
folks in favor of this.
We get a show of hands of those
opposed to this bill.
Would anyone like to speak on
this bill either on zoom or in
person.
Saying aye let's come to the
committee.
People signed up to speak.
Representative thank you madam
chair
Representative thank you for
those of us who are new could
you just explain the process by
which we came to this bill.
I mean please yeah I I I I just
talked about earlier it's it's
the a process by which member.
See how many members one of one
to four members from the house
and for members of the Senate
come together at the beginning
of the legislative session to
then discuss along with the LFC
top advisers and DFA to discuss
projects and our capacity to be
able to compile a list of
capital outlay projects during
that time I use the last that
for this year last about a month
of intact and that we were here
to then devised a capital outlay
budget and and a division of of
how the money is going to be
split at that point in time the
governor has her share with that
we get our own share and then at
that point everything is
compiled into a bill which you
have in front of you with the
county by county list and at
that point then we wouldn't be
here and then it goes to the
regular processing any other
bill.
You madam chair thank you
Representative so each
municipality or county submits
the projects that their
priorities to them for before
you start that process Madam
chair representative absolutely
it's the ICAP of a process that
we go through as well as visits
that each of municipalities
throughout the state makes to
the governor and and to our self
respectively in regards to what
their priorities are.
Thank you speaker Martinez.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chair first of all
congratulations to you and.
T. not LFC for pulling this
together is no.
Small feet you know bringing
this up is because act together
I want to commend Ross's these
are the involving about Lee for
the probably six seven years I
have seen madam chair this was
the most transparent processes
that I've seen.
and it's not because of lack of
transparency of those of us who
pays for it's really just better
planning and and more
collaboration between the
majority and the minority and
more collaboration between the
house and and and the executive.
This is a bill that I think we
should all be very proud of of
the product that we should all
be very.
excited about
Madam chair in Mr chair what was
the.
Your.
Capacity for each of the house.
or rather what was the amount of
the share for each of the house
members we started the process
of the bedroom and and and and
Mr speaker the initial number
per member was at a one point
seven what what to I wanted
twenty five million dollars
total.
One point two million dollars
under twenty five million
dollars.
For contact.
So this is for members so so one
of the so so it was a hundred
twenty five million dollars
total house white and then
divided that up it was one point
seven five per member one point
seven five million per house
member.
Coming out of the LFC
recommendation.
Madam chair and and
Representative that was the
you're right.
Now as a result of your that the
houses the the the house
negotiating team with the
senator the executive.
You all were able to decrease
that to how much program for.
But.
Madam chairwoman Mr speaker that
number jumped up to two point
five million dollars for members
after our deliberations and
madam chair over Mr speaker I
expected that you know that that
that was a process by which
because we started so early in
the session meeting amongst each
other we were able to with staff
here with us today look at the
statewide numbers and really
identify those that had
duplicate measures to that and
and begin eliminating those
types of of initiatives and so
by way of doing that it was just
continue just the things about
of how we read and use that
money creatively do that at two.
Shares thank you madam chair
Mister chair that that's super
important because I think that
it was that transparency.
Let us all of us to.
X..
More efficient.
And that was.
The critical component of these
should be able to know
Generally speaking what the
executive was was looking at
funding and and that the
collaboration between the
chambers as important and I've
been lucky that the two senators
that mining district overlaps
with we work well together split
projects right but I understand
the sense so I think that that.
The collaboration these are the
tools are there no madam chair
Mister chair also want to
highlight the fact that when the
initial LFC number came out so
the and I'm just talking in
terms of how much shares his
support for us but we need to
show see recognition came out
and each of us we're going to
take one point seven million
dollars toward districts.
Many of us certainly here in the
house and then also some of the
senators are saying wait a
minute.
A lot of capacity there's a lot
of capacity the general fund
which left us.
Why are we taking a little bit.
which is a fair question right
because I think a lot of our
districts specially those rural
communities have a lot of
things.
so I just want to commend you
all for fighting to get us a
little for and I know it's also
need selfish state one for my
district but we offer districts
but you know we do have I mean
I.
Speaking just a we have district
eleven do you have any issue
with people who are on house but
we just St reporter projects to
with people's lives now I get to
take a little bit more to my
community to help improve the
lives of people.
Applies to each and every single
one.
Because we all split the shares.
so the closing manager Mr chair
one of the few of the thing
every member of your team
optically staff of course
but as mentioned chair again
goals and us are for the
in our side and all senators of
all up for your good work I'm
very proud of this bill is that
we know you are as well.
And then they of I appreciate
the effort I appreciate the work
that way.
Thank you.
This feature is no
Representative of the.
Thank you madam chair hand the
chairman.
The county.
Thank you all for the great work
here I I just want to insure a
couple slots
and.
A
maybe just a little bit about
and very high level how cap what
we normally works and how it's
different this year because I
think what we did this year was
actually a phenomenal thing that
we did but what normally happens
for capital outlay dollars is we
get to severance tax dollars
right when I when minerals oil
gas whatever are severed from
the there is a severance tax if
it's done on state land that we
all as the state owned right.
So the legislature's done for
for for a long time is.
They take those severance tax
dollars and they will provide
against that revenue stream we
do that every year.
And of that that bonding there's
like a really big pie with lots
of cut outs to it the biggest
one is a public school capital
outlay so public school capital
outlay authority you know.
Let's all school districts and
reviews all schools in the we
actually have this great scale
where they the range of
different buildings and that
this is all part of the the so
many
lawsuit in the state through
this money actually helps make
sure that our school facilities
are in good shape so that's
really a lot of.
and then there are some other
Act carve outs there's some
money that goes to water
infrastructure projects there's
some money that goes to
colonias projects there somebody
because the tribal projects and
then we had another card out a
couple years ago I think it
works already of our one year
for housing.
And.
All those hard outs are done.
What's left
goes to the legislature and the
governor for our capital outlay.
Yeah and usually we come into
the session we know what's the
tax service tax revenue streams
are we kind of have an idea of
how much bonding capacity will
have.
And that's really how the
framework for how much money we
have
capital outlay and sometimes
they'll add you know a little
bit general fund or some
shifting around of other fun
projects and that's really how
that normally works.
this year though we're doing
something different that are I
think it's brilliant what we're
doing is if you look at your for
fiscal impact reports.
All of this
is general fund or other phones
there's no severance tax
bonding.
And what we're doing is instead
relating that service those
service tax dollars come in
instead of bonding against them.
We're just gonna let them flow
into the permanent fund to to
strengthen that fund which needs
some need some help.
It is that we're using some of
this three point six billion
dollar surplus.
Representative restriction
projects I just think that is
that is so whites rates that we
you know I think many of us I
think all of us please when I
asked for the session we're
gonna spend all that money on
right I think a lot of us that
you know roads and
infrastructure is a great way to
use this money that's perhaps
not reoccurring you know help
our our schools or government
buildings roads and so I I just
think this is.
Really a great outcome that
we're using up some of this Act
right the surplus on on capital
outlay that was just really
really.
Okay and then let's talk just a
little bit about the process
this year because I I agree
madam chair with the the
chairman and with the speaker
the process is here was
significantly improved over.
At least eleven years that I've
been here.
and also a traditionally it's
the chair of the tax committee
and the the ranking members that
negotiate that I'm very grateful
to be invited that doesn't have
to be the case you know all
fighting including me and I was
grateful and and I actually.
Think we did some good things
together part of those
negotiations so so thank you for
that when I was chair of the
ways and means committee it was
me and Jim Trujillo and at and.
We did some good things for the
legislature
but interestingly you know we
had a little conflict even with
our our governor at the time
even though she was wearing the
same jerseys me right
it was interesting this time
to see
There really was not that much
conflict with this this governor
staff at all in fact for the
first time ever they try to work
with us on their share of
projects
that was huge
I've never seen that before and
the president quite turn out the
way we we would have liked
but I think as a first step in
that direction that's that's
amazing right so I just want to
give kudos to to the governor's
team as well.
Yeah when it comes to.
Hi and how we divided up.
I mean normally we hear normally
it's a service service or the
government's insert the house
it's through the CENIC it's a
third.
I think that is probably not
normal and we actually did that
when I was chair of the ways and
means committee and I think that
was a big source of conflict
with the governor.
We always been under
Yes governor's is there's a half
of it goes the statewide
projects and then a third of the
remainder does the governor sort
of communication Senator limited
goes to the house and that's
kind of how this would flushed
out when you add everything up
together there's a half of those
the statewide projects ministers
research.
So
When I see the the only other
thing I'll mention is as regards
to these negotiations and it was
clear that the governor's.
Portion of the statewide portion
were much.
Traders then which are
That's split
you know being the the fiscal
conservative I was hoping that
to we would shrink the
governor's portion to make it
come into alignment
and of course just the reality
was that wasn't the case and and
we had the means so instead what
we did was we expanded the
legislature's questions so to
make that all fit within the
right percentages so that's what
really happened that's how we
went from a one point seven
million to two point five
million for each house member.
And also you know I'm grateful
that meant I could help more my
schools in my district so so I
think it I think it's a good
thing overall.
So I I think the the west
manager C. is I thank you madam
chair and chairman to the staff
LFC staff work all during the
interim going going around the
state finding out.
Your prioritizing the list of
project needs for statewide to
put it right framework together
for us.
And in the course let's council
I mean I I.
I I I think it is not an
exaggeration to say this is the
most complex bill every session
right to to have to work with a
hundred and twelve members so
this was really literally the
input of a hundred twelve
members.
And each member has you know a
dozen or two dozen items that go
into this and so.
the show and the staff up there
putting the school together it's
a tunnel you know that I just
want to six of all publicly for
that every year we have.
Kevin doesn't a credible job we
actually give him for these new
does line by line it's retired
bill make sure it's right thank
you Kevin and I think just to
see how good let's council is
over the last nine years you've
done that.
one year we found an error in
this one year without an error
in this and that's it so it's
it's pretty amazing shop.
And all that said I want to just
explain one last thing Madam
chairman
I and my friends over here of
course very much
are supportive of this bill and
the projects and it except for
one.
And we have I I personally have
a very deep.
Cultural and personal believe.
That's a abortion is murder
adjust my culture my belief
system is that and so I
personally can't support this
legislation because of that
component and it that's that's
why I'll be voting no.
But I I just want everyone here
to know how grateful I am for
the great work that was done in
this this is that is the only
only little mark against this
everything else is a special
thank you madam chair thank you
thank you madam chair if I may
respond to that very quickly and
I completely understand and
respect your your your
sentiments and the philosophy
around that and the the way that
we were able to address it and I
thought maybe we could it would
help but but maybe not a leave
completely your concern is that
we took that that money out of
the statewide framework and put
it in the in the governor's
political shared want to call it
that and and so even with doing
that it is actually still part
of this but I understand
completely where you're coming
from and I respect that a
hundred percent I I do also want
to make mention regards to LCS
and their work as well I did
mention that earlier but I mean.
In in trying to do things
differently and and in trying to
to collaborate with the
governor's office and trying to
get a list and collaborate
project to project and how maybe
they could share with us their
information we can share with
with them hours when I asked
Michelle upstairs the I think
the day before our our this
reduce we could have an extra
two days she about a lot of a
chair and asked out because that
was that was you know way too
much time for them to develop a
bill this large in any time
frame to meet a deadline like we
have now and so now I know why
and now I know why and and so I
appreciate that and that they
can bring that up thank you
madam chair.
All of our representatives.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Mr chair I wanted to
just have also expressed my
appreciation to at the speaker
for pretty once again on this
Committee and also to be part of
the negotiation team I've been a
part of the negotiation team for
several years and I will say
that madam chair did this was
one of the best outcomes I think
that we've we've come up with we
definitely got into places of
where.
Tensions got a little high but
we were always able to come back
in and keep doing hi I think the
will of the people I think it
was a bipartisan
conversations all the time
because we were all thinking of
constituents and the help that
we received from the staff is
just amazing and every year you
all make us look like stars to
the rock stars and I just want
to make sure to to express that
because
I mean literally from our our we
would have used spreadsheets and
with that being being kept up to
date on those particulars we
would not have been able to have
a fair fight because we actually
were able to get more then the
chairman was talking about
making sure that we always have
the information and that we
didn't back down and so
very very happy to be part of
the process and I think it's
opened the door to continuing
that conversation.
In the past what we what I have
been part of is that everybody's
very territorial of their money
like to make sure that you know
you can get the most of course
your district and I think this
year the approach madam chair
was
how do we best serve the whole
state and I really believe that
we we knew we had the the the
more funds and this might be a
once in a you know.
Generational type of of of that
for us and so I think that we
all went in really wanting to
make sure that the kids always
start projects but finish
projects to we so desperately
needed to to finish I know in my
area they'll be water projects
that would have taken ten years
to probably finished and now
people have running water and to
me that's very very important
fit you know being able to to
build a multi generational
center that I've been working on
for years and actually having
real dollars to say we can
finish this project is so that's
that's going to be
I think for me.
A proud moment to be able to go
home and tell my community this
is something that we were able
to do this session and so I
wanted to just once again say
thank you
With working with the with the
governor's staff of in the past
we did not know how she was
going to spend it so sometimes
of items we get duplicated and
then as as you know when we had
our share it was money that
you've been put to something
else and by having just open
communication madam chair that
would make all the difference in
we didn't you know the at the
end it got a little bit of the
and time's because the you know
things start moving fast but I
think that open the door to to
have better
conversations and better use of
our many I constituents and so I
want to make sure to
acknowledge that the chairman
was part of those conversations
every step of the way our staff
was amazing and I'm just so
proud as Committee because
without the support of of you
all I don't think we could that
is mentioned so thank you so
much.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair
Thank you Mr chairman
There definitely is a lot of
work into this.
I want.
In my district madam chair.
I think I would have seventy
percent and thirty percent I'm
happy and happy.
Both sides of the aisle probably
did get everything we wanted to
go.
Therefore I have to say it's
probably a decent Bill.
It is a new legislators
I think that's the definition of
if both sides are unhappy with a
decent.
In.
We are happy that.
at your Mr Chairman.
Representative Harper health
related to the fact of the
spending money was going to be
spit it bonding.
Is that a hundred percent or is
that most of.
Madam chairman and and
Representative that's all of it.
Yeah thank you after that.
As a.
So I find it interesting that we
have money we want to help ten
years instead of spending that
money down.
Fiscal conservative I.
are process it probably don't
understand all the results of
the educational.
The years that.
So I I guess that's the only
thing I want to say was
thank you so much for that.
We are calling in yes.
This is that going to be happy
and.
Things are Representative
chairman chairman.
movie do yes chair.
Our
local yeah.
Representative radio.
Yes.
Representative Castellano this.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Gaydos yes.
Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez.
