Well before it's a little before
nine we have one bill tonight
one forty six before we start
can you call the roll please.
What a little.
Representative Castellano
present at chairman.
Representative.
Okay.
Representative Harper your
opinion on this.
Representative in.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Townsend Here by
Representative.
Here.
Representative.
Six right thank you chairman
members I'm very grateful that
you have made the time tonight.
So this bill we passed
unanimously Tax in judiciary on
the house floor two years ago.
and it made it over to the
Senate wants to Senate tax and
then ran out of time to be heard
Senate Judiciary.
So this time we try to reverse
to see if that would help we
started the Senate and just
barely like today maybe it house
through Senate taxed Senate
Judiciary.
So so this the Senate finance
what's been through three Senate
committees.
And I'm just going to.
the bill number Senate bill one
forty six and I'm just gonna
walk through it section by
section.
There's only.
There's only nine sections.
We're this this is a audience
for.
I'm I'm happy to explain.
Right okay.
Right so this is a bill from the
department this is a cleanup
bill we try to do it through two
years ago.
The first two sections have to
do with the minimum amount that
TRD can go after someone for two
week one tax and right now it's
twenty five dollars.
I'm here actually losing money
by going after people who'll
them twenty five dollars and so
this raises that amount to fifty
dollars.
All right so this is amazing
ground breaking stuff this is
actually gonna help the
department.
That's sections one and two okay
section three what we when you
have to apply for a credit to
the Department.
They have a hundred and eighty
days to approve it but the
problem is they are getting
incomplete applications all the
time and and then they're like
okay when does the clock start
to mimic the it's it's deems
granted after hundred eighty
days if we don't prove it and so
it's it's like a mass and so
what third what the proposed
instructions there's a
compromise they're gonna say we
start the clock women the
application's complete but
several we have a hundred twenty
days not a hundred eighty days
so I think it's a good
compromise.
Section four makes sappers and
phantom where illegal in New
Mexico so these are systems that
people can get that basically
kind of culture books the of two
different books they can avoid
taxation that way
we're just making it clear that
that's illegal in New Mexico.
Okay the last sections all have
to do with property tax.
It doesn't change property tax
at all this just has to do with
when you are
Going to protest something where
do you go.
In five and six to just
clarifies that if the property
is valued by the county.
Sen when you protest it goes to
the county protest board.
Should say exists already
disbursement occurrence County
probably goes kind of report if
it's property valued by TRD this
is usually what state what our
state property like.
Probably that crosses multiple
counties like what rural roads.
Yeah you're you're good if TRD
evaluates it then it doesn't go
to the county for just forty
goes to the A. O. H. right the
state level protest correct.
Okay section seven.
This is
Something actually help tax
payers right so this is if you
there's there's two types of
property right there's probably
that assessed.
This omitted right the committee
on accident or maybe on purpose
but if if it's just if it's
are assessed the taxpayer has a
bunch of protections they can
protest and goes through a
process but there's a lot of
silent with regards to property
that's omitted as was question
do they have any rights and so
this just says you have the same
rights whether it's assessed or
whether it's a minute.
So I I think that's a great
change the last two sections
section eight and nine.
this.
Clarifies.
The ability of TRD to yield an
adverse decision and that orders
of residential commercial
property also searched like.
By assessors or TRD also have
the right to appeal this
decision.
So that is what this bill does
chairman thank you members.
The one on the line.
The.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Harper I do
counties have the capacity to
handle those those protests I
know they do that now but if
we're.
Directing them or giving them
more to do yeah so so chair
representative so great question
right and and this really is not
going to be like a.
Ground breaking chain where
things go it really is just a
clarification.
Is to have these boards of in
existence and they are currently
handling these protests.
Really kind of your statewide
stuff is assessed by TRD was one
make it clear that that doesn't
which county do go to right you
don't you go to the state A. O.
H. to yes Mr chair
representative at can you just
tell me a little bit about what
the the properties that the
properties that are in limited
what does that even mean thank
you so so what what's what's a
this could be an awful example
made new right let's say I've
I've got whites.
you know House rental property
property and I've got some
more land somewhere and
and the county clerk is where my
house and my.
Perfect complex so those
recessed.
But they might not be aware of
my property that I've got just
out of nowhere Rio Rancho and as
the doing an audit they provide
hello Representative Harper has
this land out here that we we
don't know about that is an
automated property.
It well that's that's good.
I think I might have carried
this bill it's a separate thing
you know that rigs but I just
want confirmation that there's
nothing in here about abandoned
property and whether it's
published in a newspaper.
The secretary seems to be very
fixated on that is right want to
make sure that nothing in this
bill that touches on it please
can you confirm that for me.
Sure to change nothing in here
about a property okay thank you
for newspapers thank you chair
of the.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chairman thank you
Representative for the I think
this to questions really I guess
what's the formation of bringing
this bill back now at this
particular time of night.
Ten hours eight one nine so so
at German Representative
Serrato.
I think all of us who have dealt
with Senate Judiciary Committee.
Why this happens like this we've
we've been sitting and we got
through this was Senator force
one forty six races pretty early
in the session we flew to tax
and then we will part in
judiciary for a really long time
so I got a hearing.
And then and then we still had
to go to Senate finance.
so three committees just off the
Senate floor finally so we're
here.
Thank you Mr thank you for that
as well and again looking at the
fiscal impact there doesn't seem
to be then this means more
receive thank you correct.
Remembers a motion.
K..
As.
Representative Dawkins and
second by Representative what
this and this is the motion.
