Focus on on the amendment
putting questions on the
amendment.
What voters.
Okay questions any other
document the.
And your bill been invented now
we are house bill ninety nine as
amended any questions now on the
amended bill.
For the case.
Representative got.
Thank you Mr.
Reach the.
And to Representative.
It should have just strictly.
Recreation of the funds.
The actual.
State revenues into.
Mr chair representative Scott
that is accurate.
So.
Mr Chairman representative
Nibert.
It's encouraging donations and
Mr chair Representative Scott
and income from the investment
of the fund.
Representative thousands of
thank you Mr speaker
and it.
your capital outlay or are caps.
The directors and that the part
that
Mr chair.
And and confident with our
invention international with for
the operation.
Well.
Have a.
There's nothing wrong with that
this.
Got to get her cap.
We would love your capital.
Out.
Thank you.
Teacher at any other questions
or comments from the committee.
And that is our motion to to
Make a motion Mr chair that we
for the past.
House bill ninety nine as
amended yes Sir the second is a
second chance yeah I don't.
that will.
Representative or echo yes.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chandler
representative Duncan yes
Representative guy it goes
Representative Harper and.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative I speaker
Martinez.
Senator Ted is.
Representative said that.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Townsend them.
Thanks chair could damage.
As chairman you don't mind this.
I'm gonna need to meet yourself
please.
What will go over the okay J.
Lente yes.
Out of six to to you thank you
thank you.
Responsive for making those
adjustments are working with the
committee.
Thank you let's move out to
house bill two thirty what CYFD
child ID card Representative.
And then.
Representative right.
Thank you.
One of the steps to yes Sir we
do have a committee substitute
point two two five three one two
point two.
Will the substance.
That that that that I yeah I
know
we passed that on the twentieth
it out with that.
What was more profit these are.
I did want.
Is that wages.
What yes yes Mr chair members of
the committee so in the last and
committee there was concerns and
help committee members and yes
money from CYFD led to several
changes in the bill the language
provided by CYFD is more clear
that the ID requirement applies
only to foster children and not
kids in juvenile justice
facilities M. and there was also
discussion about an age we
didn't have an agent there and
we had a big discussion on when
is the proper age have that a
child will tend to be a run away
and we we came up with kids
twelve and under based on
research and also expanded it to
kids eighteen to twenty one if
they were in extended foster
care
it also and limits requirements
and.
To it that the standard ID card
and not a real ID card so we
didn't have to we can do
standard ID card and not a real
ID cards which and then also
that a child to refuse an ID if
they wished and so those are the
changes that were recommended by
that committee when they passed
this and that's what we can
expect.
I got any other on the field for
you with us.
yes Mr chair just briefly and
members of the committee I'm the
reason we feel this bill is so
important and I think people
don't understand or in the past
twenty years the cases cases
over a hundred thousand missing
foster children they're just
close because foster children
cannot be located on on an
average day fifty five children
will disappear from the U. S.
foster care system and what
these what happens with these
children Mr chair members of the
committee is they get into
situations where they're running
away and they get and sex
trafficking issues they just
appear disappear altogether and
nobody can find it and the
problem is they don't have any
type of identification card so
when there's an amber alert or
something goes out there's no
picture for us to even be able
to locate them and so one of the
suggestions and working with
CYFD and working with all these
different agencies is that if we
can get a photo identification
card to assist law enforcement
in finding these children that
would be a huge step in helping
locate the children that have
just kind of fallen off the map
and so that's the general intent
of the bill and I will also just
add that and social services as
a lose over twenty thousand
children a year and they don't
know where they're at and I feel
that we have a responsibility to
try to help children is a very
simple way to do it very cost
there's not a lot of cost in it
and with that though I would
defer to the expert if she has
anything Merioles back is here
with me from.
Thank you.
Thank you chairman and
representative I just wanted to
think nationally twenty thousand
and foster care go missing every
year so I'm currently as of
January first we had fifty kids
on run in foster care capacity
I'm last year nine age out and
so one of the other things the
status he noted the FIR is the
Attorney General I'm recommends
that we really ensure that these
youth aging out in the foster
care system before they
discharge they have these vital
documents and so it is
facilitate discharge planning
which include help helping help
them apply for benefits rent
jobs etcetera I'm knowing that
at least ninety job last year
without these vital documents is
attendance and so so we believe
that ensuring that these
children in foster care youth in
foster care young people and
fostering connections I'm get go
through this process with the
support of CYFD ask their
guardian I'm making sure that
that we're starting to get their
vital documents both helps them
and how our selves as the aging
out and then also as
Representative reads that it is
a safety feature and CYFD is
supporting this.
Thank in the office lots of no
Mr chair members of the
committee would stand for any
question.
Thank you again that's going up
to the audience although the
face and online of housing of
the case up to do to help build
to thirty one please raise your
hand.
And in the audience here today
in online.
I believe that
I don't see anybody that that
all of the opposition.
Two thousand to thirty what in
the what I.
Okay one of the great question
about.
There are medical issues that
are.
Which of the
public that.
One hundred dollar.
Hands of hope.
All right
I admit.
The best I.
Sorry.
At the heart of this do not pass
on house bill thank you two
thirty one and that to pass on.
The the second.
Hello.
Harper thing about them that
this is taken please.
Representative for a go yeah.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Duncan yes
Representative they of those.
Representative Harper yes
Representative Hernandez yes
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative that.
Representative Serrato yes.
Representative Townsend.
By Dan.
I just wrote a with this now.
Well accessing and.
Okay chair.
Yes.
That was the best thing we've
issues as one thank you right.
Can you hear me.
Thank you but you're gets I just
want to.
House Bill to sixty nine that
will force drivers license.
Representative that's the
Thank you Mr chairman but I
guess.
Are yours.
Thank you chairman in the
committee members House Bill two
sixty nine.
As a response to some federal
legislation changes.
The feds have a system that is a
nationwide clearinghouse that
collects data on drug tests for
folks who are applying for
commercial driver's licenses.
And there was legislation that
was passed recently that says
states have to use this clearing
house or they will lose some
federal funding and so what this
bill does is a aligns our state
with that new federal changes
says whenever someone is
applying for commercial driver's
license we will reference that
nationwide Drug clearinghouse
database.
And if we don't do this the
impact to the state will be
about six point two million
dollars over two years
recurring
and with that all the turnover
to secretary.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and thank you
Representative Harper for
helping us bring this bill
forward this is an MVD agency
bill and also here today is
taken solace to the acting
director of N. B. D. we're ready
to answer your questions but yes
this is this is basically aimed
to conform with federal
regulations make sure that New
Mexico's commercial driver's
license program stays federally
twelve which is important for
DOT's operating funding
and ultimately this is intended
to keep our roads safer too
because certainly we we are we
don't want people drunk driving
or driving under the influence
of drugs especially in a
commercial vehicle.
I will stand for questions and
and chairman if I could add
in transportation we noticed a
couple just drafting errors and
so we have an amendment.
that I'd like to
For the committee's
consideration Act I would like
to discuss sure you have the
equipment to.
Yes it's point two two five
three eight eight point one we
should all have a copy of that
this point remove the eleven.
Second question of sufficiency
yes I think chairman so some of
those two things the first is
on.
Page three line at nine
there was.
The just miss your frontline
services their vision meaning
tax department shall request
commercial driver's license
trucking operations records of
an application for commercial
driver's license here is at the
time of issuance that doesn't
make sense we're gonna strike
issuance and insert in lieu
thereof applications so at the
time of Asian will reference the
clearing house.
The second she was on page four
yeah this was really just an
awkward sentences online three
I'm not gonna read this census
starts online three you can read
yourself it's kind of confusing
what we're gonna do is insert
instead there and then it says
the division shock and plead the
downgrade I mean it's not
allowing a commercial driver's
license to be issued and entered
on the commercial driver's
license information system
driver record.
Within sixty days of the vision
receiving.
Receipt of the drug in offering
us record so it's just saying.
When the department receives
information that there is a
problem within sixty days to
enter that into the system and
downgrade the.
The license
that chairman I stand for
questions on the amendment
questions on the amendment.
Yes Representative drive thank
you Mr
just just one question
Representative on within the
sixty days
of the application the division.
That means that they will get
back with the capital within the
sixty day period and if so
Are we giving them sixty days to
drive if they are.
Tested positive or something.
Great great to question chairman
and I'm certain that's not the
case but all of those who lives
every day.
And Mr chairman and
Representative I know that the
sixty days is coming from
federal regulation but what
happens in the meantime I might
diverted director Gonzales yes
within.
Mr chair representative within
sixty days I have at the time of
application will not continue
with the issuance of that
credential but the commercial
driver have sixty days to come
back and that to go ahead and
then that.
Report that the positive for
future.
That.
Now with the.
To pass on the MSA medical C.
thirty one no objection to that.
Of the bill will now is this on
the bill itself.
The chairman all right that's
where the audience that those.
live all those in favor of house
bill two sixty nine the reason
that.
The road
is that one online.
Average I I don't think that
already is working on getting
from.
Okay are we apologize to those
economy of it that's the point
of it all it's it's not the the
audio that that we've always
used Representative has over
four still functionally this
morning so we will continue with
the discussion of this that go
to all of the opposition of
Bill to sixty nine in a row at
at the live and online but in
the real anybody.
Okay let's come back to the
committee question or comment on
house bill two six and that is
that with representative
Thompson.
Thank you Mr chair thank you.
That that have on.
After that drivers are you
hearing.
United States regularly at.
Chair representative thank you
for the questions so currently
state of New.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair
representative thank you for the
question so currently FMCSA has
an agreement with international
drivers from Canada and Mexico
a reciprocity agreement where
anybody that comes into with the
commercial driver's Mexico or
Canada can and we would honor
their CD else as if they were
coming from let's say New York
or California so we won't one
the actual clearing house I will
tell unless they actually apply
with the state of New Mexico.
Chairman.
Representative is just.
there then or Mexico or.
C. L..
So what Mr chair representative
there is an agreement where I
can see as his determined that
Mexico and Canada CD else meet
the requirements of the
requirements listed within FMCSA
to the federal guidelines are
being met with Mexican and CDL
a Mexican citizen can candidacy
deals.
Thank you.
Representative right.
Thank you Mr chair just quick
question Representative and and
cabinet secretary
so just like walk me through
this okay so I'm going in for a
CDL and I test positive for
drugs
five years it's on my record in
the according to this right so
that person can get a CD
allocation
or what I mean within those five
years.
Mr chair representative so the
customer can get a CDL again
they just have to go through the
order that says substance abuse
prevention program okay that's
required by FMCSA once they
clear there are positive with
the clearing house and the state
is able to issue a commercial
driver's license once more okay
just another quick follow up Mr
chair of what about for
marijuana.
The same same process Mr chair
representative yes that would be
the same process that currently
marijuana is not legal federally
so the federal requirements to
follow.
Okay thank you Mr chair.
One
than that because that's the no
fiscal impact we will this out
of the one where the so with the
pleasure of the committee.
Yes Representative out though
second by Representative and
that this is there any
opposition to this.
yeah with the passive house bill
as a.
Two sixty nine as amended that.
Members.
Has that will to.
There in the real estate.
Representative Armstrong house
bill thirty fifty four died
diesel fuel.
Representative four thousand
every year that.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee with me I want
to introduce my expert witness
Caitlyn Hart.
this bill all a lot of people Mr
chairman don't know if a lot
about die diesel die diesel is
used in construction and mining
and agriculture out an offer
some off road vehicles.
Mr chairman it was brought to my
attention that
I have several.
Add related people in my
district that are actually going
under I want to is going down to
going back into is quitting the
farming industry I startling die
diesel was a big part of his
life but right now in nineteen
ninety seven I believe it was a
sunset it used to be gross
receipts tax exempt and it's one
sunset in the ninety seven I
believe.
And so right now die diesel you
have to pay gross receipts tax
on it's all the reason that they
don't do the excise tax is
because it's not used on the
highways.
And so what this bill does Mr
chairman members of the
committee and what I'm trying to
do is help out those farmers and
ranchers and.
Urban and rural New Mexico that
used light diesel and exempted
again from gross receipts tax.
and only for agricultural
purposes this is a pre
construction this isn't for
anything else Ag purposes only.
And so Mr chairman members of
the committee when we.
Got our first FIR from taxed
ram.
They said we didn't need a bill
because it was already exempt.
This is how complicated.
It actually reads in the tax
code.
and so that's not true we we do
need the bill we would prefer to
have the bill but then so they
did a re evaluation on the F. I.
R..
And they came up they didn't
really have a way Mr chairman
members of the committee to
decide what was used for ad what
was used for construction what
was used for anything else for
mining and so we did a little
bit of research and came up
with.
Without the suppliers Mr
chairman members of the
committee and we're we're
thinking it's around ten percent
of what the FIR is I just asked
we do have a construction
business where we is about
twelve thousand gallons a week
of dyed diesel and so I'm
assuming.
The numbers are are really close
to about ten percent Mr chairman
members of the committee we are
going to go back to the
LFC and try to work and see if
we can't figure out exactly what
the amount would be and but we
really are
thinking conservative number
would be ten percent of the
eighty million so around eight
million.
So with that Mr Chairman we
stand for questions who is your
expert witness this is Caitlyn
Hart good morning chairman
members you want to.
Now at the you know as as
representative Armstrong stated
it is quite complicated within
the tax code and in the new SFA
are they to point out the
regulation which states that die
diesel is exempt from the
special fuels excise tax which
was included in the original FIR
that TRD stated so in the new
one you'll see where that
exception for the exclusion from
the special feels excise taxes
and where it says that it is
subject to gross receipts tax.
S. R. it also no no Sir we we
stand for questions very much
I was still having audio.
Should be good okay so let's not
go there to are for this offense
House Bill five at the fifty
fourth meeting although the
favorite these families have.
Okay and all the money the right
hand of also will go to the ring
first on my left hand side yes
please.
Mr chairman members of the
committee to be Rivera
registered this.
I've talked about this Dennis
Ross four.
You for legislation will
directly benefit our state's
agricultural producers will now
have
to pay the tax there's a diesel
as representative Armstrong
mention.
We're not on sections of their.
Taxation and for that reason we
stand for.
Thank you that
has been looking to Mr chairman
committee Lara.
Representative right.
They have a sample of what is
happening here we would be so
happy for the Alan at eight
percent we were paying over
forty cents.
them the state where is the
highly excise taxes twenty fifth
I have a lot of my neighbors and
may I just started by regular
the need for.
Thank you thank you anyone else
on the left hand side of.
Representative Lujan.
Yes there's a chairman members
of the committee my name's bill
king on farm for more The New
Mexico I stand this bill on this
because.
Our taxes on this diabetes
what's on from like five cents a
gallon size thirty two cents a
gallon since the populace bugs
and very difficult for us to
work with dozens and.
Taxed so we would appreciate
your consideration.
At school.
Thank you Mr king well I.
Members of the team
that really good morning here
with us things part of house
bill three fifty four.
Thank you Mr chair good morning
members of the committee but
really it's in good executive
director of dairy producers of
New Mexico we stand strong
support of house bill three
fifty four as you all know those
involved in agriculture cannot
pass on additional costs they
incur so this is a common sense
bill that will help our
producers and we would like to
thank representative Armstrong
for bringing it forward thank
you thank you anyone else
online.
Okay very good anyone online or
in the audience in opposition of
house bill thirty fifty four.
One of the real.
What.
No no okay very good that's one
of the committee questions or
comments on house bill three
fifty four first we have a list
Representative Ortez Mr chair
thank you Representative
Armstrong of what types of
vehicles used acting so you
mentioned off road.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative mostly farm
equipment is used by diesel some
ranch vehicles that don't leave
the ranch that never use up the
highway it's it's all.
No highway use at all.
The trucks that ran strats
and tractors yes ma'am.
castings that yes ma'am Mr
Chairman representative any kind
of heavy equipment that you put
could use on the ranch and also
vehicles.
Mr chair at Representative at is
that a diesel manufactured here
in New Mexico.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for that question die diesel
is regular diesel with the dye
in it.
Mr chair representative the
thanks for that clarification
why is that hi there.
Mr chairman Representative it's
because they want to be sure
that it's not used off road and
so it is a red dye and so it's a
red color.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm good
thank you.
The representative about the.
Thank you Mr chairman the
representative of the bill
I'm just curious somebody
mentioned that they ended up
using regular diesel as opposed
to die diesel instead because
the cost of increased so much
I'm curious.
at city are inch I guess the
question is one of the
interchange for use and then to
is that because the tax Pacific
Lee Alcon died without so much
for the diet is more expensive I
just kind of it kind of.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative
it is interchangeable but it
you're not supposed to do that.
What happens is you would you
would use the regular diesel
because you didn't pay gross
receipts tax on it so the gross
receipts tax the dye diesel was
about the same price as the
regular diesel but the gross
receipts made it much more
expensive thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that and I get him
to send a clear message that
simplicity also mentioned that
some weeks it's up to thirty two
percent some weeks it's very
well
help consisted I guess it
changes as the price fluctuates
as well is that correct Mr
Chairman representative yes the
plight the price of the diesel
fluctuates but the you know the
gross receipts tax depending on
where you're at.
Stays the same but the regular
diesel
that excise tax stayed the same
on that so it didn't fluctuate
as much as that died diesel
thank you Mr chair last question
just and so.
It's it's a committee estimates
that you have that they were
receiving I I guess is our TRD
how much does that cost but
there is also confusion if we're
even tax in the first place so
apparently we we believe we're
getting a decent amount from it
but we just had no idea that
what Mr Chairman representative
the first FIR we got said we
didn't need the bill because it
was exempt and so it's the the
language in the bill is just
very very confusing and that was
from TRD and so Mr Chairman
representative they we sent it
back to say you know that we
know the this is a correct and
then they they have no way to
separate from construction from
mining from act.
But we believe from the
producers the information we've
got from the producers of the
delivers up the act diesel die
diesel that it's about ten
percent of this but we are going
to go back with to LFC and work
with and try to figure out if
there's a way we can actually
get the exact amount I do Mr
chair like your idea of the
questions on the stop here's my
colleague single board but thank
you very much reflection.
Sure that's the question.
Okay I'll be fast so two quick
ones is that do we number one Mr
chair and Representative do we
know why what was a lot of sense
in ninety seven and two
that you there is the actual way
to chase signify would die
diesel is for agricultural use I
guess that are is because that's
the question I thank you Mr
chairman and madam
Representative yes there I mean
the the the people who deliver
the diesel they know if they're
delivering it for Act use or
construction use a lot of times
and construction it's an end
product so sometimes they're not
taxed because it's an end
product but the other problem is
I'm sorry what was that year
second how do we know sensitive
Mr chair all that yes Mr
Chairman representative I'm sure
it's because at that point time
we were either so it's not
through the cracks and no one
caught it or we needed the money
at the time and we let us on set
thank you Mr.
Thank you okay Representative
Harper.
Thank you chairman and
Representative it's good to see
you this morning I just.
Apple clarifying questions for
myself and maybe kind of a tax
policy comment but so Chairman
representative.
my understanding is that if I'm
wrong die diesel is the exact
same composition of regular
diesel.
There's no like increased in
Seoul for anything like that is
the exact same product is that
correct Mr Chairman
representative yes.
Yeah and and Chairman
representative we're not the
only ones that die diesel here
in New Mexico which is kind of a
nation wide standard and my
understanding is we diet.
Because if someone is using it
who is not permitted to use it
like you know like a you know
some I you know freight trucking
company right that can be easily
determined from looking at the
diagram there's hefty fines for
for not paying the tax on that
field is that correct Mr
chairman Representative that's
correct.
All right thank you when I make
sure I got that right and then
one of things as mentioned early
on in yes Medicine Reacher we
all understand this so there's
there really are.
I have two main taxes for for
fuel right if it's gasoline is
the gasoline tax if it's diesel
there's the special fuels tax
figures like wrestling taxable
for diesel.
And then on top of that we also
sometimes have gross receipts
tax.
so so Chairman representative
right now die diesel is not
subject to a special fuels tax
is that correct.
Richard okay although I'd like
my hair Representative that is
correct it is only subject to
the question.
Guests also chair representative
that's whites died because part
of it is tax free will not be in
the gasoline tax special tax
andai diesel and and I can
understand that because as
mentioned earlier that.
Very typically these are not
used on roads.
and and and so when we look at
the gasoline tax that is really
a user fee it's a user tax rate
and it's a great one.
Because if you have a white
vehicle that is very fuel
efficient.
It's not to do as much damage to
the road and you actually use
less fuel so you're not paying
less tax of course the other
side of that if you have a heavy
vehicle that does a lot of I
wear and tear on the roads you
generally have a lower fuel
efficiency and you pay more in
taxes which was a great user
fees so I understand why we have
taken the special fuels tax off
of diesel that's not really
being used on probably on roads.
Yeah Chairman representative
The gross receipts tax as kind
of a different story right that.
And kind of where I'm coming
from this major we say this
before right
good tax policy that we tax
everything we taxed at a very
low rate.
And and the more we the card
into the Swiss cheese the higher
the rate on everything else
right.
No that's that we have done a
really good job of removing most
of the gross receipts tax from
the ag industry
it's actually right I used to
use hamburger when I was
describing what you're meeting
was right use tax the fee for
the cow and blow all the steps
you know finally take a bite you
know.
But that doesn't work in New
Mexico because we really almost
top chairman anything at
industries at all.
this is one of the very few just
for the committees understand is
one of very few things left for
the ag industry actually pace of
gross receipts tax.
so so chairman and
representative that said
I I don't like permitting I also
know my closeness with cheese
some kind of stuck in the middle
to the rock and a hard place
here but I will say I don't
think the cost of this bill is
as high as what's in the FIR to
find out ten percent of that.
So thank you thank you anyone
else was in the process.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative screech CA
and you and your guests so how
much money does the Act industry
pre into New Mexico.
In terms of economic impact.
Sorry I was just chairman
question I have nothing like
that I have a you don't mind Mr
chairman.
Chair members of the.
Okay that's what I thought
that's pretty high
so.
For that matter people would
hear.
What is the percent of rig up
this would take from that.
Total amount.
Representative Harper.
Chairman of the board that
is the question.
Of the three point seven
million.
Yeah.
What percentage would this be.
This process.
That's pretty low.
Is fighting twenty five twenty
yeah that's for the thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative.
Thanks for all the help twenty.
The.
Thank you that's the question.
that was just a question I have
been so regards to the
discussion of the place of the
discussion was runner back.
What's at.
Vehicle it's of the pavement
whether the panelists Dave of
whatever it is that we would
they would lose.
That that that exemption correct
Mr chairman they should not be
driving on the ad hoc act
vehicle on the highway at all it
this is for dirt only it's no
paper no paved roads but if you
if you do Mr chairman at the
highway you should have regular
diesel in your vehicle and that
brings the committee members
this because I know farmers in
and around my community we have
to use up the road just what you
know to that end so there's no
other way around at this point
because everything's been so
seventy five percent there is no
other way to get from point a
one so how do you deal with that
Mr Chairman I believe that
I would possibly think that a
police officer DOT would give
you a break because you're
trying to go to from field to
field and most of the time
they're off of the highway as
much as they can be and drive
slowly and I don't think that
the wear and tear on the highway
would be or on the road paved
road would be a significant
amount.
What I'm one of those guys I'm
yeah let me think about it that
way but it's a reality yeah
Representative Townsend.
Mr chair the.
Process of dying the diesel
currently staying
at all.
within the tank carburetor.
yes yes and the there has.
It the intent of the legislation
as always.
If the predominant use of
involved us for agriculture off
road use.
Construction on that those.
Are
you can you read diabetes.
But no one wants to use no one
should use red dye diesel.
Picked up on the range and then
go to town and sale I put the
diesel in it when I went down
that that god will.
Active medication questions and
comments from the committee.
Thing that because this doesn't
fiscal impact the process of the
committees that will hold it
back but we really appreciate
your presentation this morning
thank you so is there a motion
detector table this.
Some of the second by
Representative Townsend any
opposition seeing that thank you
Representative presentation
thank you thank you committee
members.
We'll be back with the better
FIR.
Thank you thank you that's what
I health bill one eighty six of
the magic disabled veteran
property tax group.
Martinez.
Martinez this.
Little.
Handsome as ever.
Have you have you are you saying
that because you're about to
table the bill.
Let's see whether there's a
verse Mr chairman members of the
committee I appreciate the time
to.
Come before you I bring to you
the.
Bill that has very very little
fiscal impact on anybody
according to the counties this
bill.
Would simply allow a disabled
veteran to transfer their
disabled veterans property tax
exemption from one house to
another if they purchase a new
house.
In the middle of the year and
they miss the deadline that the
counties impose on property
taxes we did have an amendments.
That we did in.
House labor and Veterans.
That was on page five we simply
added online to.
when they disabled veteran or
the disabled veterans on.
Married spouse and then online I
we.
The M. disabled veteran or the
disabled veterans on merit
surviving spouse and with that I
stand for questions presentation
that's what the audience all
those in favor of house bill one
eighty six as amended in the
Roman offline please raise your
at.
Yeah what is that.
Chair members of the committee
client or.
Representing the New Mexico
County and other the billion and
up the status of for this bill
as a player I mean comes in on
that current tax.
The confusion on one hundred
percent disabled that for the
moment you.
We say now all I following here
so there's more of a long that
they have the ability to use it
and then.
In New Mexico and we will
support of our one hundred
percent
sure that I know a lot of people
that.
Eight of you.
This is this a clarified is to
use it in nine years that we
developed.
The weather system.
Thank you no one else in the
room anybody online support.
What they want opposition.
Are a lot.
Seeing that this from the
committee Representative Harper.
Thank you chairman and the
Representative great to see you
here so I've heard about this
strange.
Hello Paul but is like an
aberration in the process right
this process of assessing
house's value in putting the
property tax on it it's like a
yearly cycle and the dates are
like in statute.
And so what I understand is
happening in and just make I
want to check out this right
Chairman representative.
Let's say a the water percent
disabled that has a whole they
are not paying any property
taxes going through the system
it's.
And then they decide to move.
There are cases where when they
moved.
J. as mentioned by Mister ward
state go almost a year still
trying property tax because they
missed the cycle.
And then almost worse the person
who bought their house.
Budget.
That year and they don't pay tax
at it Chairman representative
was that's a proper try to solve
Mr Chairman Representative
Harper you have the issue
exactly.
We just feel that that disabled
veteran like Mr works at its
rate the the very high price
and we want to make sure that
that budget falls veterans were
there on on merit surviving
spouse.
You know in all the years that I
I work better as benefits the
families rate just as high a
price we want to make sure to
include that.
S. also chair representative
thank you for that and I'm
pretty sure I was ever in that
situation I purchased a house
for disabled that I would just
feel awful you know knowing that
I didn't pay my two three four
thousand dollars and that is.
Are the the surviving spouses
paying that on their new home so
I really think.
This is important checks and
thanks for for bring it before
us thank you chairman thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman the I just
have a quick statement as a
former treasurer this will take
about that long to take care of.
So it will not have any impact.
You Representative but.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative screech Sears I
just want to make a motion of
the past we have a comments that
will come back to that motion
yeah that happened Martinez
this.
Thank you real briefly thank you
for bringing the bill for
Representative up makes a whole
lot of sense this is what we're
here to fix problem.
Each that I think needs to be
fixed for a long time ago thank
you bring it forward exam.
For sporting Gen ladies motion.
No question about.
Not be able to made by
Representative regular the
second that represent us Mr
speaker will arrive of motion
the second is there any
opposition to the motion.
Things that we have to pass on
house bill one eighty six as
amended thank you Representative
Mr chairman members of the
committee I appreciate your time
thank you.
with the House Bill G. twenty
two that particular tax rate
Representative Harper.
Because.
What was.
The service.
Jobs.
All right we'll
From.
Right to so chairman committee
members good morning for the
second time this year again.
This bill does two things we
were talking about these things
for the last many years Smith
reform and this preface this by
saying this only relates to
corporate income tax so
corporations.
So when you think of the
businesses in New Mexico the
vast majority are pass throughs
sees partnerships.
There's probably a dozen or so
corporations that file in New
Mexico maybe a little bit more
and that revenue is usually
about twenty five million two
hundred fifty million just kind
of your ballpark of of what this
is impacting.
Right so the first thing this
bill does is pretty simple right
now we have two brackets for the
corporate income tax if the
corporation in that year
less than five hundred thousand
dollars the rate is four point
eight percent if it's more if
it's a four four thousand or
more it's five point nine
percent.
This bill proposes that we go to
just one bracket and as the five
point nine percent bracket.
And and the reason is.
The reasons you have multiple
brackets for personal income
tax.
Don't really translate for a
corporation we're talking about
you know if folks are making
less
having
Tax on them is you know
proportionally generally a
higher impact on their percent
of estimated they can use on
things right so this kind of
progressive argument for a
progressive tax system as you
earn more money perhaps you can
pay more tax.
Well that that you can't make
that same argument for business
and attacks from nation actually
as a high school statement here
I'll just share with you says
twenty nine states and the
district of Columbia have a
single rate corporate tax
system.
And.
This propensity to this reason
why F. single right systems is.
for corporate taxes and income
taxes because there's no
meaningful ability to pay
concept.
And this call by Jeffrey
qualities of our waters
professor of law University
in the Chicago school of losses
graduated corporate rates
multiple brackets are
inequitable.
That is the size of a
corporation.
There's no relation to the
income levels of the owners.
Right so in the low income
appropriation maybe all owned by
individuals with high incomes.
And highincome corporations may
be owned by individuals with low
incomes so the argument just
doesn't make sense and so.
The best races that have will
call us toll Tax Code we have
one bracket for corporation tax
and it mirrors the top bracket
your personal income tax.
And the reason for that is you
don't want your tax code to
influence whether someone
structures as a corporation or
LLC right for for a corporate
income taxes lower you can see
where people might want to.
Structures as a corporation to
pay less tax but and vice versa
right so so you want to have
them both the same so that's the
argument for the first part of
this bill one corporate tax.
Right at the highest level to
match our our at the height to
match your highest level we're
all the other L. season pastors
of the state or tax.
Okay the second.
Seeing this this this this bill
dies.
Is it proposes that we go we
finished
the race we finished the past
towards a single sales factor.
Proportion business income.
And all this that sounds
complicated I'm good just
briefly describe what this is
Are in and I'll give you
examples examples help me so if
you pick your favorite multi
state corporation I'm just I
don't know I used team last time
maybe I'll use checks away this
time I don't know thank you for
your favorite Corporation right
that's multistate this private
example is probably the.
You know I don't registration.
Yeah right.
Yeah right.
If you're you're favor
corporations multi state what
state it makes a billion dollars
how much of that she we tax in
New Mexico.
And and it also doesn't say it
will all right but I'm sure that
appropriation would argue about
that you could say well what
senator tax one fifty of fifty
of it and the price they will
you know we tried a lot more
business in California then New
Mexico so that's not fair either
so in the fifties and sixties
folks came up with a formula
that has three parts because
this three factor formula.
It says okay.
What percent of your total
payroll is in New Mexico.
What percent of your total.
Square footage.
Is in New Mexico and what
percent of your total sales our
New Mexico compared to
everywhere else in the in the US
right so let's say it's three
percent
payroll four percent.
Property a five percent sales
because we really like whatever
they're selling here in New
Mexico take the average of those
three it's four percent so we
take that one billion dollars
multiplied by four percent.
And that's we tax at the New
Mexico tax right here.
Okay so that's what everyone did
back in the fifties and sixties
made sense right it's it's it's
fair.
But there were some unintended
consequences of that.
And and whitewater states have
gone away from that is
if you.
Expand hire more people us our
New Mexico or issue a bill you
know.
More facilities outside New
Mexico you're you're you're
percent New Mexico goes down and
so your payment of tax New
Mexico goes down.
And so kind of in a wait we're
rewarding people for expanding
outside of Mexico by lowering
their tax.
But probably more more painful I
think what really what folks are
going away from this is a
similar size I'm gonna invest
New Mexico we're gonna have a
lot of square footage in New
Mexico and and a lot of people
in New Mexico.
we're going to substantially
increase your New Mexico tax.
And and so you can see why folks
you like I just.
Made a huge investment New
Mexico and now you're you're
you're increase my tax extension
that doesn't seem very fair so
what states have done is
they've.
Going away from to try to remedy
that they got away from three
factors going to one factor the
single sales factor it's another
state
we're really not going to look
at how much square footage and
and they really have here is a
look at your sales.
And you should a little handout
yes not all of you if you look
here on this list.
I've done the math of the states
that have an income corporate
income tax seventy six of them
have adopted seventy six percent
of them have adopted the single
sales factor.
and this is a case where New
Mexico's kind of behind able
again there's only six states
that still the three factor
formula.
And if you look at New Mexico it
says three factor slash sales
and in what this really means
is.
We we do the three factor
formula but we've started moving
in direction of single sales
factor and and right now if
you're a manufacturer or a
corporate headquarters we do the
single sales factor.
So this this part of the bill
the second part of the bill
you'll you'll notice strike a
lot of language district
actually a great simplification
what we're proposing is that we
go to rest the way that all
corporations we treat equally is
into the single sales factor.
So
That Mr Chairman was never
questions.
HM.
Let's go to the audience for a.
In in support of bills the fund
to raise your head in the room
and all I need to start with the
I guess it.
Here are.
work with actual voices your of
yours and what my good friend.
More more and legislation
it really makes sense to.
Right over he says.
Right.
This.
also say that there is an of the
all
that raises the former income
tax six point nine percent we
will a personal income tax
top right that you're also this
is it says that a personal
income tax rate and the top the
operation is
what we're the state.
right wise with the second part
of the whole single sales factor
we see that is it is now.
And trying to game the system by
choosing how they want to
report how it wants of files and
it just it will by the age right
if we have one one of the
system.
Thank you artistic.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Armine all
through this for fidelity
investments we're a large multi
state corporation headquartered
in Boston Massachusetts however
we maintain a significant
presence in New Mexico by Lloyd
over seventeen hundred New
Mexicans or Mason bill soul
location we believe that this
will Senator I all the
administration and compliance
for.
Taxes Mexico also significantly
stabilize or funding compacts
that Mexico out on
this.
Thank you when I was in the
room.
Support anybody online.
J. the following ten J. P.
Morgan.
Good morning Mr chairman nice to
see all of you
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce supports this
legislation because it does two
important things that
establishes a five point nine
percent flat rate for all
corporations in the state and it
applies that critical single
sales factor so all companies in
New Mexico and it's particularly
this latter pace that's of the
most important to all the
facilities
so we strongly support this
legislation it's used by a great
majority of the states as it
removes the penalty to growth
and a questions taxes on the
amount of sales in the state and
the chamber strongly supports
this bill and thank the sponsor
thank you.
Thank you grant the room for
those opposition of the house
bill three to anyone in the room
for anyone online.
The card.
Have you with us.
Good morning Mr chairman.
Yes good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee it's
Leri Sonntag here speaking for
the New Mexico business
coalition we so appreciate the
sponsor of this bill and we were
saying yes as he introduced so
many of the good parts of this
bill simplifying the tax
planning it out the single sales
factor are all great parts of
this bill the opposition that we
have is to a tax increase
especially during that time
whenever the state has enjoyed
multi billion dollar surpluses
we recently hosted a nationally
known economist who is a co
author of a book called rich
states and poor stage and New
Mexico's rankings have been
going down over the past two or
three years add one of the
reasons is tax policy.
So we well we appreciate the the
Sanchez efforts and so many ways
we oppose this bill because this
is not the time for a tax
increase on especially the small
corporations that this would
impact greatly.
For those reasons we apologize
Senate bill to House Bill three
twenty two hundred thank you
thank you anyone else online.
Okay that's committed to the
school Representative.
Thank you Mr chair so first I
want to thank you for bringing
this I think we have another
corporate tax flat tax on the
Senate side that I'm co
sponsoring with senator Wirth I
am very much appreciate the idea
of having one corporate tax and
one that matches the income the
highest income tax bracket in
the state so whatever that may
be I would I'm sure we would all
agree that would be the
appropriate thing to do moving
forward
so that's point one Mr chair
second of all singles feels is
tricky
I think it's very hard to
predict what outcomes one's
going to have a single sales if
we go to single sale so
Representative Mr chair what's
your goal.
Yeah so so chairman
Representative Chandler that's
thank you that's that's a great
question first I do it.
Mills a good tax policy.
goal for this bill.
Is to adopt a for the second
part of this bill is to adopt
good tax policies.
specifically single sales factor
that will not penalize
your purse pursue panel an
observation for improve
expanding for hiring in New
Mexico it really is we're gonna
treat businesses that are that
are here invest in New Mexico
then we would treat businesses
that are outside in a kind of
file follows the the old adage
if you know don't tax me tax
that guy behind the tree.
and
And I think our tax code should
really.
Four folks to invest and and and
It's down in New Mexico that's
that's really the goal and also
not to look like an aberration I
mean you look at the other
states on this list have
additional of the three
factor apportionment and I will
call them the meccas of pre tax
dollars.
Well I appreciate that I am a
little concerned about some of
the con good discussion on in
our FY in our Mr chair pages two
and three particularly as.
This is the provision this is on
page three the top paragraph of
this provision is intended to
incentivize national and
international corporations to
build plants and facilities in
New Mexico and higher New Mexico
workers but export to but export
to Mexico produce products at
cetera however the bulk of the
tax reductions in the state will
affect the oil and gas sector
that has very much property and
payroll but very low sales
factor so I find it a little
concerning that we are giving us
what could be a tax break to.
Oil and gas I suspect give our
members of our public knew that
they might have a different view
of single sales factor.
Yeah so so Chairman
representative I appreciate you
bringing that forward and
actually respectfully disagree
with that portion of the
analysis I've been working with
some of the folks I understand
that industry and
I think the officer it might
actually be the case and I've
shared that contact information
with our LFC economists and
they're they're actually working
with those folks right now so I
I I do which is really you know.
Disagree with with with assets
okay.
You Mr Chairman just a couple
more same page it says some
policymakers up at the bottom of
the page second from the top you
know bottom paragraph some
policymakers have argued that
using a single sales factor
method of apportionment
incentivizes corporations to
increase payroll however the
data regarding increase unlawful
employment from adopting a
single sales factor are
inconclusive for the more the
large majority of states have
now adopted the budget there by
diluting the potential impact on
Mr chair I think the point there
is when we want to be like
everybody else than everybody
else is getting the same yeah
hope alleged budget Mr chair and
so really it could be an
overstatement to suggest that
this is going to assist in
expanding employment when as you
point out Mr chair and
representative so many other
states are doing in the past so
chairman and researching.
Eight point you'll notice that I
didn't lied by saying this was
gonna result and a bunch of
corporations flocking to New
Mexico or growing in New Mexico
and that's exactly speaks your
point I don't think that know if
maybe we were the first ones to
do this
you know twenty years ago maybe
that would be the case
so so Chairman representative I
I I I hope that this will lead
to some growth
but that is not the main purpose
of why I'm introducing this I'm
interested because I think it's
good tax policy okay so
thank you Mr chair and
representative I appreciate that
you know I'm just you know Mike
perspective as I've done a lot
of reading over the summer tax
policy and it's all across the
board in terms of what is good
tax policy and it's often Mr
chair in the eyes of the
beholder and the world view of
the particular so called think
tank involved so I know there's
been a push amongst many of the
think tanks that in my opinion
sometimes are really just
Structures� to advance certain
political or policy perspectives
I certainly got that feel of
when we were hearing from
various think tanks and I mean
the folks on the left and on the
right.
So I'm a little leery when the
here you know there's a drumbeat
Mr chair that happens I think we
need to do what we think is best
for New Mexico regardless of
what you know the national
trends may or may not be thank
you Mr chair representative
there's a lot.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative.
New Mexico which corporate tax
rate with.
The worst.
so Chairman representative Scott
thank you for that question you
know I we have an economy the
size of New Mexico we should
really be kind of a little the
pack not an out wire on the high
end or low end.
state right now we're we're a
touch on the.
Hi slide we're we're we're not
the extreme right you can go a
couple states over to California
and provide a pretty high rate
but obviously Texas doesn't tax
incomes in a corporate compacts
but they do have a gross
receipts tax
let's percent and the also high
property tax rates you go to
kind of look at things and then
the no taking into account the
whole tax package of that
particular but we are we are a
little higher than the average
four point nine was the average
Verde bridge states for awhile
but Arizona's lowering their tax
rate so five point nine you can
get a money an idea of where
we're we fall.
And.
Mr Chairman representative to
describe Committee.
Hello my name is extracted from
corporations.
Back to the end of
each.
And for homeowners and the tax
code which is of the one that.
Sure.
Yes so Chairman representative
Scott.
all all first preface this by
saying I understand no season
partnerships much.
Better than I do corporations
just because we have so few of
them here.
But the main difference between
the two is an LLC or
partnership.
You know the the calculation is
made how much.
Was actually earned that year
and then that is distributed
through to the partners for the
owner and the staff is personal
income.
Corporations it's different.
In that it is taxed at the
corporation level and then what
is left is distributed to
shareholders honors.
It is my understanding.
Mr Chairman representative to
our actually correct.
When that distribution is made
to shareholders or holders.
I.
Personal income tax yeah so so
chairman and representative yes
that's exactly right you have a
personal income tax on the
owners on Representative you
forces the shareholders.
realize any capital gains they
would they would also have a
on that as as income.
Mr Chairman.
Dividends would be taxed as
ordinary income
capital gains so.
The fact.
At five point nine percent that
comes to all.
Russian.
Also has taxes paid on those
funds go back to individual
investors.
Making.
Formal double taxation.
So.
Mr Chairman representative you
can easily understand.
Why our new companies organized
and.
Mexico that way because of the
very fact kids.
Less expensive.
Have all those revenue flowing
through to the individual
taxpayer where.
Taxes will.
Yeah so it's a Chairman
representative of you that is
great point that is I agree with
you that is one of the reasons
why that is the case but another
reason to is just how
complicated running a corporate
income tax.
is compare to hello season per
person talking to but also
especially
I mean we talk about this three
factor formula right now percent
of payroll percent of square
footage right I mean.
Imagine actually trying to do
that calculation every year.
going in and I mean so I it's
it's a.
Yeah there there are several
reasons why I think we don't
have many corporations.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative.
Representative right.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Harper thank you
for bringing this forward you
know one of the it's one of the
big issues that we always have
in Albuquerque which is the
biggest city in the state was
attracting new industries.
And you know I.
I see Albuquerque New Mexico it
is very interesting place in
terms of
Kind of where we stand you know
we set and in sort of a region
of Denver and Phoenix and Dallas
and Austin.
In Albuquerque keeps missing out
on attracting industry we need
for the jobs
we did.
Do we did find some incentives
for Netflix and NBC
And it did provide jobs for New
Mexico but you know if we are
going to be.
Excuse me and it competitive
state at some point we have to
do something to besides
providing you know incentives we
have to do something with our
tax structure.
To attract industry and and
attract those jobs that we that
we need
I'm not a tax expert so I don't
know how you know you are
and you know hi I guess my
question really Mr chair is.
Sort of the cities that I
mentioned southwestern cities
very mentioned
are they doing many things were
to address
in order to do that because I
think it's important that at
some point
and and probably the oil
industry is just yes
Representative Chandler
mentioned going to benefit but
they're not the only industry
that was benefit I mean there's
there's other companies that we
are trying to attract and at
some point we we do need jobs I
mean at some point we need we
need to say to you know.
What are things what are the
mechanisms that are going to
make that so.
I guess my question to you is
how does this compare to and
it's important because we are in
that region
how does this compare in
California is a little far
removed so Mister chair I.
He could answer that yeah so
chairman and reciprocal thank
you for that great question in
your singing my song and I'll
just give an example of where I
come from so I I really do not
agree with incentives and when I
when I first started here is
maybe eight or nine years ago
prior ministration yes love was
going around to all the states
in this area and saying Hey
we're gonna build a huge plant.
what incentives can you give us.
And the anyone with a little too
in New that's a natural resource
that they needed was an app
that.
And so that's what the plan was
going to be built the matter
what but what they did was they
shopped around all the different
states to get deals and then
they want to know that it's can
you beat this deal.
And about a bit and and making
New Mexico I remember going to
Martinez in the folks here
putting a package together to
try to identify Tesla.
What I loved was Utah.
Utah said.
We've got a great bass Tax Code.
We're not even sent.
You like our tax code to come
here we're not gonna give you
incentive I totally respected
that I thought that was awesome.
Right I don't think governors
are up governments should pick
winners and losers.
and so.
When you look at.
How to New Mexico have a good
base tax structure right where
we.
We don't stand our list we don't
have March against us you know
this is one of those things we
can do that.
Right we look at Utah right
there are single sales Arizona
single sales you too Pat Texas
of course doesn't have an income
tax.
All right single sales
Now does this mean I was gonna
flock here no but it hopefully
this means we don't get a mark
against us because of our tax
code.
Mr chairman and Representative
Harper
you know right now after having
gone to comment
we do need jobs in New Mexico
and I think that we have to find
a balance with regard to you
know bringing jobs a cleaning
industry
tracking those and I mean
usually these companies and I've
been involved in this you're
looking at our tax base they're
looking at our our education
system they're looking at you
know I mean
because they're usually they're
going to move here are looking
at the quality of life that we
can find and so somehow Mr chair
representative you know.
It is our responsibility to
balance these things
and and know that we can find
good schools and and provide a
quality of life that people want
to come here but also you know
usually if they're going to move
their company here they want to
know that they're not going to
be taxed to death.
So I think that this is
something that we need to really
be looking at in the long term
in terms of twenty twenty five
thirty years from now how do we
attract those businesses so that
works we're we have a
competitive competitive
advantage and we're not being
passed over every time hi
Phoenix or Denver or some other
place thank you Mr chair thank
you Representative Harper thank
you thank you Alex question
about the.
This is one of the bills that
that water the revenue.
Right is one that that the terms
of the tax package creation I
would like to give difference
and maybe you guys work together
if you have a bill on the Senate
side us we'll do it depends on
that so that we can bring it be
part of the tax package
potentially and so at this point
in time what we can do is
temporary table is what we'll
figure out fits into the into
the into the package and I will
come back and that package is
one that I anticipate bringing
your job I next week so that we
can get a role in that as well
so just keep in mind for those
that have those out there and
outstanding that's going to be
a.
With that as we make the motion
with that we can make a motion
to table the.
Thank you thank you the second
by Representative of Abel's any
opposition to that saying that
there are particular thank you
committee for the great
conversations with.
Your health will pour to.
Electors will tax it.
Representative Ross.
Thank you or as your everyday.
Thank you Mr chair.
One of the S..
Thank you I'm this is simple
email very very looking for for
the for the future I think.
That because there are always I
know right.
When I'm use.
To me I'm new office few people.
It is up objects created for an
activity called black bean carts
who we assisted are getting
behind on that I we when that.
without whether states that
trying to do to make it better
for our environment I'm it
propose twenty five hundred
eighty eight
for the bush is a pilot to cards
and Florida forty hundred port
personal income I mean he's.
tax credit for them and also
three hundred dollars for
legislation of the
thank you in the house of people
who want to share shouldn't have
says.
also proposed because there is a
concern about that part of a
grant that we but refusing to
run our cars is just tool for
the residents of petitions so
how are you a provision to to
have a eighty dollars fee to to
help with that with that cost of
the consumers report the number
ninety six in New Mexico an
average card will contribute
fifty three dollars fifty four
dollars to the just put to
enforce the rules of
transportation it is be proposed
again this was way about
whatever that consumers
appointees us I'm forty donors
for hybrid vehicles I would
committee Camille able man who
is our US based expert witness
and on she wants to add
something else.
Thank you so much Mr chair
members of the committee
previous sponsors of this bill
and current sponsors of this
bill you know companies like
Ford and GM are committing to
going all electric by twenty
thirty five.
So to help New Mexicans begin
that transition we're bringing
this easy tax credit before you
and we wanted to clarify a few
points it does after five years
when we think that the gas
vehicle in TV vehicle price
points will be about equal
it's a ten million dollars each
year but if you don't get that
here you get to be at the top of
the list the next year and a one
million dollar cap for the
charging infrastructure also
between this local it that is
increased for low income
families and the federal income
we can really help families
afford these vehicles New Mexico
was the first state violence
federal electrification plan to
spend thirty eight million
dollars to paste place Chargers
every fifty miles along the
highway and Evey can save the
average New Mexican driving
about three thousand dollars in
gas every year based on current
gas prices and average annual
gas use in New Mexico.
So after a summer of climate
driven.
Fires and floods and given that
the transportation sector is the
largest contributor to
greenhouse gas pollution we hope
that we can earn your support
for the credit this year.
Thank you with these we stand
for questions Representative
all those in favor of health
bill four twelve in the room and
online the signify by raising
your hand.
You yes Sir.
Just over these reasons I
believe this is the future
there's about two million
electric vehicles on the road in
the United States but if there
is a small fraction.
And even though the cost of
ownership is probably the will
be the last coming down by to be
able to go.
Current price of I would be able
it's important that the we are
here for people.
They have these vehicles for the
adoption of this is all for this
reason I believe this tax credit
is very important so that we can
increases adoption rate goes
between vehicles faster so we
strongly support thank you very
much thank you.
But the district.
Chairman committee members
already trying to reverse the
Mexico a lot of issues
association of the right to the
big huge transformation going on
in the auto industry It for
dealerships there's a long with
the these are coming online
which it by twenty thirty five
all vehicles shipped to the
state what have to be these and
so we're gonna be there and so
that requires us to try why the
proper equipment to do all the
work that we may have to do all
these vehicles and so is right
on the cost of the vehicles this
tax credit would help us ease
into that as we as we make this
transition so we stay in support
thank you if that's the answer.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Charles the martyr
status for natural resources
defense council action fund
stand strong support the
building Sanchez
you know it's been stated.
Whatever your comfort level
about EV's.
They're coming they're gonna be
here this is no questions of
this bill doesn't isn't really
gonna change the whole market
some really critical compliance
with this bill does is it helps
to make them more affordable for
lower middle New Mexicans
graduated credit especially is
important for that and the
provisions were to settle and
and transferable so first twelve
comes part of your down payment
service.
Monthly payments
but so without that yeah if only
higher income folks these
are these are the rules
They also and the economic
benefit if you work hard
senators are going to be needed
are gonna also we go to the
higher and from New Mexicans.
Further widening the divide so
this bill is just really I see
is a long way making sure that
the growth doesn't why do the
dividing line.
Thank you we have a hands up
online yeah I move.
Hello.
If you want to.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Lillian
access CO deputy director with
Cobb crime advocates buses in
need us for all the reasons
previously stated we strongly
support the bill I think that
there is a recognition that our
grid definitely need some
modernization to support the
widespread adoption of the
committee that is coming our way
but that should not preclude us
for making EDD's more affordable
for more New Mexicans thank you
so much please vote yes for the.
Thank you that's.
Having a problem that a good
morning.
I thank you chairman team
members of the committee my name
is CENIC how I'm emit energy
advocate with conservation
voters New Mexico for reasons
already stated in the room we
also support this bill at the
rate emissions in our state make
up up to fourteen percent of all
air pollution and this pollution
primarily affects lowincome
communities of color who reside
near those high traffic
corridors PED's it be a very
excellent way to alleviate that
pollution so for those reasons
others we are we urge your
support this bill as well thank
you.
You next can use.
They are muted.
Hello Mr chairman I'm not can
Hughes but I am.
Yeah my momma.
Okay that that that's go with
the the with top.
Yeah.
Thank you Mr chair restriction
use a collection system.
So I was not in town center city
and county law workers you this
is we start supports this bill I
and I will be glad to give you a
would you trust test drive my
bike my electric car tomorrow
morning eleven forty five to
twelve forty five rental side
the side of the capitol it's
going back thank you thank you
so we have a can't that food.
Now we're in front of you okay.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Tom Solomon
co coordinator with the climate
focus environmental organization
three fifty New Mexico and
behalf are nearly seven thousand
members so we strongly support
this bill I'd like to put some
numbers behind and what C. BNM
said about electric vehicles
being far cleaner and of
reducing fossil fuel air
pollution which is a major
source of diseases such as
asthma emphysema and heart
disease from the health spending
perspective of the LFC is that
New Mexico spent about eight
point four billion dollars of
Medicaid in fiscal year twenty
twenty two and our twenty
percent share that amounts to
about one point six eight
billion dollars for the health
benefits from Medicaid spending
hello to pay for the ten million
dollars per year cap in this
bill we would only have to them
see an improvement from electric
vehicles to improve health
spending by less than zero point
six percent in order to I have
the reduction in fossil fuel
spending
of pollution pay for this bill
so for that and all of the
climate benefits we strongly
support this bill thank you so
much thank you you're not.
Okay thank you an opposition to
house bill four twelve in the
room or on life.
I want to call.
Hello all good morning.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee if as many of the
supporters have indicated
electric vehicles are coming any
way I see no reason for the
taxpayers of the state New
Mexico to subsidize them through
a tax credit system currently
the average income of electric
vehicle buyers according to
blast waves it's a hundred fifty
thousand dollars annually for
folks on average it's about
sixty three thousand let alone
here in New Mexico where people
are poorer than average I have
no hostility to electric
vehicles but we should be
subsidizing a technology that so
many people including the auto
dealers seem to indicate is
preferred anyway also the issue
of taxation for road maintenance
needs to be addressed as well
because that's yet another
subsidy for electric vehicles
thank you for your time thank
you generals are much okay thank
you for your comments this is
not from the committee for
debate first on my list as
Representative Ortez.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative.
to table questions about.
Cost of vehicles and charging
stations and things like that on
the first hi I just want to if
this tax credit is only for the
vehicles.
It is for our new bagels and
these.
Any comment on that their
greatest in New Mexico.
So new for.
K. T. across.
Okay.
I am I understand why but one of
the challenges I think is that
you know you easy.
Quite expensive can you get them
can you give me a sense of the
range of costs of the new TV.
I will refer here to my experts.
Senator
There is quite actually range
you can.
Right now purchase a Chevrolet
volt TV for about twenty five
thousand dollars the federal
credit does apply to use cars
with some other copied onsen is
being assembled in the last
section some of the larger
vehicles like I think some
people are really into the have
here Ford pickup truck which you
can use as a thirty day
generator at your house if you
need to or to use power tools at
a construction site and that
obviously would be much more
expensive but with the top a
twelve thousand dollar tax
credit on a Chevrolet will you
be getting your car down to
about thirteen thousand dollars.
Yes.
Representative at an expert.
Thank you for that that gives me
a better understanding of what
are the costs for a charging
station.
Mr chair representative I think
you should ever arise the
minutes of
So please tell me the the
situation in the home but that
we respect that three hundred
dollars would cover the COVID at
least half of the cost.
Mr chair representative can you
use this tax credit along with
the other I think this is the
table buildings tax credit.
Can.
Also paid for to give you some
funding for for that as well Mr
chair representative.
Mr chair representative you can
use additional credits from the
building so ably sponsored last
session maybe it was two
sessions ago and also as part of
the transportation
electrification bill that passed
anybody living in entirely new
service territory has additional
benefits that they can gain for
installing Chargers some of the
vehicles can just be charged
into a regular plan and there
are varying kinds of plugins
some of it depends on you know
how powerful your battery is one
of the neat things about these
electric vehicles is that the
the the batteries can be modular
so if you're gonna have a big
vehicle you know you'll get five
of the the lines in your vehicle
and if it's a smaller vehicle
you get one and so that makes
the manufacturing process
simpler but you do have to very
your charger a little bit
depending on the powers here.
Thank you Mr chair
in X..
Lastly what registration fees
nap for eight vehicles.
Mr chair representative
commission.
Chair representative the EBV and
co pays the same registration
under statute that a normal
gastric than the as so there's
the tax credit right on one side
and then there's the
registration the on the other
side the bill you know and
nearer bill started in Senate
tax with the fee of a hundred
and twenty dollars it was
amended in that committee to
about eighty dollars for a
communities and then forty
dollars for plug in electric
vehicles because those to use
gas.
Consumer Reports did a in depth
study to understand whether the
gas taxes in each state what are
the average miles driven
and then looked at what Affairs
the would be about two years ago
that was fifty four dollars or
so for in the so AT with
inflation and other factors
seems like a fair.
Increase one thing I should
point out is that gastrin
vehicles have a registration the
that's what goes down based on
the cost of the so in in the
store owner will play in that.
B.
of the same amount throughout
the life of the vehicle so you
might actually see a much larger
contribution to the road and
transportation projects these
are a.
At the house over the life of
the vehicle that significantly
higher even.
Thank you Mr thank you
Representative that they.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for your presentation today
I believe the electric cars of
the wave of the future and I
think we're seeing that I am and
I support you but I I do have
some concerns
Regarding New Mexico's readiness
my sister who has from
California and and came down
spent a lot of Christmas
vacation two years ago looking
for a charging station to be
checking her car
they at one point needed part
which is very expensive and so I
think we talked about making
electric vehicles affordable to
to the population you're
targeting that we need to look
at overall maintenance and
infrastructure.
and have that conversation along
with with yes because I I
believe it's it's a package and
so
I.
I have a question here but I I
just want to throw it out to you
of that it's more than just a
one time tax credit we're
talking about low income
families that are going to be
able to to be able to sustain
the vehicle do you have a
comment to that Mr chair
representative actually
Meeting.
I don't remember the name of
national electric actually
testify that Act appliances to
structurally it going to New
Mexico the state agency in in
New Mexico.
Right now does the that we
black.
Mr Chairman representative a
couple of things first of all
the tax credit is significantly
increased for families that are
within two hundred percent of
poverty level in New Mexico that
varies the number varies with
how many members of the
household there are but
according to press thirty works
about half of New Mexico
families are considered within
that range so this credit would
be four thousand dollars for a
family and that he had level as
opposed to the twenty nine
hundred dollars you add to that
hello three thousand dollars.
Savings and that in general do
these have been sent to have
less maintenance needs because
of the simplicity of the system
not that there's never and
maintenance need of course but
you know as the auto dealers
have indicated they're really
working to kind of build out at
the capacity that they have at
the dealerships to service these
cars and so you know part of
this is just building it and
it's like with the old Kodak
cameras then they went out of
business because they forgot to
get on top of digital so this is
kind of the same thing we're
just trying to help everybody
come on.
Thank you Mr chair and and thank
you for the answer I I am like I
said I think that it's the wave
of the future and New Mexico
needs to become of war have.
We we need to to right kick it
into gear for ourselves to get
to that place Mr chair I know
that
Is that what your car family
they have that you can get on an
app and it'll show you where you
can charge and so one of the the
things that I know I've done in
my district is trying to set up
a station to make sure that we
have that capacity but I was
shocked when she was down here
that in New Mexico from Los
crucis to Santa Fe there was in
the charging station and this is
a couple years ago so this may
change but it will there wasn't
a charging station and tell I
want to say tier C. and so
going somebody like me who
travels across the state on a
regular basis I would want to
make sure that I have the
capacity Mr chair to to not get
stranded.
And so I you know and I know
that's not pertain to this bill
but I think that that that has
to be ongoing conversations
issue for the families that
we're targeting we don't want
them in in situations where
there's limited resources and
they may have limited resources
to to get that to where they
need to go thank you Mr chair
representative of.
Thank you Mr chair.
It is just have a couple of
questions
chair representative.
I think of the words I think we
we're putting the cart before
the horse.
the Navajo reservation.
Talk about.
How they're going to church of
the.
We go.
Cost is to bring that.
We know.
Do we have any infrastructure
all.
Mr chair representative for the
question part of that the bill
impaired this also tax credits
for installing projections to
turn on home and yet it will
change into different areas I'm
sure bringing their technology
the forty basis he will could be
the first and it will be
challenging to be pretty busy so
I agree with you does know this
amendment will calculate P. I've
got to have more space to
charging stations have done in
other places but he's it is it
is through but like some of the
people who support that would
state activities and device.
Dot to and I believe in not to
want to start getting there it
was going to be it would be.
I don't the the closest.
Once before this to committee to
these to.
Okay thank you Mr.
Representative so.
What made this want to roll.
From the main power line with
the late.
Reform plans.
So I don't think three hundred
dollars off to raise them so
that.
Areas I do the right I do
believe that you plug in your
car and.
That's great for somebody to
is driving seventy miles.
Are they gonna get stranded
somewhere and and do they have
a.
At city.
The other question that I have
Mister chairman is.
Did I understand you direction
for to say because of the fifty
dollar fee that would make the
difference in the cast.
This is here Representative.
Chair representative just two
quick things on your to
questions I do want to flag the
availability of plug in hybrids
those are great vehicles for
people who have day to day short
distances to drive and then need
longer capacity and continues
the gas engine so that is
available also you'll remember
my mention thirty eight million
dollars coming into New Mexico
for building out charging
infrastructure and that will
have and in that plan and
inclusion of Navajo Nation
infrastructure that includes
development of charging stations
there and then there are big and
now some money available for
more complex charging needs that
are coming out of.
Electrification
transportation litigation
legislation that passed
in twenty nineteen and then
finally Consumer Reports did an
in depth study of each state how
higher their gas taxes how
higher there's actually the
board proposed.
Credits and the estimated that
the average the the owner if
they were driving and gas be
able would pay fifty three
dollars a year and gas.
And so that a fair.
At road fees for limiting the
would be about fifty three
dollars we've built eighty
dollars into the.
K..
Thank you Mr chairman I think
that's it I'm not sure that I.
Not sure that I agree with with
that assessment in my neck of
the.
Thank you thanks that much.
What was once are the experts
that see answers a little bit as
State Farm and I say this is a.
this year but as but keep that
in mind Representative Harper
thank you chairman and that
Representative it's good to see
this morning I talked to my
comments really short
I want to talk about the
structure of this credit
several things in here that I
like that are good.
Couple of years.
Just make sure all aware of it.
So first credits like this this
committee for the last decade is
make sure that there's always a
reporting requirement.
And a science and.
And I'm pleased to see that this
bill does have goals there is
annual reporting required.
At a five year sunset which so
you're B. to be commended on
that Chairman representative
good job on that.
It also though I just wanna make
sure members now this this act
credit is refundable.
So again we that generally those
are very rare and want to be
very careful with those but what
this is saying is that if
someone does not have tax
liability to.
They will receive a check from
the state
for this credit amount I
understand why Chairman
representative you put that in
there because retirement center
by some people that
might not have a huge tax
liability and then the only one
thousand dollars the state
dollars back instead of the.
what's that.
Yeah four thousand right so like
you know what we try to really
not to trouble credits Mrs on a
real pressing need for any
special make sure folks are
aware of that that's in here.
at another point in my life but
I might suggest a change is this
new registration fee that is to
cover cast tax loss I appreciate
that you have been distributed
to two different funds thirsty
thank you save seventy seven
percent actually to local
government road funds.
At thirty five twenty three
percent are going to the
transportation project fund so I
like that it's going to local
roads
I would just suggest Chairman
representative
We created the transportation
projects fund to be easier for
locals to use the actually
before that fund over to local
government which I actually
don't like that anymore rostrum
not putting money there anymore.
and also I think these vehicles
we used a lot on state roads so
if we do put the sport Act
recommend that we change that
distribution of the half the
transportation projects on help
locals and have to the state
road fund I think that's just I
think that's.
Hi Sarah that the question I
have Chairman representative you
mentioned early in the testimony
this is only for new vehicles
and new leased vehicles.
I'm looking at
page one into it.
I don't believe that's right.
Says a tax payer is not a parent
of another individual.
purchases and electric vehicle
or enters into a new lease.
These three years makes the
credit.
To me that reading says that it
can also be used cars.
I understand that correctly.
Thank you Mr chair thank you to
proceed with the after we.
Mr chair representative I don't
believe that was the intention
of the original drafting.
So Chairman representative I
left a sharp hide member of this
committee apparently that's in
the definitions on page five
electric vehicle means a new
motor vehicle.
So we've that.
Clear that definitions thank you
for we understand that.
I also appreciate that there is
a cap on the credit
I think that's why is most of
these we don't want to have them
open ended and it looks to me
like you're expecting.
Roughly.
US seven.
Seven million of that kind of a
let.
To be used in the first year so
I think you I think if you put
that cap on about the right
place keeps I appreciate that.
I guess my last Madam chairman
Representative is so I think
you've generally structure this
really well as a credit that the
question my mind is is this the
right thing to do
with with the taxpayer dollars
we have an right now we're
swimming in taxpayer dollars but
I've been here when we're not
swimming and we're talking about
sweeping money from two through
twelve schools right and so I'd
ask myself doesn't make sense to
incentivize purchasing electric
cars
when someone in the future we
might be putting that against
teacher rates right.
And so I really appreciate kind
of the structure that Tesla has
put together their model you
know they started with the
roadster.
Right which is.
Two hundred thousand dollar car
that rich people can buy and and
then that pays for R. and D. and
the development of the model S.
right and that's that's the you
know I I would love to get a
more less pleasure they're
amazing right but that's your
kind of upper middle class
people cooperating that right
and then those purchases pay for
R. T. for the model three and
action of why and how kind of
your middle class people can
afford that and their plan is to
use already for that the card
that you know is twenty five
thousand dollars right so I do
believe this is the future I
believe it's happening.
I'm just not sure.
We need to incentivize it to I
think it's gonna happen
naturally.
Like to thank you chairman
Representative Representative
what.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll try
to make my comments quit because
I know we have to go
so the City of Albuquerque has
two hundred sixteen public
charging stations twelve those
are three Evey charging stations
at Albuquerque has a total of
forty nine DC fast Chargers
twenty two which are Tesla
superchargers I just thought I'd
mention that and also
Representative Ortez asked how
much those costs and the cost
anywhere between twenty five
hundred and fifty five hundred
dollars most of our charging
stations are within Central
Avenue and a downtown area just
FYI
But I but I did have a question
regarding I mean I think
Representative Gaydos made a
really important point about.
If we're serious about doing
this we need to have a strategy
for New Mexico.
In the in the short term and in
the long term as in in terms of
where we put these electric
vehicle charging stations
because.
I have some friends that own yes
lesson which I can't afford that
have you know which actually
thanks to my second question but
in terms of you know there plant
trips they have to plan their
trips out and I think that if
they do charge them at home page
a couple of do
on the higher end
you know the there's a certain
plat there's a certain type of
the electrical outlet good to
have to have installed in your
home and so I think the the
green these issues up because I
think that it's important that
if we're really going to
incentivize is to be able to
also make sure that the plug.
What.
It allows for that in that and
that's suspended and additional
charge so I think those are
questions that are still a
little bit in my mind the other
question that's important to me
is hybrid because if we're we're
not we're not gonna go into this
immediately everyone in New
Mexico is not going to go buy a
Tesla or a.
So does this also affect
hybrids.
Thank you Mr chair
representative yeah.
Mr chair representative just a
couple quick things the Chargers
you mentioned public charging
stations so they're quite a bit
more expensive these ones and
provide home charging stations
and there are plenty of benefits
to help and so you can hire an
electrician to come of course
yeah in your house and then this
this budget does credit plug in
hybrids but not new in plugging
thank you.
I know about that you want us to
to chair representative about to
fix it for hybrid cards if that
plugging yes it applies to them
too.
Okay I guess my main point Mr
chair was that we really need a
strategy of for serious about
doing this for the entire state
not just Albuquerque not to
Santa Fe I mean everywhere
and to miss two up
Representative Harper is point
about the tax how it's going to
be divided between the gas tax
and the local roads tax
I think that those taxes could
potentially help putting those
point at some point in time was
charging stations because I
think Albuquerque actually used
our tax rate our transportation
tax to put in some of these
charging stations thank you Mr
chair for dodgy as one mind is
kind of.
Got.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative next project is
quick math on seven hundred and
fifty gallons of gasoline
purchased a year which would
certainly typical thanks for.
New Mexico Family and they will
pay a hundred and forty two
dollars.
Tax on that seven hundred and
fifty gallons.
Would it not be.
Perhaps for procreative talk
about annual registration fee
in that neighborhood.
Thank you Mr chair
representative effectively
expert here thank you Mr chair
representative the great thing
about Consumer Reports is that
they go deep into the matter.
So they look at average distance
driven and they look at the tax
that is that the gas tax that's
paid in each state and then they
create a feed that's based on
their estimates of what that
driver would pay in gas tax so
unfortunately although and super
into back of envelope as well
that's not how the now with
Consumer Reports turns out and
then I will add that because of
the statewide plan to build out
of charging stations the W. then
with the transportation went to
vacation planned with the thirty
eight million dollars coming in
from the federal government
you'll have charging stations
built throughout the state and
you will be allowing the average
residents to save about three
thousand dollars on gas while
still contributing to the road.
Mr Chairman expert check
Consumer Reports.
Average.
Rhode Island in New Mexico.
which yeah we're.
Thanks.
Travel long distances show all.
We could use.
The.
Substantially above the average
Mr chairman.
It's we're just one more
question what is the least
expensive.
The vehicle to the.
Mr chair representative the
question was for use of.
Representative I'm on the list
that we have from Chevrolet's
done days to kia's to Audi's two
four we see a range from about
forty six thousand I'm down to
about twenty five thousand there
may be some some cheaper and
some more expensive that's a
range of a dozen or more New.
Mr Chairman experts.
All of the.
Rebates and subsidies will apply
that twenty five thousand dollar
vehicle the the consumers that
out of pocket cost.
For the.
Mr chair and representative I
think between you know twelve
thousand or so credit between
federal and local if you're
looking at a twenty five
thousand dollar car maybe about
thirteen thousand dollars.
On the lower end.
Mr chairman I have.
Thousand questions in the
interest of time.
This is like.
Yes thank you Mr Hammond thank
you I agree with Representative
progress in the.
Welcome back to local government
roads this is an idea and I
think you have to.
Not have taken we're getting our
way before the course.
Representative boss.
The testified in here the other
thing.
And he said Representative
you're right select receive
funding I have been working and
so.
And in the it's a lot more
complicated with the with the
integration that we're dealing
with in the rear and the rear
the cost is going to be.
E. expensive.
And.
And I'm reminded of
my prior life used to build
things and I I live right with
that I can build almost
anything.
If I didn't run out of money.
Yeah engineers could always
figure out a way to get in the I
mean I could get over ever met
and I wanted to go over they
knew how to get there but
sometimes you this wasn't any
financial reasons that go over
there.
And and I think that's where
we're at I mean I think the
lectern maples have.
Have a most populated areas
we're short.
driving distances in New Mexico.
Our level you know I think
there's probably I think there's
a reason for that nope they're
small.
Cities and I think there's
there's a reason for that.
Much of New Mexico.
Outside of what I.
Matt Paul outside forty square
miles surrounded by reality
When you get outside of Santa Fe
and you get people are really
working one of the things and
but for horses and the driver
and one to the other side of the
ranch in the state into three
days to come back
not work.
And and for us to sit here and
think that.
Five twenty thirty years all of
the gasoline vehicles in the
the late we're all may be one of
or straighter with the line are
this bill which.
We're just gonna be going to
Texas and provide the.
Or will be important some places
just I mean the battery
technology has a long ways to go
we have a lot of things to
figure out we have a jillion
dollars to stand charging
stations we have a jillion
dollars this modernizing.
We only know what the.
And so what we're doing on the
all state once again October bad
of the body most by the.
And we're we're.
And so I I think in those local
Albuquerque.
Papen areas we have to get
behind it we ought to fix it we
have to make it work that Sam is
going to work and.
And across the Navajo Nation
down south on the road in the
school buster in the ambulance
or in the fire that means for
you this is we're not there yet
thank you.
Thank you.
Anybody else question comes from
the committee.
Appreciate your your
presentation this morning I just
a couple comments from committee
I've for several years had a lot
of pushback on on the TV movie
full for number reasons because
I I felt that for the longest
time that it was a toy for the
rich right it was an enjoyment
for the region and it wasn't
until I saw prices come down but
I could understand okay well
maybe there's options for those
that maybe they've let me a
those living in my district in
the state that could probably
find this affordable.
So so at earlier this session my
wife and I made the investment
on MTV I found out the hard way
that.
It's it's it's not for me it's
not for me for the number of
reasons that was identified on
this committee is that even a
short drive from San Diego to
Santa Fe had to turn the heater
off of the blowing snow just to
make the car make a lot of
people to.
That's out of this that's that's
the honest truth I have read in
part is that this is not eight
four so I think we need to get
back on the in the car the
dealership of the ticket that
but you know I I think we have
to do a lot in regards to
getting our capacity built up
within the state and then I do
that I'm mindful as well as in
terms of the comments that were
made in regards to if this is
gonna be for everybody with this
make it for everybody I think
it's a great.
Vehicle for for small business
for small towns or sectors act
for small business but to the
point that was made in regards
to the Navajo Nation I don't see
how someone that maybe lives
thirty miles off the great you
left part of this that maybe not
even has electricity in their
own homes to date that that
would even charge you know I
mean so I think that there's a
lot of things to think about I
I'm I'm not all this missing
that technology I think it's
great but I think it has some
time to catch up to where we
wanted to be to be utilized the
state but at this point in time
because this doesn't have a
physical impact the practice of
this committee is to hold it
back and see how it if it may
fit into our tax packages so
with that being said thank you
so much for your presentation is
there a motion by the committee.
So I have a table that for the
second second by Representative
but yes thank you Representative
thank you thank you.
Thank.
A special case and.
Representative but.
Yes.
Yes this is one part.
But.
Thank you.
Look at the schools.
I have to.
I just wanted.
Off of that because of.
Thank you so much.
Representative is.
I was.
That.
Or for.
Stay on.
You.
The state.
So.
Also.
Funding is
here.
Generators.
The.
What is.
Or is
that the.
Thank you.
Okay thank you.
So.
Most of the applications.
As always.
