Don't think it'll take too long
I wanted to give everybody an
opportunity to introduce
themselves
both to ourselves and we have a
lot of new faces on this
committee and several new
legislature's.
As well but then also to
introduce ourselves to the
public as you know this meeting
is being webcast through our
website and also you know
members of the public are able
to join this specific zoom
meeting as well as an attendees.
Well All before before we get
started
I want to express a great deal
of gratitude to our team to to
the entire staff and and they'll
introduce themselves ring to do
time but you know we're all
learning this process we're
we're all learning zoom for many
of us whom is
new I know for me it certainly
is I I I was joking to the day
prior to the pandemic and USM a
total of one time and now
obviously have to use it all the
time but you know it's it's I'm
I'm learning as we go along as
well so first and foremost at
the we're gonna have to practice
a great deal of patients both
between us between ourselves as
as members but that also with
our with our staff you know that
this this will get tricky I'm
sure we'll get we'll hit some
bumps on the road but we'll
we'll make it through
With that I'd like to go around
this virtual committee room and
have each of our members
introduce themselves please tell
us your name what district to
Representative in and give us a
little bit of background what
why are you interested in taxes
I'm I'm assuming nobody got the
plan is to go into the tax
committee I'm assuming all of
you probably ask for this
committee so if you could give
us a little bit of of background
as to why you're interested in
what your your goals are and I'm
I'm gonna call on on folks just
to make it easier and I'm just
going to go around my screen
here and and do it that way
so I'm gonna start at the bottom
of my screen here with
Representative Larry Scott go
ahead Representative Scott.
Mr chair slowly.
Up and running here there we go.
State representative from
district sixty two which is the
Lee County the northern part of
the city of hopes to the south
east portion of the city of
London this will be.
Find your number.
Seven thanks committee.
And
please.
Welcome newcomers and we'll look
forward to the conversation and
when Mr all of the introductions
are complete.
We'll
questions about the.
Process and procedure will work
so if you'll come back to mentor
program appreciate that's all
excellent we will do resent
Scott and and we're both members
of the infamous class of twenty
fifteen so yeah this is our
seventh year together on this
committee representative.
Nexus good representative
Stansbury.
Good morning hi everyone thank
you Mr chairman it's nice to see
everyone I am excited to be
serving on this committee is
that bona fide budget and tax
nerd and so I'm looking forward
to crunching some numbers and
get into it thanks much.
Welcome representative Stansbury
Representative got into.
Good morning Mr chair and
committee thank you my name is
make alot Act and I'm honored to
serve in New Mexico's health
district thirty three the
detective about four hours south
of our capital here including
three historical communities
some follow up there to that
image via for my family than for
generations or I wanted to raise
my little and today and also
improve clued the west side
impact that electors as well as
New Mexico State University and
thousands and thousands of acres
of ag land I often say district
thirty three if certainly a
microcosm of our incredible
eight I am proud to be coming
into my second term with you Mr
chair as a member of the tax and
Rev Committee I look forward to
the smart conversations ahead
and our work to make sure that
we have attacked them the
equitable and give room for all
of our New Mexican family thank
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you president Kevin and
and welcome back to the to this
committee.
Representative Strickler.
Thank you Mr chair a.
James Strickler a Representative
district two city of Farmington
in rural parts of San Juan
County this is my.
The fifteenth year on this
committee so I'm proud to to be
back and we've got a lot of work
to do obviously this year and
and I look forward to all the
good discussions and and I wish
I hope I can make some more new
members in person.
this is a so it's always get in
the get to know each other and
glad to be here.
Thank you representative loving
the beard by the way looking
good thank you.
Representative Maestas.
Thank you good morning Mister
chairman everyone
great to be here along with the
Representative stricter ma.
I'm up from the famous class of
two thousand seven my name's on
Tania Maestas site I represent
district house district sixteen
which is the west myself
Albuquerque west of the river
between a central and Mantan yo
south and north and then the
river and Unser of east and west
give or take a few neighborhoods
so it's my seventy on this
committee
so it's a fantastic committee
and so what I look for is
You know government does things
that the private sector cannot
in particular road schools stuff
like that.
Of prisons I mean that's ninety
percent of what we Fund but we
got to make sure that we don't
disincentive eyes economic
activities.
but we can't be afraid to to
raise revenue when it does not
negatively affect economic
activity so anyway going to be
a Mr chairman what great
morning.
Representative Maestas let's go
to representative role metal.
This is not in this committee a.
Good morning everybody I'm
representative Andrea Romero I'm
from northern Santa Fe County
our district runs from the
northern part of the city of
Santa Fe through the Pojoaque
valley into the city of Espanola
you also have the honor of
having four published in our
districts and all the fun so
walk in on that and to suchen so
like Representative Kevin that
we feel like a microcosm of all
of New Mexico very rural very
Irvin we definitely have it all
in in North and Santa Fe County
I'm here on tax and requested to
be here
I don't feel punished yet Mr
chair but that said I
I'm looking forward to making
our tax system absolutely more
intuitive and accessible
especially to small businesses I
think it's it's incredibly
cumbersome for folks to to
understand how to navigate and
it's a it's a it's a tough one
for a lot of people so I'm
looking at more of the user and
on and on how we make tax more
understandable and and how we
help New Mexicans moving forward
out of COVID and and use this
tax system progressively and in
a way that that helps everybody
work forward so thank you Mr
chairman glad to be here and
thanks everybody looking for to
working with you.
Thank you representative and
welcome to this committee
let's go to Representative
Terrel hunt.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members Representative terrible
on Santa Fe County.
US district forty eight
very happy to be here it's my
first first year.
As the and you representative
and Tax Rav I started.
July of last year as a
representative
and served on many interim
committees but
My my background and experience
has been working
in the legislature has been and
Senate Senate finance areas so
always very interested in the
state's economic structure and
this is one of you know.
Heartbeat for us here in this
and this committee so it's
always been a
Very interesting and very
important to me and this
pandemic like others have said
has triggered a national
recession and yeah we're gonna
do a lot of problem solving here
so it's it's an opportunity to
accomplish in work and look at
more fair and equitable tax
structures for states to thank
you and appreciate everybody
here thank you Mr chair.
Thank you and welcome
Representative.
Representative Joshua and on
this.
Good morning Mr chair
representative Josh Gordon is
from district sixty which is the
southern part of Rio Rancho
between Representative fashion
Representative Harper.
I look forward to it R. as my
first year as Representative and
I look forward to working with
you guys on tax and
Representative.
Welcome Representative we're
we're glad to have you and we're
looking forward to working with
you let's go to a Representative
Jason Harper.
Thank you chairman.
It's great to to be here this
is.
I guess my ninth year on this
committee it's hard to believe
it's been that long but
It's a it's a wonderful
committee to be on really
excited to have you as our
chairman.
I represent Sandoval County area
house district fifty seven it's
northern Rio Rancho.
I grew up in Rio Rancho high.
My wife and I we we started
dating in the high school
marching band to see live before
god Rio Rancho high school.
And we decided to move back to
raise our family here and it's
just it's a it's an awesome
place we love Rio Rancho.
Continues to be rated you know
by different focuses so number
one place to raise your family
in the US and I agree with that
it's a it's a great place.
Yes super super excited to be
here again and I try to make
some progress on on reforming
our our antiquated broken Swiss
cheese of the tax code.
Thank you chairman.
Thank you Representative Harper
and and welcome back for for
those new folks my very first
chair person of of tax and
revenue at the time ways and
means committee was
Representative Harper so he's
he's definitely somebody who has
been able to to build up to this
committee you know along with
with former chair Camille and
and before them as well.
So great to have you back
vice chair Chris Representative
Christine Chandler please
introduce yourself
good morning everyone I'm
representative Christine
Chandler and I'm I'm honored to
have been appointed to the vice
chair to the leadership of
chairman Martinez and I hope to
work with him closely to ensure
there is a smooth running of our
committee so I think I know
everyone on the committee except
for Representative
Representative Hernandez so
welcome very happy to meet you
and look forward to the day when
I can see you live and in person
and I'm looking forward to
working with this great group of
people I have been on this is my
third year on the committee my
third year in the legislature I
asked to be on this committee
because I think tax policy is
the engine that really drives
every all policy across the
board so Representative my ****
talked about all the services
and infrastructure that we need
to bill that's all revenues that
are based on our our tax policy
and tax policy also has a
significant impact on social
policy and social welfare and I
view it as a tool to support a
more equitable society and
progressive tax code will help
us do that so looking forward to
working with you all and the
patient I will
help that try to help chair
Herman Martinez follow who's
asking to be called on and I'll
be texting him so be patient
with me I'm gonna try to
recognize you and put you in the
order that you raise your hand
but if I miss you my apologies
in advance so thank you all and
look forward to our first
meeting.
Thank you vice chair and very
very excited to work with you as
well my name is is have you in
but the agency and I I like
Representative Scott this is my
seventh I I lose track but I'm
gonna take his word for it I
think it's my seventh.
State here session on tax and
revenue I am
I I Representative district
eleven which is the downtown
core of Albuquerque the historic
neighborhoods of Albuquerque
when you think about it lasted
Martinez town and Grandison
Wells park those are all
neighborhoods that are within
the district I represent like
many of you very urban but also
pockets of of rural communities
as well as you get further up
into the north valley you know
long haul on that it would and
it.
I come to I come to taxes from
the perspective of of social
impact reading and and how we
can help.
Improve the education system
improved our child well being
systems improve the economic
system for all families through
the tax code and you know as as
the new chair I I I take a lot
of money
experiences both under chair to
heal and interment Harper too
hard I I've seen the way they
work together
you know it is and then perhaps
is a good time to transition
into sort of second part of
Medicare
but you know what what what one
of the things that I should
before I do that I I got to get
something else but.
You know as we.
As a committee we don't always
agree and and you know
Representative Harper and I will
the first one to tell you we
**** heads all the time but we
also know how to work together
and this committee prides itself
in its pragmatism to the extent
that we can be pragmatic in
conversation about taxes
and we pride ourselves in being
hard workers you'll notice
special twenty members the first
few weeks that would slow if you
kind of slow you know we don't
have a lot of bills that that we
deal with and that's because
we're sort of a last stop before
the floor so built up to get to
other committees before they
start making their way onto us
Have you said that you know this
committee cannot do its work
and this committee cannot remain
pragmatic and this committee
cannot remain the collaborative
without the tremendous implants
of our of our over staff and we
have a top notch staff bowls the
committee as committee staff but
also in the majority and
minority.
Staffing and so I'd like to to
give our our our team an
opportunity introduce themselves
as well and some have been
around for a long time around
this committee for a long time
so please share any words with
some of the young might have as
you introduce yourselves I'm
gonna start at the top of my
screen and work my way around so
I'll begin with Mr bill more.
Good morning everyone good
morning Mr chairman.
My name is William more and this
is my fourth year working as a
policy analyst.
For the committee.
Thank you bill welcome back.
Let's go to Jackie.
Good morning everyone.
I'm doctor Jackie coal ash I
retired from the New Mexico
taxation and revenue department
in two thousand nineteen after
twenty nine years.
And this is my second term with
the committee.
Thank you everyone.
Thank you doctor glass great to
have you back
I'm gonna miss seeing you
calling that that suitcase full
of a documents and books around
the center and we'll get back to
it next year I'm sure thank you.
Let's go to Mr Reddy Lopez.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee R. ray
Lopez I have been working for
the house of representatives
since a chair Martinez was in
high school.
Okay
Will be helping coordinating the
mechanics of a.
The committee with the rain who
is the committee the assistant.
Are are you will be working with
bill more who is one of our
analysts and Jackie who is a
major analyst.
and Pam right
who has extensive experience in
council service and Kevin powers
will opposition are we all keep
in touch throughout the session.
to keep the chairman and the
committee apprised of what's
coming down the road Mr chair at
the moment you have thirty six
tax related bills that were pre
filed two of them have been
referred to a committee house
bill ninety eight and house bill
one fifteen.
Is if you.
You need.
Any explanation to into this
mystery we call the legislature
please feel free to call me or
no program.
Thanks ray enjoy enjoy that
glorious beach behind you.
Chairman.
You changed it up.
Let's let's go down to a two Pam
right.
Hi Mr chairman.
You can hear me now I am right I
I come to the
the committee from the
Legislative Council Service I
worked there until I retired and
then I started working under
chairman Santa.
You years back.
And
So I my background is mainly I'm
a lawyer and I and
Let's see I
I drafted tax law up in the
council service for about ten or
twelve years before I retired
and so that's how I got here.
I look forward to our and our
meetings and seeing everybody
and getting to know everybody
even though it's virtually.
And
I guess that's it for now.
Thank you Pam and and welcome
back
to the committee.
Mr Kevin powers.
Thank you Mr chairman the
morning everybody my name's
Kevin powers and I am a retired
investment banker.
and I've been working with this
committee for seven years now so
I came on board with a lot of
the other members and it's been
great working with the committee
we have a I think we have a
great committee this year and a
great staff and looking forward
to doing some good thank you.
Excellent thank you thank you
Kevin and elasmosaur Lee not
least the the glue that holds us
together and keeps us in check
Missy lane maybe not.
Thank you Mr chairman welcome
all the committee members back
this year and all you need
people I can hardly wait to meet
you all
we look forward to the.
Wonderful cooperative
legislative session and as you
all know and if you didn't know
you have any problems or any
issues with any of this stuff or
need direction trying to find
bills or anything to that extent
you feel free to call me and you
can definitely sure my name my
number my phone number with your
committee assistance or
LA's as well thank you and
welcome back.
Thank you Elaine and and thank
you for for all that you're
doing to to keep us all together
and and you know figure out this
this issue of of zoom.
Members before before I get to
the resident I I do want to give
an opportunity to
Members of the audience to
introduce themselves if they
wish to.
so for the new members the way
this would work is would be
sitting in the committee room
and we would have done what we
just did
and then there part of you know
it's the first meeting so they
probably would've been like
three people in the audience
but we usually go to the public
to offer some public comment
either for against the bill in
this case we would have members
of the audience introduce
themselves I can see here we
have
we have five people in the
attendee list and I see a couple
heads up so but vice chair
Chandler I think generally
speaking and and working with
the land you all would probably
see those has before I do and
you would feed me info and and
then we would call on folks so.
I think we can skip that step in
a process and
and I can just call them myself.
So what's going to happen for
members of the audience
listening in
all recognize you and then
somebody behind the scenes does
their magic and they promote you
to have a list I believe so that
you can actually speak and we
can hear you and then once
you're finished they put you
back in that's in the
at least that's how I understand
it.
So let's give this a shot I see
I see maybe give me the heads of
the funds up there so I'm gonna
go down the list is in the order
that that I see it up here and
first we have this are the.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Vanessa lady to I am a
registered lobbyist with on
multiple clients but before your
committee I'm most likely going
to be representing eighteen tea
and Fizer possibly I do
Representative development as
well I will be providing my
contact information to miss miss
Elaine miss Medina so that I may
answer any questions that you
might have regarding any of my
my clients and maybe a resource
to you as well my question Mr
chairman and members of the
committee as we have access to
the analyst contact information
so we may be providing
information to them as well as
they proceed with bills thank
you very much.
Thank you for being here this
morning.
Miscellaneous the answer is yes
I it'll be the same as it's
always been you know and and
I'll check with the lane you
know I want to make sure that
you know I'm not sure if if
staff have their own personal
cell phones that they have a you
know legislature
provided a cell phone I I don't
know those details but my
assumption is that at the very
least you could do email.
Which obviously everybody has
their provided email which is in
the public domain so you will
have access in that regard and
then we'll check to see if maybe
you know phone is is possible as
well.
Thank you for being here next on
my lips I have a is don
Iglesias.
Thanks committee.
It's great to see.
The faces on the committee.
Yes chief economist for the
legislative finance committee.
If.
Be providing legislative support
throughout this process.
The fiscal reports that you will
see committees in addition to
some of the agency announces
that you
see in front of you happy to.
This process is essential.
The.
to answer any questions.
On our fiscal impact reports
as for any questions that you
may have throughout this process
we look forward to working with
the thank you.
Thank you done is great to see
you and and good to have you
back as one of our.
Leading experts.
Next on my list I have the Frank
Google go ahead Sir.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I hope you can
hear me my name is I'm with the
Rio Grande foundation we're at
and economic policy analysis
institute so I'll be watching
the progress of bills to this
committee as well as several
other so be in and out and we're
providing some comments as well
as the so as bills move to this
committee so thank you very much
for your time.
Thank you Sir thank you for
joining us and welcome to to the
committee.
Next we have a.
Bruce Weatherby.
Mr whether beer on the line.
I thank you can you hear me.
We can hear you okay thank you
very much I one very quick
question I know you getting
started but besides the
representatives from the New
Mexico tax research institute we
very hearing or getting advice
from any other.
Organizations that provide
information relative to taxation
issues.
Great question yeah you know
this committee takes a great
deal of Madam and and that input
from a number of organizations
across the political spectrum as
well as nonpartisan
organizations and nonprofits and
whatnot so the answer is yes we
we do take a lot of that into
consideration as we make our
decisions.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Those are all the folks I see
with their hand up I'll give it
another few seconds to get
somebody changes their mind.
All right so I think we can.
We can move on how let's see
right did you have but did you
have a comment right Lopez.
to record we Mr chairman and
answer to
Mrs.
In.
During a regular session.
we analysts are available to
lobbyist constituent this and
the public.
to you know answer any questions
that they may have or tried to
address any confusion that may
have been because so are we.
Pam.
and bill.
Will be available on regular
working hours for me to I if you
have any questions ceiling
you're free to give up my cell
number to anybody who might have
a question do with that.
And
I just wanted to of that Sir.
Thank you thank you ray
well well said.
Let me let me move on to the
next for the agenda I just have
some some house cleaning here
that I wanted to do with you all
before before we move on and and
I know that Representative Scott
had a couple questions as well
so we'll get to those here in a
minute.
For us so as you know this
committee meets Monday Wednesday
Friday.
The the published time is eight
thirty the rest of this week
we're gonna we're gonna push
that start time to nine o'clock.
We have up presentations on
Wednesday from the taxation
revenue department we've got LFC
I believe we also have DFA and
then on Friday we have
presentations by the office of
the state auditor and state
treasurer.
It is possible that we consider
those two bills that are
refer toward committee later on
Friday morning.
So we'll we'll we'll make a
decision on that here in the
next day or so but that's
That's going to be the run of
the show that this week starting
next week will probably go back
to our.
Original start time of eight
thirty.
which means we'll you know we'll
jump on zoom roughly you know if
if we can a few minutes before I
know eleven we'll have those
rural rural open.
A little bit before eight thirty
so for folks who want to jump a
little earlier and just kind of
hang out we'll be able to do
that in our start time will
we'll try to keep to the eight
thirty as as best as we can.
Up.
This committee follows the the
the you know the the rule of
having committee subset or
amendments to the committee
twenty four hours before that
gives battle is on both sides
the opportunity at applies
Sometimes we've taken the
approach of making an amendment
specially for the end of the
session unit for theirs
amendment that needs to be made
to a bill on fly on the spot you
know we we might we might do
that with sort of some sort of
consensus.
But you know big things will
will will we really would like
for all of you to say to the to
the twenty four hours is just
just Vera thing for everyone
you know the in the event that
they haven't seen.
if it's a new type of amendment
Committee sub.
There's there's a system called
Citrix that our staff is using.
I'm assuming you all you all
have seen it I I kind of dabbled
with a little bit over the
weekend.
you'll find out real soon here
that I'm not the most tech savvy
present my a a resist the stuff
but the you know we'll we'll
make do we'll figure it out that
means that they're still paper
there slowly other folk people
that are going to be sent to
your house racing with bills or
analyses everything as I
understand it will be published
through through that system I'm
assuming some of you might get
an email from your analyst you
know.
If if that's what you choose to
do but for the most part I
believe the documents will be
uploaded to to that system.
if you absolutely require you
know printouts or whatever just
check in with with your with
your staff with you L. A.'s and
and they can cordon the
coordinate that for you.
She was we get into the big
bills and you know they create
jobs for the new folks the new
legislators there is a print
shop here on site.
and and their fantastic you know
they'll they'll run the.
Harper four hundred page tax
bill for you.
the whole point should put a
nice binder for your.
If you if you wish to read it.
you know in hard copy not on the
screen.
We will have a physical copy of
the twenty twenty edition of the
New Mexico selected taxation
revenue loss regulations it's
the big blue book that looks
like this one.
Really pretty and full of
information.
my first session chairman and
then chairman Harper was
gracious enough to to
to get us all copies of this and
it's it's it's quite a read you
know when we talk about tax
reform.
You can look at all the goodies
over the last forty years and
have been privy to that one
of things that I shouldn't be
there anymore so the those will
be ready at some point in the
next week or so they'll be here
so maybe if you're in the
building to come pick it up for
you can have your staff can get
it for you.
you all have a copy of that.
We are in room three sixteen
just in case you didn't know
that that's for the.
The office suite isn't and worry
lane will be physically.
You know during business hours.
Make sure the lane has your
preferred email address and a
cell phone.
If you can email that to her
that would be fantastic
you know there'll be times issue
might need to thank all of us if
we need to want to get started
or if there's a change in plans
or whatnot and and I would hate
for you to not get that in full
because it's going to to the
wrong email address or or the
one that maybe you don't check
is offered.
or you could just have year
legislative assistant to that if
if you which.
We are yeah we're pretty
flexible in this committee we we
recognize specially when so when
he gets into later in the
session everybody's got bills
and other committees if you need
to step off that's fine you too
can Judy lane a text just kind
of telling you Hey I'm gonna be
gone for thirty minutes
presenting a bill or I'm gonna
be late this morning around the
gonna be there today that we can
mark you as excuse and
you know on on on the on the
committee report so please do
that if you can
obviously need to get off camera
if you need to go you know
feature kids or whatever you
know that's understandable
absolutely.
So you know I'm not gonna
require you to you know have the
camera on yourself twenty four
seven you know we understand I'm
I myself have two little kids at
home today I'm here in the in
the capitol building but more
often than not I'll be swimming
from from my home office and and
you know I might have a six year
old Russian the rural and jump
all over me and yell at me for
breakfast or something and you
know I might have to step away
from chair to that's that's just
the way it's going to be so.
This inflexibility I'm asking.
For you to have with me I'm I'm
obviously gonna have page with
you all as well and the same
goes for staff I mean you know
we're we're we're all in this
crazy time together so we'll
we'll make it work.
As far as
We'll call during the committee
you know we'll we'll do the race
and function as we get into
bills and people have questions
just raise your hand and vice
chair Chandler will be working
with Elaine to keep that list
for us so that we know who's
first and and all that good
stuff.
You know generally speaking we
all get one one bite at the
apple during a committee hearing
every once in a while.
You know maybe some really good
idea pops into your head after
you've already spoken to just
raise your hand again more often
than not I'll be able to
recognize you that second time
But will you know again we'll
just roll with the punches
that's all we can do and and I'm
sure that given the
collaborative spirit of this
committee historically and and
the respect that we all have for
for one another that will we'll
give each other the benefit of
the doubt and and we'll move
forward together as best as we
can.
I think that's what's on my to
do list I know rescinded Scott
had a couple questions and and
I'd like to open it up for any
questions or comments from the
from the committee so first let
me go to Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman.
These committee hearings
frequently.
To.
Well.
Questions.
During during the proceedings
and.
The of.
We'll committee rooms the
global.
Those ones will be in the
capitol.
What to.
Hello Kohli.
The media center for the
questions and consultation
during the committee hearing.
All of our participation will be
virtual.
That's a question Senator Scott
you know I I I thought about
this over the last week or so
I'm gonna say no I think that if
if you know I I totally
understand where you're coming
from I I'm gonna miss the
ability to walk over to a staff
member or to a member of the of
the committee to run down an
idea or to debate something
offline
but I think in the interest of
of first of all safety.
But also just you know there is
for everybody like if if this if
if you choose to huddle together
in a conference room or you know
of a place to be choosing that's
that's totally up to you but I
would prefer that we don't use
the committee room.
If if we're gonna be
participating you know through a
virtual session.
That would be my my preference.
Mr chair while leadership
request.
In the capital for use during
these committee hearings you
would have no objection to the.
You know I'm not sure
I'm not sure going up the the
the ranks of leadership you know
conversations between the
speaker in the minority leader
you know if if they make a
decision to allow for you know
group setting site I'm not sure
I mean that's a decision for
them but.
You know with regard to the
committee room I've my my
preference is that we do not use
the committee real and that we
can conduct our business
virtually either from our
offices or if people choose to
be together in some other
location you know that's that's
up to them I can't control that
but my preference is that it
doesn't happen in the committee
room.
Thank you representative any
other questions or comments from
the committee.
I see hand up going up
Representative Romero.
You Mr chairman I just wanted to
clarify are we following the
twenty four hour rule on
amendments and anything else
that comes down the pike that
may change our agenda and how
will we be notified with all of
that.
The answer is yes we we we do
follow the the twenty four hour
rule so any amendment to any
substitute please get it to the
to the staff within those twenty
four hours as I said earlier
there might be situations where
you know special to the late in
the session where you know we
might decide to make an
amendment or whatnot usually all
consult with Representative
Harper we we have a real good
relationship and
he knows sometimes it's hard to
get a hold everybody so I'll say
Harper talked your members and
then I'll probably ask Christine
how to our members
to get information out but check
your email the staff will be
responsible for emailing out
amendments and analyses and and
whatnot and please please do
your best to get stuff in within
twenty four hours so that
everybody has a chance to review
and analyze otherwise we get
into these weird space so you
know did something come in this
morning and and you know.
Nobody saw it majority and
minority equity side except for
the sponsor and it is very
difficult to proceed that way in
in a gets really messy so yes
please please try to stick to
that as best as you can thank
you Mr chairman that's it yeah
any other questions or comments
from committee members.
All right well.
with that Elaine did we cover
everything we were supposed to
cover today.
Yes Mister chairman I believe we
did I just want to touch on
representative from metals
question what if I do get any
amendments for Committee
substitutes or anything like
that just at the last minute
I will upload them up into
Citrix immediately and I will
also email on to everybody in
the committee I know that we're
not always on our.
email round the clock but that
will be the the best I can do to
get it to everybody as well.
Otherwise I think we're we're
good to go thank you for
everything.
Thank you the land up I see
Representative SSS is hand up.
Thank you Mr chairman I has
come.
Speak with the the minority
leadership by us that we do with
maybe a twenty two hour rule as
opposed to a twenty four hour
twenty four hour basically push
it back to the night before.
Aug seven we could get some to
Elaine by nine or ten.
The folks already it is the
funds that was only we to.
But up but as long as you know
obviously if it's that easy fix
this as opposed to a complicated
proposal I ask folks to consider
that but also Mr chair if you
could ask
If we get a email and phone
number list of all the analysts
and and fellow members that be
great thank you.
Certainly what we'll get that to
you Representative Maestas
all right well having no further
see no further questions or
comments
I think we're ready to go will
will
We'll adjourned for the day and
we will be back here on
Wednesday at nine o'clock we'll
have as I said presentations
from TRD LFC BFA
this is this is important for
all of us a lot of good
information it's especially
important for the new members of
the committee and definitely a
must see for the new members of
the legislature
so see you on Wednesday we are
