Representative Stansbury morning
I'm here good morning
Representative Strickler.
This.
Your.
Chairman Martinez.
I'm here.
We have a quorum.
All right thank you Elaine good
morning members we have a
relatively
simple agenda today not not too
loaded so we'll we'll try to get
through and and be.
he is is Dilip Gen is is is we
should be with these bills we do
have a little bit of time I
don't think our next committee
meets until noon so I'd like to
give you all a a chance to go
grab something to eat before you
have to jump on to the next
committee but we've got three
bills today we've got a house
bill three fifty Representative
Dow who I see on the screen here
we have house bill two ninety
six which is our capital outlay
re authorization bill it'll be
presenting to you all and then
Senate bill one thirty one
Senator Stewart.
So with that Representative Dow
are you ready to go.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee on what
proper for you is a bill to
address one of our very
important industry in New Mexico
that isn't that left behind in
all of this COVID release part
eight billion dollars has come
to the state of New Mexico eight
billion and eight in that
distribution many of the
boundaries and restrictions on
receding waters included
bringing workforce back to work
our movie theater simply would
not do this because they are
closed
they're completely closed three
hundred movie screens have been
in the dark for over a year and
just recently they were
presented with the cap moving
forward nationally the reporting
is that revenues for our at
movie theaters maternity to
closing is ninety percent in New
Mexico those numbers are even
higher this is a bill with a
high number because I just I it
took that long to see that all
the COVID and all the he that we
were passing through this
legislative session excluded.
To our movie theaters they have
not even been able to get the
small ten fifteen thousand
dollar requests that we put out
there in the state and so the
industry employs over twelve
hundred New Mexicans throughout
the state these are large
cinemas and metropolitan areas
and smaller one screen
appropriations like in my
hometown to the consequences and
in Silver City and the speakers
the report their portal cultural
institutions that does business
multipliers driving foot traffic
to other businesses and
administrative districts and
these there's thanks a very long
road to recovery colleagues have
the light of the releases are
delayed or are permanently not
happy so there will be less new
filter truck customers even when
they are able to re open
compounding this problem is that
they face counting six cost such
as their property taxes their
rent their mortgage payments and
that what they do on their
technology payments.
This provides a critical point
dried years three and a half
million which I thought was a
lot the money that I seen going
through are you a hundred and
ten million dollars just in did
your bill alone for broadband if
we have a desire to help these
theaters we can do it and with
forty eight based on the clock I
don't think it's too late so I
do have two expert witnesses a
Russell Allen who owns Alan
Peters he's in New Mexico owner
and operator and John curry
he's with the national company
if we collect and the.
Certainly.
Give me a minute.
You said Brian Mitchell right
Representative Dow John curry.
Juncker yet we've got Russell
Allen.
And John C. was just promoted to
panel on C. okay thank you
Elaine.
Welcome Mr Allen and Mr curry
good morning.
Do you have anything else to add
to Representative Dow is
presentation before we go to
public comment.
Well yeah I'll go ahead go first
John if that's alright with you
I'm Russell Allen with Alan
theaters.
family owned circuit in the
state of New Mexico that started
in the Representative mon twenty
as home town in my hometown of
Farmington in nineteen twelve by
my great grandfather we operate
cedars and nine New Mexico
communities and with a total of
ninety three screens.
And as Representative Taos.
There has been zero
help.
From the state with the with the
different opportunities that
have come forward and even in
the things that are done
yesterday that the governor was
kind enough to the sign that
there's still no help for for us
that have been a hundred percent
close by none of our court
our business.
When we're running full bore in
mind my particular business we
employ approximately three
hundred people from high school
students all the way up to
people that are supporting their
families we what I know we have
a well we had two people that
have been working for us for
over thirty years that have been
working for my family since they
were in high school and so we've
done generations and now we're.
This bill that are
Representative Taos put forward
would be a very.
helpfull lifeline going forward
because as we said we don't
expect our industry to get any
kind of recovery for a couple
years and any help that can
happen our way will be greatly
appreciated to help us with this
fixed costs that we've been
bearing for a year now so that's
a.
And I'm open for any questions
after a Mr curry is putting his
time so thank you.
Thank you for being here Mister
Allen Mr curry.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Dow and committee
members really appreciate the
time this morning and the
opportunity to speak in full
support of house bill three
fifty my name's John Currie and
I'm a senior vice president with
regal and have had the pleasure
of serving in this capacity at
regal for nearly thirty years
taking care of our guests and
also our team members we operate
sixty screens of the three
hundred screens in New Mexico
and I locations two of which are
in Santa Fe earlier in
Albuquerque New Mexico movie
theaters like Representative Dow
said employs more than twelve
hundred team members so are a
hundred seventy sixes is pretty
a pretty substantial there we're
very lucky to have them with us
that's not to mention all the
indirect jobs that are related
to janitorial and security
services among other things that
the Peters help fern in the
local communities as
Representative Dow said we're
we're important cultural
institutions for the communities
we serve we anchor lifestyle
centers malls and really Main
street New Mexico we drive that
much needed foot traffic to
nearby and neighboring
businesses like restaurants and
cafes and shops and again the
employment opportunities are
pretty significant.
Our business is been absolutely
and thoroughly devastated the
pandemic has been debilitating
to our business we've been
closed for nearly one year with
no revenue in fact the
anniversary of our when you're
closures will begin next week
we've had to make gut wrenching
decisions such as for allowing
the vast majority of our
employees there in New Mexico
and even though New Mexico has
been recently allowed our has
recently allowed theaters open
as of March fifth I believe only
one percent of the theaters are
reopened.
And in spite of all of this we
will continue to face challenges
moving forward we have mounting
fixed expenses like rent and
utilities and taxes just to name
a few we're closed but the bill
state bills keep coming in.
We have operating restrictions
that we deal with in the various
states and communities that we
serve and then also as
Representative down Russell
mentioned you know the studio
releases you know we're waiting
for Hollywood to stick to firm
dates that will give us that
attraction to bring people back
into the theaters and then not
to mention the cost for us to
safely reopen these are things
that we're going to face here in
the hopefully near future.
We have a long road to recovery
data from Ernst and young
currently suggests that the full
recovery for the theater
industry won't take place until
sometime between twenty twenty
three and twenty twenty four so
we have been forced to be very
creative and look for various
ways to survive many including
ragel I have had to increase
their debt load pretty
significantly just to survive we
work with our partners in our
landlords and suppliers to
extend terms and make
alternative payment arrangements
we continue to seek assistance
from the states and communities
that we live work and play to
help us get back on our feet and
reopen safely and unfortunately
it's my understanding due to
constitutional restrictions in
New Mexico leaders were not able
to access the a state based
grant funds you know that are
typically provided in many other
states to help us get back on
our feet.
So rest assured we're turning
over every rock to make it
through this difficult time and
we desperately need your help.
So you'll ask you know how does
this bill help movie theaters
and I would say just for an
understanding at you know
majority of ticket sales go back
to the studios so we rely
primarily on concession is our
source of revenue to continue
operations this bill would
provide us a vital lifeline.
In a reopening recovery process
it gives a boost to help
covering operating expenses you
know related to that reopening
and recovery so this could
literally help us keep the
lights on my covering a large
portion of our utility bills
among other things so it's
incredibly important so we
really County data ask for that
much needed assistance so that
we can get our teams back to
work safely reopen for gas and
help drive foot traffic to our
nearby neighbors we're
exhausting every Avenue in order
to sustain during these dark
times and truly need a helping
hand from New Mexico so this is
a for sure and in my mind would
be considered part of New Mexico
New Mexico's COVID relief plans
and is there for the recovery
efforts so we strongly ask that
you help support us with this
particular.
Thank you Sir appreciate you
taking the time to be here with
us this morning let's go to the
audience
if you are in support of house
bill three fifty.
Please raise your hand.
Mr Billington good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you for
giving me an opportunity to
speak this is JD Bullington and
I'm the registered lobbyists in
New Mexico the actional
association of theater owners
and I have to tell you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I this is my twenty
fifth year as a lobbyist and I
have never in my career.
In toward as much pain and
frustration standing by the side
of the theater owners in the
state the last.
Fighting with them trying to get
them open
too many conversations with the
governor's office and they've
you know they've been helpful
but they're still closed and
because of their unique
situation where they have never
been allowed to reopen and they
have no employees they can't
take advantage of any of the
incentive so far that are tied
to job creation and employment
and it's been frustrating and
it's been sat I fully understand
the protocols in this committee
Mr chairman and members but you
know I'm I'm I'm asking it
anything you can do.
Work with the effective date
Tweek tweak the duration of it
but if there's anything that you
can do as a committee to help
this industry it would be
greatly appreciated they employ
a lot of people throughout the
state we're not sure public us
and anything you can do would be
appreciated thank you.
Thank you Mr Billington.
Alright more the good morning.
Good morning thank you.
What.
Thank you of thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee and and Representative
Dow for presenting such a great
a statement for us my name is
our Northman senior vice
president of operations for
Cinemark century theatres.
When we closed our doors.
One year ago on March eighteenth
I was operating for three years
in Albuquerque.
And had approximately a hundred
fifty people employed in those
four theaters.
I want to talk to you about.
Our support for house bill three
fifty because it's terribly
terribly important.
Not only to Cinemark and century
but to our industry.
we are a long time business
operator in New Mexico.
our origin dates back to
nineteen seventy eight.
When we were operating the site
you feed luxury driving on the
more side Albuquerque.
In the mid nineties we close the
drive in and we built.
a brand new state of the art
walk in theater and most
everybody in the state knows of
the Rio twenty four up on the
north side.
You've heard some very very
heart wrenching testimony from
Russell and John.
I want to try to put some
reality to what they're seeing
what they're saying what they're
talking about.
When I get the opportunity to
reopen my theaters in in the
coming hopefully near future
instead of opening for theaters
I'm only gonna be opening to.
The Rio twenty fours of Business
theater in New Mexico.
But we also operated two very
small theaters in Albuquerque
that appeal to the lower cost
segment of our.
Population these were lowcost
theaters they play movies very
far into the wrong and it gave
people on the lower end of the
socio economic scale an
opportunity still go to the
movies with their friends.
Of the margins for these
theaters these two figures in
particular were very very.
Very well.
And due to changing conditions
within our industry.
In New.
The.
In the pandemic in being closed
for a year and no clear path
going forward.
We were left with no choice.
But to let the leases lapse that
we did not renew our lease.
we just did not see a way where
we could be profitable going
forward in the future one
because we weren't sure when
we're going to re open.
In and to and into because of
the changes in our industry.
And what the pandemic as cost.
Just two buildings that
employed approximately forty
five people.
That will not reopen.
We we employee everyone and you
heard the testimony earlier we
we employed all types of people
from call are high school age
kids.
All the way up through my
general managers who are
supporting the family.
I myself have been in this
industry for forty two years.
This is my high school job.
I just forgot to quit this is
been a true rific Opport.
Lifestyle from the and
Pardon me.
An unfortunate with these two
buildings we're not gonna be
able to continue for the future.
We've been hit my company as
well as our industry have been
hit particularly hard in New
Mexico.
As we have been closed for.
Here.
We've had the bordering states
of New Mexico open for six plus
months.
And of the forty two states we
operate in only New Mexico is
still closed.
I ask I yield to the committee.
For some help as as Russell and
John of both said there has been
no assistance thus far in the
state.
We need your help.
And and whether it's in this
form or some version of it.
I ask that you give it.
Appropriate consideration.
And thank you for your time I
appreciate it.
Thank you Mr Murtha Brian
Mitchell.
Thank you good morning my name
is Brian Mitchell our family
theater circuit has fifteen
locations in seven states with
three locations in New Mexico
Los Lunas Espinola and house as
house just enter level green we
were able to open the
storyteller seven last Friday.
I had not been to tell since the
pandemic began so I was happy to
be there last Friday to welcome
our local customers as well as
people traveling from
Albuquerque and Santa Fe excited
to finally see a movie on the
big screen again I am pleased to
say our counts free opening was
a success with customers feeling
safe and no issues whatsoever
although we are not profitable
twenty five percent occupancy is
a place to start.
I was feeling optimistic about
our movie theater opening until
Saturday I started with
breakfast at I hop I visited
several stores on that house
plants and had a late supper at
Lambert's on the plants.
And every business I entered I
visited with the managers and
owners all of them said they
were still struggling and things
did not seem to be improving a
few of them even said they doubt
if they would be able to survive
much longer and these were
businesses that have been
allowed to be open sometime ago
so then I got to thinking about
New Mexico movie theaters if
other businesses are still
struggling after being open for
some time how many months or
years will it take from movie
theaters to get past struggling
after being closed for over one
year.
In the short term assistance
that gets businesses like movie
theaters to the other side of
this is greatly needed and
appreciated.
Thank you for your time and
consideration.
Thank you Sir Jason Espinoza
welcome.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director with the national
federation of independent
business and we just want to
really stand up in support of
House Bill three fifty and and
talk about its importance and I
think others have done a great
job of sharing the narrative
around.
What's happened with movie
theaters during the shut down
and you know the legislature's
done a great job and and given
financial relief and targeted
relief to restaurants and other
industries one I think we just
don't want the legislator
legislature to forget about is
really those close contact
recreational businesses like
movie theaters that have been
shut down throughout the
pandemic and and have received
limited financial assistance you
know in if there's any money to
move around to help the
secretary you know we really
just employee look at that and
then moving forward to during
the in our we know this is gonna
be a long recovery you know it's
going to take years for
businesses to recover so that we
do plead with you even during
the interim can we develop
innovative ways through the
interim to continue creating
financial assistance for movie
theaters and other sectors of
the economy because they're
going to need it for years to
come out of this pandemic in the
in the closures that we've had
as a result so we really just to
come with you and ask that that
you do help movie theaters in
the sector and and continue to
find ways to move money around
to really support these impacted
close contact businesses thank
you.
Thank you Mr speaker.
let's go to those in opposition
in a house with three fifty.
All right committee members
Representative Harper.
Thank you chairman
Dow great to see you here and
Thank you for bringing this bill
and it it's great to hear from
those in the audience and Mr
Allen and and John.
I don't think there's anyone
here that.
Does not like going to movies.
and and I'll just I'll just say
I actually was able to go to a
couple movies here and the not
so distant past my brother lives
in San Antonio Texas and that.
He told me you've got a common
see tenet and the so we we
middle family trip.
Out of it and we are.
We went down there and and then
I I loved that movie I think it
might be.
My top I made my top five list
it's a not to spoil anything but
it deals with time travel in a
way that I never considered and
just loved it
washed it there and I think we
lost about four or five times at
home I think we finally get the
movie.
And then
also awhile ago
One of the rings
the movies were just updated the
forte and then I'd maxed
actually took that four K.
version and and our.
adapted it for for IMAX and so I
took the family up to Colorado
springs.
There's only been shown for one
weekend weeks also shivering and
that was a.
It was amazing.
So I I know I want to see we are
all desperate to go back to
movies and and I understand your
your plight I mean obviously
researchers are open in Texas to
Colorado in a limited capacity
and such.
I'm hoping that we'll be able to
get there quickly west New
Mexico theaters.
so just the couple couple
questions so first I want to
commend
Chairman representative out
and all of our.
Incentive based tax.
deductions or credits we we ask
for reporting requirement.
And I see that you have one in
the bill we also ask for a
sunset.
And I see that the bill.
and thank you talk just for a
little bit about the sunset date
that you chose it looks like
this is a four year sunset.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Harper we do
believe the recovery will take
that long.
and so we did go with the three
percent that.
There were some sort of
partnership for commitment
trying to get some direct aid
that could be shorter I actually
think it's point all this point
in the game billion dollars and
without a dollar to Peter's.
Oxen pretty thank.
I don't think that's fair I
think it was two years with the
commitment to work on this in
the inner and figure out how to
get eight to them all but four
years is kind of conservative.
If you look at the statewide
impact of around three point
five perhaps the four million.
It it's would you divide that up
between three three hundred
fourteen screens that we have in
New Mexico.
It's a pretty small amount.
So the Mr chair and
representative out thank you for
for that and that and I
appreciate you being willing to
be flexible on that yeah I found
it interesting that two four
hours we have the tax from the
tax department assumes that
they're being essentially
immediate recovery to pre COVID
levels in July.
I think if there was
so how I would have a you know
your chain of movies coming out
I think
maybe that would be the case.
and then LFC is FIR I found
interesting I think they were
projecting would be about twenty
twenty three would be a full
recovery.
So.
So so I I do get it that
you know so perhaps the more
than one year that we would
find this this help Mr Chairman
representative apartment also
focusing on that all screens are
opening all theaters rate G. R.
T. and many of the smaller.
Our nonprofits.
And the G. R. T..
It's I. R. is over it's
definitely over.
For.
Interesting arts thank you Mr
Representative Dow
So that another question I have
is.
So this is just a straight up G.
R. T. deduction is that right.
Mr Chairman representative
Indians it's about seventy five
cents on the on the ticket the
ticket sale it was ten dollars
but.
Inclusive cost you do not pay
tax on your ticket includes.
it is dependent on sales which
are going to be slow and not
pay tax.
Yes so.
So Mister chairman of doubt
are you are you familiar with.
The message that we actually use
to help out restaurants that
passed.
and I bring this up because I
think it's actually much more
helpful a mechanism what we have
here.
so our chairman Representative
out what we have here is if I go
to the movie theater and I pay
for the ticket what's it's a ten
dollar ticket.
Normally I would pay you know
separate percent on top of that
gross receipts tax and that
comes out of my pocket goes to
the state the movie cedar still
and it's ten dollars.
Right.
and so I'm.
What we did for restaurants as
we gave them a certain time
period I cameras like six months
where they would not.
With a four.
Okay thank you thank you for
correcting me chairman for
months where they.
Would charge gross receipts tax
but they would not have to remit
to the state.
and so the restaurants would be
able to keep that gross receipts
tax.
And in that way was a help to
the.
My argument when that bill came
forward what was gonna be that
to and I see Mr on you raise
your hand all all reach out to
hear that but my ari was gonna
be.
People are going out to
restaurants participating the
gross receipts tax and having a
deduction isn't gonna make
people go to the restaurant more
and it's not gonna help the
restaurant directly.
So I having this mechanism where
they would pay the gross
receipts tax restaurant to keep
it that was actually a short
term budget.
To them
so so if I'm understanding I was
a structured.
Without that mechanism I really
don't think it helps there are
the movies movie theaters but.
Chairman if it's all right all
of our reach out Representative
Mr Allen.
Yes Mr chair Representative
Harper that ten dollar ticket
includes the tax that's how all
of our pricing includes the tax
like what you're saying so we
don't we don't put the tax on
top of the ten dollar ticket
it's ten dollars if that's what
the prices because each beach
places it's communities got
different pricing concessions
are different pricing we we
leave those those dollar amounts
of these numbers are staff don't
have to worry about pennies
dimes and nickels so are all
based on quarters but the taxes
included in all of our pricing
so we okay so we're collecting
that and while while we're
having this if I could take just
a moment because I because I
know where I know where you're
going with this because you and
I have spoken in the past about
these kind of deals and and
we're trying to get rid of the
tax and and and chairman my ****
in the last committee that we
put through and.
You know and and I have kind of
a different view because I
understand how the the growth
the G. R. T. is put there's a
state portion there's a County
portion there's a municipality
portion.
And Representative my **** he
brought up about cutting out
those communities in those
counties and I for one.
I'm the one who lives in those
places.
And I don't want to do about my
communities where I live.
And we're we're talking about
you know ideas of something to
do the states the one the
clothes.
The state is called Sliq and the
municipalities I know that the
community that I'm in in the
representatives in the city
council members that I've met
there you know they're
devastated that were closed and
you know as a past maybe there's
a way to just eliminate the
state's portion of the G. R. T..
And you know so I'm just kind of
throwing that out there because
you know we need all the help we
can get but I'm different than
the Senate marks in the re goals
and even Brian from Kansas
wanted to death thank you Brian
but I live in these communities
and I want our communities to to
be able to.
Survive and grow and and pay
their bills so you know there's
there's an option that I'm
putting out there that I get to
my people but they're going to
be kind of shocked at this one
right now to so.
The you know
something I think is an option
designed I know where you're
trying to go with the tax code
and and I do that I fully agree
with where you're trying to go
with it these are extenuating
circumstances and and hello any
help we can get what we need it
we need to be okay or we need
it's it's a whole completely
different deal right now.
Thank you yeah sure so
chairman the Representative Dow
it Mr thank you for that
clarification I'm not at all
common that in here in a second
but
is it just your Allen won this
year's are you all.
of our Seedrs basically include
the G. R. T. in the ticket
price.
I don't know for sure I mean
that's a question for John and
and arts and Brian but I know
that's what we've done for a
hundred and.
Almost a hundred ten years so.
Yes according according to our
team Representative Harper we do
it is an inclusive price and
that is something that we were
met you know at the at the
appropriate time.
Okay so so Chairman
representative Mr John thank you
for that so so then you would
essentially benefit from this
the same way that the
restaurants would benefit that
you charge ten dollars for a
ticket
whether there's your tier not so
you would see that that that
okay so that that makes more
sense to me because I was
discretion had second walking
how does this even help you
So so going to the the other car
about the tax code.
I appreciate that you're aware
of you know what we're really
trying to broaden the base and
more that the right
and and when we do things like
this that narrow it goes
contrary.
and also we we try to adopt I
believe we actually have adopted
the streamlined sales tax rules
And and those
make it clear that we don't want
to split our base rate to not to
the state portion and only to
the local portion I think we've
only done that a couple times we
really try to avoid doing that
because it just makes it more
cost.
Yeah.
No so so that's what I'd like to
maybe suggest
because I mean we we have a lot
of the state level to help
businesses.
restaurants with this you're
T. thing we've hundreds of
millions of dollars at the state
level.
I will say though that when you
do the massport about five
percent of New Mexico small
businesses are actually getting
this help.
just because there's not enough
money to spread out amongst the
hundred sixty thousand small
businesses that we have state
so
I know that doesn't make you
feel any better but I'm just
trying to put things in context
number two numbers.
But what happens thinking here
because what we do on this
committee every single bill that
comes before this committee that
has a fiscal impact.
We temporarily table.
And then we get together as a
committee and we decide
based off of how much capacity
we have in the budget what what
what bills we we think merit
leading out of the committee.
And and we've already had that
exercise this this year this
session sadly Europe a little
late to the party and I don't
know if you would have made that
that cut there are several bills
that did not.
but I'm I'm just putting on my
thinking cap you're trying to
try to give us a solution.
And
I just laid out here I don't
know if it'll work but we do
have
roughly a hundred million
dollars New Mexico Film tax
rebate
program in the state.
And and I don't know if there be
a way to amend that program.
for one or two years to have
some benefit also to the movie
theaters of New Mexico.
and that way we're not
you know touching the tax code
we're not having to get you know
provide capacity you know for
for a tax break but we're just
able to tap into existing film
tax rebate program.
there may be some creative way.
You know working with us.
I believe it's that.
The.
The economic development
folks that really work that
program.
so talk with John Clark.
I think would be a great idea
because we just we don't have
the capacity to get this this
out today.
and but I I realize the need to
try to think creatively of
something we can do now but we
also think of things we can do
during the interim.
So.
Any any thoughts on that.
Mr chairman and Representative
Harper I think it's a good idea
twenty.
Ten real challenge is but we
still have forty eight
legislative days so I do
believe.
Possible and that the the
capacity of this committee to
come up with a solution.
Would be felt very optimistic I
know at some point in the film
tax credit there was there was
an attempt to put in a portion
have you going to.
Local.
I think it was like trades.
So so when when when they
receive the tax credit and how
to direct a certain percentage I
don't know if his past the
address a certain percentage
into local capacity building of
New Mexico filmmakers and so I
mean it is kind of a it would be
a cool County the people who
were actually getting a tax
credit to create these films may
be left without very many
screens to show the bills so I I
like the idea I don't I'm not
taxes not my jam and this is not
my committee so it would
definitely take the thinking cap
that this committee but we.
There are very few industries
that we have completely left
behind and this is one of them
so just the fact that you're
giving this as much time as you
are knowing this committee's
feelings on G. R. T..
To keep the conversation going
this is very important if
they're standing in the session
I think we have to do it I'm
folks like Alan Peters do not
operate outside the state they
don't have other states but you
know other Revenue coming into
us the third dramatic losses in
New Mexico for Alan Peters the
only reason they are still
surviving is because they were
about to open up a recreation
like a multi plex and an
entertainment center and they
have one through that seedings
took years to acquire so we've
got to do something I think it's
this is no.
Yes Representative Dow
So yes I I guess I would
recommend
I know Representative Maestas is
work a lot on the phone tax
credit you can reach out to him
but but I think this might be a
maybe even a better mechanism
because instead of waiting for
you know all counties to turn
green and and for them to vote
and get gross receipts tax if we
could somehow.
Have some distribution to every
cedar in New Mexico
I might even work out better
so what you have proposed here
so.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative part I think
you're right and I don't have
any of the rest of the
committee.
The genetic bill but I don't
believe it is in the intent of
this legislative body to forget
or omit one of the hardest hit
industry in the state.
Right
right.
Those are all my questions thank
you Chairman representative.
Thank you Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Representative down
well listen I'm for Farmington
the late the elevators or or
just a landmark in our community
I received a wonderful letter
from
from Russell on on the protocol
of opening up or theaters
nationwide and unfortunately
you know New Mexico is an out
liar and and you know we're
we're still shut down it's just
it's just not fair it's just
it's just.
L. make theaters is is close to
my house all of twentieth street
it is a beautiful state of the
art theater they have a some
retail spaces there land it kind
of a very popular restaurant is
an add to it while your anchor
stores a Blue Moon diner.
And the second is to be done I I
know there's some tweaks to this
but of all the industry out
there the movie theater said the
band the most negatively impact
it is just not right I'm a we
love going to movies one of the
big screen we love the expensive
a concession stand items you
know we we would like to
get some popcorn and and and all
that good stuff
and we need to do something.
I don't know of any industry
this band this hard hit a
hundred percent shut down for a
year I mean our surrounding
states are partially opened they
use the excellent protocol that
the movie theater industry has
put forth is is safe practices
you know Ag I command the
industry for doing that but what
is New Mexico such a you know
stuck on an island here so.
I don't know if we you know I
understand that the capacity
issue
But for if we if we could use
some.
Squeeze out some dollars at over
budget we we certainly need to
consider that members of the
committee
It just says I love this
industry we've got to
you know we got to help maybe
it's it's this is totally out of
control
the state is decided to shut
them down right or wrong and the
let's do something important so
thank you and I appreciate all
the testimony and thank you Mr
chairman for letting them use
speaker please I know we've
we've got a timeline and all
that and I really appreciate it
Representative.
Chairman Ferdinand they need to
have they need to get this off
her chest and tell us the the
devastating impact of twelve
hundred employees have lost
their position.
think that stuff so anyway
appreciated the Representative
down into the thank you thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you for.
Meister Jed.
Mr chair and Committee and gas
thank you for the presentation
we I know I know every member of
this committee is very
sympathetic with your situation
and want to be a supportive a we
can.
And I just want to point out a
couple of programs that
legislature asked just this year
and that just the session of the
governor signed one is a
recovery loan program that very
very favorable terms and very
very low interest and the other
is a grant program that would
allow you to use those grant
monies or rent and mortgage
payments and I know a number of
you have pointed to those issues
as things that you need
assistance with so I this
legislature this session and
frankly in the previous special
sessions have worked very hard
to provide assistance and I
believe just based on what you
the information you provided in
this hearing Mr chair at I you
many of you may be eligible for
these programs and I'd encourage
you to look very carefully
particularly at the grants
program and thank you very much
I just wanted to point those
items out.
Thank you by chair us speaker
golf thank you chairman I I
would echo what Representative
Chandler said we.
Have mobilized in a truly
unprecedented way beginning with
the June session last year and
the November special session
last year and with house bill
Levin.
And with Senate bills one two
and three to try and address a
lot of the issues that we're
hearing come up today I am.
Very confident that house bill
eleven the grant program is
available to feeders.
The employment requirements are
very very very
Easy to comply with as long as
you have access to up to two
hundred thousand dollars I think
her location
in requests to help with
mortgage or rent payments and as
long as you're showing quarter
to quarter any increase in
employment that would be you
know one additional employee
you're able to go for the next
twenty five thousand dollar
payment and.
My expectation is that by the
time we're into April and may
then you're gonna start to see
the your is here is able to be
open and you know to bring one
employee on I as long as you're
able to do it for less than
twenty five thousand dollars a
quarter you're able you're gonna
be net positive for each.
Location you know we also had
PPP I don't know are you really
need that but I'm.
Yeah I agree with Representative
Chandler Mr chairman you know we
want to be helpful you know
there is zero desire to have
not been helpful to feeders I
I'm just.
I am almost speechless that the
first time we're hearing about
this is today.
You know I mean we're.
All right why was this you know
what I I just don't understand
why.
This year these issues with the
theaters were coming up during
any of the extensive debates we
had a house bill Levin Mr
Chairman representative Dow like
why are we why is this coming up
at the eleventh hour you know I
mean after the eleventh hour you
know we their tax bills have
already gone out you know we
follow the process capacity has
been exhausted we have no more
room to do this.
Yeah it's the I don't know
twelfth legislative day whatever
number were on it.
You know to get this over to the
Senate threw Committee.
I need it is status so late in
the process Y. eight.
Mr chair sent out why did this
come up as a possible Amendment
house bill eleven you know why
why is no one raised this issue
before today.
You Mr chairman thank you Mr
speaker egolf you think this
would be an appropriate option
for need to answer eight I that
is quickly as I could with just
brought to my attention.
Do know that that hundred
million dollar grant program
from last year around six
thousand businesses which was
about fifteen thousand dollars
and so that's about five percent
of small businesses across the
state and so it was I did not
realize how much of the dollars
were tied to the number of
employees and has been the
problem for years most states
have limited openings and other
states the reason other states
were able to benefit from PPP
but it's it's only helpful if
you can keep employees on so the
theaters in New Mexico are
unique among the states because
they were literally quotables
and so they did not qualify for
the PPP or even the SB.
And so why it was brought to me
at a late time I cannot tell you
but I you know obviously
district locally owned and
operated one screen theaters and
so it was it is late to the game
that could be allowed to be
willing to answer that.
Well Mr Chairman representative
at a I I also you don't have
locally on one St Peter's in
Santa Fe I have locally on small
theaters here in town.
I'm.
I.
yeah I see headlines in your
times the Wall Street journal
that AMC theatres is pleased you
know they're they're biting
package that's going to become
law later today in the house if
there is you know money in there
for two years is that I mean Mr
Chairman representative out it's
now pass the Senate in in
Washington is there a is there
not anything in in this two
trillion dollars that could be
of benefit to New Mexico
theaters.
Mr Chairman representative I
would have to defer to one of my
experiences.
Mr chair of the speaker it off
there there is a program in
there
we don't know what the details
of it are but we have heard
through our industry that there
is going to be some help yes
okay well that's good and I.
I Mr Allen yes chairman John I
I've never been to an alligator
but at you know we that doesn't
mean that I don't appreciate
and.
Yeah and and I'm not grateful
for all the work you do it have
dedication The New Mexicans
employed over the years and I.
yeah I wish that there had been
some differences in the public
health orders that would have
allowed you to open up I am
cautiously optimistic you know
New Mexico is the fastest
vaccinating state in the country
and that's going to do nothing
but help us get to reopening
quickly we're twenty five
percent of the state's
population is had at least one
dose where it fits almost sixty
percent state is fully
vaccinated we're doing it faster
than any other state in the
country
we're going to fifty thousand
vaccines administered per day
hopefully by sometime in the
next two weeks.
Yeah that would be these
counties moving.
In the right direction.
So I I hope we can get there
and.
Yeah I don't think we're gonna
be able to do this this press
receipts tax slides down I we
can do it but I be my comments
are yeah I did I just regret
that it's coming up.
With yeah basically nine days
left in the session.
so.
Yeah.
Please you know follow the our
the advice of vice chair
Chandler you see if there's
something house bill Levin that
could be helpful to you
And that you know if if if
there's anything that my office
can do to get you the
information to make applications
process easier and happy.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
speaker I really truly
appreciate the kind of this
committee and I do apologize for
the weight you know the building
such a like number and like to
the game and you know that
particular part of it was just.
Peter is coming in saying we
still think you know we're not
going to be able to participate
so I'm glad there's several.
The company this committee would
be committing to helping them
with it if there's not a
priority directly dollars
appears there will be more
demand than and you know I think
we've brought the attention with
elevated now and I appreciate
your offer to help.
Thank you Representative Dow I
don't see any other hands up
thank you chairman.
I'm sorry your mask say
something in response to
Representative in regards
comments regarding the federal
assistance if you can make it
quickly that would be great
thank you I will absolutely so
yes the the federal government
has come up with a particular
program the shattered venues
grant program which would
essentially help a lot of live
in use some movie theaters and
museums etcetera it is very much
geared toward smaller businesses
so not necessarily larger chains
or medium size change that may
have some other restrictions due
to time and employees or number
states that you operate and
whether or not you're part of a
publicly traded company it said
so we applaud the effort to help
the industry but that would
probably only help maybe up to
forty five percent or so of the
movie theaters out there I can
say this you know from a regal
standpoint and for many other
theaters we have exhausted every
effort we have gone through
taking on additional debt loans
at cetera we've tried to apply
for every program that were
allowed to many times there are
restrictions to that whether
it's you know particularly grant
programs in New Mexico or other
states so any consideration that
this committee could do whether
it's for this particular bill
that's up or if there are other
alternatives you know we we for
some other suggestions you know
tossed around about the the film
credit cetera we're we're open
to not to listen we feel that
we've exhausted almost every
every Avenue we're really
looking toward you for some help
I know it's late we have been
struggling with this for for a
long time and really going
through all the motions to make
this happen and we're very happy
that Representative dal decided
to help us and bring this for
two years and we ask you for you
to truly consider this for help
us discover an alternative that
will provide us that much needed
help to reopen and get people
back to work thank you.
Thank you reserve now thanks for
bringing the bill Ford you know
I have to agree with with both
Representative Harper and
receive egolf
on on the points that both made
I do think that having this at
the Levin tower is is very
difficult
and it really forces an issue
that I think all of us on this
committee want to figure out a
way to support and help
but there's also a very
practical reality.
With regard to.
to help tax policies is done
and you know I I think over the
last few years we've certainly
been a lot more
not only pragmatic but also a
lot more without equal into how
these things happen
and I could see how once upon a
time something like this you
know my just get out and we
might just make it happen
because
you know it's an industry that
maybe some of those really love
and appreciate or because maybe
we have one of these local
theaters in our backyard in our
neighborhood or or whatnot and
and we want to you know we want
to help.
But you know that's that's just
not the way I think
we we should be provided I
think.
I think some pretty extensive
lessons have been learned from
past practices that we don't
want to repeat so I think the
lateness of this certainly is a
problem.
Up I did do some homework though
after the previous committee
after commerce.
when we heard this bill
and
I know for a fact that the New
Mexico small business recovery
loan program if your local
theater you don't have any Chloe
requirement if your own local if
you're owned by an out of state
company then you do have to have
employees on payroll but that
program for those of you that
are locally owned that program
is there for you end this
session we actually updated the
program to make it.
More responsive to your needs
the way the program had been
instituted back in November
during the special session
turned out that it was pretty
difficult to actually
Qualify.
And so the sponsors of the bill
on the house side of St Matthews
and Representative kind of that
in the sense that I think really
put their thinking caps on and
figured out along with the NMFA
away to make sure that the
program is actually useful to
businesses like yours so you
should be able to qualify for
that and I know it's a loan but
it is a very very low interest
loans the only reason it's not a
grant is because of this anti
donation clause that hopefully
one day will modernize our
constitution and and sort of
take that to the curb.
But it is a very very low
interest loans
In terms of the industry itself
you know I think.
I think you're industry like so
many others has been deeply
deeply impacted but I want to be
clear you're not impacted
because eight governor chose a
particular public health pass.
I'll tell you right now and I'll
say this every single day in my
life I'm glad this governor to
the path that she took because
people like my parents who are
essential workers are safe.
Because people like my kids club
underlying health conditions are
safe.
And you know I really I really
dislike when these conversations
turned into well the governor
shut it down like for a reason
people are dying.
People are literally dying out
there.
and I've said this before I've
got plenty of disagreements with
the governor.
But that's a place where she
really got it right and I know
that in unintended consequence
of those orders is the impact on
an industry like yours in
industry where you have a
hundred people sitting inches
from each other in an enclosed
room I mean that's the point
right and yet here we have a
virus that is airborne and that
could spread like wildfire.
So let's let's be clear it's not
a governor that impose this on
you it is a global pandemic that
quite frankly if we want to look
for guilty parties we had a
terrible federal response for
ten months.
For ten months there is Lee but
we'll.
And we saw the devastation of
that cost I don't care what the
political affiliation here is
the fact of the matter is the
federal government was asleep at
the wheel.
The guy in the White House was
asleep at the wheel the guy in
the White House got is vaccine.
Before he left the White House.
They left us all to our own
devices so.
I want to find a way to support
this industry I was very clear
in the previous committee how
much your industry means to me
on a personal level.
Movie outings or what we do in
this family.
And we go to a real twenty four
we go to sentry fourteen.
Flakes because weeks you can
have a beer and pizza
and hopefully with Rizzo messes
house bill two to five and yes
two fifty five in a land this is
two fifty five all the movie
theaters we now hopefully offer
some beer that would be
fantastic.
But this late in the game to
lead a gross receipts tax
deduction now I think it I think
it would be
it would be legislative
malpractice my opinion
having said all that
We do have.
Ten days left in the session.
you know I would I'm gonna keep
working to figure out as bills
go through the Senate
how we can.
Maybe incorporate something to
help support your industry
understanding that we've already
passed for five recovery bills
that are designed to help the
most impacted businesses in New
Mexico including yours
and if it's not the loan program
if it's not the the the the
grant program to through HB
Levin let's figure out some way
to support your industry because
you're industry means a lot to a
lot of people myself included I
just think that this has been
You know
just.
It's malpractice to bring this
in so late because we want to
help.
But our hands are tied by this
process so thank you for your
time thank you for for doing the
work that you do I appreciate
you sharing your stories and and
rest assured that we're going to
keep working over the next ten
days to figure out a path for
for for you all if at all
possible so with that what is
will the committee.
Mr chairman the table gently.
And supported late of this
industry.
Okay there's a tabling motion
Representative Romero
we don't need a second for that
keep please call the roll hi
Elaine.
Representative contest.
Speaker box just.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative Maestas yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Stansbury yes and
I'd like to briefly explain my
doctor.
Representative Strickler.
Representative Montoya.
Representative is a no.
Is there yes.
Chairman Martinez.
Yes.
In the affirmative to make it.
Table one of tended to
Representative Dow house with
three fifty has been tabled
recess has agreed to explain
about.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
wanted to explain that I did
vote in favor of cabling this
motion as a procedural matter
because the tax package has
already left the house and there
isn't room in the budget
currently but I wanted to say to
folks who came and testified
today that my heart truly goes
out to you I know that
especially small theaters in our
borough communities are like the
backbone of of like family life
and our communities and so I
support you and if there are
other things that we can do to
help support our theaters and
our small businesses certainly
you know we we support you so
that's it thanks.
Thank you very next we're gonna
do House Bill to ninety six.
and that is the result capital
outlay re authorization bill we
do have a substitute that was
put on Citrix yesterday
this is all procedural the the
substitute is after Council
Service does our work in
compiles a list of projects so
you all should have it
madam vice chair of we're gonna
have you take the.
Right.
So weird to zoom into this.
I'm happy to take care of this
bill are you going to present Mr
chair.
Are you want me to.
I'm going to present okay very.
Right looking for my expert
witness the results and he's
already and I think.
And madam chair what number
against.
Get.
To
at them if we could just the
chairman to repeat the number
I'm sorry I don't have the
agenda so to ninety six.
Ninety six and madam chair I
move the committee substitute
for discussion.
Very good thank you.
All right.
members good morning again a
house with two ninety six is our
annual re authorization bill the
the bill re authorizes capital
projects that have been
authorized to previous years
from different funds.
Some of these projects range
from changing in administering
agency or perhaps the original
purpose of the project has
changed or perhaps or extending
a reversion date or expanding
the original projects purpose
I want to be clear the bill does
not require additional capacity
this is all within the capacity
those allocated previously and
these are non recurring expenses
to either the general fund
severance tax bonds or other
state funds and I've got Mister
Steve you'll send from the
legislative finance committee
here to answer any technical
questions that the body may have
with that madam chair we stand
for questions.
It is there.
Mr chair do we need to do any
public comment on this bill I
think probably is there any
public comment you can try.
Anyone interested
let's see no no hands raise so
Mr Representative Harper.
Thank you muted Representative
there we go thank you madam
chair
I like to a.
Move a do not pass on house bill
two ninety six and to pass on
house tax revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill to
ninety six.
Your second.
The
second the motion.
We have a motion to
Of do pass in a second.
Any comments of apparently no
comments from Representative
Harper.
Speaker egolf.
Thank you madam chair at like to
go through the bill can we go to
we start page two one one.
Just getting.
Well in this age to learn one.
Is there anything you wish to
add on this Mr speaker.
I was just teasing the chairman
a little bit madam chair.
All right.
I think the speaker has a bill
in this committee on Friday so
Yes you have to yeah I know I I
I have on its for a table motion
though you Mr chair.
I believe of Representative.
Mr speaker are you act have any
other comments you wish to share
insights.
Currently not.
We see when when this comes up
for but on the floor the state
enters into next week.
A representative lance this.
Thank you madam Representative
Martinez present your your work
on this it's a huge fantastic
bill.
to improve our communities
quality of life but and more
importantly to spur economic
growth with with key investment
investment in infrastructure but
anyway I'm looking at the
statutory construction just kind
of curious so every single
expenditure Madam chair
representative much this is is a
section is a section in the
bill.
and and I noticed there's up to
eighty one sections is the
Senate then put on more sections
to the numbers changes kind of
refresh our memory procedurally
how the bill becomes law yes
Mister chair resigned last as
this bill shouldn't change that
this the the the the process
that they go through to draft
this is is collaborative through
the two chambers if there is any
change of something is notice
that perhaps was left out I
would imagine that they you know
obviously they have the Braga to
amend it at which point we would
you know I agree or disagree
with the amendment of the
district probably stay the way
it is.
At this time of no amendments
Madam chair representative thank
you.
Any other panelists questions
eight let's see.
I see no further debate on this
Alain would you call the roll
please.
Representative covenant.
Speaker you got yes.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Stansbury.
Yes.
Representative Strickler.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Vice chair Chandler.
Yes.
Chairman Martinez yes.
In the affirmative Serna
negative.
Levin and affirmative zero in
the negative the.
Just this committee.
Thank you madam chair and before
before we leave this this bill I
just I want to I don't know if
Mister Olson wants to see a few
words but he is a.
He he is the the the next
iteration of is in the key hole
the up and coming
expert on all things capital
from LFC Mr cereals and simply
say just a few words I don't
think you've met the committee
yet formally Stevie thank you
Representative Martinez there's
no replacing when the key hello
I I just have big shoes to
walk in or or try to walk in but
she's she's been a kind mentor
and very generous in her wisdom
and experience and so we're
we're doing our best at the LFC
and I'm very grateful to have
you and and her helping us along
the way and hopefully we'll have
a capital bill shortly for this
committee and maybe some more
questions when that comes up.
Great thank you we'll we'll look
forward to that is rules and
thank you for being with us
today.
madam chair I'll take holding
back the gavel very good gavel
in.
To Senate bill one thirty one
madam pro tempore Stewart we see
here.
We see you're head shot now we
see you live good morning
Senator Stewart please proceed
with your bill.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
and members of the committee
before you I have Senate bill
one thirty one this is a bill
from the public school capital
outlay oversight task force
affectionately known as purpose
good us.
Representative Andress from
Meryl be the chair of that I
think this coming here Senator
souls is been the chair the last
several years so Senate bill one
thirty one next to technical
amendments to our capital
improvements act affectionately
known as Senate bill nine don't
know why we can't get away from
that that that's what we call it
it's formal title is capital
improvements act it's
announcement of our public
school facility funding
suspected seventy five it allows
school districts to impose a
levy up to two mills for six
years for public school
construction renovation grounds
improvements maintenance
activity vehicles computer
software and hardware
educational technology in
infrastructure we have a state
match for that
for districts that don't raise
much current language says that
the calculation should be based
on an average of prior year
total program units on second
third reporting dates but that's
not how we do it we use the
prior year final program units
so this corrects the statute to
line up with how we determine
these units and that change was
made of by now superintendent
Dennis Ross when he was a
representative that we all
supported it gives more
stability to the funding for US
Senate bill money to capital
improvements at.
So the second change is one that
we made last year of with
Representative chat feels bill
but then we had to repeal that
in the special session so this
insures that we don't use
discretionary program units in
this of funds.
You know we're the the capital
outlay Council PSSA
was all set up in response to
this any losses so the funding a
really needs to ensure that it's
equitable and that we have
funding to pay for the capital
outlay for our districts that
have very little ability to tax
themselves so we we've had an
expansion lately of these
discretionary program units and
it's increase the capital
improvements to act but it's a
problem for the equity in the
distribution of so and
Representative Chatfield bill we
eliminated those discretionary
program units and this bill does
the same so it does a reduce
that amount by by several
million dollars I want to remind
the committee that what we're
doing with
now probably house bill six
Representative Lundstrom to
impact aid bill is we are
doing our credit taking not just
with impact date with half mil
that alone is sending about
eighteen million dollars more
now into our districts and
forestry service and with the
impact aid credit removal many
of our districts are going to
have a lot of funds for capital
so this bill just insurers that
we don't use discretionary units
in the capital improvements
that.
And I will stand for questions
Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Stewart we'll
go to the audience is there
anyone in support of Senate bill
one thirty one in the audience.
We have a couple hands up we'll
go first to Joseph S. co battle
good morning Sir.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee and Madam pro
tem thank you so much for
bringing this bill forward
Albuquerque public schools stand
in full support and we
appreciate the legislation thank
you.
Thank you Sir and then looking
here we've got the one and the
only former state representative
Dennis Roch good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
thank you for the opportunity to
address the committee we're are
the superintendents association
I'm representing this morning is
pleased to stand in strong
support of Senate bill one
thirty one
this one taken together with the
the other legislation that the
senator mentioned is really
going to help to equalise
capital funding which is
precisely what the goal of our
funding formulas is to do and
and not just a funding formula
for operations but also for
capital to ensure that every
student in New Mexico is treated
equitably in their facilities as
well as in their school
operation funding so thank you
for the opportunity we look
forward to seeing this bill all
the way through to enactment.
Very good good to hear from you
Sir.
Anyone else in support of house
bill on the Senate bill one
thirty one.
Anyway in opposition.
Very well.
Speaker Egolf.
Mr chairman I move it to pass
and also Mr chairman I want to
make sure we check on
superintendent Rashi C. is is
this camera broken.
Is you know when average unity
C. is filing face this morning
and all we got was still
photographs so it was a little
disappointing I have to say but
I can still have you do the if
you pass.
All right thank you Mr speaker
and do passed motion we do have
more discussions all old hold on
to the motion for now
Representative Harper.
I thank you chairman and the
Senator it's great to see you
this morning you it it's it's
it's not a it's not a special
session and we'll see you in the
tax committee at least once
So chairman and senator I the
only question I have if you just
help me understand.
under current law.
If I may a capital outlay
allotments to Rio Rancho public
schools project.
That
funding.
Yes Representative far as your
member what learning just a few
years ago that funding.
Actually can be subtracted from
funds that they receive.
Is that correct.
So Mister chairman I am happy to
answer that that has nothing to
do with this bill I'm gonna
answer it anyway so
You know we have been working as
hard as we can for fifteen years
on equitable funding both of
operational and capital so when
we up put the public school
capital outlay process in place
of several years after that we
put in a provision that to use
your example if you contribute
to the Rio Rancho public schools
and then they come to the state
and help for with for help with
their capital projects that a
portion of what you again will
be deducted from what they can
get out of capital outlay so Rio
Rancho does not come very much
to the capital outlay council
because they're one of those
districts of whose voters can
and do vote for bond issues and
so they raise enough money so
they don't have to come but the.
All over the state there are
districts that when they come to
the public so capital outlay
council for help with the state
match on capital they will have
some of that of those funds did
that that I think it Albuquerque
public schools has about eight.
I don't want to say how much it
is but they've got million
dollar backlog that is not been
subtracted so I don't think
they're even coming to the
public school capital outlay
council because of that backlog.
I hope that answers your
question.
That that did thank you for for
a.
Yes most couple cobwebs offered
help in the remember that so.
And chairman and senator I think
you answered my second question
which was that
the structure of this current
bill does not change.
That particular
R. the.
King of capital.
For for the different school
districts.
You chairman and Representative
that's correct you know this
only looks at how we determined
that capital improvements accent
bill nine so it's just to
technical issues we passed them
both last year with
Representative chat feels bill
but sadly we at we have to pull
that back.
Thank you chairman Senator are
gracing you appreciate the
Representative I I Mr stories
about milk and cookies at that
time.
Thank you.
On that note let's go
Representative Maestas.
Thank you Mr man thank you
Senator Stewart about part time
just a couple because a quick
question up because I notice
you.
We have the definition section
of that of of the act trying to
pull it up right now.
So we correct the you know we
correct the language to make
this logic consisting with.
With what we do now and I'm
assuming what we do now is for
the best we also talk about
quote.
Excluding discretionary program
units.
And then on the bottom of page
three of.
Mister chairman Senator madam
pretend we we describe
discretionary program units.
That's a real with some really
cool stuff fine art education a
multi cultural educational
programs extended learning K.
five plus so Mister chairman
Senator Stewart madam pro tem is
that is that does that change
what we do now is that kind of
to incentivize that.
Those those programs or what's
the purpose of of putting that
definition and clarifying that.
The so Mister chairman
Representative Maestas.
I wish we were fully funding
fine arts we are not.
I wish we were fully funding
physical education we are not so
these are discretionary units
because not everybody gets fine
art not everybody gets of
physical education not everybody
does K. five plus and not
everybody does extended learning
so these are these are units
that are generated when
districts decide they'll try to
use those funds so the intention
for this because the capital
improvement tax Senate bill nine
money comes out of the public
school capital outlay fund
that's designed to address this
issue in the lawsuit so it's
important that we always keep
this equitable so by not
allowing discretionary units
everybody is getting funding for
everything that everybody gets
so you're you're SCG your you
know your your your normal a
program the programs that are
required to programs that
everyone does that's what this
needs to be based on and it's
been based on that for quite
awhile only recently have we
been throwing in these
discretionary units it this
sequel lice's it uses too much
of the funds and so this is to
ensure that what the units for
every one is what counts in the
capital improvements act
so I hope I answered that no
thank you Mr chairman thank you
center street number to know
that's great it's always good to
learn more about this and we
just have so many challenges
with the
One of my constituents lots to
say we spend more dollars per
student than other states
whatever it's because where the
most rural state in the country
the most rural state in the
country with numerous small
school small school districts so
to to utilize a you know every
dime to the best possible.
Way is is fantastic so I
appreciate you bringing this
forward and and and improving
the statute thank you Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you Representative we have
a due pass motion from speaker
Egolf is our second.
Second.
Seconded by Representative Lujan
sure thanks for bringing the
bill forward I'm like in every
state with everybody else's did
I'm finding out that's one of
the.
That's one of the dilemmas of
being a chair you don't get to
say thanks and to everybody says
their piece and then you just
kinda.
Flowed out there and either
repeat everything everybody else
center maybe offer some insight
that nobody else offered but in
this case I think everything is
being covered so good to see you
again in tax and I agree with
that Harper is out of session
until you show up to the tax
committee and these ones usually
on the last week or might just
who will tradition going I'm
Elaine please call the roll.
Representative.
This.
Just.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative Maestas yes.
Representative Montoya yes.
I'm sorry was that a yes.
Yes yes thank you.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Scott yes.
Representative Stansbury.
Yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
Vice chair Chandler yes.
Chairman Martinez.
Yes we have twelve in the
affirmative zero an indicator.
I think this is a first though
in tax for me.
Thank.
I usually got Representative
Harper saying now.
Not always but not always.
All right thank you so much
thank you for your work today
we've come a long Madam pretend
we've come a long way from the
days when you see a grilled and
I got doubled down on this
committee it's much better much
better today yes better today
chairman Harper we'll do that
gavel with an iron fist yeah I
was I was became on a few times
and that I can say it's much
more pleasant now and I jumped
ship so.
All right thank you all thanks
so much thank you members enjoy
the rest your morning we'll see
you on the floor today thank you
bye.
