Representative Strickler here.
Mr Chandler here.
Chairman Martinez and I am here
we have a quorum.
Thanks so much Elaine members
we're gonna start with how house
bill two eighty five that is our
capital outlay projects bill and
then we're gonna move on to
Senate bill one twenty one and
that'll be the end of our day as
I indicated Friday we're we're
at that point in time where we
might have to convene to to
tackle bills as they come to us
but you have my word I'll give
us as much heads up as possible
and all court Representative
Harper to get the word out to
everybody
Madam by your do you want to
take the the chair seat so that
I can present to eighty five and
I believe my experts it's
already in the wrong.
Okay
and so I think we could go ahead
and get started.
I'm happy to do it chair would
you you summarize the bills for
us please yes thank you madam
chairman and members of the
committee
house taxation and revenue
committee substitute for house
bill two eighty five with an
emergency clause is our capital
outlay bill we are
I a feels like last year again
we're seeing it sort of toward
the end there's been a lot of
moving parts in it should be
made a little bit worse quite
frankly by the pandemic
everybody having to zoom in and
out it's not as easy to pull
people into a room in the
capitol and.
and get things done so it's a
little bit delayed but here we
are The bill appropriates about
five hundred seventeen million
dollars for capital projects
from the following three funds
the vast majority comes from
severance tax bonds that's four
hundred and seventy seven
million dollars there's eighteen
point six million dollars from
the general fund and another
twenty two million dollars from
other state funds that that are
in this bill.
The way it's broken down the
bill appropriates of two hundred
fifteen point seven million
dollars for state owned and
operated facilities across the
state this includes state
agencies higher ed and special
schools and an additional thirty
million dollars for tribal
projects this is the big if if
you're familiar with the capital
outlay spreadsheets this is what
they call the statewide
framework this is a framework
that that DFA in the state
agencies negotiate with LFC over
the course of the summer and
into the fall and then this is a
framework that the LFC boats on
at the December meeting so those
will be on LFC have have already
seen
that statewide framework their
budget
The bill also authorizes two
hundred and seventy six million
dollars and this is the share
that the house Senate and
governors with three ways says
as you'll recall each house
member was able to allocate
roughly one point three million
dollars that's part of money
that he comes from
as you know those projects
address everything from local
and regional needs Roach water
systems health public safety
cultural facilities parks
community centers.
You know some of you probably
can pay for some school related
stuff as well of that fund.
in addition the the bill
authorizes the three year marks
that we have in statute and that
comes out to about fifty three
million dollars for water
projects provide twenty six
million dollars for the colonias
infrastructure fund and twenty
six million dollars for the
tribal infrastructure fund.
our bonding capacity this year
also includes supplemental
severance tax bonds totaling two
hundred and thirty two million
dollars for public school
construction.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
With that I'd like to introduce
my expert witness this Mr Stevie
also and with the LFC who is
responsible really along with
missing that you help in putting
this entire package together so
I'd like from to introduce
himself to the committee and and
say a few words.
Thank you Representative are
also.
I I apologize.
Thank you for welcoming
just Representative Martinez a
great job the only thing that I
would add on is that LFC staff
works very closely with the
department of finance and
administration capitol bureau as
well as the higher ed capital
staff throughout the year and we
spends we meet with the general
service department facilities
management division monthly and
so we're in close communication
with all of the agencies and the
bill is really a collaborative
effort of many different people
that work very hard and I just
get the support Representative
Martinez here at the end but a
big thank you to all those
people who have been integral in
this process.
Thank you Mr chair I see right
right Lopez do you see your hand
up did you want to add anything
researcher and director of
manager the adults have the two
oh two number of two eighty
five.
There are a couple of.
Press pass it around and I
believe you have a black bill on
your table.
Our house bill two eighty five
that is to be substituted.
Great okay sure I'm sure the
chair will be happy to
supplement the information yes
yes thank you thank you right
that that is correct so this is
a subject to bill and let me let
me get that so that you all can
have the tool the tool to number
although it's it's like a seven
oh seven number now is it.
Yes Representative Maestas I
think was the one who told us
the whole story of the tool to
number and.
pretty fascinating give me a
second will pull that up.
If I can find it to you.
It should be in your Citrix yes
ma'am.
So I have it up let me see if I
see the number the number ice me
see.
Is it three one four two.
One that's the PDF number looks
like.
Madam chair it is two two zero
six seven three point one okay.
So it's two two zero six seven
three point one.
Correct.
Will move this up for discussion
chairman.
Madam chair.
We have a song I'm a move on the
sub for discussion.
I think we just had some
presentation on it.
There anything I think we just
had a discussion madam chair I
agree we let me just see if
there are any participants who
wish to comment.
Anyone in opposition to this
bill please raise your hand.
Anyone in favor of this bill
please raise your hands.
No surprise there are not a lot
of discussion to questions from
the many.
I don't see any hands if I'm
missing somebody please let me
know.
Okay.
Any additional information
chairman.
you all have the bill and you
all should have the charts so
you know I think I ate and I
work really closely with council
service from the last few days
to make sure that you know all
the projects were were the way
they're supposed to be so I
didn't see any any issues at all
but you'll have the charts there
and I think I think we're at the
we're good to go very frankly
so.
yeah I mean if you guys want to
if you guys want to take a
moment and and review those
charts that's fine
you know we we've got a little
bit of time this morning so
we're not in a rush.
I just noticed some
Representative Harper raised his
actual physical hand you want to
add anything Representative.
No no madam chair I I just I'm
happy to make a motion when
you're ready.
I think we're ready all right
although the do not pass on
house bill two eighty five and I
do pass on house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
house bill two eight.
Okay so we have a do not pass on
health bill two eighty five in a
do pass on house taxation and
revenue substitute two eighty
five do we have a second.
All
right.
Was that.
Okay great okay my apologies
thank.
The motion was made by
Representative Harper it was
seconded by Representative
Cadena.
Okay any further discussion.
Alain would you call the roll.
Representative.
Yeah not impact.
Speaker eager.
Representative Parker.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Yes.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Scott yes.
Representative Stansbury yes.
Representative Strickler.
Yes.
Sh.
Speaker you got.
Meister chamber.
Yes.
Chairman Martinez.
Yes.
Well in the affirmative zero in
the nation.
Well in the affirmative it's a
do pass.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members and thank you Mr
Olson appreciate your support
and help about this process.
All right members thank you for
that let's go to Senate bill one
twenty one and I believe we have
Senator.
Once this so he's already in
here hi Senator how are you good
morning.
Good morning to you do you have
a an expert or experts with you
that we need to let in.
Mr chairman though yes I believe
well we have all capital.
Mike Santa.
And I think yes to other persons
so.
All of George Dodge and this is
costs.
Very well we'll we'll let the
man I I I can't make any
promises about George Dodge I
don't know in that and then also
the lady may be to it okay.
He's going to make us gonna make
you seeing it being better what.
All right Senate bill one twenty
one taken away Senator body on
site it's thank you Mr chairman
and good morning to everyone on
Senate bill one twenty one this
would amend the law bonds
statutes to allow New Mexico D.
O. T. to issue the remaining in
the authorized amount of two
hundred and thirty four point
six million in bonding authority
the proceeds of the bonds.
Will fund projects authorized on
in the twenty nineteen regular
session and the additional
projects of the New Mexico DOT
has developed and include so
state transportation improvement
program from the state of the
New Mexico DOT has sufficient
projects developed and ready to
move to construction yes there
is funding available all Mr
chairman of numbers so that's
what it does it just brings out
forty we had approved seventy
five million in the special
session so it would be L. the
remaining part you know with the
seventy five million those
approve that but with this I
will be able to.
Happen the.
cabinet Santa.
Thank you senator.
Secretary subdivided good
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for having me today in your
committee and I'll just follow
up with a few comments first of
all we did send last night a
couple slides showing our debt
current debt service into
hopefully you receive that if
you did and I would be happy to
pull that up at any time if I'm
allowed to share my screen you
you want to go over that it be
happy to do that
you Mr send all that would be
very helpful if you send them
last night up there probably on
Citrix and it's probably better
if you can share your screen
let's see if but if the name
give you permission to do that
that we okay you can just share.
Not yet it says host disabled
participants screen sharing
more get it right now just give
me one moment yeah no problem
thank you thank you.
In the meantime we'll say good
morning to George Dodge good
morning George.
Good morning Mr chairman a good
to see you get a good morning to
all all my former colleagues.
Yeah it's nice to see you nice
to see a lot I like that going
to look good.
Thank you Mr chairman is getting
a little again a little gray but
that's okay we're good.
Good deal we miss you up here my
friend I miss it too I miss it
too but in a good place thank
you Sir.
It looks like you're having fun
though that's absolutely having
a blast.
Are you able to see my screen up
yes Sir okay so Mister chairman
members of the committee what
we're trying to do is in the
special session we were allowed
to bond the seventy five million
those projects there have
already been identified a couple
years ago and house bill two
there is an additional about a
hundred and fifty nine million
left in grip that we'd like to
to have permission to bond the
reason is is we think it's a
good idea to do this all explain
the debt service now but when we
refinance some bonds a few
months ago we were able to save
the department about seven point
seven million dollars we're able
to get a point six percent
interest rate interest rates are
still really low we think that
by doing this now will be able
to get somewhere around the one
point two one point five percent
interest rate to get this
through these next four years
and I'll tell you explain to you
why these next four four years
of so important so on this chart
Mr chairman members of the
committee you can see in this
gray area here that says S. R.
F. that's our state road fund
we've this is our debt service
going through twenty thirty the
department is pretty much at it
that in twenty thirty this grey
box here that says state road
fund that's the real runner
payments that we still low
twenty seven million this year
and then evening out to about
forty million going all the way
to twenty thirty our federal
debt that we use is the FHWA
Federal Highway hundred eighty
million and then it drops off in
twenty twenty A. our last
payment being sixty five million
we'll just go to this total here
of what our debt payment is so
when you add those up in FY
twenty one we're going to pay
about a hundred and fifty two
million dollars of debt that
goes up all the way to a hundred
eighty two million in FY twenty
for an increase of about thirty
million and so we're gonna be
probably taking this away from
the construction program to be
a.
Will to pay this then we have a
good reprieve in a a good thing
happening in twenty twenty five
where we really at that point of
paid most of our debt off and
and you see that debt payments
lower so we're gonna have to go
out to do the seventy five
million dollars worth of bonding
anyway as you can see what we're
gonna do is front load the
payments.
Or the the the frontal part will
be just interest so about three
million dollars in interest and
then we back low the payments in
principle and that that gets
better for us we're not
extending debt past twenty
thirty I don't want to do thirty
year bonds that we've done in
the past all of these will still
be in line with when we're out
of debt pretty much in twenty
thirty if we were to bomb the
full two hundred and thirty four
million dollars we would do the
same thing I'm just interest the
first few years this will put
about three hundred million
dollars worth of projects into
place over the next three or
four years and then we make up
the majority of payments on the
back in those last three years
when we're our payments are
really really low for twenty
eight twenty nine and thirty so
when you look at this all
together this bottom right
corner we'd be paying back about
three hundred and twenty million
dollars we're we're guessing
we're gonna get about three
hundred million dollars worth of
proceeds with our low interest
rates in so it's really twenty
million dollars over ten years
when you look at inflation and
all of the the rising costs that
we think might happen over the
next ten years we think actually
were in the we're gonna be in
the positive with with the
amount of projects we're going
to be able to get out so the
last slides also Mr chairman is
just the yellow is our current
debt payment as you can see it
goes up these next four years of
dramatic drop and it goes up and
down a little bit in ending in
twenty thirty or able to do with
this two hundred thirty four
million if able to on that is it
will still go up but not as much
would be able to afford that we
still have that big drop in
twenty twenty five and then we
have more stable payments all
the way up until twenty thirty
to help us plan a lot better for
these next ten years so with
that Mr chairman I'd be happy to
answer any questions
with me today we have George
dodges you know and Tammy Haas
who's our director for bonding
and capital projects and she's
really the X..
For them all the technical stuff
and I'll be happy to also answer
any questions you may have in
general so thank you for your
time and when we stand for
questions thank you Secretary
miss Haas good morning welcome
do you want to add anything.
I'm good at this time.
All right in the Mr Dodge
anything else we.
No Sir I think of the
secretaries something.
Of very very well.
Okay thank you very much let's
go to the audience
see if we have any public
comment.
In support or against.
We've got one hand up.
Good morning Mr Martinez go
ahead.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name's on
air Martinez I'm speaking on
behalf of the MS of the soul
Development group the message
also development group is that a
project going on south of the
airport which they have Netflix
The New Mexico United States you
know going on and a whole bunch
of other really cool stuff we
support this legislation because
we believe will help accelerate
completion of of of really
critical piece of transportation
and highway infrastructure
throughout the state such as
message also so with that we we
support legislation thank you.
Thank you very much.
Anybody else in support or in
opposition.
Okay seeing none will go to
committee and first on the list
is representative Larry Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman.
This wall.
On one of these charts the the.
We've got about a billion
dollars of unfunded needs.
And we look forward.
For the next five years do you
have any projections as to what.
Those needs will be down the
road because
it looks like we're not spending
enough money to keep up.
Could could you address Sir.
Yes Mr chairman and
representative we we have about
close to three billion dollars
of unfunded needs we had
provided madam chair Lundstrom
the list of projects worth about
a billion dollars that some of
the money that's in capital
could be used for and those are
projects that we feel are
critical that we could move
forward in the next couple years
but our actual unmet need is
about three billion dollars I
would only expect that to grow
until we're able to at least
break even with the revenue and
the need that we have every year
and so it's three billion now
and I think that just keeps
getting bigger and bigger as
years go on less were able to
address the maintenance needs
and other things that could help
keep costs down.
Thank you for that Mr central Mr
chairman so what what is the the
here to hear deficit between
what we are putting a toward
roads in the state and what the
actual need is.
Mr Chairman representative I
think the calculation that we've
been using is about three
hundred million.
when we look at all of the
maintenance needs what I like to
compare our roads to our our
cars and when we buy a new car
and should last us quite a long
time as long as we change the
oil and rotate the tires and do
all of those maintenance things
that could last a hundred two
hundred thousand miles the roads
are the same way when we build a
new road if we do all the
maintenance or certain
treatments it needs every three
to five years that'll make the
road last longer we have not
been able to do a lot of those
treatments just because we don't
have the money and so what ends
up happening is the life of the
road is shorter is like if you
don't take care of your car it's
not just in to be much your life
your cars and be much shorter
and so Justin maintenance alone
about three hundred million
dollars short each year.
Mr chairman miss what's lot of
money.
Would you call of the crisis.
Mr Chairman representative up I
think I would I I mean we've
been very fortunate these last
two years and it looks like this
year will be the same where the
legislature and the governor
provided us if everything goes
as planned this year about a
hundred million dollars of
general fund to help make up
some of that deficit in so we've
been very fortunate but prior to
that I the last ten fifteen
years there hasn't been a lot of
extra money put towards that and
and we follow and really behind
this department in maintenance
and other things and try to keep
our roads ups are doing a lot of
catch up these last three years
we very much appreciated we
think we can take some some new
steps forward with this funding
bill but at some point there
needs to be a longer term
solution to try and get us at
least to break even and what we
need to make sure that our roads
are being maintained properly.
Thank you for that Mr central Mr
chairman I'll hold the opinion
that.
One of the primary functions of
state government is to.
Is to build and maintain an
adequate growth system and that
is economic development is
completely dependent.
On.
I'm good transportation system
so.
This is.
We need to take a hard look at
thank you Mr chairman miss
central.
Thank you Representative Scott
in the sixty excuse my kid he
was trying to get me to give you
more serial and I said I can't
we're about to give more money
to D. O. T. hold off.
Next on the list Representative
Harper.
Thank you chairman and the.
It's great to see a some of my
old friends faces here today
it's great to see you are.
Representative Dodge and Senator
Gonzales
missing some of the good old
days when we were together.
But I appreciate you being here
today and and secretary Santa
and and miss Haas thank you for
for being here as well.
So I I just have a couple
questions just to.
Make sure I understanding the
timeline and in the process here
So Mr chair and maybe Mr Santa
this seventy five million that
we're we're talking about if I
remember right.
Correct me if I'm wrong.
we had appropriated this general
fund money towards roads I think
was the twenty nineteen session.
And then during the special
session
When we were having some fiscal
constraints
We did a swap said we're not
going to take that certify that
a general fund we're gonna
bonded in my I remember that
correctly.
Mr Chairman representative that
is correct in the twenty
nineteen session will given two
hundred fifty million of general
fund during the special session
seventy five million of that was
taken back to help shore up the
finances but bonding authority
was provided for seventy five
million to make sure that those
projects were completed
that's not scheduled to happen
until July of twenty twenty two.
what this bill does is not only
at the additional money to get
us to the two thirty four but it
moves the bonding authority up
to July twenty twenty one to
take advantage of low interest
rates we've already seen them
start to creep up.
and so we wanted on sooner
rather than later to make sure
that we're still have those
lower interest rates as opposed
to who knows what they'll be
or a nine fifteen months from
now.
Chairman and the.
Senator Representative and and
yes Representative of all yeah I
think that's that's wise to.
We'll get bonding now
I think we all know that.
This is been a stork low
interest rates for a very long
time and and that we could see
rates going up sooner so I think
that's.
Good move I I spy up I support
that.
so we talk about the seventy
five million there's also.
I believe.
I think it was a hundred eleven
million that was mentioned that
was still outstanding debt from
the the the governor Richardson
infrastructure projects to grow
projects did did I hear that
correctly can you talk about
that.
Yes Mr Chairman representative
so we still have going back all
the way to the chat bonds we
still have.
These next four years we were
paying this year a hundred and
fifty two million dollars in
debt payment and that'll go up
to a hundred eighty three
million dollars or so in twenty
twenty four so we're still
paying quite a bit at that
office it's close to a billion
dollars in debt.
over the next ten years and so
we do get some reprieve in
twenty twenty five or we can
have a cliff were our debt
payments significantly go down
and that's when we would try and
finance these new bonds is when
we make up some of that
difference four years from now.
Chairman and secretary thank you
for that I.
Right I remember right the.
Those bonds that the grip
project bonds were were really
long term Lente like thirty
years or something and and
really not good not not
structured well.
chairman and secretary can you
talk about how those are
structured and how the bonding
that we're looking at now is
structured differently.
Mr Chairman representative they
were long bonds and if they're
twenty five or thirty year bonds
are not actually done till
twenty thirty.
these new bonds would be short
bonds we don't want to push our
data Albany more than past
twenty thirty so make sure that
we maintain that.
and then originally they were
structured with a huge cliff
payment coming up in twenty four
and twenty five those were
refinanced a couple years ago so
that means a more level payment
but that did increase the debt
because we had to refinance
those and so what we're looking
to do is get fixed rate bonds
you saw kind of the idea that
we're looking at more overall
debt payments would be
relatively the same over the
next eight to nine years and
certainly helps us with planning
I think we learned a lot from
the last time we bonded and so
we want to be smarter and then
like I said take take advantage
of those low interest rates but
that does that cliff was fixed
but it did it cost us some money
to be able to.
Chairman and and secretary I I
bring these things up because I
really want to commend you and
apartments
Senator and and.
Representative Dodge.
We're when you when you look at
this three hundred million
dollars we have and maintenance
I guess deferred maintenance and
how that weeds to our rose not
lasting as long you can look at
our debt service and say well
that that service would cover
that maintenance if we don't
have that debt service right
now.
And it seems like we are just.
Paying
you know.
No worries I'm a couple.
Governor's beyond when we
started this last that service
and.
we're still paying for for that
and that was just really not a
wise way to.
Structure.
Our our.
The financial.
You know obligation to the
department and and I appreciate
that the department's doing a
great job with my date they have
they have had a since you've
always been in the top five
apartments in the in the US when
it comes to best bang for the
block you guys really make that
that money
tobacco is far as I can I just
want to commend you for moving
forward.
you know looking at not
repeating those focusing.
Transgressions I guess all calm
of the past.
I'm.
I would really love us to be in
a position where like
the state of Utah or like no
only twenty percent of spare
transportation budget comes from
the fed's that they're able to
you know pay cash for most of
their projects and and and and
that we were not paying for road
two or three times over
as were you know refinancing
balloon payments
and and we'll make that money go
even that much further so.
Just wanted to say thank you and
that we're noticing.
You're doing seems the right way
here we appreciate it.
That any any thoughts for
turnover.
No okay.
Mr chairman thank you
Representative.
Thank you chairman.
Thank you Representative Harper
you left you left them
speechless.
Representative Strickler next.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you
Thirty percent of all
I know now's a good opportunity
a good opportunity to issue
bonds because interest rates are
so low and that that makes sense
you know is it would be nice if
we could pay cash for projects
but sometimes we we just have
to.
you know borrow money to get
these projects done.
And can you explain a little bit
about the federal dollars that
are coming in federal tax
dollars are coming in for
highways I I know the cares Act
to you know we're we're we're
getting a lot more funding that
we that we normally do can can
you share some of those numbers
whether so
cabinet secretary Santa.
Yes Mr chairman and resident
thank you
basically the the bill that was
signed just after Christmas
provided a direct payment to DOT
and it was about ninety one
point eight million million
dollars there was it was formula
bait couple of the some of that
money did go to some MPO so the
Albuquerque MPO at about eight
eight point four million in the
el Paso MPO that includes Dona
Ana County cut a few hundred
thousand left the department
with just over eighty million
we're still looking to see
exactly what that money can be
spent on but that money was
directed to us with no flow
through or or anything else and
so we're very grateful for that
digit the bill that just passed
now and signed it's not clear to
us and I I haven't seen anything
that gives a D. O. T. direct
money so of the few billion
dollars that are coming to New
Mexico I think that's.
There's some flexibility in that
how much of that will come to us
I don't know if any but there's
not anything that I'm aware of
that's directly on to the state
DOT's and so of all the federal
money that's come around for
roads it's just that eighty
million dollars that we received
there has been some other money
for transit and rail and those
type of things nothing directly
to us for rail that would help
us with our debt
but there was a lot of transit
money that came through but as
far as roads go it's just been
that eighty million dollars and
then we'll see as we start
breaking down this new
one point nine trillion dollar
bill have made any of that money
may come to us.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
cabinet secretary
up in the Farmington area
DOT completed I a wonderful
project between Farmington and
Bloomfield it's it mansa
superhighway it's six align with
the term line we have a lot of
industrial activity along that
corridor and we really
appreciate it you have to move a
lot of hillsides air in in power
poles to to make that happen it
was a not an easy expansion but
we we can say your good work up
in our country and
share with me in the committee
your efforts and Lee and Eddy
County that's the that's the the
hub of of a the only gas
industry in Southeast New Mexico
and I know and twenty nineteen
there were some special funding
down there.
For those make you know the four
line those projects two eighty
five I think from artesian to
the state line of Texas a was
part of that I think highway
eighty two
thanks of kind of slow down
because of the pandemic and and
the last year and the traffic I
think is meant is you know is it
is not as crazy as it was are
you guys making some progress
down there we would like for you
to give me give us an update.
Thank you Mr Representative yes
From house bill six in twenty
nineteen these last two years of
a specific money from the motor
vehicle excise tax directed
towards the southeast part of
the state which totaled about a
hundred million dollars of extra
money I want to call an extra
and we were in the process of
several projects the first one
is from from the Texas state
line to mile marker twenty two
which takes a closer Carlsbad
it's a hundred and fifty million
dollar projects it's upgrading
the road for a US two eighty
five in those twenty two miles
we've already construction is
already started its four phases
the first two phases are under
way with that project is fully
funded like I said I was a
hundred fifty million dollars
were working on the intersection
of two eighty five and New
Mexico thirty one is south of
Carlsbad that's one of the most
dangerous intersections in that
particular area in one of the
most needed of of of upgrades
that's about a thirteen million
dollar project that's already
under design and that'll be
happening relatively soon that's
fully funded and then we're
there's a bill out there Senate
bill thirty four center Kernan
bill to allow us to use a design
build process for the next
project which is the New Mexico
thirty one at eight miles the
connected to New Mexico one
twenty eight which is about a
hundred another hundred million
dollar project and that is fully
funded as well and so when we
talk to the folks down there in
the in Eddy county that's three
priorities for two eighty five
thirty one and one twenty eight
school next move to New Mexico
one twenty eight which connects
basically Carlsbad in jail in
Hobbs that's maybe another
couple hundred million dollars
we don't have funding for that
yet but some of this funding
money would likely be used we
have faced that out into four
five faces and so we're looking
at getting that done as soon as
we can so we.
We are investing a lot down
there we've also provided Eddy
County person county roads an
additional five million dollars
so we're investing quite a bit
of money down there it's much
needed we know how that part of
the state supports our budget
and we have really good
relationships and communications
with both those counties so I
think for the most part things
are going well and and I'd be
happy to answer any other
questions on that but thank you
for bringing that up thank you
Mr chairman and and thank you
Kevin secretary sent of all that
that's really good news and I
know these projects
take a lot of time to implement
you know the the construction
industry and then the road
construction industry.
Really vital you know of what
you do and it's just amazing the
heavy equipment and and how much
you can get done in a short
period of time and just this
finish that up we're gonna have
another boom down there I'm sure
we we you know want to slow it's
it's time to catch up on those
roads and
you know I have some we have a.
A lot of consultants that live
in San Juan County that work
down there there two weeks on
two weeks off and for that
traffic.
Down there you know two years
ago when things are really
booming was just terrible
the main they have to get up at
five o'clock in the morning to
get to the failed and it was
really really rough a lot of
traffic fatalities unfortunately
because the those two lane roads
just are very safe and so I'm
glad you're focusing your
attention on that but don't
forget San Juan County would
need help up here our our
opinion hills bridge fish sure
use a shot in the arm that's
been on the drawing boards for
as long as I've been here and
the cost people going up
that can you explain and this is
my last question can you explain
the inflation you know
construction inflation is it is
it is it slowing down a little
bit ours is still you know cost
of construction continues to it
is a.
Thank you Mr chair
representative yes it is you
know inflation is is it is a
problem it is an issue and you
look at our funding and for the
most part it's staying flat what
what that really means is it's
going down because it's costing
us more for projects and like I
mentioned before the longer we
wait the more expensive they get
and that's why we thing for this
particular case bonding makes
sense with the low interest rate
we're only going to be paying
back an additional twenty
million dollars but were put in
and make more than that up in
state inflation or if we waited
till we were completely out of
debt to do some of these
projects would actually cost us
more than bonding right now and
so.
Percent agree with you that the
longer we wait to do maintenance
the longer we wait and see these
projects done the more expensive
they're going to be.
I think this this bill makes
makes perfect sense for us to do
this now.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
gentlemen I just can tell you
that
Moving to Farmington New Mexico
twenty six years ago a highway
five fifty was a two line
highway and it was it was scary
and to see that for lying it's
been a game changer for for us
analysis you know there's this
was constructed in in the
mid nineties and we really
really enjoy that four lane
highway so keep up the good work
in the thank you Mr chairman and
thank you Mr Santa.
Thank you Representative
Strickler I apologize between
getting off but you all were
freezing on my screen so I'm I'm
gonna keep it off in the
maximize my broadband I don't
see any other hands up are there
any other questions from
committee members.
Okay thank you C. decide about
thank you Ceragon silencing good
to see you again percent Dodge
always a pleasure I've got just
a couple of questions so the the
projects that a and I'm I'm
going through the FIR there's
never projects here that were.
Then H. B. to authorize bond
funds for.
These are projects that now
you'd be able to.
We use this new bonding capacity
for.
Mr Chairman yes and so
we provided a list a new list to
Madam chair Lundstrom that's
about a billion dollars we would
go off of that list some of that
will be those projects will be
done with some of the capital
outlay money receiving this year
but we would certainly use this
new money from funding to help
shore up those projects because
some of the money that was put
did not complete the project and
so we've been very transparent
with the projects we're looking
at and and we always want to try
and get a project fully funded
is you know so that the money
doesn't sit there that's one of
the things we've been good at
with the money that you have
provided us the general fund
money over the last couple years
is it's out there it's in it's
not sitting in there in our
coffers it's out there in
projects being used helping
create jobs in those type of
things and so we want to make
sure that we funded project
fully so we can get out the door
and money's not seen around but
those are the projects that we
plan to use this money.
Thank you Secretary and and how
do you prioritize this list of
projects.
Mr Chairman one of the things
that we've been asked to do is
to try and the equitable among
the state and so we want to make
sure that we're addressing all
all corners of our state so we
we look at kind of dividing that
up longer six districts not a
hundred percent even but
somewhere close to make sure
that we're equitable and then we
look at what projects are gonna
be ready the quickest to make
sure that the money's getting
out there as fast as possible so
we're equitable and then we look
at what's in and be ready to
students.
Very good thank you Secretary as
far as these projects are
concerned and and maybe this is
more of a general question your
department but.
How do you what do you have the
a percentage chair or how do you
How do you ensure that money
goes to New Mexico based
contractors is that something
that is a priority for the
department.
Can you even do that I'm not
sure.
But what what the
You know we're talking about a
lot of money here and I'm
wondering if you Mexico based
companies can benefit from.
Mr Chairman yes with the money
that you've already provided us
so it's about five hundred and
thirty five million over the
last couple years one of the
things that the contractors and
consultants as had asked us to
do is to make sure that we have
a consistent construction
program going out there so we
don't dump a lot of money all in
in the next six months we kind
of spread that out over here too
and that really helps some plan
and be able to higher up in the
consistent with their bidding
and we've been lucky in the
sense that a lot of our local
contractors have been able to
bid on this influx of money and
get the contracts we haven't had
a lot of out of state companies
come in as a matter of fact I'm
not even aware of law in which
case this money has gone out and
so we've been able to keep it
local I think we can continue to
do that as long as we're
strategic on how we let these
projects out we've been working
with our contractors or
consultants just to try and make
sure that we're not overloading
the system and what happens when
we overload the system is that's
when I think out of state
companies come in and and and
pick up some of these larger
projects so.
That's kind of what we try and
do to make sure that that
doesn't.
Very good thank you Secretary
tell I have anyone else have
anything else to add or go to a
vote.
Right by your jam.
I do pass on Senate bill one
twenty one.
Okay we've got a do pass on
Senate bill one twenty one with
an emergency clause is there a
second.
Second.
Seconded by Representative
Strickler.
The main please call the roll.
Representative.
Yes.
Speaker Egolf.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lujan.
Yes.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative role metal yes.
Representative Scott yes.
Representative Stansbury yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
It's.
There.
Yes.
Martinez.
Yes.
In the affirmative zero in the
neck.
Very well said it was silenced
by a vote of twelve zero you
have a do pass on Senate bill
one twenty one thank you for
being here this morning and
could see you Secretary could
see you Representative Dodge
good to see you miss Haas.
Good luck the rest away.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you have a great day
members that concludes our
agenda for today as I said at
the beginning of the meeting out
we we might be
We might be calling meetings of
the call of the chair but I'll
give you all of planning heads
up if we need to do that if not
we'll plan on being back here on
Wednesday
Time to be determined either
eight thirty or nine just
depends on what's coming up on
the agenda but we'll play that
by year and we'll let you know
all with plenty of notice.
And this the the last thing I
would say and and I want to say
it is before we get too far into
the session because I know that
we're at the end of the you know
we might not get should say this
but I'm just very very honored
and grateful to be leading this
committee along with by your
channels there and I really
appreciate all of your great
questions and the great work
that you do
I respect all of you immensely
and that I love the way this
committee operates you know we
have we have some tough votes we
have some party line votes
that's that's normal but I'll
tell you what I've I've spent
the I've spent about a week in
the Senate
with different bills I nervous
the corporate has as well and
and by your Chandler and others
yeah I it's it's night and day
right now.
and I'm just very very proud of
the way we treat people the way
we treat experts the way we
treat.
The legislators in front of us
even on bills that we may not
agree on we ask the tough
questions which is what we're
supposed to do
but always always
in respectful respectful way so
I I really appreciate that and
and I know that the the last few
days get tens we are a little on
edge and we're a little cranky
but
you know you you all just.
Keep a very professional and and
I I I appreciate that so thank
you all very much we will see
you Wednesday if not before then
and you have a great rest of
your day we are adjourns.
Thank you.
