We're gonna skip around this
agenda this morning. So let's
start with House Bill 292, all
cities and counties Fund,
Representative Senator Ortez
and, and friends.
Or in sanitary, look at you.
Look nice. I miss you here.
I, I, I, I miss you here. Let me
put it that way. Good to see
you.
The floor is yours whenever
you're ready.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, good
morning. It's an honor to be in
your committee again after my
introductory remarks, my
co-sponsor Representative Henry
will share and then my experts,
Senator Scott, Todd Randall,
who's the assistant city
manager, I believe is online
from Hobbs and Toby Spears,
who's the finance director from
Hobbs. They will all take over.
So before you is House Bill 292.
So in simple terms, this bill
seeks to
Transfer a portion of the gross
receipts tax revenue to
municipalities and counties.
So for the newer representatives
in HBs in in 2019 HB6 moved the
gross receipt taxes to the
location of the service rather
than the location of the
business. So what this did, this
moved oil and gas GRT revenue
away from municipalities and
gave it to the state. The
unintended consequence resulted
in estimated annual loss of 10
to $20 million to oil producing
counties, um.
specifically Hobbs and Carlsbad
and I'm from Hops. So the move
is part of a larger tax bill
when it was presented and to my
knowledge, the impacts were not
readily clear to the legislators
at that time and so this bill
would be a solution to those
unintended consequences and
would help 33 counties. Now I'll
turn it over to Representative
Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh,
Committee, uh, as representative
uh Senator Cortez said, this is
a bill really that if you look
at the Carlsbad area, which is,
is part of my district and uh
was greatly affected as I was
when I was a commissioner.
So this was a huge discussion
there, and they estimate about 5
to $6 million dollar loss in the
cars that area, uh, because of
that destination. So, uh, you
know, Artesia has another
example. We have a tank where we
build tanks, those tanks are
delivered, that, that
destination tax is actually paid
somewhere else, so, uh, this is
just a way to try to help
correct that, help those cities,
um, regain some of their GRT so
that they're able to take care
of all the things that we need
to.
OK.
Good morning, Miss Chairman,
members of the committee.
The all cities and counties from
Captures 8%.
Of the gross receipts tax.
That has now coming directly to
the state.
that used to under the old.
Location-based GRT tax system.
was allocating some of that GRT
to
Local communities.
These, uh, the switch from
destination sourcing to
destination sourcing, but
All of those.
Tas locations out in the oil
field and away from the
municipalities that support
those activities. So the way
this system of as envisioned.
The way the system works, it's a
formulaic distribution of a
little over $300 million of
gross receipts tax that is
currently coming directly into
the state and the first division
of that is into.
The 33 counties.
And that division occurs by a
formula which weights.
And gives a slight advantage to
those counties that sent all
that tax revenue up to the
state.
So, the economic powerhouses of
the state, including Elio County
and uh
And Donnahana.
Really
Do contribute.
quite a bit to the state GRT as
does Lee and Eddie County.
So these counties would enjoy a
slight advantage.
With a waiting factor in the
formula.
Once it gets back to the county
level, it's distributed at that
point per capita.
The important thing to note here
is that every community in the
state will benefit from this.
A tax policy.
From the smallest.
To the largest
Everyone will participate.
And it is a way.
To allow all of the communities
outside of the oil patch to
participate in the current.
Oil and gas revenue boom that
the state's been enjoying for
several years, and with that
we'll stand the questions.
Just a moment, Mr. Chair, uh,
Mr. Randall online would like to
add to that.
Mr. Randall.
You're muted.
sir.
Uh thank you, Chair. Can you
hear me?
I hear you now.
I thank you, chair, member of
the community. My name is Todd
Randall. I'm the assistant city
manager for the city of Hobbs.
Uh, this bill will have
significant impact on
municipalities like by ensuring
a portion of GRT revenues return
to cities and counties across
the state. And the creation of
this fund will provide critical
financial resources for local
governments to address community
needs through public service and
foster community growth.
As was stated, due to shift in
GRT distributions from business
location to destination based
and the city of Hobbs has
experienced a 30% reduction in
revenue response. We've been
forced to implement new
strategies to maintain services
including difficult decisions to
cut 8 positions, which is about
15% of the workforce.
Uh, throughout the years, the
city has actually extended
public infrastructure, water and
sewer to serve those businesses,
oil and gas, um, members of our
communities and with that shift,
those businesses are located
inside the limits, but the GRT
based on De based, and we no
longer receive that GRT.
In fact, now that the change and
the state actually gains a 30%
revenue because they no longer
have to share that portion with
the communities where the
business is located.
Uh, Senator Scott did a great
job explaining so I won't talk
more about the bill. Um, just
last statement as far as this
bill is structured to provide
equal distribution recognizing
that both municipalities and
counties play a vital role for
the overall success of our
state.
Uh, by supporting this
legislation, we are investing in
local governments, empowering
them to deliver better services
to the residents both local
communities and statewide. Thank
you.
Things are at the end of your
presentation. Very good. Uh,
just so that we're all on the
same page, this presentation is
just for present uh for
information purposes only as at
this point in time we've uh our
time to include this into a tax
package has come and gone. So
with that being said, we will
still have a, a regular hearing
on this as a matter of process,
so we have everybody online
wishing to speak on this bill?
No? OK. Anyone in the room, uh,
wish to speak in support of this
bill.
You wish to make public comment,
please move for the forward and
our attendant will hold the mic
for you.
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs for the
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
Focus supports this bill because
we support the fair and
equitable distributions of funds
to cities and counties. I
understand that New Mexico's
economy is volatile, and we that
better distributes funds
throughout all of the state's
communities.
This is sound tax policy that
has been vetted through the
interim process and would help
to stabilize unpredictable
funding structures like capital
outlay for the legislators and
their constituents.
The oil and gas industry is
proud to provide over 13 billion
in local and state taxes, and we
want to ensure all New Mexicans
are equitably benefiting from
the generated dollars. Thank
you.
Next
morning Chairman, members, my
name is Matt Thompson. I
represent Eddy County, the
cities of Carlsbad, Jal, and
Hobbs, as well as the
Independent Petroleum
Association in New Mexico. We're
here today to support this House
bill, which we've seen over the
past few sessions as it tries to
fix.
As a representative Cortez sent
I mentioned, um, an unintended
consequence from the 2019 HB 6.
our cities have lost um upwards
of $2 million in GRT per year
since this took effect, um, as
Toby laid out, Hobbs has
suffered pretty serious
consequences with cuts and
services. Um, there is a lot of
activity going on down in the
southeast corner, and the best
part about this bill is it looks
to fix some of the revenue
shortages, not just there.
but across the entire state,
though allowing everyone to
truly participate in the oil
boom that we are experiencing in
a very equitable manner. Thank
you.
Thank you. Anyone else?
To me.
As chairman and members of the
committee, I'm Tim Jennings and
Mayor Roswell and, and it really
would help us. We need every
little penny we can get, uh,
right now with all the travels
problems we have and it would
really help us because these
businesses the, the jobs and all
that stuff, really the taxes
were created and should have
been paid in a our local areas
rather than.
coming up here and we
put on most date. I don't have a
problem with any of the other
except it's.
Really very helpful, the regular
cities
outside of the large ones are
extremely kind of hard.
Herding for funds.
compete with infrastructure cost
alone. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else?
in opposition of House Bill 292.
See now, let's come back to the
committee. Questions and
comments, first on our list, we
have Speaker Martinez.
Tam's chair and Representative
senator to see you, um,
representative could see you,
uh.
This was done in 2019 and you
said he was an unintended
consequence, and I do wonder if
it was intended or unintended. I
don't remember. I was part of
that bill, but it was a long
time ago. Um, however, this is
something that every year keeps
coming back. And I think that
that's um part of the reason
we're having this briefing
because I do think that.
When there's legislature and
particularly with this
committee.
Uh, creates policy, tax policy,
uh, we are not afraid.
To evolve into to fix things
when they need to be fixed. And
I'll give you a very good
example of that, that's the
cannabis regulation Act, which I
co-sponsored back in 2020, 2021,
and there are some things that
need to be fixed. Um, in fact,
Gallegos is leading uh some of
that work this year with House
Bill, uh, House Bill 10, I
believe it is. Uh, this is
something that I think
We need to find a solution for.
And we've, um,
We've done a few band-aids year
to year, I think in 209, in
2023.
We did a um inappropriation
through the House bill to to
your communities to help offset
the loss that year, we may have
done that again last year. I
can't recall, but that's not
gonna, that's not sustainable.
Um, and so I, I do appreciate
the way in which you have framed
this solution, I think it's um
I think it's on the right track,
so.
Mr. Chair Representative
Senator, um, you're creating
You're creating a fund, you're
intercepting 8% of the state
share you're creating a fund
that then distributes to each
local community based on this
formula. Is that correct, Mr.
Chair, Senator Representatives?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Speaker, that
is exactly correct.
Every it's important to note
that every community in the
state would benefit from these
distributions.
And Mr. Chair Representatives,
Senator, um,
I love formulas. I know you love
formulas.
You sit over there.
teach math class every 3 days a
week, um, so it's, uh, so me,
I'm, I'm looking at page 2 like
for municipality population. Can
you, can you walk us through the
formula.
For both municipalities and for
counties.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker.
The first division of this 8% of
the state's revenue occurs into
the 33 counties.
And that division occurs with a
waiting factor that waits the
contribution that came from that
county as 30% of the formula.
And per capita, that is.
The population.
Of that county as a 70% factor.
What this does is it gives a
slight advantage to those
counties that sent all that
money up to the state.
Which
Obviously would include uh
Verillio probably is the biggest
beneficiary of this, but every
county in the state.
Would get.
A portion of that.
Once it gets back to the county
level, it's then distributed
back out into the local
communities on a per capita
basis, and if there's anything
left that would be.
Just
The not attributable to a
municipality, then that stays in
the county coffers.
Got it. Thank you was chair,
Senator Representatives, the
total fiscal impact of the state
would be roughly 30075 million
on the high end.
Distributed to each of these
communities. Um, now let's go
back a little bit, so as I
remember, um, and the, the late
chairman Trujillo would.
Know a lot more than I than I
do, but
The crux of the problem was
because in 2019 through House
Bill 6, we implemented the
internet sales tax, and I think
that's the crux of this problem,
is that right?
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, when
we went to destination-based
sources and, and the intent of
that bill was to capture
internet sales.
And what this artifact was was
was completely an unintended
consequence.
So when we went to destination
based sourcing all of that
economic activity that occurs
out in the oil field in the way
and away from municipalities was
no longer being taxed inunicipal
GRT so we.
The Southeast New Mexico
communities lost that revenue
stream.
And what this does is partially
makes up.
For that loss this formula does
not bring any of those southeast
communities back to being
completely whole, but it gets
them a long way in that
direction.
Mr. Chair, um.
Senator Representatives just
last question, uh, just to put
it in, in very real.
Terms here, what, what has the
loss of revenue for these
communities, or I guess for your
community specifically.
What has that represented to you
all.
In terms of loss.
I have seen estimates, Mister
Carman, Mister Speaker, up to
close to $20 million for my
community of Hans about uh 12, I
think, in Carlsbad.
So, so 20, Mr. Chair, 20 million
for Hobbs, which is you all
shared district.
Sorry, Mr. Chair Speaker,
Carlsbad would be the bigger hit
in my district, um, and that's
anywhere from 5 to $12 million.
And, and Mr. Chair, just to, to,
to bring it even further down to
to the ground level.
What are we talking about and
less public transit, meals for
seniors, after school programs
for kids. What what does that
mean?
Yes, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker,
I think when you look at our
communities, that's exactly
right. It means, uh, police and
fire, uh trying to find, find uh
wages for those uh
infrastructure, you know, we've
got a lot of water projects, um,
Carlsba is obviously growing
rapidly like, like many of the
communities in our area and so
the need for all those extra
outside services become greater
and then with such a big
reduction, it kind of, it made
it very difficult as you're
growing, you see this reduction.
And yet you're still having to
make up for it on the backside.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, it's
important to note that those
communities and now not
receiving any of that uh GRT
revenue from
Outside in the oil fields, still
maintain all of the services,
police, fire, roads.
All of those people that are
working out in the oil field.
Scatter back in the hobs and
Carlsbad.
At the end of the workday and
We have to, we have to be able
to accommodate those.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um,
representatives and senator, uh,
a couple just suggestions, I
think that this is a really good
uh concept that I hope carries
over to your.
tax stabilization and committee
and to the LFC, um, I think the
biggest challenge at this point
as the chair stated is the
capacity, right? So we're
talking about $300 million it.
uh, that if we can prep for and
budget for.
Through a concept like this, I
think is is doable in in the
coming session. Uh, and, you
know, the, the reason I asked
that last question, Mr. Chair
is, uh, you know, unintended
consequence or not, I think.
part of what we're here to do as
legislators is ensure that.
People have at the very least
access to the most basic
services, and I think that uh I
mean, I've I've been to your
communities and I know that. I
guess if you've got the
resources, you could always just
go to the Texas side and get
your healthcare and get your
schooling or whatever, but if
you don't have the resources and
you're stuck.
And if we are shortchanging
local governments and they can't
provide the after school program
if they can provide the, if they
can't provide the meals for
seniors, so they can provide the
public transportation systems
and it's really
The people of these means in
those same communities are
hurting the most. So, um, I'd
like to find a solution for
this. I don't want to do any
more band-aids the way we have
been, and I think this is
probably a very smart vehicle.
So thank you for the time. Thank
you all for, for the
presentation. Thank you for the
time, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Let's go to the next
speaker. It's gonna be
representative Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have
a question regarding the FIR,
the last page that has been
provided to us and it has a
listing of the jurisdictions,
the population distribution
amounts can, is there somebody
here that can answer the
question on this?
Brendan.
Like I
I'm trying to understand the
math on this, uh, Mr. Chairman,
when I look at
Albuquerque as an example. It
has a population here on this
chart of 562,000.
4188.
With the distribution looks like
a 90 million, is that correct?
We have red and gray from the
LFC, you can use a mic, please.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair Representative, yes,
that's correct. OK, and then you
go right across there to
Carlsbad as an example in Eddy
County.
Population of 31,000
distribution of 11 million.
915.
Yes, so is that distribution
number, the amount that would
Um, be the calculated amount
back to that community based on
this formula.
Up
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
that is correct. OK, so, really,
I think.
Because of Berne Leo's
population based on how you told
me the formula is gonna work is
the reason they would get that
much.
Mr. Chairman Representative,
obviously the population centers
tend to benefit or will benefit
more than anybody else just by
virtue of their per capita, but
yes, you are correct. OK.
Um,
So can you explain to me how the
contribution of 30% in the
formula works.
30% of the distribution.
Back to the counties.
That is awaiting factor that
waits.
The, the contribution that that
county made to the total of 8%.
OK, so that, well, for example,
Barleo County by virtue of its
of its economic power makes a
very large contribution to the
8% as do both Lee and Ante
County, but virtue of all of the
oil and gas activity.
All right, I just wanted to
understand how the math works,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Anyone else questions or
comments.
Ranking member Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, thank
you, Senator Representatives,
um.
One of the things we, I think
this committee does really well
and we we try to do anywhere
anyway and Senator, you said on
here a lot, a long, long time
and, and as uh the speaker said
you taught math class for 3 days
a week, um, for quite some time.
And I think sometimes those
unintended consequences last a
long time, and so hopefully we
can do something in in the
interim that makes sense, um,
and make it simple.
And while you're not going to be
made whole.
Perhaps there's a way that we
can at least uh help you uh to
stop the bleeding as much and
maybe it's only a drop or two
now and again, so that's what my
hope would be. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. Thank you,
Representative. Any question or
comments?
If not, Vice.
Humans to care. I know that we
need a table, um, house bill
292.
Emotion seconded by
Representative Duncan in the
opposition to that motion saying
none. Thank you for your
presentation this morning.
We appreciate the time you spend
with us.
Thank you for, thank you all for
listening, sir. Thank you. Let's
move on then. Let's just jump
back to House Bill 211 is a
sponsor in the room.
OK.
Her expert is uh please come
forward.
Yeah, it is Representative
Ferrari gonna join you?
OK, yeah.
OK, so, uh, look, this goes on.
Yeah.
So gentlemen, um, we've already
had a hearing on this, on this
bill before. Uh, this is the
committee substitute, so we're
not gonna have a full hearing on
this. All I, all that we want to
know now is how this committee
substitute is different from
what you initially proposed.
Floors.
Mr. Chair, committee members,
thank you very much. Um, there's
a, um,
Leadership, uh, analysis that
was done on the substitute and
basically there are uh two
significant changes, number one.
It, uh, a limit, but limits the
amount that you go to commercial
properties to 10% of the amount
unless it wasn't used for that
year by residential.
So it it adds that limitation,
and then secondly, it prohibits
double dipping so that uh in the
case of
Uh, other
Tax credits that may be on
batteries or or solar only or so
forth, they couldn't use.
Something that was given an
incentive under this bill to
also be used under another bill
or if it had already been used
on another bill, they couldn't
use it on this bill. So those
are the two major things that
were done, uh, with this
substitute versus what was done
reviewed in the uh
Subcommittee meeting that was
done previously, as I understood
it.
Thank you. Does that conclude
your presentation?
Um, I would like to just mention
very briefly that uh this, the,
the uh questions and I can take
less than a minute, but the
majority questions that were
issued in the uh analysis. As if
the bill would increase the
existing amount, and it does
not. There's no budget impact.
Secondly, we would ask who would
benefit. It would most benefit
the uh off-grid people primarily
in the Navajo Nation and the
Pueblos they do not have any
electricity.
at all
Because the combined incentive
that they would get with
federally amounts to about 70%.
So it's the only way that
off-grid solar is gonna be done
in those communities, uh, 75% of
the off grid in the entire
nation is on the Navajo Nation.
So there's a huge need for that
there. So they would benefit the
most, then ask, will nonprofit
organizations be eligible?
And the answer to that is not
directly if it's put on a
nonprofits.
Property such as a school or so
forth, they could use it
indirectly.
And do we need more incentives
to encourage taxpayers to
install solar, and the answer to
that is yes, 77% of the amount
was not used this year, uh, due
to economic issues and the
significant downturn in
residential solar installers and
then we'll stop you right there,
uh, uh, let's, let's go to our
committee for for questions and
comments on this substitute, uh,
Representative Lunstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate the changes that were
made in the substitute. Some of
these things were issues that I
had raised, and I see that it
had been corrected. Thank you.
It wants to question the
comments on a substitute.
If not, I have a couple that,
that I, I've recognized from the
FIR majority, the majority FIR,
um, that make mention of
And then I'll just tape for the
record, I'm, I'm gonna read this
verbatim. TRD notes that this
text erodes the horizontal
equity, ensuring the same
statutes applied to all
taxpayers of a broad-based
income tax because only
taxpayers who own a home or a
business and can afford the
investment of a solar system are
eligible for their credit.
In addition, allowing the credit
for third-party taxpayers who
install uh
photo voltic photovoltaic
systems and sell electricity on
properties.
In bold, they do not own.
further erodes the horizontal
equity.
Um
Can you speak to that?
for us, please.
Mr. Chair, I'll have our expert.
Mr. Chair committee members,
yes, sir. Uh, if you
Referred to the original TRD.
Um, comments that were in the
FIR and pages 4 and 5. Their
conclusion was, and I quote, the
solar energy which can be
expensive to start up should be
given tax incentive due to its
low environmental impact and
health and social benefits for
the current and future
population. The long-term
environmental health and social
benefits outweigh the short-term
revenue costs. New job
opportunities are associated
with the solar energy
generation, such as soldier bull
photovoltaic installing.
engineers and managers, so their
conclusion was, yes, this should
be done and it, it outweighs the
negatives. OK, thank you and,
and Representative and expert.
Further, I'll, I'll read from
this note, expanding this tax
credit to corporate entities
further increases the tech
expenditure and narrows the tax
base, which then negatively
impacts the general fund. So I,
I guess my question is my
concern is is that again, it
goes back to who are we going to
be helping in these types of
initiatives, uh, will
people in, in my district that
long and short.
money and don't own their homes,
many of them rent their homes,
many of them uh have a mortgage
on their homes, uh, furthermore,
with the corporate.
Interest in this outweigh those
of those that are maybe less
fortunate and not have the
ability to have this in the on
the on their home or or
residential property. So, uh,
those are my concerns. I, I
again want to go back to the
point that I made earlier is
that when I look at this as, as
a new incoming energy
opportunity. I wanna make sure
it's just, it's for everybody
and not just for those that can
afford it.
Cause that's not fair.
Mr. Chair, that's oh, I'm sorry,
I'm not done yet.
And, and when we, when we
continue to bring these types of
initiatives that are not income
tested and don't provide that
type of opportunity for others.
You know, for me, for my
district speaking on behalf of
those, it doesn't provide an
opportunity. It provides just
another opportunity for those
that can afford this, to take
advantage of this. So, uh, those
are my comments, ladies and
gentlemen. Uh, what is the
pleasure of the committee?
Miss Chery would do not pass.
motion made for a a do not pass,
seconded by Representative
Montoya, please call the roll.
Representative Cham, no.
Representative Duncan. Yes.
Representative Gallegos.
Um, no.
Representative Henry, yes.
Representative Hernandez. Yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Pado Juan.
Representative Silva.
Representatives. Yes.
Madam Vice Chair Kadena no.
Exclaim.
Mr. Charente.
Yes.
We got a 6 to 565 do not pass.
Thank you for your presentation.
Let's move on now to, oh I'm
sorry, to explain your book,
excuse me. Madam Chair, quickly,
as you all may remember, I have
had significant concerns about
previous efforts that
established the solar market
credits because for the reasons
the chair explained, I did not
find them to be equitable tax
policy. It didn't have income
test and there were some, yeah,
there were some concerns that
have played out over several
years. I do appreciate that this
was an attempt to fix some of
those problems. Um, I still
think there's significant.
questions and that, but I, I
hope that you all continue your
efforts if I happen to come
back, I would like to work with
you on that, but I do see that
you're trying to rein in some of
the concerns we've had over the
years and, and I hope that we
can continue the conversation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Vice Chairman. Thank
you all. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Let's move on to
Senate Bill 112. Higher
education housing facility,
property tax.
Representative Hernandez and,
and guests, the floor is yours
whenever you're ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
members of the committee, I'm
here to present Senate Bill 112,
uh, the spirit, this bill clears
up a property tax rule or sorry,
property tax rules around
student housing at colleges. It
says that student housing and
student family housing built on
land owned by tax-exempt higher
education institutions won't be
taxed, even if it's operated by
a private entity, its exemption
is stated in Article 8, Section
3 of the New Mexico
Constitution, which applies to
student housing built on
university owned land through a
public-private partnership. Uh,
this bill has no fiscal impact
on state government revenues or
expenses, the exemption, we're
trying to codify here simply
clarifies the exemption already
provided by the Constitution.
Simply the goal of the bill is
to keep student housing
affordable, encourage
partnerships and contribute to
student success.
I have two experts here that
will be presenting with me, uh,
Deputy General Counsel Scott
Sower said they're right from
UNM and Drew Setter, uh,
registered lobbyist for American
campus communities. And with
that, we are ready to stand for
questions. Very good. Thank you
for the presentation. Let's go
to those that are online and
support our opposition of Senate
Bill 112. Anybody?
Nobody online. Anyone in the
room, support our opposition.
Let's start with support.
Anybody?
No, is there anybody in
opposition of Senate Bill 112.
There's nobody, nobody here
today. Let's go to the
committee. Questions, comments,
first on our list, we have
Representative Chan Chairwoman
Chandler.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. um,
thank you, representative for
this bill. Question I have it
focuses on the fact that it is
directed towards student
housing. I get that.
Um, but my concern, um, lies
with the fact that over time the
use could potentially change,
become more of a commercial use,
like maybe a mixture of students
and non-students, just regular
residents in um in the in the
city or the county, and what are
we gonna do about making sure
that doesn't happen, um,
representative Mr. Chair. I will
let my expert answer.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Chandler.
Good morning. Um,
I'm Scott Sawer, the deputy
general counsel for the
university of New Mexico.
There's an operating agreement
between the university and
American campus communities that
states the first priority will
be for students, um, and to
date, um, I, based upon, um,
At least one last year's full
set of information, 100% of the
um uh residents at these
facilities were um students.
Um, albeit, uh, so, um, mostly
UNM students, but CNM students
as well.
OK, well, that's great. How long
is that operating agreement in
place, Mr. Chair?
Mister Chair, uh, Representative
Chandler, off the top of my
head, I don't know the answer to
that question, but we can
certainly.
I try to answer.
So, um, this concerns me, um, so
let me tell you a little story.
Uh, we live in, as you know, Los
Alamos, we do have a UNM campus
in Los Alamos. There was a
period of time when the, the
university owns some student
housing, uh, they had gotten
the, the structures, the
residence is from the Department
of Energy, they were offloading
some of their assets for public
purposes, and what happened was
almost no students lived in
those apartments, and indeed.
or just people did and um
frankly in Los Alamos, they were
poorly managed, um, the people
that were living there, frankly
created a number of problems for
for us who lived right across
the street from them, and um so
my concern, you can see is
actually based in reality, um,
and I would like something in
this bill, not in an operating
agreement that can be changed
that would require that the um
the properties being used.
exclusively for students. Um, I
wouldn't object to faculty being
housed or, you know, those kinds
of folks, but, um, turning it
into a commercial operation,
which I think has there is a
potential for that when people
are looking to raise income and
do all sorts of things and uh so
this is my concern. So the
question I have is on page 3,
Mr. Chair and Representative,
would you be open to, um, an
amendment um in line 18 that
says reg
residential housing facilities.
Um, for the exclusive use of
students or medical um
residents. I'm willing to add
faculty or something like that
if you wish, Mr. Chair or
representative, but um I don't
think you should be getting a
tax break if it's gonna turn
into housing, that's for general
population purposes.
Gentlemen, responses and,
uh, Madam Chair, uh, we have no
problem adding that in here if
we want to do it on the fly.
If you're amenable to that, Mr.
Chair.
OK. Before we do that, uh,
discussion Representative
Lindstrom had a question, you I.
I like the amendment except for
the part about or faculty. I, I
just feel that.
This is primarily for the
purpose of students.
I think it gets to be a slippery
slope.
The faculty.
I'd like you to consider that if
you would, please.
Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I'm happy to
just leave it as exclusively
exclusive use of students or
medical residents.
Madam Chairwoman.
Chandler, can you, uh, reference
again where exactly you're at
and what page, what line. Yes,
Mr. Chair, I'm on page 3, 18,
right after the word the, the
exclusive use of students or
medical residents.
OK, so just add the word
exclusive then. Um, yes, Mr.
Chair. I got it, got it. Um.
Gentlemen, is, is that a
friendly amendment?
Mr. Chair and Madam Char it is a
friendly amendment. Very good.
Your bill has been amended, uh,
let's see where are we at now? I
think we're still back in the uh
Chas stay on the floor.
Mr. Chair, thank you. Thank you.
Let's move on then to represent
Parajun.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
presenters, um, we have been
learning a lot about fractional
interest lately in this
committee, and um I actually
don't disagree with this, but I
wanna understand a little bit
more about how you guys got
here. Um.
I have learned a lot about Rita
and how we got there, but I
don't know how we got here in
particular, so why are are you
bringing this, um, this bill
right now, this exemption.
Mr. Cherry, uh, representative,
I'm gonna have.
Scott answered that question.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Paon,
um,
The university owns um 10
dormitories.
And until um
Uh, 20, the year 2020.
Uh, all of those, um, were
treated as, uh, by the, the
Berlio County assessor as
exempt.
Um
The only two that are.
Of that town that are operated
by American campus communities
were um assessed in 2020.
And
Um, so, um, we, um, we believe
that was inconsistent with the
New Mexico constitution.
Um, because these, these are
state-owned properties, the
university is under the control
of the state, and the buildings
are on the university property.
Um, to, so we're here today.
Uh, not to fight the battle of
what's happened.
But to um have clarification and
clarity going forward, so that
we're in a position to the
extent the university determines
it needs to do another, uh,
public-private partnership to
build a dorm. We want some
clarity around that uh issue.
So, Mr. uh Chair and um and
expert, so UN Mland is state is
state property and it's exempt.
Um, is that correct?
Mr. Chair, uh, uh, uh.
Representative Parajo, um, yes,
the, um, under Article 12,
Section 3 of the Constitution,
all of the university, its
assets and so forth, uh, are
under the exclusive control of
the state. OK, and Mr. Chair and
um and experts, so the question
that I have is that on page 3,
which is part of this statute,
is that it explicitly lists, um,
Improvements, which are
sub included is a subsurface
structure. So I would imagine
that includes, for instance,
these dorms, um, that those
improvements of land have been
exempt entity if these
improvements are owned or leased
by non-exempt entity, these
improvements are subject to
valuation for property tax
taxation purposes and to
property taxation to be paid by
the non-exempt entity. So when
you initially constructed and
this statue has been there for a
long time. When you initially
construct
Did those dormitories, why did
you initially believe that you
were exempt.
Mr. Chair, um, representative
Patho, we believed we were
exempt because the Constitution
says that state-owned uh
property and property used for
an educational use.
are exempt.
So, um, I, I, so you believe
that the con your
constitutional, the
constitutional rights of that.
Of what it says superseded what
this statute says.
At the time, when you were
constructing, Mister Chair
represented Pa the the
Constitution being the
foundational document that
drives what?
Um, state law can and cannot be.
Um, we thought that was the, the
governing law.
Um, Mr. Chair and um
representative, so you did not,
um, in my experience with, with
the Rita statute. The reason why
they believed that they were
exempt, um, is similar to the
reason why you believed you were
exempt. Um, however, they also
had gone to TRD and had asked
for clarification and TRD had
given them a letter saying,
yeah, it does say in the statute
that someone could try to
collect, but that they wouldn't
be.
successful because it's
state-owned land. So have you
gotten a similar judgment or um
a similar letter from TRD.
Mr. Chair.
Um, um, uh, representative
Patagon, um, I, I don't know the
answer to that question. I was
not the lawyer who handled the
transaction for the Office of
University council at that time.
So, uh, um, I'm sorry, I, I
can't give you an answer to
that. Yeah, so, Mr. Speaker, uh,
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, and,
and, um, expert, um, that's OK.
What I have experienced with
this statue is
that um
Is that yes, TRD it's possible
that an assessor could try as
they already have to collect
this tax, um, but at the moment
if TRD went to try to collect
and enforce that tax, they would
have to go to the owner.
Right, Mr. Mr. Chair and and um
expert and who would the owner
be?
Uh
Mr. Chair, um, uh, uh represent
Potter, the owner of the land is
the university.
So, um, chair and, and, um,
And expert, it seems like, you
know, they wouldn't be able to
collect this and so is the
purpose of this, um,
Of this, of this correction in
the statute to provide that
clarification for future deals.
Mister Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, represent our
home precisely, yes.
Um
and, and an expert, I think, you
know, this statute on fractional
interest is, is quite honestly,
I, I think is.
Kind of messy, um, there are
these improvements are listed
in, in under subsection B1, but
then they're also improvements
that are exempt listed under 4A,
um, including dwelling occupied
by a low-income resident in a
housing project authorized under
the provisions of municipal
housing law, um, there's
definitely some cleanup that
probably needs to be done
entirely on the statue, but, um,
chair and an expert, it does
seem that, you know,
If we are, if you are building
housing in the next couple of
years or trying to finalize
pencil out those projects,
especially when it comes to
affordable housing that where
your margins, um, affordable
housing for students where your
margins are so tight that an
exemption like this listed in
the law, um, would certainly be
helpful. And um,
Mr. Chair and
An expert, um,
I think that, you know, student
housing is really important.
There are many avenues, I think
that you also have towards um
finding your way around this.
What, what's listed here, for
instance, uh a fractional
interest is only defined by 75
years.
Or less, um, and so there's, you
know, certain kinds if you made
your lease longer, for instance,
and maybe this wouldn't apply,
um, or Mr. Chair and expert also
in the Constitution, it lists,
you know, property that's used
for educational purposes is
certainly exempt in, in my
experience, my university, um,
in all the dorms, they had one
classroom.
And that one classroom allowed
them to exempt the entire
dormitory, um, from the, from
the, the Massachusetts taxes,
so, um, and an expert, I, I see
there are different ways around
it, but it does seem like this
clarification, um, it, it is in
order for you to be able to
Create more affordable housing
for students, which at UNM, as
I've expressed um in a different
committee.
When I worked at the Westside
Emergency housing shelter. There
were students, UNM students who
could not afford their rent, who
can't afford rent in Albuquerque
but still wanted to get an
education. We're driven and
we're staying in the largest
shelter that we have, the
largest homeless shelter that we
have here in our state. Um, so
Mr. Chair and, and, um, an
expert and, and representative.
I really hope that we can
continue to build more
affordable housing for our
students, um.
And I think exemptions like this
fall within the the purview of
our, our powers here as a
legislature. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to Representative Caen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representatives and experts. Um,
I first want to speak
About your bill and then add to
some of the conversations that
represented Parajon and Chandler
have led us into, uh, but first,
this is interesting to me. The
bill's called Higher Ed housing
Facility property tax, but
really we're having a
conversation, Mr. Chair, about
American campus communities, it
could be read that this is all
about American campus
communities. I have been to
represent a district in Boana
that includes the main campus of
NSU might you speak um to the
other higher ed institutions in
New Mexico and whether they're
facing.
In a similar circumstance.
But
Uh
Mr. Chair Representative, vice
chair Kadina, um, I'm not aware
that that the Mexico State
University has embarked on uh
trying to do a, a, um, a
public-private partnership
around their dormitory
situation. I'm also not familiar
with their dormitory housing
situation. Um, however, New
Mexico State did file an FIR on
this and took no position.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Are you
aware of any of the other higher
institutions in New Mexico that
are in a similar circumstance.
Mr. Chair, um, vice chair
Cadina, um, I am not aware of
others that have uh endeavored
to take advantage of this type
of finance. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and specifically have you
engaged with the council of
university presidents or any of
the associations of higher ed to
see if they were interested in
pursuing these kind of public
private partnerships or it
encountered something similar.
Mr. Chair, um, vice chair
Kadina, I'm not aware. So Mr.
Chair, um,
While I appreciate the intention
of moving towards affordability
in housing and I learned so much
about housing in this committee
in particular. Shout out to
minority Leader Armstrong and
the bill representative
Parajura,
um.
Among other things, they helped
me understand that.
Creating housing access is about
creating more housing. I would
have had a lens that would have
imagined we have to focus on
affordability to make
affordability possible for
families with less means, but
really I've come to learn that
more housing is good for
everybody, but I do have
concerns, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative that
Without the other kind of
conversation or engagement of
other higher institutions in, in
New Mexico. It actually feels
that we would by enacting a lot
like this while there are
justifications towards that
purpose. At this moment, it
would feel like we were training
a policy that did center around
UNM and specifically the
singular entity of American
campus communities. That's not
something that we tend to do or
tend to do often in in this
committee. So I would have liked
to see more engagement and
conversation and dialogue.
With the institutions, um, that
exist across the state, but
specifically moving to the
details of this bill, um, and
the analysis we've got certainly
in this committee. We did this
year get to jump into fractional
interests and the last time, Mr.
Chair, I attempted to ask an
expert about factional interest,
they told a story about sticks,
um, that didn't quite go
anywhere, but as, as a
representative Arajon has named
um once um she and I
particular have gotten to talk
about now this statue at an
extensive ways. I also feel that
this statute needs a real
cleanup. What I've heard
previously, what I've heard
today, Mr. Chair. It sounds
like, um, with the Constitution
as our governing document that
what you all seem to
Your conclusions seem to be
that, um, the lack of clarity in
the statute did not protect your
constitutional rights as a
higher ed institution. Would
that be fair, Mr. Chair and an
expert?
Um
Mr. Chair, uh, Vice Cha Kadina,
that would be correct.
So Mr. Chair, and um,
Experts and representatives, uh,
again, I appreciate the
intention of this, but what I
would have rather seen through
this committee over the last 60
days or 57 days is that we
actually did the work to clarify
this statute instead of, um, I
think to to quote my colleague
here, making it a bit messier in
order to accomplish your
particular means and end. So,
um, it would seem to me, Mr.
Chair, that it, it's a little
bit sloppy that we're, we're
leaving a statue that many have
come.
to the conclusion is
unconstitutional in place while
we attempt to, in a very focused
way, carve out or define or
provide clarity to particular
entities that are coming forward
with this interest. In this
case, a particular American
college campus situation. Um, I
also had questions about the
looking at page 4, Mr. Chair of
the FIR. Once we get to the
significant issues section.
There's a lot of history, I
actually appreciate.
that's named here that we didn't
see in other bills, um, but in
part how we talked about
fractional interest to exclude
leaseholds over 75 years to
confirm again, I think this was
already established earlier in
the committee your leases do not
extend beyond 75 years to date.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, vice chair
Kaine, I don't believe they do
extend beyond 75.
Do you have any sense about the
time frame of what those leases
are.
Ah, Mister Chair,
uh, vice chair, uh, Kadina, I
don't know the precise term of.
They, um, that it's for the
primary term I just learned is
40 years, um, with 10 year
renewal options.
But Mr. Cha um, to confirm,
might you share who's who's
whispering us over here in the
corner.
You come to the microphone
please.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee on Mike Poli. I'm the
chief government relations
officer for UNM.
Thank you. Thank you for joining
us. So, so I don't understand
very much about these kinds of
partnerships on campus. Does
that mean at a minimum, this
lease will be in place for 40
years, Mr. Chair.
We are, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair,
Mad vice chair Kadina, um,
pardon my stumbling there, um,
the, we are 12 years into the
relationship, the university is
with American campus
communities.
Um, the primary term is 40
years. Um,
Um, and, um,
Or there are earlier termination
provisions as in any contract of
one side or the other, um, is is
in default, um, but the primary
term, assuming no defaults,
would be 40 years with an option
to renew for 10 years at a time.
Thank you. I appreciate that,
and it does provide some
reassurance. I had no sense that
these were 10 years, 15 years,
40 years is significant. I
appreciate that. Um, moving down
on the significant issues page,
uh, we, they've talked about the
times, this section of statute
was amended, um, and of course,
names that the least well
understood and perhaps the most
confusing section of the
property tax code here is the
part that we've come to debate a
couple of times in the committee
this year, but as the FIR says
page
to summarize current law,
fractional interests of
profit-making companies and real
property owned by exempt
entities are exempt, so again,
the exempt entity in place this
situation would be you and him,
although this exemption of
realty without a constitutional
amendment allowing this
exemption is the source of the
controversy.
But then, of course, this part
is where it comes into play.
However, if the improvements are
owned by the profit-making
company, then the leasehold is
taxable. In this situation is
American campus communities, a
profit-making company, Mr.
Chair.
Um
Mr. Chair, um, Vice
Chairudina
Mar campus community is a
for-profit entity, however, it
does not own the building.
Or the real estate.
Mhm. But as current law stands,
at least according to this FAR
and the extensive conversations
we had here, if the improvements
are owned by the profit-making
company, then the leasehold,
understanding it's a lease is
taxable in this situation are
the improvements owned or the
improvements the building itself
owned by UNM.
Mr. Chair, um, Vice Chair
Kadina, the building and all of
its infrastructure is, um, um,
owned by the university.
Not,
by American campus community. Is
it your understanding that the
building is the improvement and
all the infrastructure, yes.
Yes.
OK. So again, Mr. Chair, when I
hear about your intention to
build here I read here this
section. It sounds like many of
you all are saying the same
thing.
And the end statement there is
that the leasehold is taxable,
but you are seeing the
improvements are owned by UNM,
so it shouldn't be taxable. So
again, you come in front of us
asking for clarity, um, as the
significant issue states there.
The student leasing household
otherwise taxable because the
improvements would not be owned
by the exempt entity would
become exempt. But in this way,
the FIR is different than what
you're
Establishing
Because the improvements are
owned by the exempt entity.
Would that be correct?
Yes
OK. Um,
so on that read, Mr. Chair,
again.
I appreciate the intention of
this. I'm not convinced that we
should be trying to fix the
statue a couple words at a time
or even though I appreciate the
amendment with the exclusivity
of students. I actually think
we're making more of a mess and
that we potentially, I, I
appreciate your intention. I
would much rather pick up this
whole statue, get a group of
people together from the
renewable sector to you all,
representing Bajon and others
and fix the statue because even
from what you're
explaining to me today. It's not
in line with what the FIR says
that this amendment is
attempting to do, but I think
I'm good for today, Mr. Cha, and
I, I did learn a lot and
appreciate the debate.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go represent Lunchtroom.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you presenters. I'm
looking at page 2 of the FIR and
um just wanted to make a couple
comments, particularly around
the P3 piece, uh, UNM is has got
this agreement with American
campus Company. It's a service
contract, and it's the service
contract revenues that pay the
P3.
So if
Um, they feel that they would
recoup all of the money that
they put into this within 30
years.
Which is a standard P3 service
contract amount.
I haven't seen very many that go
beyond 30 years.
But when you have the
availability to renew an
additional, is it 40 years?
uh, sorry, Mr. Chair and Madam
Representative, so the initial
lease is 40 years with the
option at that point to then
renew for an additional in
ten-year blocks going forward.
How many years maximum.
I don't
7, I mean told 70 years is the
maximum. OK, so this is the part
I don't understand.
If you feel if American campus
Company can recoup their costs
in this P3 under a service
agreement for 40 years.
Why would you and them consider
renewing 3 more times to get up
to 70 years.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Lundstrom.
It is an option to renew, but
you must have signed that
contract, an option to renew
Mister Chairman, so I'm curious
as to what you're thinking would
be to renew almost double.
OK
Um
Mister Chair, um,
Representative Lundstrom, um,
Since I was not at the table. I,
I
don't know the answer to that
question and and that's fine,
Mr. Chairman, but I'm looking at
page 2 and when you see what the
fiscal implications are, uh,
without this exe exemption, and
you see what Lobo village would
be and Casa del Rio, 350,000.
I wanna ask, um,
Say you hit that 31 or 41 year
mark, um,
These taxes and this amount
would be passed on to those
students, correct?
Mr. Chair and Madam
Representative, absolutely. So
they'd be passed on to the
students, proportionally, um,
Based on the and this is current
information who knows what that
number is gonna look like 20
years from now. That's my
concern about this kind of a P3.
Because this amount of 350,000
is based on today's tax rate,
isn't it, Mike or?
too
But, yes. OK.
So I have some concern about
that.
I have some concern about how
those financials are set for
this particular P3.
I understand why we're doing it,
and I like P3s, you know that
I've been carrying P3 bills for
15 years. I like them, and I
think they work.
But I'm a little concerned about
what the cost.
Is to the university.
After the 40 years, I'm
concerned about how that gets
passed on to the students.
And I do, I understand that
there are contract terms, Mr.
Chairman, that if they're not
met, you can get out of this P3,
but then you're back to
legislature trying to figure out
how to pay for the project.
That's what happens.
So I, I just wanna
Explain that the way I
understand how this P3 works.
I like P3s and service
agreements are very traditional
way to pay things off.
But I think it's too long. My
feeling is, is that it should be
all inclusive within a 40-year
period.
I think anytime you say you can
go another 30 years tells me
that maybe we don't think we're
gonna manage this right.
Maybe we're gonna have things
slip through the cracks.
Especially when you don't really
have projections for what those
tax rates are gonna look like.
That would be my comment. I
don't want to try to fix that in
this bill because we don't have
time today, but there are some
issues around that. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Appreciate your comments,
representative. Let's go to uh
Speaker Martinez, uh, Mr. Chair,
I will move a due pass as
amended.
2nd.
Motion made by Speaker Martinez,
second, uh, supported by
Chairman Chandler, please call.
Representative chamber, yes.
Representative Duncan. Yes.
Representative Gallego, yes.
Representative Henry.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Montoya.
Represented Pajun, yes.
Representative Silva.
Yes.
Representative Terasas.
Madam Vice Chair Cadena?
No.
And Mr. Chairmane.
Yes.
Vote 11 to 1 you do pass. Thank
you for your presentation. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Moving on to the
committee substitute for Senate
Bill 383 is amended, flood
recovery bonds and gross
receipts. Senator.
Is there
The senators, though, you look
familiar. Were you uh
formerly the, the best farmer
rancher in the House of
Representatives. Mr. Chairman, I
am the best farmer, but here,
OK? It's good to see all of
y'all.
available
right now.
Yes, sir.
Good morning, Mr. Chair members
of the committee here to talk
about Senate tax, business, and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 383,
as amended with an emergency
clause. Uh, this bill allows any
municipality to uh charge up to
0.375%, 3/8 to 1%, um, on
grocery receipts in order to
secure funding for uh bonding
that will be used um
exclusively, uh, for the
care and hardening of municipal
infrastructure. I have here
today is noted the my expert
Senator Ezel, the best former
rancher, uh, in the, the state,
perhaps even the world and uh
below right there and then uh of
course uh uh Mayor Ross Mayor,
uh, and former Senator Tim
Jennings and, and Roswell City
Attorney Hess, uh, I.
I think I got it. Um, with that
also, I'll turn it over to
Senator Eel, Mr. Chair. Sure
thing, Senator.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee on October 21st, 2024.
Russell experienced.
What you would call a 100 year
flood.
And there was substantial
property damage and 2 fatalities
in this event.
Sometimes reach an average, and
it fell within a 4.5 hour time
frame.
Mr. Chairman, the Spring River
channel overflowed, causing
extreme flooding in downtown
Rossell. Our first responders.
Performed over 300 rescues,
water rescues.
The flooding inundated road
swept away cars, damaged bridges
and buildings. It.
Screwed up all the sewer lines,
uh, and it's it has left the
city and the surrounding area
covered with silt.
The governor declared a state of
emergency for Chavis County area
unlocking $1 million in state
funding to help relief efforts.
President Biden declared a
federal disaster on November
20th November 2nd, 2024, which
made it eligible for fled
disaster relief.
The losses in the Roswell area
alone total over $370 million.
Mr. Chairman.
In the downtown area and I know
the majority of y'all know where
the convention center is. It
filled up with over 4.5 ft of
water.
They were holding a quire in the
convention center at the time,
these people had to evacuate to
the roof of it.
Mr. Chairman, right across the
little the river that's there
where the Rossville Museum is
located. It was up to 5.5 ft of
water with over 4.5 ft of mud
that was in it.
The museum collection totals is
valued at over $300 million that
it is insured. I don't know if
the insurance is going to pay
for all of it.
Those pieces have been sent to
Chicago for restoration. We're
gonna see if that works. Mister
Chairman.
I love our area.
And it does my heart good to
know that whenever redo
experience the things that they
did, Rosal Artisha, Carlsbad,
all the surrounding areas fell
in there to help.
Whenever Roswell and Dexter and
those re
experiences flood. Guess what?
Reed as he came down to help
again. That's what you do. You
go out and you help your
neighbors, Mister Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, what we're
attempting to do here.
And this makes it applicable to
every other municipality in the
state, it is Roswell helping
Roswell.
And I'm gonna let, I know this
gentleman sitting right here and
I'm gonna to limit the amount of
time he can speak, OK?
But I know that he and the city
attorney would like to say some
things over this particular
bill, Mr. Chairman and members,
this is something that not only
Roswell can utilize to help
them, but what every other town
in our state will be able to do
in case of another natural
disaster.
Thank you, Mister Chairman. I'll
let the mayor speak, and if you
want, if you don't, I'll turn it
on over to him.
Hey, that's fine.
Thank you, Senator Mr. Mayor.
Committee members, uh, I will
have to demand equal time on the
ranching comment, uh, I've been
doing that for a long time
myself and I can tell you I know
a lot about it
specifically sheep, uh, but you
know, when we go on to that, but
this bill allows Roswell to.
And that's the gros receipts tax
that we can't do it for 20
years. It will give us hopefully
5 to $7 million a year, we can
bond that and we can come up
with about $75 million. The
problem is that when everybody
talks about we have a lot of
money in Santa Fe. I can't get
anybody to commit that they will
give me $150 million or whatever
to come up with the 75% match
that FEMA has to have. FEMA, if
you look at what they've done
and and
Northern New Mexico. It's been
extremely slow and FEMA has, uh,
you know, you have to have all
your money upfront before FEMA
will put you on the waiting list
to do your project. If you have
your cash upfront, they will do
it. This bill will ensure
Roswell has our cash upfront,
but it will also allow the
people in northern New Mexico,
Las Vegas or wherever had water
damage and everything else for
there, it will allow them to.
with the same taxin and generate
the money and put, hopefully the
state will give us a 0% loan.
Because, you know, you're the
state's still gonna get 5.5 or
$7 million in grocery seats tax
on anything spent in these
projects.
Originally we had that where we
kept that too just to make our
money go farther. FEMA will pay
25 or 75%, the cities have to
come up with 75%. And when you
look at that, our museum alone
is flooded 4 times, then our
insurance people say they are
not gonna put it back. They will
not insure our collection there.
We're gonna have to build a new
museum with 65 70,000 square
feet and probably in a cost of
about
900,000 $900 a square foot.
That's where we are. That's,
that's a lot of money.
60 million bucks and we have a
beautiful collection, but we'll,
I assure you we will go on a
hill.
And uh so we won't have this
problem again, but we have to
have that, we have to know we've
got the cash.
And FEMA won't listen on
anything else, and if, and why
it's so important that we do
this now and let the council and
improve and put this into
effect.
Is that
We have, we have all kinds of
disasters already going just
like the one in North Carolina
that's going, and then you have
Pacific palisades in California.
And if we don't get ahead of
Pacific Palisades in North
Carolina, and we don't have our
upfront money there. All that
money is gonna go to California
and, and they have 6 66,822
homes that are 2 to $4 million
they're gone.
And so you look how much money
that's gonna take. We've got a
president that's threatening
right now to do away with all
FEMA?
Where's that gonna leave us and
you know, on top of all this
FEMA will work on private or
state or federal property, but
you have to have some property
that they own. As the flood
commissioner, I have $70 million
worth of projects that have been
washed away.
They have to be replaced, and
that's to protect the
committee's all the way from the
Felice River.
All the way through Travis
County.
And uh a lot of that area is
flat, um, but I have to put that
back. I have no source for it.
We have $16 million contract
right now. I need $4 million in
cash.
You know, to match the 25% for
that 16 million to protect
Dexter Hagerman and Lake Arthur
and or not Lake Arthur, but
Dexter and Hagerman from the
Fleece River all the way to
Roswell. I've got to find $4
million there too.
And so, and that's not
necessarily protecting the city,
so I have a dual function here,
but this is why we have to have
that. I would ask that you pass
this as soon as you can so we
can get going so we have our
insurance we can get it and I
would, I would just tell you and
we dropped the part about taking
the gross receipts tax off. I'm
hoping that we can get the board
of Finance to give us a 0% loan.
Mains it's the least you can
they can do for us for raising
our own money to fix our own
stuff. And, you know, and Las
Vegas and northern New Mexico
was in the exact same boat we're
in.
And this gives us a way to fix
our problem and not always come
to you and have have to have her
hand out and then have everybody
fighting about how much you get.
I mean, so please, I hope you
can do it. We still need more
money. I hope we can get some
flood money from somewhere, but
uh we need this, sorry, thank
you, but I still want to reserve
time to talk about the sheep and
how we got put out the sheep
business.
Thank you, Mr. Mayor. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you,
Representative in the interest
of time might we go to the
public for,
that would be great. We stand
for questions. the presentation
this morning. Let's go to those
online. Anybody online in
support of opposition?
No, no one online. Let's go to
the room. Anyone in support for
the Senate Bill 383 Queen
substitute for that.
No one in support anyone in
opposition.
Seeing no one. Let's come back
to the committee for question,
comments. Ranking member Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. If uh
Senator knew anything about good
horses, I'd make it do do pass
on this bill.
Yeah.
Wait, was, was that a motion?
OK,
motion do passed by
Representative Duncan, and I
heard a second from
Representative Terazas.
And the question comes before we
go there.
Oh, represented so.
Oh sorry, thank you, chair. Um
thank you committee senators,
experts, I appreciate it. I just
have questions, um, to
understand, um, and, um, and
one, thank you for the
testimonies. I just wanna
express my, uh, condolences and
um a hardship. I can't, I can't
imagine having to go through
that as an entire community. um,
and my questions are, so why
issue
Bonds rather than um not just
use like the GRT increments that
you might have as
municipalities. Can you help me
understand what the benefit is
to, to issuing a bond. Thank
you, chair. Mr. Chairman, at
this point, I am going to let
our other expert witness, Mr.
Hessein to answer that?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
the, the way it works with FEMAs
that we have to have a bulk of
money upfront in the city of
Roswell simply were
mapped out. Uh, so the, the way
it's structured is we can bring
in up to 3/8 of a cent,
exclusively for the purpose of
bonding. So it's a very limited
uh GRT implementation
exclusively designed to be able
to help us get that 75% match
from FEMA. Got it. OK, thank
you, chair, and thank you,
expert. And then are there
revenue bonds that don't
currently exist, like quite
create a whole new flood
recovery bond you does Roswell,
um, or the statement that issue
that sort of
Mechanism already um.
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, no,
this is a, it could have fallen
under general revenue bonds, but
we didn't want to create general
revenue taxes, so the flood
recovery bond exists to
demonstrate how this is a very
limited GRT application.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and expert,
um, and then I see in the, in
one of the physical impact
reports tax and rev department
says that the bonds may not be
issued until about July 2026,
just because of the way that the
mechanism needs to be executed.
Um, how are you all feeling
about that? That feels like a
long ways away. Um, so I just
wanted to name that and get, get
your your thoughts on that, Mr.
Chair.
Um
Mr.
Chairman and I guess I don't
have that one, but would that
would be covered and Mister Mint
to help me out here. This would
be under the emergency.
And I think that it's spelled
out right here. Issuance of
the immediate.
You can't talk right now. The
issuance of flood recovery
bonds, revenue bonds.
And wasn't that put in in an
emergency, yeah, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, uh, I think we
could actually get it in
September 1.
Um, of 25, so if this were to
pass it with the emergency
clause, the city would implement
almost immediately, not saying
we have to violated the Open
Meetings Act, but I have a
speaking suspicion the council
would like this to go forward.
Um, and so we could probably
move it 3 months faster, which
would make a big difference.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
experts. Um, I am looking at, I
think this is
Um,
The FIR for, uh, it was that was
prepared by LFC. And so, and I'm
on page 2, and it says, um, with
the emergency clause, the
attacks could begin as early as
April 1, 2025, but this would be
out of cycle for the tax and rev
department pursue it to and the
names of statute, the department
requires a 3-month leave time to
implement the new tax. This
means that the earliest
implementation date would be
January of 2026.
If this bill were passed and
signed um a January 1
implementation date would not be
possible, and the tax would most
likely begin July 1 of 2026, and
bonds being issued as of June
30th, 2026. So I just raised
that so that you are aware of it
and um it because I also want
this to be expedited, um, but
that just raised a concern for
me. Thank you, Chair.
Thank you. We have a motion for
a due pass from Representative.
Duncan is a 2nd from
representative Tarasas, uh.
Any opposition to that motion.
Seeing that, you have a do pass
on the committee substitute for
Senate bill 383 is amended.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you very much,
and I know all the residents can
Chefs County. Thank you as well.
And on behalf of the best farmer
rancher in the House of
Representatives. You're welcome
and on behalf of the best farmer
and rancher on the Senate side,
I thank all of y'all as well.
I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I didn't
hear.
less.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, when
you're ready on House Bill 450.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We have
a substitute.
The sub is being passed out now.
That's one big tree.
And cheering with the
substitute.
Um
move the substitute for
discussion, Mr. Chair, you'd
like to present your committee
set. Yes, ma'am. Thank you,
Madam Chairwoman. Thank you
committee members. I wanna first
recognize those committee
members that helped to negotiate
this capital outlay package this
past year. A couple of members
on this committee, we have
ranking member Duncan that
represented the minority party,
uh, in this in this initiative
as well as um uh Chairwoman
Gallegos in regards to her work
on this negotiating team as well
as our whip Da Hopman B. Hill,
uh
We met for weeks with the
administration to negotiate uh a
package that you see in front of
you today, and I will make
mention that this house taxation
and revenue Committee substitute
for House Bill 450 appropriates
about $1.2 billion to more than
1400 capital outlay projects
statewide. Mr. Chair, will you
read the 202 number just quickly
on your
phone.
Can I get a copy of that
substitute.
Oh
everybody.
Madam Chairwoman apologize that
too.
3 number is 0.231948.2. And it
looks like
a member of the committee and
you, Mr. Chair, have this to
these proceed with your
presentation. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair. As made
mention, uh, house, this house
bills community substitute
appropriates $1.2 billion to
more than 1400 capital outlay
projects statewide, uh, of that
$1.2 billion 799.8 million
dollars come from the general
fund.
Uh, $292 million in severance
tax bond funding $133 million in
other state funds.
Nearly 600 million in general
fund and the bill is
appropriated to projects
prioritized by all of you around
this table, House and Senate
members, and the governor. That
is considered our local chef.
Those are for initiatives that
are, are, are near and dear to
your respective communities and
your respective districts. The
remainder is appropriate to
state agencies, judicial and
higher education projects.
Some of the state agency
projects are for the benefit of
local entities that is more so
the statewide framework of this
capital outlay bill.
Additionally, this year, in our
negotiations, uh, we were able
to hold back about $50 million
from the package to help, uh,
prioritize some, some work in
local projects to help
completely, fully fund those
projects. Uh, this year, a
bipartisan group of House and
Senate members prioritize more
than $50 million.
For over 90 projects in the bill
for completion of existing
capital outlay projects. This
funding by legislators
represented all regions in the
state with the goal of again
fully funding the request of the
entire project. Now mind you, is
that in, in past years or since
I've been a part of this, of
this negotiating team, we go
upstairs and we negotiate and we
have nothing left when we come
back downstairs. This year was a
little bit different where we
push to make sure that we held
back some dollars, uh, that you
could
probably call a closing fund,
and that's what we used it for.
So for the, for those
initiatives that many of you in
your communities, respective
communities might have uh that
received just enough, but never
enough to fully fund that
project. This is where that fund
came in handy, and I'll, I'll
I'll make a couple of mentions
in regards to uh that work that
we've done, an additional $8
million was provided for for
waterline expansions in Curry
County. That fully funded that
project that otherwise would
never have received full.
funding of that project and
would have continued to go year
after year hoping that we can
nickel and dime until we get to
that point. Uh, an additional 2
million for a skill for a
skilled nursing facility in Rio
Reba was also uh awarded an
additional 1.3 million for an
early childcare facility in
Eunice, New Mexico was also
awarded an additional $1.1
million for a real-time crime
center in Las Cruces was also uh
made fully funded. An additional
$1.6 million for water system
improvement.
for Maxwell, New Mexico was
fully funded. Uh, that's been on
the list for years, and that's
finally fully funded. And
finally an additional $975,000
for housing infrastructure in
Harding County was again fully
funded by the charts you see in
front of you today, all the
projects and amounts included in
the bill are by county, and with
that, Madam Chair, I would stand
for any questions.
Thank you. We'll begin with
public comments. We'll start
online.
If you are participating on Zoom
and would like to speak in
support of House Bill 450,
please raise your hands now.
Anyone on opposition online,
please raise your hand if you'd
like to speak in opposition, the
HP 450.
OK, we'll go to the room now.
Anyone here to speak in support
or opposition to House Bill 450,
please line up.
Seeing no public comment will go
to the committee.
dy
Representative Silva.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, chair, for uh the
presentation and the work that
uh was put into putting this all
together. Um, being new as a new
legislator, I, so this is just
the capital outlay that
legislators have put together,
this does not include the
executive capital outlay or does
it? Mature.
Madam Chairwoman and and
representative. This includes
yes ma'am, it includes the
governor's initiatives, local,
uh, like the ones that we have
for our respective uh
communities like like you see
$2.5 million. She received $175
million for her administration.
And it also includes the
statewide framework which goes
more so towards upkeep of state
facilities and or building of
new state initiatives.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
and Mr. Chair, is that broken
down or is it just all in there?
I'm sure.
Uh, Madam Chairwoman, in front
of you, you should receive, you
should have received, um.
You have
3 different one of these. I
allow Kelly, who is our capital
and I forgot to introduce her.
Kelly Carswell, who is our uh
legislative finance committee
capital outlay guru who has
helped us along the way. So
Kelly.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative, so
it is all just in the bill. Um,
however, and in your chart by
county, um, you will find
there's a part of the chart
where the county is called
statewide.
Um, that contains a number of
those state-owned projects, the
chairman mentioned, um, those
also include higher education
institutions with which in these
charts would be sort of spread
based on the county that they're
in, um, within the bill itself,
uh, you can find some of the
statewide projects, um,
appropriated to GST or capital
program funds, and then there
are some others that are
peppered throughout and we could
provide you a list of the
statewide stuff in particular.
If you'd like to see that after
committee.
Great. Thank you. Thank you,
madam chair.
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
ma'am chair and Mr. Chairman,
um, I, I can't tell you how much
I learned being the first time
that I've done this on this
committee and, and we learned an
awful lot.
We learned, uh, not only were,
um,
Those
Request that had been funded 5,
10 years ago and, and still
brought forward, not fully
funded. We learned that, and we
were able to do some things for
90 projects throughout the state
of New Mexico I think is great.
Um
And that's probably one of the
best things that will, will come
of this is being able to finish
projects that these rural
communities probably never were
going to get done. So, and if
there was an ask on the table,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, and that
was the criteria. There had to
be an ask. We couldn't just go
out and find a project in in
some of those counties that had
no ask and and had no ask for 5
years that had been waiting for
funds to to capital that way
from the representatives of
senators to get it done. And so
those were the, those are the
things that uh we looked at.
and uh try to
spread that money out as evenly
as and as wide as we possibly
could to get some projects done
and for that I'm really
appreciative. Um, I am, I
recognize that um
We have capital outlay. Governor
has capital outlay, and um Madam
Chair, Mr. Chairman, uh, this
was a lot of hard work.
We put into this and I
appreciate the work that was
done to this. I'm looking on
page 242, um, the governor has
$10 million to plan design and
construct equipment, furnish a
reproductive health care clinic
in northern New Mexico. I assume
this is going to be an abortion
clinic.
And for that reason,
a bill that I would have voted
for, I cannot vote for this bill
now. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Gallegos.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I just
wanted to, uh,
to mention that I've been on
this negotiation team for about
8 years. And um I think this
year we made probably the most
progress in getting the most
projects completed and um
Very proud of the work that that
you um led us to do and um that
we were able to really look at
those smaller communities, um,
that I think, uh, Representative
Duncan said would have never
gotten those projects done. So,
um,
With that, I, I just wanted to
commend um the staff who is
working I think around the clock
to give us all those numbers and
making sure that all those
projects were brought forth and
we were able to to complete
those. So thank you, Mr. Chair.
represented.
In humanitarian and Mr. Chair,
I'm just in awe because for the
whole time that I've been a
representative. I've heard over
and over again that our rural
communities, you know, the
distribution is not proportional
to the need and, um, you know,
there are certainly a lot of
infrastructure projects that are
still being built out in my uh
in my district, but I think it's
really impressive the way that
you've, um, the way that y'all
have gone about it where
You're holding back a little bit
of the funding to be able to
make projects that have been
incomplete for years and years
whole, so, um, I'm just really
grateful to be part of this
body, to be part of this caucus,
um, that's really pushing
forward on on fully funding the
some of the projects that have
not been fully funded in the
past. Thank you.
Representative Montoya.
Mr. Chair, if I may respond to
that, that Madam Chair and
Representative. So the the top
you you you make in regards to
the references you make in
regards to funding more of the
rural communities. I want to
make it clear that that funding,
that $50 million isn't because
we withheld money to each and
every one of you as legislators
in the House or the Senate, that
was negotiated back from what
the governor would have spent
anyways, and so usually the way
it works is that we'll go up
there and she'll negotiate and
all of a sudden we come down and
then she
Fully funds many of her
initiatives, which often are not
your initiatives and so this
year we, we approached it
differently we said, OK, we're
only going to go to a certain
point, uh, with the intent that
we're not going to spend it.
Long story short, but we
discussed in, in our work group
that, that no, actually it would
probably be a good thing to
affect local projects that never
get fully funded or and or those
projects that
are not the governor's
priorities and never would have
been her priorities. So that is
where that money comes from.
It's not because we took
From your uh appropriation, but
because we held back some of
those for that closing fund.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
yous representative. Madam Chair
and Mr. Chair, it is equally
impressive. Thank you.
Uh represent in Monteo.
Uh, thank you, madam chair. Uh,
just briefly, Mr. Chairman, uh
appreciate the work done on
this, um, capital outlay is very
important to every one of our
districts, and it has always
been, um, I, I am gonna look uh
just briefly at on page 2 of the
fiscal impact report, um, under
significant issues. The first
line says demand for capital
outlay continues to exceed
available funding even a state
revenue surge.
Um
Obviously, we, we, we had a, a
pretty good debate on, on House
Bill 14 and a tax bill, um.
And just the concerns that we
were not able to stay.
Uh, within a budget that was
$13 billion of income into the
state, but um, Madam Chair, and,
and Mr. Chairman.
Even with that,
fully planned on voting for.
Call outly Bill, uh, just
because it's the one area where
Local
legislators get to to have local
impact, the greatest local
impact it's within our purview.
Um, but I, I like, um,
Representative Duncan with with
the governor adding in.
The
uh funding for a new abortion
clinic and apparently right on
the border to
I, I, I would imagine to appeal
to out of state.
Abortion seekers.
I, I just think that's a
misappropriation of of New
Mexico dollars and uh I I think
this is the first time in 11
years, I'm gonna have to vote
against capital outlay bill
because of that. I, I appreciate
your work. I appreciate the work
of the committee, and uh so I'm
not wanting to integrate that at
all. Uh, I, I, I know this is
completely within the governor's
purview.
And um
I, I just can't support it.
Representative Henry.
Madam Chair, I believe the
chairman wanted to respond.
Madam Chairwoman and, and
Representative Montoya, I'm
gonna be fully transparent and
candid with the, with the.
Committee this morning and
When our staff alerted me that,
that the governor had made that
appropriation a late change, if
you will, uh, in the, in, in
this.
In this bill, uh,
Well I'm a Democrat.
I, I consider myself to be fair
and open and transparent with
each and every one of you
regardless of where you come
from in the state or your party
affiliation. So I quickly called
our ranking member and told him
that this is what's in the bill.
I want to let you know because
when you get a bill this size,
you can't shuffle through it in
minutes and find what's in it
and what's not in it.
And so it's, it's, it's my duty
as, as the chairperson for this
committee, the steward of this
committee for this time that
I want to make sure that that we
take that we have the most
information available to all of
us, again, regardless of
Democrat or Republican, but to
the point that I know that many
times and I've been put in this
situation before where members
weren't able to vote for it
because of, of, of those values,
right?
I have zero judgment that if you
cannot vote for it because then
I don't think any of us should
have, have any judgment on if
somebody can't vote for it for
those reasons, but I felt it
important to tell our ranking
member so that he could tell the
membership so that you're not
caught in a situation where you
voted yes we're here on the
floor then you would have to
then, then recount for that and
then maybe make some, make some
excuses or make some type of of
comments related to that. So I
felt it important, Madam
Chairwoman and, and, and
Representative Montoya to make
sure that we understood.
What's in this bill and what's
not in this bill. Thank you,
Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you, Representative Henry.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank
you, Chairman.
I do, uh,
Really appreciate the work you
Cliff in the capital outlay, you
know, as a local official, so
often we see that uh some of
these rural communities are so
close. Uh, there, there's,
there's the projects that they
have to have. They're not.
want to have their halves the
haves, whether it be water,
sewer, uh, police cars,
infrastructure, um, and, you
know, I'm very lucky where I
sit, our council of governments
does an amazing job of making
sure we fully understand each
community what their needs are
and give them that voice so that
we can understand them, um.
So I can't thank you enough for
the work that you put in and
that extra money to make sure
those, those, whether it be a
big community, it doesn't matter
to me, it's helping New Mexicans
get those truly needed projects
funded uh to make sure that our
cities and our, our counties uh
are fully operational, um.
I was just going to explain my
vote, but uh for the same
reasons, I absolutely hate that
I have to vote against this
because I see all the good that
this is going to do. Um, but I
also bothers me that
Having sat through so many of
those council of government
meetings with our small
communities.
They didn't need that 10 million
would have gone a long way to
make sure they had drinkable
water, to make sure that their
septics were working, um,
And it just bothers me, uh, and,
and, and it just goes against
everything I can. So thank you
for pointing that out. I
appreciate it. Um, I hate that I
will have to vote against it
because, I mean, look at this,
these are pages and pages of
amazing projects that our
communities need, um, that
affects their daily life and
makes it better. So uh I
appreciate that and with that I
you.
Representative Lindstrom.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and
presenters. I'd like to ask how
did um your
Negotiation team decide what
would be general fund and what
would be severance tax bonds.
met him and and representative
left him he would allow Kelly to
Go into detail on that.
Um, Mr. Madam Chair, sorry.
Representative, uh, so the
general fund target was set as
part of the overall general fund
budget through LFC in the fall,
um, and then the severance tax
bond capacity was what was
available, um, from the board of
Finance. January estimate, um,
that number is lower than in
past years as a result of uh HB
253, which you all passed last
year, um, which
Uh, directs the Board of Finance
to essentially um only set
long-term debt at a level that
will maintain stable that ratio
ratios for the state over time.
I'm sure what I'm actually
asking is how did you determine
which projects would be STB
versus general fund.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Lumstrom, sorry, I misunderstood
the question. So, um, we try to
prioritize larger projects, um,
that were ready. Uh, for the STB
funds, um, as opposed to smaller
projects that we are sort of
unsure of their readiness or the
capacity to spend funds and the
severance tax bond capacity um
was all spent within the
statewide framework, whereas
general fund funded the local
projects and some of the
statewide framework.
So let me ask Osco also, Madam
Chair, uh, Mr. Chair.
House District 6 projects are in
here.
Um, Madam Treman and
representative of House Disc 6
meeting former Representative of
Gon's district. Yes, ma'am. OK.
I just wanted to make sure
because of the timing on that
appointment and everything, um,
and the other question I had,
uh, Mr. Chairman, is when will
these
sponsor names be listed in the
portal.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, those will be published, um,
I believe it's 30 days after the
session, um, or it might be
after the governor signs the
bill, but, uh, there, that the
timeline where there's uh
published online is set in
statute.
Reason I ask is that then I, I
assume that there wouldn't be
any vetoes in this bill. That's
his negotiated with the
executive, but it is helpful for
all of us to know who actually
supported what project?
I know that was a question
earlier by some of the newer
members. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Terazas.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Mr. Chair, thank you very much.
I'm gonna tell you.
I have a lot of deep respect for
you in, in that you express
that, expressed that to us this
morning and let us know, being
that out of 249 pages. It's one
of the late things we would have
never been able to read through
all this, and so, um, that gives
me a lot of respect to how you
run a m your committee, and I
also uh for the same reasons,
can't support it, but, you know,
there is a lot of need for
capital outlay, I will say.
There's a lot of work that goes
into it to
To come to this point.
Um, all of our, all of our
communities work very hard and
and and need this, you know, uh
throughout this uh all 33
counties, but yeah, it's just I
think it was one of those things
I just
I, I can't support it obviously
for the the same reasons and
it's unfortunate, but thank you
so much.
Speaker Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Mr. Chair, thank you
for all the work. Um, thank you,
Kelly, for all the work to the
negotiating team. Thank you for
your work. Um, I just wanna
express a couple points. Um, I
really appreciate the way, well,
you were on the committee, but
also the way you've led these
negotiations along with ranking
member Duncan. I appreciate you.
Um
Navigating and balancing all the
different angles of this thing
and um, you know, in terms of
this reproductive health care
clinic.
Second you found out about it,
you relayed that. Um, I just
want to warn us though that if I
went through this bill line by
line, there will be projects
that you funded that I don't
agree with.
And, you know, I'm
I'm not gonna
I'm not gonna
No, because you decided to fund
a project that your community
wanted.
Um, at the end of the day, the
governor does get a share of the
capital outlay, and the governor
gets to appropriate as they see
fit.
Um
In fact,
Uh, there's an appropriation
here for the miner's Hospital in
Colfax.
For medical equipment.
I don't know what that's for. It
might be for procedures that I
don't agree with.
But I'm not going to vote
against this.
Because of that appropriation. I
don't know who made it. I can
only assume maybe it's whatever
senator or representative
represents that community. Um,
But it's as much as I
appreciate.
Um
You know, perhaps the heartburn
that some folks may have.
fact of the matter is that this
is all above board.
The second you got the list, you
relate it.
Uh, there are no surprises here,
um, and I would just hope that
folks can um can see that and
understand that. I, I, I get
that it's an issue that for some
of us could be a little bit more
difficult for whatever, whatever
the reason that might be. Um,
but as I'm going through this
list, I'm like, OK, well,
there's a project here that I am
wondering about.
Right? What is it for? Who ask
for it?
Is that really where the money
should be used.
Also understanding that this is
Well over $500 million of
investments in all of our
communities.
Um, I have links in my
community, yeah, I'm in urban.
Urban Albuquerque downtown.
I've got parks that need to be.
stuff.
I hope this bill passes, because
if it doesn't pass, my
community's not gonna get the
money that they deserve, their
tax dollars back in these
investments, so, um, I
appreciate the debate and
discussion. I just want to make
sure that we all understand that
this is, this is not some
surprise, some gotcha moment.
Bear you down page 91, only 400
page bill.
As soon as you found out that
this is in the list of
priorities for the governor, he
related to all of us.
We know exactly what we're
voting on. So thank you for the
work. Thank you, ranking
members. Thank you to the other
members of the negotiating team
for this good bill, I'm I'm
looking forward to supporting
this.
Thank you, Representative
Chandler.
I move that House Bill 350 do
not pay 450, sorry, not wearing
my glasses.
I,
I have a motion that the House
taxation and Revenue Committee
sub for House Bill 415. Am I not
supposed to do a do not pass on
how they do not, uh, sorry,
I got it. Um, I moved that house
bill 450 do not pass, but house
taxation and revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill 450 to
pass.
second.
Seculent representative Silva.
OK, we'll do
Call the
Representative Chandler.
Yes.
Representative Duncan. No.
Representative Gallegos, yes.
Representative Henry.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Yes. Representative Montoya. No.
Representative Parajuan, yes.
Representative Silva.
Yes.
Representative Tarazas.
Madam Vier Cadena, yes.
Mr. Charlie. Yes, ma'am. We have
an 8 to 5.
Very good.
Thank you again, committee
members for your work this past
session. Uh, if we do have to
call up another meeting, it'll
be at the call the chair, but at
this point in time we have no
other committees, uh, action to
