There.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Romero.
Good morning.
I'm here.
Representative.
Here.
Madam.
Representative Hernandez yes
says tell you I am here thank
you.
Madam chair.
Tasking I am here.
We have a where.
Okay Senator Kernan is happens
technical difficulties.
Is unable to hear anything I
wonder if it's the same problem
we had there were problems on
the Senate side yesterday
Committee members when I was
over there and similar sorts of
things were happening so a
bummer I don't know what let's
see how it goes she could always
come here when we get to my
office when we get to our bill
if if necessary
so let me it before we all right
here she comes
before we get started I'd like
to talk about the order of
Business last late well I guess
it was probably early early this
morning we got to bills sent to
our committee Senate bill two
twelve and Senate bill two
thirteen the first one is the
capital outlay bill and the
second one is the re
authorization bill I'd like to
get to those a little with with
with respect to the re authors
ation bill I want the whole
Vigil is here with me for both
bills but she told me she got a
text message from but we all the
floor leaders saying something
about maybe needing to amend the
re authorization bill because
you know something was missing
so what I may do the state.
I just got a text from him.
okay so I just got a text from
Representative Lujan Kimberly
Representative Lujan needs the
link.
So that that be great but
What we may hold off on two
thirteen until I hear back from
Representative leader look
Martinez just to see what's
going on in terms of whether he
wants to amend it in committee
or on the floor obviously it be
easier if we could amended in
committee so let's do this let's
do to twelve which is a big bill
then if I haven't heard back
from leader Martinez I will will
go to Senator Kernan still
Senate bill one thirty seven I
think the number is.
And then will have a pre of a
briefing brief briefing from
Roger Representative Roger
Montoya
where he'll be talking about
rural infrastructure issues it's
it's a preview of what we may
discuss during the interim all I
wanted to.
Share some information with you
or have our representative share
some information with you on
that partnership so with that
let's go to Senate bill two
twelve and I'm going to hand the
reins to the vice chair as I
will be presenting with the Ben
who is in my office and as long
now she's a great expert on this
I am not she is available to
answer questions so I have a
brief statement
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
twelve with an emergency clause
is the capital L. late bill for
projects statewide the bill
authorizes or appropriates eight
hundred and twenty seven million
dollars from the following
funds.
Six hundred and eighty one point
one million in severance tax
bonds thirty million from the
general fund and a hundred and
sixteen point six million from
other state funds.
Funding in the bill includes
approximately four hundred and
seven point three million
dollars for state agencies
schools and judicial projects
three hundred and ninety eight
point four million dollars for
projects identified by the
governor the house and Senate
members to address local and
regional projects statewide and
thirty million for tribal
projects state wide.
The key Ben and I are available
to answer questions after public
comment is received madam vice
chair.
Thank you madam chair let's go
to the audience and see if there
is if there are any members with
the comments those who have
comments to support the capital
outlay bill as you heard it laid
out
The last you to please raise
your hands.
Right now I see one attendee
with their hand raised.
We will go to that person right
now Isaac Consadole you have one
minute thank you good morning
madam chair members of the
committee I Maestas solders
germinated American democratic
caucus and we stand in full
support of this capital projects
bill as it is consequential in
bringing dire infrastructure to
many of our native American in
rural communities also we ask
your do passed in this bill your
concurrence and hope that we can
continue bringing much needed
relief and support for our rural
and tribal communities thank you
so much.
Thank you very much miss silos
is there anyone else who wishes
to make a comment either in
support or against the
information in the capital
outlay bill.
See attendees with their hands
ratings Kimberly will take the
clock down and let's go to the
to the members of the committee
are there members of the
committee was to make a comment.
And to make sure that I'm saying
this correctly today I see
Representative Harper is hand
first.
Representative Harper you have
the floor.
Thank you madam chair and the
chair Chandler
Miskito thank you for being here
I have just a couple.
Technical questions just so I
can understand.
so our manager and chairwoman
Gen general
What we try to split the capital
outlay
Portion the leftover seniors
portion a third was the house to
start with the Senate and
answered with the executive.
So that that's six hundred issue
million capital outlay portion
was.
Was that
I kind of Sir Senator mall
follow here.
Good morning Representative this
is Linda G. O. responding yes it
was it was a hundred and thirty
million dollars for the house
hundred thirty million dollars
for the Senate nine thirty
million dollars four of the
executive for the governor.
Thank you.
Madam chair and and Miskito and
enter Chandler up.
And and then the.
And I'm just asking this because
a few years ago we had a lot of
capital outlay that was a mix of
general fund and capital outlay
and then
When we had that drop fall short
shortfall in oil and gas and and
a budget crisis we came in and.
that had just the budget but I
think the the governor line item
vetoed all of the capital outlay
projects that were general fund
Associated so can you just
explain to me your the thirty
million dollars of general fund
what projects are those going
towards.
Yes Sir of those are all tribal
entities statewide.
And those that thirty million
dollars was originally in a
committee substitute for house
bill two and three.
And the site Senate finance
committee decided to move that
thirty million dollars into the
capital outlay bill.
Interesting okay madam chair and
and Miss Vigil was were you were
you part of that
decision making or not decision
addressed by by just asking what
was the impetus for for making
that move.
I thank Mr speaker what it was
is that they were all
General I mean they were all
tribal from infrastructure
projects that needed to be done
immediately not have to wait for
severance tax bonds to be
passed.
This is you know nonrecurring
general fund can be started to
spend as soon as the governor
signs the bill rather than
waiting for the bonds to be
issued.
Got it thank you that that
answers that question and then
the last question on that line
is.
Madam chair and.
Chandler.
Why would why was the move made
to take this thirty million from
house bill two and three and put
it in the capital outlay
projects I was curious why that
decision was made.
Did you say three million the
thirty apologies.
again I I think is that they
wanted the tribal entities
projects to get started right
away.
Okay so I wasn't part of the
decision making to move but I
was just told to put it into the
capital outlay bill.
Right originally
We were told not to put general
fund into the capital bill
And that was just a decision
that was made in Senate finance
committee.
Madam chair Chandler missed your
thank you yeah that that that's
why I'm just a little confused
and doesn't tell it is a great
answer sure that I know there's
lots of projects capital
projects that are funded in
house bill two and three and so
I I don't see why we kind of
left that in there and it you
know what is going to affect
immediately as well but
nevertheless that's that's fine
the the other question I have
Madam chair Mister she holds the
hundred sixteen million and
other state funds.
could you maybe just go over
what
Funds those are are coming from
I know that we usually have a
good amount of other state funds
but I'm I'm thinking back
usually about sixty to eighty
issue million I think is the
average you an order than I do
so this is this is a little bit
higher if you just maybe talk
about that yes the
representative of what we've got
here.
Is nineteen point five million
dollars coming out of the game
protection fund.
Four or four five different
conservation projects three
million out of the big game
enhancement fund a million
dollars of the habitat
management fund.
A million dollars of the Sykes
account from the game protection
fund three hundred thousand
dollars from the fire protection
fund five million dollars from
the educational empowerment fund
one point three million dollars
for minors Trust Fund and what
was decided just before the the
the bill was
Drafted was to take seventy five
there's eighty five point five
million dollars it's coming out
of public school capital outlay
fund balances.
And what was decided is
to transfers and this was a
committee decision just before
the bill was drafted.
The bill authorize seventy five
million dollars that was
transferred from balances of the
public school capital outlay
fund to the public school
facilities authority for
distribution to each school
district
the the purpose was to allow
each school district of based on
the capital improvement act to
be able to access at least a
hundred thousand dollars for
minor repairs of that had to be
done that we're more immediate
mostly due to the pandemic.
And this distribution of does
not require a local match.
R. or the offset that is usually
required by public school
capital outlay of funds.
So and and there is on your your
FIR.
An explanation I mean it gives
you a list of the schools and
how much that they would be
allowed to get up for the we're
from that money now the reason
for taking it for the public
school our capital outlay fund
is that.
There was quite a bit of
balances that were accumulating
as of January twenty second the
public school cap that Lee
council reported on committed
balances in the fund for FY
twenty two approximate three
hundred and ninety five point
six million dollars and also
anticipated that a further
increase would go to seven
hundred and ninety five million
point four million dollars by FY
two six because of the
additional supplemental
severance tax block the past it
would be at it.
To to that fund.
Yeah madam chair and chair
representative madam keyhole.
Mr Keogh of thank you
yeah and I I think we talked on
the house for about the great
balances starting to projected
to accrue in that public school
capital outlay fund so I think
this is actually a great idea
to.
Transfer some of that over to
the schools to use for
maintenance which is actually
what that frontier is is also
for anyway so maybe making it
easier to to spend those dollars
down.
and then I guess the the.
The very first couple items you
mentioned
The manager Chandler Miskito of
the dollars from game for
conservation projects I know
there are several folks
That are sensitive to you know
well these are are dollars being
spent to purchase private lands
are those kind of things do you
do you know what these
conservation projects are
I I do know that I think
approximately five million
dollars was for land
acquisition.
I think there was question as to
from the director as to whether
there that that was a request
from them or not.
But from my understanding that
that was put in there at the
request of the executive.
Thank you madam chair and and
chair Chandler and and Miskito
friends my questions I'm I
really appreciate the time.
Thank you Representative Harper
are there any other questions
from the committee.
Okay if not I have a couple
questions of.
Madam chair and Miskito when we
went out Representative Harper
ask about the one third one
third one third between the
house the Senate and the
executive he said that that was
a hundred and thirty million
each and I thought he was
referencing the six eighty one
in the severance bond but the
totals only cool so I'm just
trying to understand.
What so one thirty one thirty
and one thirty yes because
that's only three hundred and
ninety.
Well it's actually it was the
house and the Senate each got a
hundred and thirty thousand two
hundred dollars.
Divide to divide amongst
members.
And of course at three ninety
was after of what was in the
framework for state agencies and
there was other initiatives that
were included in the state
framework of by the executive.
But that that division was of.
That was decided very early on.
Madam chair if I could just
clarifying the six hundred if I
and I'm sure let us know will
correct me if I get this wrong
six hundred and eighty one point
one million is what our full
capacity was and then there are
fund there's monies that are
taken off of that six hundred
and eighty one such as I think
there are various funds that get
a certain percentage like the
colonials Fund I think there
about three funds that water
project fund in the tribal fund
that comes right off the six
hundred eighty one and then the
balance is divided among the
executive the house and the and
the Senate so that's how we got
to but whatever allocations were
madam chair and committee thank
you very much madam chair and
and Miskito and I just have one
of the question for
clarification when you talk
about the other state funds
under the.
I think it's a one hundred and
sixty million indicated I think
that five million was coming
from the education retirement
fund so my question is is
because it's always been this
question about have enough money
those funds is that money going
to be going directly to
something related to capital
outlay for education retirement
could you please explain or or
if you can yes yes madam chair
that five million dollars is
going toward the final phase of
their facility that was
relocated several years ago and
of course our we checked with
the balances we checked to make
sure that the that the funding
is is solvent before allowing
pride of authorization from
their their own funds.
Okay thank you very much of
Madam chair and the Miskito are
there if there are no other
questions and we are I'm
prepared to take a motion.
And who would like to make that
motion.
Thank you Representative Harper
for making that motion.
But would you make the most yes
yes I I certainly will madam
chair I move a do pass on
What is the Senate finance
committee substitute for
Senate Bill to twelve.
With an emergency clause.
Is there a second on the motion
second by Representative Lente
thank you representative Lente
it all in we'll take Kimberly
would you please call the roll.
Yes.
Representative.
Speaker is yes.
excuse me completely yes thank
you thank you.
Thank.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative.
Yes Representative we want yeah
thanks.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative will not.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler.
Yes.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair.
Yes.
We have an eleven there about.
Thank you very much Mr read
madam chair we have a you have a
due pass from Senate finance
subcommittee for Senate bill two
twelve.
Thank you madam chair we are
prepared to go to sign the
Senate finance committees of the
two percent of bills to thirteen
if if you're prepared to hear
that madam chair we are prepared
to hear that madam chair would
you please make your opening
statement I will thank you
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
thirteen re authorizes one
hundred forty seven capital
projects authorized in previous
years from various funds re
authorizations of capital outlay
projects range from changing the
administering agency or the
original purpose of the project.
Ending the reversion date or
expanding the purpose of the
original project the bill has an
emergency clause.
The re authorization of these
funds contained in this bill do
not require new capacity and are
a nonrecurring expense to the
general fund severance tax bonds
fund or other state funds
without madam chair we stand for
questions.
Thank you very much
Madam chair
of Representative Chandler are
they let's go to the audience of
the any members of the audience
who was to make a comment the
this in support of the.
Of the.
Capital outlay.
The authorization bill.
I see no hands raised among the
attendees so we will go to the
members of the committee.
I see one hand raised and the
that would be Representative
Harper we will go to you you
have the floor.
Thank you madam chair and
insurers Chandler and and Miss
Vigil
I keep I want to keep this very
brief but I I think there's a
maybe just an option here for a
little bit of an education.
Madam chair Chandler and Miskito
I was actually sitting in Senate
finance committee waiting for
one of my idols to be heard when
when this bill came up and
Very interesting
Diatribe from the chair of that
committee about the re
authorization bill and how he
felt like we should not have one
at all.
I actually very much disagree
with that but.
Mr Keyhoe can you maybe just
tell us and and and maybe all
out a little bit is the only
purpose of this bill to extend.
The lengths of capital outlay
projects.
Madam chair representative
Harper no there's various
reasons of for the sometimes the
language has to be broadened
sometimes it has to be moved to
a different agency to oversee
sometimes it does require an
extension of time
I would tell you that there are
times when there is true
justification for a
reorganization.
But I I noticed the many were re
authorizations for nineteen
twenty and twenty one money
thank is and I think.
That two years of that was due
to a delay in getting projects
going because of the pandemic
but then you'll also notice in
the bill that there's some and I
think this is a concern that
senator Munoz yes is that there
are some that date back to
originally authorized in two
thousand fourteen.
And so there's I think members
have hope that they'll be money
to keep adding to it because
much of the time there's not
sufficient funding to get the
project will be and so it'll be
delayed.
And you'll also notice that
they'll be some that there are
getting the right away for
highways for Roach is a delay.
Which of course we've talked
about many times to work on that
right away before you start
getting the money for
construction otherwise.
As you heard last night the end
of the in Senate on the Senate
floor that we already have
probably one point five billion
dollars in state money sitting
out that is not.
Totally moved on the cell is
encumbered but others has moved
it all.
Yeah madam chair and a chair
Chandler and Miskito thank you
for that and I think that's so I
I just wanna spend woman just
talking about tax I think it's
important for members to
understand.
And I missions on house for once
the session already.
When you hear that there is one
point five billion dollars
that's just sitting out there
that has not been spent.
And and we legislators often get
pointed at and to see it's the
terrible way you guys do capital
outlay that causes this.
I'm I actually really disagree
with that because you look at
that total of one point five
billion that includes the four
hundred million that we just
talked about of public school
capital outlay it includes the
balances in the water Trust Fund
colonias the tribal.
So all those are included and
when you add the legislative you
know we're maybe a third of that
balance okay so
Now the.
We don't want to have a balance
we we we get that.
But.
Mr really the reason we have
this reauthorization bill I
think there's there's a couple
reasons one is.
Madam chair Chandler Mr Keyhoe I
believe each project has is it
just there are three or five
year authorization before it
reverts.
Vehicles and equipment have two
years and other major renovation
transients construction that for
years.
Okay.
Madam chair and chair Chandler
and missed your thank you for
that that's helpful and so.
I think it's point for our
members to understand that our
projects are completed within
four years.
that money will revert and and
if the project is you know
coming close to completion you
know it's important we re
authorize it if after four years
nothing's really happened.
In this bill is also important
because maybe we decide K. that
project was not a shovel ready
as we thought we're gonna move
those funds to a different
project that's moving.
So without this bill we can do
that
I'm not sure and and and you
brought up an example miss
Keyhoe about rights of way so
over the last ten years one of
the biggest projects was part
projects in my area has been
still double time that road
project that connects.
essentially you know Rio Rancho
five fifty all the way forty
huge huge important project for
economic development for my
community.
We've been over the last ten
years we put about twenty two
million dollars in capital
outlay into right of way
acquisition and we finally have
enough money to do that they're
starting to make those purchases
but this year there were I think
to.
My my capital outlay
You know from from a few years
ago that need to be re
authorized to keep that process
going.
and then and then I guess that
the last example mentioned we
had a project that we had a
Sandoval county delegation
funded last year to get some
robotics equipment.
for unpaid on incredible group
here Rancho and there was a
misunderstanding we we reached
out to our restless schools and
order that they had agreed to be
the fiscal agent.
but later found out that you
know we we you know cross you
know there's crossed wires grant
you know we and they.
We're not in a position you know
being hit against their capital
distributions.
if they took that money and so
we were to find a different
fiscal agent and so
there are several others that
were very willing and so in this
bill there's a a line item in
the changes the US escalation so
anyway madam chair chair trailer
and just you know I just want to
take a moment to just remind
members that it's a great idea
every year to call up last
council capital outlay in state
are there any of my projects
that need to be re authorized
and go through that list and
figure out to these really need
to be Ross rise or do I need to
be put somewhere else.
and I really think we do need a
reauthorization bill every year
unlike what was stated in New
and Senate finance
so those those are my think my
comments thank you for the time.
Madam.
Thank you Representative Harper
are there any other members of
the committee who was to make a
comment or ask a question.
It's not I have a question
Madam chair Miskito with respect
to the re authorization.
We talked about at the beginning
with a capital project is set up
it's for four years once the re
authorization is may if the it
needs to be made is it maybe for
another four years of doesn't
have to be made every single
year after the four years as
fast.
Madam chair generally are an
extension of time is usually
only for two years only under
certain circumstances as an
extended for four years.
Right now we have I'm I want to
make sure I understand we have
no
limitation on how many times
they can be extended looking
back at one been in existence
since twenty fourteen secretary.
That's correct.
They'll get can I just as one of
the display Fund question the
project that's been going on
since twenty fourteen and we're
now in twenty twenty two just
tell us what is the project.
One of them is a film project in
our.
Dona Ana County.
And I believe that the problem
there the first time that it was
reauthorized because the
language needed to be abroad
will to allow what they needed
to do another time there was a
time that was taking of between
the community and the public
schools in New Mexico State
University on exactly what
approach to take.
And another one they just needed
extension of that they needed
more time and and that's from
memory what I recall of the
project.
Thank you.
Madam chair Chandler and
Miskito so we know that hands
ratings that we are ready to I'm
ready to accept a motion on this
bill would like to make that
motion.
Representative the.
Is this would you like to make
that motion.
Madam chair of the past.
The
second.
Okay how.
Finance committees of the two
percent bill to thirteen with an
emergency clause I just wanna
make sure we clear record madam
chair thank you thank you madam
chair and we do have a second
from Representative Harper thank
you Representative Romero for
making that for making a motion
so Representative agency keep
agency requests would you please
call the roll.
Yes absolutely.
Representative.
There you go.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative master.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative Romero.
Representative yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler.
Yes.
Yes.
Really my apologies this is
recommend I'd also like to vote
yes but for madam chair thank
you perfect thank you.
Madam chair yes.
We have a twelve.
Thank you.
Thank you.
You do have a due pass.
I'm.
Thank you very much committee
for that expeditious discussion
of those two very important
bills will be getting on the
floor soon I'm sure we now have
Senator Kernan to present on
Senate bill one thirty seven the
floor is here yours Senator
Kernan.
You very much madam chair
members of the committee for
hearing this bill this morning
it's it's a Senate tax business
and transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill one
thirty seven and
at some point I may need to ask
the semester to I I do have to
experts I do have aged four tank
with the new agency public and
perhaps Janet peacock as well.
Basically as we all know
destination based sourcing
enacted in house bill six and
twenty nineteen had significant
impacts on cities in New Mexico
both positive and negative at
the time the policy discussed
discussion focused on some of
the benefits from this change
but did not fully identify the
potential for serious revenue
loss in some cases.
Cities lost revenue from local
implement rates on sales where
the buyer is outside of the city
even when the seller is in the
city this shift in taxation have
a substantial impact on cities
in southeastern New Mexico that
rely heavily on G. R. T. revenue
from oil and gas services for
example Carlsbad so a loss of
nearly nine million dollars in
G. R. T. revenues comparing the
first half of FY twenty which
was pretty destination by
sourcing and pre coated with the
first half of FY twenty two.
Hi estimates similar losses
during that time frame in
addition to G. R. T. revenue
losses a few cities also saw
their local share of state G. R.
T. they're one point two two
five distribution decrease this
was an unintended consequence of
house bill six and LESC analysis
shows the revenue impact to
cities could be over fifty
million dollars in FY twenty
three.
The committee substitute for
Senate bill one thirty seven
creates a destination based
sourcing safety net fund that
provides two years of support
for cities that lost revenue due
to the impacts of destination
based sourcing and were unable
to make up those losses through
other growth in their G. R. T.
tax banks.
Cities that had G. R. T. revenue
losses of at least ten percent
during the first half of FY
twenty two as compared to the
first half of FY twenty the base
here would receive payments what
cities could receive payments
for six month periods in FY
twenty two and FY twenty three.
Payments from the fund while
temporary would help affected
cities avoid unnecessary and
damaging cuts to budgets and
critical services House Bill to
includes ten million dollars
general fund appropriation to
this fund.
we know and believe three data
that has been collected by our
financial directors in both
Hobbs and Carlsbad through it
press to the taxpayer and
Revenue Department we are very
confident that those losses that
we have incurred are directly
related to the mining industry
not completely that at a huge
impact with regard to that.
It's as if overnight the state
of New Mexico did not receive
any revenue from the oil and gas
industry that's basically what
has happened in Carlsbad and
Hobbs and with that madam chair
I will stand for questions and I
believe Representative Harper
may have.
Amendment.
Thank you senator current I'll
first go to the audience and
ask for
those wishing to speak in favor
I ask you to keep your comments
brief please we're on a pretty
tight schedule so
Lipshutz you're speaking in
favor of this bill one thirty
seven.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee John Lipschutz
with The New Mexico federation
of labor AFL-CIO we stand in
support of this measure and
thank the sponsor for bringing
it up well you know we
Representative workers and some
of the southeastern communities
our workers and their families
that are both in our front line
Sir they provide frontline
services and certainly benefit
from them I as this as the
senator mentioned what we have
seen is is an unintended
consequence in which the workers
of these communities are
starting to lose out on valuable
resources to even do their jobs
their families are not able to
benefit from from the services
and that is very scary for us
and so for these reasons we
really hope that you consider
this measure and and help make
these communities whole and and
provide them with the services
they need thank you very much
thank you Mr Lipschutz Dale
Danny more I think of Carl's.
Mr tanning.
Your name correctly and if I'm
not reading it correctly again
what John like sorry I see very
well not wearing my glasses
sorry.
Good morning
members of the.
It is Dale G. and weigh in on
the mayor of the city of
Carlsbad number here to speak in
support of this B. one thirty
seven.
We've seen a major that will be
great population increased over
the past decade with the same
time we're currently in the
middle of a hiring freeze due to
a major loss of revenue caused
by the change in the G. R. T.
formula the changing destination
sourcing altered the groceries
each formula in a way that is
making it harder for us to
provide services to all of our
residents this is already
impeding our ability to provide
necessary services your ruling
number Regina chan assistant in
growing and diversifying our
economy this bill would
temporarily address these issues
so we can continue to look for a
successful long term approach
thank you for your consideration
in support.
Thank you thank you more mark
strand.
Yes thank you my name is mark
strand I am with I international
brotherhood of electrical
workers I am also the president
of the central New Mexico labor
council I stand in support of
house bill one thirty seven
Senate bill one thirty seven
thank you very much thank you
Sam called.
Mr Cobb yes good morning this is
Sam Cobb on the more fobs and
good morning to Madam chairwoman
chairwoman Chandler members of
the committee Mr Keogh.
On behalf of the forty seven
thousand residents of the city
of Hobbs we stand in support of
H. B. one thirty seven Senator
Kernan very accurately and
eloquently described the
situation this is having an
adverse impact on us and we
appreciated the support we're
we're safe from the legislature.
As they solve the impact how
they're trying to work with as
we speak sincerely appreciate
that and we are fully in support
of H. B. one thirty seven and
any amendments it records check
that to that repertoire for make
present this morning.
Right thank you more anyone in
the attendees list two wishes to
speak in opposition to this bill
please raise your hand.
Okay I don't see one anyone
speaking in opposition let's go
back to of the committee.
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair and
Senator Kernan hits a great to
see you this morning
I'd like to just spend a couple
minutes just framing the problem
and then yes I I I'd like to
present to an amendment that.
Very grateful at times in the
work with you on many many many
others Wes yesterday but to just
just to frame the the issue so
folks understand what's going on
here this really all generated
with house bill six.
And house bill six started
the this provision house bill
six language started years ago
and this was in regards to
capturing internet
sales for state taxation and
local taxation.
and the reason we could not tax
internet sales.
One of the reasons is the way
our tax was structured we taxed
where.
The
the the transaction happened not
where it was delivered.
And so that was called an origin
based where the place of
business is.
And and of course the state of
New Mexico doesn't have the
jurisdiction to tax the state of
Iowa if you buy something from
online from Iowa.
So we could not impose that tax
and when the Supreme Court over
you know with.
In the way fair decision allows
states to tax internet sales.
Virtually every state I believe
every state you moved from
portion based sourcing to
destination a sourcing we're
gonna tax where the good or
service was delivered.
so that way even if you buy
something from Iowa and we can't
tax Iowa it's delivered in New
Mexico take that we use in New
Mexico so we can tax in New
Mexico if we change where are
you know we're we're we're
taxing it.
So.
we all knew this could be a huge
change right and this is just a
second very significant change
and I remember being in rooms
for several.
hours over several weeks and
months and years.
what's your experts like I'm Jim
o'neill former tax secretary
Janet peacock who we all know
it's been a.
You know tax one would Senate
finance for years and and that
Mr Stewart was able to.
Grab her for the municipal
league I mean great catch
Richard Anklam the there
president of our New Mexico tax
research institute hello impact
a credible resource she is the
general counsel for the United
States multistate tax
commission.
And and we work for a long time
trying to figure this out.
And in the end kind of where we
drew the line what would remain
origin and what would become
destination.
We drew the line at professional
services.
and and madam speaker I'm sorry
madam chair and and Senator.
We knew at that time that was
not going to be perfect that
they're gonna be some industries
that perhaps we're capture that
shouldn't be and some.
That were not captured that
should be we we know it's not a
perfect like all tax policy
would not be perfect.
And we anticipated that really
kind of your your big business
centers like Albuquerque would
be the ones that had the
greatest kind of impact right
that a lot of folks are centered
in Albuquerque their businesses
are but they do work all
throughout the state.
but we hope to the internet
sales what offset revenue from
internet sales revenue from
giving locals compensating tax
increments those kind of things
would at least offset.
put them chair and Senator
Kernan.
when you brought this to our
attention I I initially thought
was promised Carlsbad and.
And and and Hobbs you know in
the ten years I've been here
we've seen these oscillations of
plus or minus fifty percent more
G. R. T. several times I thought
maybe risk going through another
one the cycles.
But.
after looking at the data that
was provided to us and and and
from you as well.
I I I don't think that's right I
think we see a lot of increase
in economic activity.
And with the downward trend
gross receipts tax and so that
that kind of breaking of those
two ties to me says.
This is not just
a regular cycles causing this
issue it really is the changing
definition of sourcing and I
love madam chair and senator
current how you said it that
this is like the state suddenly
losing.
I'm revenue from oil gas and
mining so I think that's exactly
what's going on here.
so I hope that helps everyone
understand what the problem is
and that this is a real problem.
Madam chair and senator do you
did I characterize that right to
to I.
Do you have anything you'd like
to add.
The madam chair and
representative Harper I think
that I think you definitely have
captured the issue in a way that
it's it's a difficult thing to
to truly understand but I think
you've done a very good job so
thank you very much.
Thank thank you madam chair.
Did you have an amendment you
wish to you propose for
discussion purposes
Representative Harper and not
just for the committees
edification not Representative
Harper and I have also been
talking about this issue and I
and he was working yesterday
afternoon to try to come up with
that message suggested amendment
that we could all agree on so.
Jordan thank you yes this is the
perfect timing I think to talk
about at least a temporary
solution to this problem and
then I'm but I think the
permanent solution will be that
will need to talk about during
the intro the manager all all
move the amendment for
discussion purposes
this is the dot to version.
And
Is the chair all talk about
What this does and why I think
this is the right direction to
go
temporarily.
General manager can explain the
minutes please do all right
thank you so so the bill as it's
before us has two sections.
The first section creates a
temporary fund that is designed
to help municipalities who have
a significant decrease in their
G. R. T. revenue.
to have a distribution from the
state
to help offset summer all of
that that shortfall.
I I think that is a great
solution especially since the
state is kind of really getting
money that they should be
getting was that one point two
two five I mean I'm happy to
answer questions about that I
think it's a good move and my
understanding is there's ten
million dollars and house bill
two contingent on this bill
passing so I'm it's already in
the budget so I think this is
the most important solution and
and I'll I'll talk about the
amendment does to section one
here in a second.
Section two.
Is a set of new reporting
requirements.
and and in my mind I.
I think these are really two
separate issues.
and we need to spend more time
talking about the reporting
requirement issue.
and so I'm and and just it just
a brief example why I think this
is a a problem to include right
now when someone files their
monthly CRS report once when a
business or you know someone
goes and aid to the tax for
website and fill in their
information further gross
receipts.
First the pops up gross receipts
you have to put in your location
what type of business you are in
your gross receipts and then you
have to pull up the compensating
tax and say no I don't have any
comments in tax right did you
have for withholding tax and and
so it's kind of burdensome
already I think during rest up
we need to talk about how to
make this better for small
businesses.
But.
What this legislation would do
understand what's being asked
for I I totally get it but what
this legislation would do
section two.
As require that in addition to
that we now also have to
include.
Not just the destination of
aware this transaction happened
but also the origin story of put
destination and origin location
and then split whether this was
a service or a good and you can
see doing this for multiple
transactions and and I work on
all the detail here but it's
it's gonna be a huge burden on
the taxpayer.
And and the data that we'll
collect I'm not sure will be
good because I think they'll be
compliance issues and taxpayers
will discuss how much time so
I'm I'm not sure how good it
would be.
But also I think the data we
have right now already tells us
the answer the answer is it's
the mining and oil and gas
sector that's causing this.
I think the bigger promise arm
Yunis are costly having to
impress TRD for information I
need to run their business and
so and I talked with the
secretary about this she also
you know the doesn't like having
always upper class it's a
challenge to answer them all
there so many and so I think
there's an opportunity here for
when when if we can get together
during the intro and figure out
how to before on that.
So madam chair this amendment
does is strike section to.
Is this time in the intro to
work together to figure out how
we can fix our reporting.
But maintain section one.
With some minor changes of
section was relying on some of
the data in section two we just
simplified it to say that this
is based off of actuals now
we're gonna look at actuals were
to look at what did you get the
average of twenty twenty of
twenty twenty one and if that's
ten percent before you got
twenty two is ten percent less.
Do you qualify for distribution
and then same thing for your to
average of twenty twenty one if
you're twenty three is ten
percent less your qualify for
distribution so we solve the
imminent problem is tied for the
dust to settle and work during
the interim.
on I think the the real solution
which is going to be to take
minerals and oil and gas out of
destination and put it back into
origin a sourcing not so with
that natural stand for
questions.
Are there questions from the
committee.
Okay just one comment for me I'm
open to suggestions but I would
prefer that we not pre determine
what's the solution actually
have a real conversation about
every state that went out of
her.
I also share with you that we
have Representative Harper and I
have consulted with the
secretary of taxation and
revenue and she I believe is is
comfortable with this change in
my not correct Representative
Harper you madam chair thank you
for that I worked with
the secretary she actually
helped draft this amendment so
and Schardin I want to really
thank her for that
requests that for later worst
and again up Senator Kernan you
know what the strapped
originally had only a one year.
Fund but west you know her
suggestion you know we we rolled
out two years so this really was
a group effort chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Scott and then
vice chair Herndon.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Harper without
the reporting requirements in
section two do you feel
confident that the data that we
have from an actuarial
standpoint is sufficient to
make.
The appropriate distributions.
Yeah madam chair and
representative Scott that's a
great question and and the
answer is yes very much so the
the R. P. eighty data that the
Department collects.
Then and really we're just
looking at the total actuals
just what was the distribution
not not even looking to see well
what's internet sales related
versus oil and gas related or
any of that it's just very
simple what what was the actual
distribution.
And if it's less than ten
percent that's a receiving now
that qualify for distributions
that it actually makes things
much simpler.
And madam chair Representative
Harper added we settle on the
ten percent number.
Madam chair and representative
Scott great question and all all
I'll be honest there was not
some of.
You know serious tests to figure
out what that number would be
what we did was
looked at and what the trends
are throughout the the the state
and looked at what what appears
to be
an out liar from that trend and
and this was also the what was
recommended from just as good
Senators Original Bill.
Madam chair Senator
Representative Harper I think
this is a good temporary fix in
I'll look forward to
participating in the
conversations as we go forward
to the trying to find something
more permanent thank you madam
chair that's all I have thank
you Representative Scott I'm
perhaps we could move the
amendment before we go any
further so we'll have an amended
bill one we're ready ready to
vote and Representative Harper
could you read the two oh two
number if someone's willing
enough to make a motion to
amend.
I'll make a motion to amend the
I'm in the bill I move the
amendment okay and that's two oh
two number to make sure we have
a clear record again is point
two two two seven nine six point
two is that correct
Representative Harper Madam
that's correct thank you very
good at.
In.
Okay very good is there would
people put their hands down so I
can see if there's any
opposition to the amendment.
Okay I see no opposition to the
amendment.
You have an amended bill
Representative now vice chair
Herndon you were next and then
we'll do and then Representative
Terrel hunt.
Thank you madam chair I just
have to where for to clarifying
questions madam chair
Senator
Representative Harper with
respect to the rob Lawson
Revenue there was some
indication that it some of that
loss of revenue may have been
with respect to mining so my
question is and calculating that
ten percent what is the mining
is no longer going on art that's
been since my concern is are we
still supplementing that with
part of this ten million dollars
please help me to understand how
that figures into the
calculation.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for the question when when
you look at the the segment
mining this service companies
that are in the municipality
related to activity in the oil
field
there's much activity in the oil
field the the the ceasing there
will most likely not be ceasing
of mining that goes on
constantly day in and day out
over the years we'll continue at
that's not going to stop what
has happened is those businesses
within you the within the
municipality.
Prior to HB six we're able to
charge the G. R. T. and it was
returned to the municipality
because.
That's where the business was
located after house bill six as
those businesses perform
services outside the
municipality.
That's where the G. R. T. is now
being paid so the the mining is
just one line item in the list
of G. R. T. construction is one
And professional services there
are many other areas and and I
would welcome Representative
Harper if you if you want to
continue to explain that I think
the issue is not that mining is
going to stop it's where that is
reported it is the issue.
Madam chair may I.
Please.
Madam chair and and vice
chairman Senator Kernan did a
great job describing that all
just maybe I come from a
slightly different angle.
When we when you say mining
really that that kind of
includes oil and gas as well so
that that's all kind of wrap
together generally when we
report these things out you're
right that you know mining why
copper is different than
extracting oil and gas so if
you're correct in that way.
But but madam chair and and.
By your heard and what's what's
really going on here is
Construction I think it's a
great example construction was
one of those kind of out wires
in our code where it is always
been released for many decades
has been at the destination.
So if you have a.
The construction company based
out of Albuquerque.
But if they're doing a job in
jail.
The gel collects the gross
receipts tax for that
construction job.
But that's very different and
essentially everything else
you know if you had an account
based out of Albuquerque and you
are paying them to work for your
business and gel Albuquerque
collected the gross receipts tax
for that accounting work.
And so what we did to capture
internet sales was we moved
almost everything to the
destination so now Jack how is
going to get a lot more tax
revenue than it in the past.
Except for professional services
where we drew the line
professional services like
accounting.
will still be collected
Albuquerque if the business in
Albuquerque.
So.
Now what we're saying is I'm.
This oil and gas the oil and gas
businesses are based on a call
about Carlsbad and Hobbs for a
long time they were getting that
G. R. T. which was a lot and
they were doing a lot of
services helping these people
out right I mean that was
appropriate but now.
The county is gonna be getting a
ton of that money because that's
where the work is being done.
And then also.
The state gets a portion that
money that was it wasn't getting
before either because if it was
happening across matter Hobbs
the state portion goes back to a
the state portion goes to
college then hops.
So this is really the the
problem
that that has been cost and and
we're gonna I say we're gonna
spend a lot of time in
Representative was ation Tax
Policy Committee talking about
this and working together on
what are all the possible
solutions and and hopefully
talking together will hone in on
the one the next law sets.
Okay thank you very much Madam
chair representative of
corporate Senator Kernan so I
was just that at I think you
might have touched on it a
little bit I was specifically
looking at mines that have
closed down with in the
computation area and had not
been producing
We're not now producing anyway
and so were they part of that
computation so I think that.
You may have to note that I'm
not sure but for purposes of
this conversation that I and I
just also wanted to make sure
for in terms of the ten million
that we have I don't know how
much money we're looking at in
terms of the ten percent
allocation and we are looking at
reimbursing the city up to ten
percent of the amount that was
lost and if it's over ten
billion representative will
attend some sort of.
Formula for allocation yeah all
right well thank you madam chair
Representative.
The department yes and I'm Matt
madam vice chair committee will
probably be discussing this
during rest happened have a more
thorough discussion on
destination sourcing in general
and this issue in particular
Representative Lujan thank you
madam chair and.
Yes this is your this is really
come up a lot I think and and
even during the entire event not
mistaken and so my my concern is
and I know we've already with
the amendment but.
There's a lot of reporting
information as I'm understanding
that it is that correct madam
chair.
Senator Senator please yes madam
chair can can you respect the
question when you talk about
shifting of of reporting what
are you.
Go ahead I'm sorry Madam we just
took out a section of all the
reporting of risk information
correct so madam chair.
And not hearing that together
with the and I and I did have my
hand up during the member I
apologize I'm passionate.
I'm so I'm just kind of you know
we're talking we're gonna work
this out and I know that this is
been a big discussion for awhile
now and I respect the
conversation discussion what
happens if we don't do this
Madam chair Senator.
I'm madam chair just going back
to the reporting piece just real
briefly that was in the bills.
That.
Have a real clear understanding
of the loss of revenue that's
leaving the the municipality
after conversation with
Representative Harper and can do
to my attention that that
particular change would require
so much more effort on the part
of our small business owners in
in in my opinion the the data
that we have collected over the
last almost a year we know we
have the data available through
the import process the financial
directors of both Hobbs and
Carlsbad have had an opportunity
through it press to dig very
deep into the data and they can
not reveal confidential
information but they are very
very clear in the results that
this is due to a specific issue
with regard to the mining oil
and gas industry and services
provided so we have that
information we think we've got
enough information currently to
use the actuals in in to make a
determination on distribution I
don't think we need to continue
to do the very as Representative
Harper mentioned a very granular
deep dive that we've been doing
for the last six months to a
year we know what the problem is
so with regard to reporting I
agree to take out that section
because it was going to be very
burdensome on small businesses
because according to
Representative Harper and the
secretary of tax and
Representative we know we know
what the issue is so I'm that's
out which is focusing now on the
fund which originally a request
was fifty million because I
believe ten million is not
sufficient but we're very
grateful for that we will start
there and then we have the data
to determine how to make that
distribution I hope that answers
your question.
Thank you I mean that goes to
the point of my question about
the data but what happens if we
do not do this Madam chair
Senator we do not on this well I
will tell you madam chair and
Representative Lujan currently
it's my understanding that
Carlsbad is considering laying
off employees I know the city of
Hobbs has put on hold a capital
project that they are not going
to be able to do so it's going
to affect that they have
vacancies that they're no longer
going to fulfill you know we've
been through the ups and downs
of the oil and gas industry and
we are very cognizant of the
need to have high reserves of
those reserves are are going to
be helpful but in Hobbs for
instance the city commission
there hasn't working it's which
set a definite line in the sand
with regard percentage every
service I must maintain I
suppose at some point if that if
we are.
Needed to go into those reserves
it'll require changing the
ordinance what was most
concerning to me recently I
believe there was an
consideration of of some sort of
mandatory a prohibition against
raising taxes that that would've
been a real serious problem for
our two communities in light of
what we're looking at over the
next year to until we can find a
permanent fix for this issue so
I think this is the best.
That we can do at this point
very grateful that this bill has
made it this far I appreciate
the municipal league aged forty
Janet peacock they have walked
me through this from the very
beginning and I'm so
appreciative and now
Representative Harper he's been
extremely helpful as well and so
that's kind of where we are
right now but we need to pass
this bill or we're going to see
some pretty significant issues
and in those two communities
until we have a permanent fix.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator thank you for answer my
questions.
Thank you Representative are
there any other questions or
comments from the committee.
I'm happy to entertain a motion.
Chair on the to pass on Senate
bill one thirty seven as
amended.
I'll second that.
I'm.
Correct me if I'm wrong
Representative Harper and
Senator is it not Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill one thirty seven that we
are amending I just want to make
sure we're clear yes.
Actually okay yes thank you very
good do we get a second I'm
sorry.
Okay was made a motion made by
Representative Harper second by
Representative Cadena
Kimberly will you call the roll
please.
One second I think there's
someone talking to me.
And madam chair if I can mention
it looks like representative
Lente fell off in his in the
attendee list you can bring him
over so he can vote.
I'm gonna go ahead and take the
role not running really.
Don't forget to bring in
representative Lente.
Yes
Chairman could you I mean vice
chair could you play please take
the committee I need to consult
with somebody and
Representative Roger Montoya is
up next thank you.
Thank you very much so miss
upgrades to call the roll please
yes definitely.
Representative because.
Yes.
Speaker.
Representative Harper.
Yes
Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative.
The amendment.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
Yes.
You madam chair yes.
I'm not sure Representative
Lujan is still on the line I see
that she's on here.
Okay we have a nine zero about.
Thank you very much Senator
Kernan you have a do pass on a
that substitute for Senate bill
one thirty seven as amended.
Thank you very much and madam
vice chair madam chair I really
appreciate the help of this
committee thank you so much.
Thank you Representative Montoya
you are up next.
And you are muted
Representative.
Good morning everyone and thank
you so much for this this chance
to really speak out I know that
we have extremely limited time
so every second I have before
you is critically important to
my constituents.
And folks across the state from
a rural perspective I introduced
a bill house bill one seventy
three the rural infrastructure
crisis response act I speak
those words slowly because two
words crisis and response are
critical foundational to the
remedy and trying to bring.
I was told that this is a very
audacious and massive bill a big
idea and it indeed is it's one
that needs to enrollment.
Of need across our rural areas.
Emerged from.
Work that I instituted last year
as a freshman.
I created the rural task force.
Commission report if you have
not seen this report will be
critical as we enter into the
interim work it's a study that
is literally a Bible or a blue
print for what we must do to
bring remedy to areas in need.
In the late nineteen fifties
president Eisenhower created the
last significant infrastructure
investment in rural New Mexico
in rural America.
In nineteen sixty one to sixty
seven was when most of that
infrastructure went into New
Mexico.
Urban areas have fared much
better because they have this
year G. R. T. in numbers to
upgrade.
In contrast rural areas across
the state have never fully
realized the infrastructure
upgrades for sixty years.
As I came in that was critically
important to me.
And I listen to.
Countless leaders.
Thirty three New Mexico counties
are unanimous support at this
piece of legislation.
The remedy would bring twenty
five million dollars with the
creation of a new fund.
Through sponge bonds sales twice
a year now we're talking about
critical need to cost a whole
host of issues.
So I get it this is kind of a
big idea.
But let me give you a reality
check for local governments
local governments statewide
required to reserve one twelfth
of their operational budget.
For crisis events and things
that emerge again the
counterparts in urban areas can
manage that.
But the village of Cimarron is a
case in point has an operational
budget of nine hundred thousand
dollars one twelfth of that is
direly insufficient when.
A much needed water
infrastructure failure happened
to durable equipment to the tune
of four hundred and fifty
thousand dollars that's just one
emblematic example of how every
county across this state is
suffering.
Thankfully we have some funds
and some remedies that have
emerged over the last decade the
colonials Fund the trouble
infrastructure fund the water
trust board are ex exceedingly
important but they lack an
inclusive nature they can not
respond.
In the thirty day parameter that
is absolutely necessary for.
Local governments to remedy
issues that emerge.
In my research and working with
just two of our colleagues the
north west and the north central
is estimated that in the last
year thirty eight million
dollars of crisis events that
they tried to remedy in some
form or fashion could be
remedied through this
application.
I am no I I have no sort of
believe that this is going to
obviously be a magic bullet but
I want to plant a firm seat in
your hearts and your minds that
this work must be part of the
agenda for the rural task force
and frankly every aspect of our
of our work in the insurance
because if we cannot remedy the
critical infrastructure needs
across rural New Mexico we
simply cannot address the social
determinants of health in any
meaningful way.
We're talking about basic.
Electricity water waste water
broadband roads bridges.
So with that I will stop I.
I have about sixty one leaders
across the state that would like
to speak we simply don't have
time for that but I think it's
important that this committee
here from some of them and I
know they're waiting in the room
to bring their one minute
testimonials to your years arts.
Madam chair that's test possible
at this time of course yes
Representative let me just share
with you what our policy is we
allow ten minutes for comments
on all issues and one minute per
persons so that will allow up to
about ten people so I'll and
I'll just go in the order that
they raise their hands.
Before we begin may madam chair
committee members it's important
to note that DFA is absolutely
committed to this work we have
worked very closely with Donnie
can Donna colonel
informing of euro to manage this
onslaught of work that we would
be required if and when this
fund becomes a lot thank you.
Thank you Representative Montoya
thank you.
Sure just car.
Jeff Carr.
I'm here madam chair thank you
for having me on.
the more of eagle nest I'm also
here with our commissioner Brett
we're
and I don't think they can see
me but
I I can't tell you how strongly
I support Representative Montoya
is bill and how much it is
needed.
among us this is I don't know
how many times I've talked about
it but
Please support this bill is
sorely needed
yes madam chair this is
commissioner right we're again
the importance of
Representative Alcon toys bill
is not just from a financial
aspect although that is
important to me the more
important aspect is the timing
issue hearing Colfax County we
experience unfortunately several
disasters occurrences recently
and it takes a lot of time up to
six months to get the financial
support to rectify those
situations this bill would solve
that problem thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Isaac cocido sous.
You madam chair and members of
the committee I suppose Senator
chair of the native American
democratic office we stand in
support of this bill we believe
that it will help not only bring
desperate funds toward native
American communities of the
twenty three tribal nations that
we Representative but also our
rural communities which are in
dire need as representatives
spoke out many of our
communities have not seen a key
investments in infrastructure
for a number of decades and that
crumbling infrastructure will
then create public health issues
and potential environmental
issues if we don't address it
now one year.
Costing the state billions of
dollars so but I hope that we
can come to some sort of
movement on how we can bring
equity to the small communities
and and in turn provide them
with the necessary resources
before thank you so much madam
chair.
thank you Mr casados James
Matthews.
James O. excuse me James
Martinez.
yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee yes my
name is James J. Martinez Rio
Arriba county commissioner and
commission chairman representing
district one a very a rural part
of Rio Arriba county and the
northern part of New Mexico I
want to thank Representative
Montoya for being a champion for
rural communities as I go about
talking with the constituents in
my district I hear the
complaints in the concerns of
the infrastructure that is in
dire need of repair and
replacement we're talking about.
Broadband wireless internet
we're talking about water
systems that are in dire need of
repair and so this type of
legislation would allow all of
our rural counties and
communities the much needed
resources to prepare this
infrastructure on behalf of our
community members thank you
members of the committee.
Thank you Mr Martinez
Christopher Madrid Christmas
dread.
Chris.
Chris Madrid.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I've been working
rural communities for over
twenty years invariably these
prices have been set for every
year of folks are ending up
without water without.
Utilities needed services
and then unfortunately these
infants do not cooperate with
the traditional funding sites it
often takes far too long to get
the support that they need it
takes months and this bill will
get that down two weeks and
hopefully over time we can get
that down to days and I want to
thank the committee members
Representative Montoya for
listening to the rural
communities putting a spotlight
on their needs and working to
address these concerns thank
you.
Thank you Monica Abeyta.
Good morning madam chair.
I'm Monica data on the executive
director of the north central
New Mexico economic development
district Chris is also a member
of our team and our central I
want to thank the committee and
I want to thank especially
Representative Montoya for again
putting a spotlight on this need
originally at our central we
were trying to put together a
rural infrastructure fund just
for our costs and in meeting
with Representative Montoya he
took this idea to a statewide
level and elevated at we do
receive numerous requests every
year for emergency situations
and you know those can those can
range in dollar amount they can
range in terms of whether the
communities incorporated or
unincorporated basically
anything that doesn't have a
home or doesn't have a funding
source that's easy to obtain
comes to us so we see all of
these requests we see the great
need we stand in strong support
and we urge your support this
legislation in the interim thank
you so much.
Thank you Mr beta I think
concludes the public comment
going back to Representative
Montoya you wish to share any
additional information with us.
I would just like to see
publicly thank you madam chair
for giving me this time at this
critical juncture I mean we're
running out of time in there so
much consequential legislation
the fact that you take it in
your heart and you see the value
is very meaningful to me and the
constituents across the state.
I have extensive extensive
conversations with the executive
the executive sees the potential
of this as part of a purse so to
speak we currently have on
imaginable amounts of money that
has flown that is coming to the
state and will be coming in the
next five years for
infrastructure I believe that
this mechanism however it
emerges in the sixty day will be
a bill that is indeed bipartisan
and that will be an essential
component of the landscape of
remedies that our rural areas
and tribal communities must have
I am the champion it is been.
The greatest honor of my life
really to listen to the
frontline leaders that defend
these rural areas with such
integrity it's been breathtaking
to watch I yield back and I
think you again.
Thank you Representative going
back to the committee are there
any committee questions or
comments.
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair I
appreciate the opportunity make
a brief comment
risen much I just thank you for
being here you're clearly very
passion about this issue and as
well as you know that I uh.
Agree an understand
And it doesn't just hit rural
New Mexico and I lived in state
court I
you know very for rural I'm I
remember when the the
water facilities in Magdalena.
When I went out I mean so I mean
I'm very familiar with these
issues but also in Rio Rancho
right when a.
when the majority of the water
lines international were laid
that was a an interesting time
in in the US when.
The not the best material was
popular for water piping and so
those pipelines are
deteriorating for and we we
often capital outlay will give
money to help fix that problem
but it's it's a huge bricks as a
primer for replace all these
water lines so
very much understand grateful
that you've brought this
forward.
wish you success really request
manager and and there's no
choice
is that you consider.
Other funding sources and not
sponge bonding of our severance
tax dollars I spoke a little bit
about this on the house floor
last night.
our severance tax permanent fund
is in a very precarious
situation.
prior to some legislation that I
carried and got past it was
projected to collapse.
because it distributes more than
it brings in.
And the the reason the reason
why.
Was because sponge bonds were
used to soak up any
funds that would be distributed
to the Somerset sprint Fund
that's why we had several years
was no inflows but was continued
outflows the phone was dying.
So madam chair and result I just
ask that we be creative that we
explore other options you
mention that we have lots of
revenue.
and that's exactly right we do
and I and I think that we can
find a way to meet these
emergency needs.
Without also killing the goose
that lays golden expressed.
So I and I'm happy to help in
that endeavor madam chair
because I I do believe the stick
okay great cost thank you Madam
and this much with everything
you want to.
Madam chair representative thank
you so much I am painfully aware
of the volatility of the oil and
gas issue severance tax is not.
The long game so solution.
However we we have to find one.
You know rural New Mexico
arguably is at the center of why
we are what we are urban areas
are important but without.
The land based beauty
tranquility.
And the cultural aspects of
these gorgeous areas that are
unlivable people are there's a
brain drain happening we we do
have that depletion if
population we must address this
in order to make our state
equitable so thank you and I do
look forward to finding many
potential remedies I'm an artist
after all we bring together the
materials and we create
something useful unexpected
times because we have to solve
the problem so look forward to
that in the rooms and beyond
thank you.
Thank you Mr thank you
Representative course thank you
Representative Harper
Representative Lujan.
Thank you mentors was thanks
fans for bringing this issue in
this set legislation board there
and respectfully
Command Representative Harper
for his comments and and his is
here on this and we do have to
find a solution so thank you
Representative mentor thank you
I'm not gonna get too much time
on this but I really appreciate
the efforts in all the work that
you put towards this thank you.
Thank you thank thank you
Representative Montoya and I
also want to commend you for the
work you're doing on rural
infrastructure I do now it's
incredibly important and all
give a plug for my for our house
joint resolution one.
Which is also intended.
Intended to it to support this
very important initiative I'm
hoping it's going to make its
way to present so if you would
like to offer any concluding
remarks Representative I'm happy
to hear you and them and then we
can we can adjourn the meeting.
My concluding remarks are of
gratitude really for having this
time I said earlier we have work
to do to finish up this
incredible session I I think all
of my colleagues for the
diligent we're working you on
all of your respective committee
said this one is a very
important one thank you for your
leadership we'll see you on the
floor.
Thank you thank you so much
Representative all right
thank you are there any
concluding remarks before we
adjourn from the committee.
I don't see anyone any so thank
you very much Representative I'm
sorry you had your hand up I
thought was from before you
madam chair I just want to say
It is been a great pleasure
working with you on this
committee you have been fair
you've been wonderful to work
west pleasant I just I can't say
enough and I want to thank.
I'm all the staff
you know.
Really Tasha Kevin
Pam
Jackie I mean we we are we had
an incredible group of folks
here helping us have a very what
I feel like was very successful.
Committee and I just want to
thank vice chairman as well and
and all the members
I I really believe this is the
best committee and the house and
it's because we we respect each
other we we can vote differently
and and have different
philosophies but we don't make
it personal.
and and in the end I think we we
do more good for the the people
in New Mexico
but anywhere except that that
happens out of this committee so
thank you madam chair and
everyone thank and thank you
Representative Harper for those
kind words and I also want to
share my appreciation to every
member of the committee and
every member of the support
staff that has assisted us and
preparing for these meetings I
you know I still have a lot to
learn as chair of course but you
all have made it much easier for
me than it it could have been so
thank you again and I'm looking
forward to the interim and also
next year so back to the floor
we have a lot of work to get
done before tomorrow at noon
take care everybody Senator.
I.
