Speaker Martinez.
Representative Ortez here.
Representative Scott.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Townsend.
Vice chair Dennis.
Chairman Lente.
We have a quorum update to
today's agenda that we will be
rolling House Bill three two
three.
At the Sanchez request I I did
get from the sponsor of house
bill two of eight as amended
Representative Serrato less
representative offices.
That great okay perfect got
three wanted.
Representative also us a lot of
them.
This is.
Lori was not.
We have our phones house bill
to always as a Medicaid for all
the activities of the.
The last US.
There's a lot that is his
response which you'll be
joining us
shortly at likely but that at
this point Representative the
floors are Sir thank you good
morning Mr chair Committee
members saw thanks for your time
this morning and for the
opportunity to speak with you
about V. to await the roll
infrastructure tax credit which
is a bill that will help
accelerate.
Rail infrastructure investment
and most iconic economic
development opportunities in New
Mexico
rural and urban areas.
Roads are vital to our economy
fighting critical freight
services to many of our
businesses across the state in
learning about for about real
through Mexico our research
shows that some real maybe older
than other than our statehood.
This legislation priced at a tax
credit to encourage investment
in upgrading rail infrastructure
to requires real real Roach to
invest their own money before
the tax credit is awarded for
every two dollars worth of
private investment will be a
dollar of tax credit this
legislation is based on a
successful model implementing
line of in implemented in nine
other states.
It'll help increase real
investment in position New
Mexico to bolster economic
diversification and retention of
current.
Industry especially in rural New
Mexico
expert witnesses with you today
is to do to heal and this to my
right and of course Ryan
I think it's bill.
And Jeff Vance check.
Which are both on June.
I'm an amendment also Mr but.
Okay very good up hi you did
that thing on the bill itself I
think so I was kind of questions
okay very good is there someone
that would like to move the
amendment please.
Osimo second.
No opposition these give us the
the to to to to to number sure.
Hello to all to this point two
two five two eight nine point
one okay we have the same
amendment.
We look at just a moment this
committee.
The second.
Yes.
Yes okay very good we have that
amendment Mr chair and members
of the committee basically this
this ammendment clears up the
confusion that were up double
dipping we're it's a total of
six million dollar credit that
can't be it can't be double
dipped through a personal and
corporate tax so it just
clarifies the the the language
where there's no double dipping
okay very good are there any
questions from the committee on
the amendment.
But anybody is there most of
them that are to accept even.
Questions are second second any
opposition to that amendment
very well you have built in and
then yet anything else regarding
the amended bill.
That we can proceed then to
questions from the audience
anybody here in.
Support of how this would be the
second amendment to have the two
week yes Sir.
Very good anybody here in
support of house bill two oh
eight as.
By amended in the room and also
online so in the room will go
your first to the gentleman in
the front yes Sir.
The committee but a phone
interview.
Is
the largest lawyer's office to
Mexico as of the.
Work
of this short by.
Our real critical for economic
development is Representative
here and I give you perfect
example they service our
operations other Grant County
both of CHI provided the federal
they bring in all kinds of
materials needed for our for
appropriations to operate such
things in the need to
appropriations as of all meals
were crushing
all bills they bring in ask for
eight the state take our classes
for you to those shipped over to
Arizona for.
Or for the smokers and that they
like it you know they have it of
like seven days a week with us I
won't the other operations
possibility the this
appropriations government like
five days a week so is really a
crucial operation that we need
the governor's Greco we support
this bill not only that because
teachers of expert witnesses
dollars.
Okay the help you to support.
Thanks to is that.
Chair members of the committee.
For each of you to read we.
the rails.
Sure US economic growth and
prosperity our reserves I mean
just because sure you are aware
that.
Our
competitiveness
sure opportunities.
Where is
the place
this is credible alternative
shopping with competing with
other states for a company to
issue.
Other states search which is
resulted in shoreline
investments in China.
Thank you.
Thank you also this that house
bill two eight five seven eight
anyone online.
Nobody online anyone in the room
in opposition of this bill.
Anyone online opposition.
Being done that's go to the
committee for questions.
Questions Representative
Townsend.
One of the short launch recover
that deals economically so Mr
Chairman representative.
A person the general operations
to charter schools and has such
a calm Onge.
Our.
Financially viable currently is
actually.
I would answer that is yes Mr
chair representative Scott I
think the demand there in in
Grant County alone the money is
doing really well as a matter of
fact they're they're wanting to
increase their their on
employment they're struggling to
do that but there's a lot of
opportunity and and yes Sir the
the they need to separate
structure it would help them
continue operations.
And Mr Chairman representative
this question came up in our.
Tax free meeting.
As to whether or not this.
Check or credit would apply to
citing a installation programs.
Sure Representative WHEELAND for
two expert witness on that
question Mr Representative yes.
Would apply correct.
Thank you Representative
Chandler.
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative.
The FIR and maybe this is what
the amendment was intended to
clarify.
The FIR says that it grants
owners of class two or class the
railroads both personal and
corporate income tax credits
equal to fifty percent so.
Tell me how that works if you're
how can you get folks in income
personal income tax credit and
then corporate income tax
credit.
Mr chair representative all go
in the TJ answer that for expert
witness Mr chair representative
travelers.
Act reasonable there and there's
some of the short by are
structured differently either as
a C. Corp and some businesses
were LLC's depending other
structures of the the C. one is
the is the past through the
personal is this a personal
correct okay so if you're
structured Mister chair if
you're structured as a something
other than a corporation.
Then you would be eligible for
the personal income tax if
you're a corporation that you
would be eligible for the the
corporate income tax credit
that's what you're this is what
that's what this bill does okay
sec Mr chair that the FY I was a
little confusing when they set
and but thank you very much
appreciate the clarification it
would also question the comments
from the committee.
Saying not appreciate the
presentations morning.
Yes
Sir there are pretty the
gentleman just to clarify you're
you're exactly right madam chair
the amendment makes it clear
that either for and this is how
we do it through the rest of our
statues like related to tax
credit.
Representative Harper
thank you for that.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
I move the temporary table on
house bill two oh eight is twice
amended second second thank you
any opposition to that motion
saying that the committee
presentation this morning budget
you guys thank.
Next on the agenda we have.
House Bill three sixty three
Smokey bear license plates
Representative doesn't.
Representative Ortez
two members of the committee.
Are you are to okay right you
want to join them you're welcome
to.
Anyone else in the committee on
this bill.
Yes.
Sounds good well then folks the
floor is yours whenever you like
to be used for service thank you
this is constituent bills
Smokey bear has a rich history
in the state of New Mexico and
fortunately our witnesses not
with us today and would it be
appropriate for me to tell a
story.
Okay the bear.
Senator.
Experts the our expert witness
that is Representative he's in
another the committee his wife's
grandfather was referred to the
family.
There.
As a job in the so the same when
it was shipped out of Washington
DC's use so that was our expert
witness
this bill Mr chairman this bill
has been amendment is working
they didn't quite get it is a
twenty four hour time would you
like me to explain what those
changes will be.
On this bill if we see that are
very what we do this this way
the bill that we debate back on
I.
What will.
Thank you thank you Sir so what
this bill is
as you see it set at ten dollars
to make the bill and
forty dollars will be going to
the US for service for education
to we
Because.
The state for students to not
cause us to do some education
and helping folks are not cost
pre fires and if then within two
years twenty four twenty five
season this is twenty three
twenty four
fifty percent of the places are
sold an average within the first
two years if it doesn't meet
that that it will be sunset.
Mr chair that standard language
that we have been requested to
to change department of for New
the transportation committee.
That that's that is what you're.
I.
Yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee at hi I'm reading one
of these analyses that Smokey
the bear was that made up
marketing tool by the Forest
Service and I'm here to tell you
that that is just patently
untrue.
This for you Representative
Scott.
Members of local with your
Representative Harlan fifty
cents for bears.
in rescuing this iconic symbol
of of of the western U. S. force
so I that is why I am hearing
this bill to serve and honor the
testing of the firefighters they
want to respond that
They also you presentation most
I don't think so very good this
I'm sorry so Representative
Borrego understand your you want
to go over close to make sure we
get to the Mike just so we can
all.
Representative Borrego and I was
also contacted by this
constituents so we were having
to pay bills and then we we
noticed that we had the same
bill so I didn't put money
forward and I jumped on on their
bill which they were kind enough
to let me do that I just want to
say that Smokey the bear was in
New Mexicans so this is really
important.
Thank you but it is not.
That is not thank you thank you
all.
Patients that's right here let's
go to the audience and then like
I said we'll come back and then
on Friday we will take audiences
comments in one school street to
action so anybody here in the
audience in person in support of
house bill three sixty three.
Saying nobody anybody online
seeing no one online anyone in
opposition house bill three
sixty three nobody in person no
one on the line
committee any questions or
comments I think the ten are
talked about the amendment will
talk about the amendment for
sure on Friday Representative
yes I want to know what the at
the license plate will look
like.
Madam chair.
Mr chair
Madam chair that I believe that
it is that the design is still
forthcoming.
To have other.
Mr chair.
What would you like it to.
Should this bill get out I think
we should have a small.
Replica of the banner so.
Put my two cents.
What I picture one of the other.
Thank you Mr Mr.
Sounds reasonable anyone else
questions or comments from the
committee.
This got.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative forties if you're
not in sales you have missed.
Mr chair may respond.
You may good.
Mr chair representative that are
we all.
Mr chairman and representatives
how many license plates are
currently authorized the use to
New Mexico today.
Mr I I've heard a rumor that
there's close to one hundred.
A place the state have.
Okay and Mr Chairman
representative is our partner
passionate provisions on these.
Four plates that or.
But.
West.
Mr Chairman representative yes
it is if after two years twenty
four twenty five years if it
doesn't meet the standard of
fifty percent than it sounds.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative well it would
also make questions or comments.
Seeing that we'll see you again
on Friday with the amendment
that will talk about the what we
do next it.
In addition all right let's move
the house bill three sixty eight
tax exemptions and definitions
Representative Harper and by
children could.
And the chairman committee
members that
Short title was getting causing
so much confusion I actually was
able to get it changed so the
new title is pass through entity
tax credit.
It with the pass through
entities tax credit we'll talk
about what those are here and
but I just want to.
But no that was causing a lot of
confusion
Mr chair I might start to name
my implication in this.
In last year's legislative
session I was impressed by the
New Mexico chamber of commerce
to introduce this bill relating
to pass through entities we
describe it as a unicorn bill
best thing since sliced bread
and lo and behold even though we
have the most billion tax mines
in New Mexico working on this
assuring us that this was the
right way to do this it's time
for a little bit of a claim
already so we sometimes that
happens we do our best and I'm
glad that we get to come back
and tie in this in the ways
that's appropriate so
Representative Parker I'm I'm
done with my skills thank you
madam vice chair so.
always start off by saying this
is really wonky and really in
the weeds so I'm gonna do my
very best to keep the high level
perspective what we're doing
here and then the we've got to
market with the tax department
here as well to help out.
So in two thousand seventeen the
Feds passed the tax cuts and
jobs act.
And as part of that they put a
cap on the amount of state and
local taxes that you could
deduct from your federal return
that cap was ten thousand
dollars and the the rationale
for that cap.
Was that there are several
states high tax states you know
California New York these folks.
And they rack up a lot of state
local tax you can deduct that
from your federal tax return.
And the feds were thinking Hey
we're we're subsidizing high tax
states.
Okay we're going to cap it at
your personal income tax level
of ten thousand dollars.
Well
But you know people are smart or
creative and so states look at
them as it will you know that's
just personal income what if we
do it at the.
And two of what the business
level.
And so we started moving those
forward and the IRS just kind of
looks the other way and and so.
More than half the states and
union adopted this fix we were
one of them.
And all this talk very high
level what that fix once.
so imagine you have a small
business R. you know LOC a pass
through entity we call.
What you normally do is you
calculate what was my actual
income so all of your own money
brought in.
Minus the things you can deduct
your expenses and that gives you
a value that values and passed
through to your personal income
tax and it's charging your
income tax personal income tax
level.
Well normally at that point is
when you deduct the state and
local taxes that you paid.
What this bill that we passed
together with senator Lott last
year was just that instead of
doing it at this part after you
passed it through you can do it
as a business expense at the
entity level so here's a
tracking you know all your
business expenses we change the
definition so that you can now
include your state and local
taxes.
At the entity level since you're
able to drive it.
At that point and so you pay
less federal tax there was a
unicorn because it actually.
Slightly increased your state
tax
the business actually turned out
fine because they they save more
on the federal then they're
paying on the state so there are
ahead but actually was a
positive fiscal impact to the
state that's why I was a unicorn
help the businesses electoral
tax but we got a lot more state
tax.
So that's how we got to where we
are now what this bill does.
Is when all of the other states
enacted this last year we did it
as an exception.
And what we've all kind of
collectively found together was
their unintended consequences of
that things that.
Implementation wise which is
really hard and it is not giving
the benefit that we thought it
would actually and so the states
now all of them in the committee
dispatching it from an exception
to a credit Colorado just did
this
and so this is what this bill
does it changes the mechanics of
it to make it so that it works.
I really want to thank you March
we reached out to him.
What the small and intimate
apartment have been working hard
with you know for secretary Jim
o'neill and hello impact and
Richard including the whole tax
team.
To make sure we got it right and
I was really grateful for all
this help to get.
Tourism from you today so all
all I was there and.
Market would like to add.
Mr chair members of the
committee good morning my name
is mark shaking tax policy
director at the taxation revenue
department and thank you for
those words Representative
Harper no I don't think we have
anything I have anything to add
to what you said yeah I think I
would say is that the R. is
actually has blessed this very
issue to revenue ruling I think
a lot of tax professionals were
surprised the the iris would
normally look at this and saying
no I don't think so but other
actually blasted we have a
formal blessing they are just so
I just want to reassure
everybody that we're not doing
anything that I was going to get
anybody in trouble here.
With that was never questions
right thank you very much anyone
in the audience would audience
and then all online as well as
in the audience support House
Bill three sixty eight in the
room.
Anyone online as of the thinking
went online in opposition that
House Bill three sixty eight in
the real or online.
It's not Representative Chandler
Representative Scott thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chair I'm
interested in language that's on
page fifteen bills.
Lines nineteen through twenty
one.
It says forty percent of net
capital gains properly allocated
to the owners who are subject to
tax pursuant to the
income tax act so I'm trying to
understand this reversal the
bill we're trying to get past of
eliminating the capital gains
deduction so chairman and madam
chair no I would not be so
underhanded
all of pass over to March or
just a moment but what this bill
is doing is it's consolidating
and defining what is income
right when that it's T. past you
introduce defining what is my
income and one of my expenses
you know and recruiting now in
your state local taxes as part
of that.
We're recruiting everything that
currently exists but I'll pass
it over to Martinez.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Chandler of the
point of this is to ensure that
the passed through acts the
gets the same advantage that it
would if up for the deduction
would would have been passed
through states to really to make
sure the math works at Berkeley
you have a comment from the LFC
that maybe that should be a
deduction that it should be a
subsection F. road and separate
number two to make clear that
it's being deducted from the
income so there may be some
confusion just a about the was
formatted so we're going to
double check on that but yeah
it's to make sure that if the PC
is paying the tax directly it
still will be able to take a
valuable part of the deduction
Department be eligible to the
partners that are included is
income is including distributed
net income I'm sorry but it gets
complicated but basically we're
defining the amount of income.
All which the PDP to pay the tax
directly so certain part of that
income is excluded and we want
to make sure that this is the
deduction that would apply to
certain of the owners of the PDP
and so they are also able to
take advantage of that deduction
so it's it's that we're trying
to preserve the deduction will
take anything back
just add one seeing chairman
madam chair the F. I. R..
I think you had a good
suggestion
which was just to reference the
the existing statute for the
capital gains deductions of that
statute changes we don't have to
come back and change this.
And and to me I think
I would be open to making a
change like that is it.
It's challenging or statutes we
we copied sings in that we
forget to change one we change
we have got another so perhaps
that might be a
an olive branch I would stand up
well
just to be clear Mr Chairman.
There's a proposal to eliminate
the capital gains deduction with
the exception of twenty five
hundred dollars I understand
that has not been adopted or you
know tax under percent.
Yes this that is adopted this
would be in conflict with that.
And that would mean this would
have to be eliminated from a
reference Mr chair do we not
agree yeah so okay German chair
I agree with you and that's why
I'm saying perhaps instead of
spelling out here in I don't to
as forty percent of capital
gains we could say.
Also included is the capital
gains pursuant to M. S. A. what
whatever section section section
so if it changes this year to
something besides what it is now
we don't have to come back here
and change this just points to
the the the existing reference
okay Mister chair if we're
planning on rolling this and
there is a fiscal impact then I
guess we would reconcile all
these issues when the package is
developed is that not correct Mr
chair let's see the fiscal
impact on the F. I. R. yeah so.
I'm concerned so chairman madam
chair there is not a fiscal
impact lives
I'm I'm I.
Again I'm not trying to do
anything under handed here we're
just trying to make this
mechanism works for our
businesses here I'm happy to
hold on to this and create an
amendment that addresses that
there are a couple other.
Henschel minor things that we
can get amended
and.
I'm very open to that.
Chair Representative Chandler I
appreciate the catch in the
clarity and also the leadership
on TRD to already looking at
possible solutions to that I do
want to fail out again for the
audience and potentially more
members this happens quite
regularly that bills moving
through the legislative session
may potentially be in conflict
there is already a standardized
standardized process run through
Legislative Council to make sure
that we capture and compile the
intent of legislation that may
be in conflict so I appreciate
that and this committee we may
have the opportunity to slow
down offer an amendment
that would feel appropriate for
our members here but there is
also process and and it happens
on a regular basis thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative
Jennifer Mr Chairman
representative I would for sure
that it have good language so if
we could perhaps bring it back
with an appropriate amendment I
would be more comfortable with
this bill.
I think that's appropriate I
think it's it's on level do you
want to work together and we can
get this right over this time
and so I have zero problem bring
it back Friday along with over
there
with the equipment and so but we
will still have the less than
the hearing this morning on the
bill itself so you don't
question okay right well that's
good representative got.
Thank you Mr chairman.
The helpful sure would be
helpful for me if we could.
Of when through scenario with
some numbers.
Representative passed through
entity was two hundred thousand
dollars of net income or
something.
What are the consequences step
by step through that process.
To determine what.
Mr chair Representative Scott I
do actually have some centers
that had been prepared by and
CPA's I don't have them on the
but I if we're coming back on
Friday would be happy to bring a
couple of those and and run
through them with you the the.
Main difference is that you'll
see the whole income is taxed at
the top state tax rate of five
point nine percent so that's the
slight bump that the state gets
because it's no longer
progressive of the full amount
of the income is taxed at a
higher rate and then the federal
budget will depending of course
on the taxpayers particularly
federal tax bracket and so forth
but I do have a couple seniors
will be happy to run through
with you thank you Mr chairman
forecast for.
I thank you for choosing
Representative anyone else
questions or comments from the
committee.
Okay seeing none that we will
roll this bill until Friday with
your amendment and then that is
what we we we got at that point
did.
All of that that's origin on
this that the late morning I I
do want to note that our
conversations with our panel as
they look that we're too much on
on schedule with bills that have
come to a committee so we're
we're handling them well
obviously with the two editions
of the amended bill for tribal
at those to the list but that
being the case we will have to
have any week in meetings this
week in for this committee so I
