let me before we.
The.
This.
I want to pass out some
homework.
For the week.
being.
It's optional living.
Your a.
But but but I I think you may
want to partake in this.
Public exercise
as as a method of inclusion as
part of this committee
I had a conversation with
Representative Harper.
as the ranking Republican member
in regards to this process and
if you look at the first hand
that the package stable on their
it represents all of that the
all of the bill that we've heard
to date in this committee
that have both the positive and
negative impact that at this
point in time if we can look at
this list and determined up
based on your own opening in
what you would find to be
appetizing for a tax act if you
get that highlight maybe five or
how many of those that you feel
that was would be important to
you in your constituency I would
like to get this rolling so that
by next week we can have a a
more condensed less and then the
tax bill the pair for
presentation in my mind
hopefully by next week Friday
okay so that's that's the that's
the package that you have a
number of of tax bills office of
the those the ones that we have
all heard at this point in time
here in this committee.
Yeah on the.
What.
So with that what it is
recognizes that we were that we
heard it but it might use of the
question was on the first page
under children possible ninety
nine that's the one that we've
got the tax implication and so
it went on to appropriations of
the this the that would cap but.
That's for all the bills we've
heard in this committee and I
want to thank I want to thank
our our channel is both taschik
Kathleen for helping to create
this matrix No Way work
hopefully we can all understand
it and create a better
understanding of of how we can
develop this
of the field the second one
Peters is a is a sheet that I
had
presented to me by the LFC the
LFC staff present this
Our system that.
Okay.
One patient.
That was that would and then we
have.
I don't know that it is already.
That sounds
correct okay so it is being
handed out features.
So.
The
LFC is that came up to me and
and had a meeting this week
regarding based on their.
Observation to the city of both
this committee and the Senate
tax committee
That that their their ideas of
of perhaps based on the of the
feelings of the committee what
maybe appetizing for four of tax
packages so this is obviously a
recommendation by no means that
the by anybody but this would be
at their recommendation in
regards to what may be fitting
for a tax package so obviously
you know take this as as a just
the consideration but it's
obviously up to greet the tax
package so that that that's what
everybody's understanding also
regards the Senate bills they
seem to be moving very slowly on
that side and and for the most
part getting caught up it's that
if that's at this point I don't
want to wait for them to do it
take to us bill they want to
send over here so that the thing
that we're going to present and
create a bill are all and then
however we can fit there's in
two hours then we will do so as
appropriate but I don't want to
wait on them to create this that
keep in mind that we do have
about a billion dollars of tax
capacity this year so so keep
that in mind and it also if you
look at that one pager.
under Senate bill kind of the
middle under Senate bill yes
additional twenty twenty one
income tax rebates.
If if if that rebate bill ever
makes the Senate over to this
side of that that's a billion
dollars and solve that wipes out
all past passes the keeping that
in mind you know we we gotta be
mindful of that but you know.
It doesn't seem to be
materialized the way I think the
governor wanted to or is that
he's in the house if you want to
do so let's not be shy in
regards to making sure that we
have a billion dollars to to
utilize it as a tax to pass IT
let's do things and can get more
return on investments then we
would have issuing a check and
it however that that that
materialize it will but
hopefully you understand that we
always fit in that so you can
take those and if we if that on
Monday's meeting you can return
the fact that we we can begin
that to develop this type of
