We're making it up for those of
you online, thanks for zooming
in, uh, to begin the meeting,
let's call.
Good morning. Representative
Chandler.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Henry.
Representative Hernandez,
Representative Lustrom.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Montoya.
Represented here
representative Silva here
representative Terasas.
Representative.
by star Kadina.
Here.
And uh Mr. Chairente
here we have a coum we are now
going to hear we substitute for
Senate Bill 249 and presenting
this morning is represented
ranking member Duncan Floro sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee. Um, this is, uh,
rather simple bill and now every
time I say simple bill, it's
probably I'm not, but what's
happening when um Medicaid
providers are providing service
with MCOs, the MCOs send him a
lump sum.
And this bill just breaks that
some out shows what they're
getting paid for their services
they provided and the GRT. And
the reason that's important is,
uh, for example, in some cities,
the GRT may be a little higher
and a little bit lower, so they
may not be getting what they
need in some of those areas that
have a large or higher um GRT
than those that have a lower GRT
in their communities and so this
bill just makes some uh break it
out and show exactly what it is,
so that they providers can then
pay.
exactly what the, what is owed.
That's what this bill does.
Very well. Do you want to
introduce your expert? You bet.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Kerry Robin Brunner
with the Medical Society just
here for any technical
questions. Thank you.
Anything else, sir? No, sir.
There's being none. Let's go to
the uh internet.
Supported opposition. Anybody
online?
One person online raising your
hand.
Dana.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Dana Gray, executive
director of Desert State
Physical Therapy Network
representing 30 independent
private practices throughout the
state. We think the senators for
introducing this legislation and
carry for her assistance, as it
has been a struggle to receive
full reimbursement of GRT from
MCO payers. We agree with a
greater need for transparency in
claims payment processes. We
stand in full support and urge a
due pass. Thank you.
Thank you for joining us this
morning. Anyone else? That's it.
OK. Anyone in the room and
support for substitutes to
Senate Bill 249. Yes, sir.
to make public comment, he'll
hold the mic for you.
Good morning, members of the
committee. Mr. Chair, my name is
Vicente Vargas. I'm the
executive director for the New
Mexico Health Care Association
in New Mexico Center for
Assisted Living.
We represent 64 of the 68
nursing facility, um, a nursing
facility, Medicaid providers in
the state. Um, for the reasons
that the representative laid
out, including streamlining the
reporting of GRT by nursing
facility, Medicaid providers,
um, will help in the in the
process of billing as well as
preventing, um,
MCOs from using GRT as leverage
during the negotiation of
Medicaid contracts with uh
nursing facilities. So thank you
very much, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
sir. Anyone else? Anyone in
opposition of the Senate
committee substitute for Senate
Bill 249.
No one. Let's come back to our
committee then. Any questions or
comments from our committee.
Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just one
question, uh, what fiscal impact
does this have?
No, Mister Chair.
OK.
Any other harder questions for
the representative this morning.
Representative Lustro.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, uh, presenters.
I understand what you're trying
to do with this bill, but I'd
like to ask when the state
enters into contract with these
MCOs.
Isn't there some kind of a
reporting process required in
that.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Lustrom.
That's, that's correct. So what
happens is the state enters into
a contract with one of the NCOs
and the MCOs actually receive a
per member per month capitation
rate. That capitation rate
actually includes the amount of
money that the MCO would need to
pass the GRT along to the
providers. So the MCOs are
supposed to be reporting that. I
think that there has been some
Uh, issues with that reporting
and by doing this bill where
there's now transparency around
this is your reimbursement for
the service versus the amount
for the GRT that will also help
clean that up and make sure that
all of the systems are aligned.
So let me just ask you in the um
that's loud in the uh
Con contract process? Is it
broken down by city and county
that they're providing services.
I know my city's gross receipts
tax level is different than the
county.
So is it broken out to that
detail.
So Mr. Chairman and
Representative Lustrom, our
understanding is that each one
of the MCOs collect the
information themselves of how
much the GRT should be that they
are providing to each one of the
providers based on that
different rate depending on the
contract, the provider that they
are contracted with, that data
is the data that they then use
to report to the state so that
the capitation rate includes
that amount. So all of that
reporting is being done or that
individual.
collection of there's a
different rate between Gallup
and McKinley County should be
happening by Presbyterian via
their contracts with the
providers and those different
rates or United with their
different contracts with rates.
They roll that up and report it
to the state. So that's supposed
to be what the MCOs do. So, uh,
Mr. Chairman and and expert. So
who does the due diligence at
the end of the day, isn't this
supposed to be the human
services department.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Lindstrom, the healthcare
authority is the one that then
establishes those capitation
rates with their um actuary. So
the healthcare authority is the
one that has to ensure that that
data is accurate. They do rely
on the data they get from the
MCOs, but that's an auditing
process that they have to go
through at the HCA.
Yeah, that's crazy. I mean, it
would make sense to me that
they'd be doing some that like
we do with infrastructure.
Projects, it's more of a value
engineering, I would think that
there'd be some value auditing
done also because these are
massive contracts. Can you tell
us, uh, Mr. Chairman, with the
total MCO contracts are for this
fiscal year alone. Uh, Mr.
Chairman and Representative
Lundstrom, I, I know that it is
well into the billions and it
would seem to me that.
The human services or this
healthcare authority ought to be
doing some online now or
sideline type due diligence
themselves and not relying on
what's just reported. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to Representative Silva.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, I
Just wanted to ask a clarifying
question that we're looking at
the 0.2.
Um, of 249, is that correct?
Because there's a 0.1 in the, in
my binder
OK.
And there's no committee action
that we need to do to at that
point to just a clarifying
question, chair.
Um
Representative, no ma'am. OK.
OK, thank you for that
clarification. And how does this
bill square with HB 344 and HB
295. I know there's a number of
GRT exemptions kind of floating
around, um, in the house and
I want to support all of them,
but also don't want to create
like a mess, so can you help me
understand that? Thank you,
chair. Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Silva. So,
344 and 295 are bills that would
create GRT deductions or
exemptions, meaning the
providers would no longer be
remitting that GRT to the state.
This bill is very different.
This bill does not create a
deduction or an exemption. What
it does is it says we as the
state of New Mexico, you all as
a legislature are appropriating
money to the healthcare
authority to the Medicaid
program. That money is then
contracted with the MCOs and
included in that amount that
they contract with the MCA.
s for is enough money to pay the
providers the GRT. All this bill
is doing is saying, make sure
that money makes it to the
providers. Let's make sure that
we have a stand-alone
reimbursement rate and then we
have a stand-alone GRT amount on
their bills so that the provider
knows I got $100 for a baby well
check. I'm gonna report that
$100 as my gross receipt. I got
$7.5 for the GRT. I'm gonna use
that $7.5 to pay my GRT back to
the states. So it's closing that
loop.
Making sure the providers are
made whole for their, for their
Medicaid reimbursements.
Thank you. um.
Mr. Chair and representative,
that's the explanation I needed
cause I was like, wait, how does
this all work? So thank you for
explaining it in that way. Um,
and I know the value you have a
representative of making folks
whole. So, uh, thank you. I
appreciate this bill.
Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Any other
questions or comments
Representative Vice Chainna.
Thank you, Mr. Tay and
Representative Duncan. I
understand how the bill is
supposed to work. It surprises
me that the FIR, the total cost
is so low.
So, including that the FIR says
that the actual cost to
implement this change would only
be 450,000, so less than half a
million dollars, but when we
consider for the federal match,
the general fund cost would be
45. I'm wondering, um, Mr. Chair
Representative, if maybe the
economists can explain how
small. Why, why that number is
so low based on how much we
actually pay for Medicaid and
through the MCO contracts.
Thank you. My name is Jennifer
Fabian. I'm an economist with
LFC, uh, I wrote the analysis on
this bill. So that operational
impact basically came straight
from HCA. It's what they
estimate the implementation of
this would be the administrative
burden. A lot of this
administrative burden is
actually gonna fall on the MCOs
and on the providers, um, and
then once that kind of trickles
back up to the HCA, that's what
they estimate the cost to be.
Mr. Chair representative, it's
been explained that the bill
means that the state is
appropriating money to pay the
GRT is
Somebody's nodding yes and
somebody's nodding no and, and
that's my question if that's
what this is actually doing this
that I doesn't make any sense.
Yeah, I can speak to that, uh,
Mister Chair Representative. So
the first version of this bill
did do that, um, it's basically
charged the state to reimburse
every provider for the GRT as
the expert witness already kind
of explained the GRT is included
in the state capitation rates to
the MCOs. The problem has been
kind of throughout the process,
getting to the providers,
getting passed on to the
providers. This cleans that up.
So the substitute that was
adopted over on the Senate.
Um
Essentially charges the MCOs and
the providers to work that out,
essentially the GRT being paid,
basically itemized per service,
not this kind of lump sum or
this averageRT rates, um, so
that each provider is getting
the GRT they actually paid on
each service.
And Mr. Chairman, I'll just add.
The appropriation that you all
are already making to the
healthcare authority already
includes the amount necessary to
pay the GRT, which is why
there's not a fiscal impact
because the healthcare authority
saying we as the as the agency
already received these funds. We
already give them to the to the
MCOs. It's just making sure it
lands in the right hands. That's
why HCA is saying it's a $0
fiscal impact for the Medicaid
program, just that 45,000 for
the IT upgrades that they would
have to make.
That they get a federal match
for.
OK, thank you.
Any other questions or comments
from the committee?
What is the pleasure of the
committee?
We do pass by Representative
Fernandez. Is there a 2nd second
by Representative Gallegos,
chairwoman Gallegos, um, we will
call the roll.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Duncan.
Yes.
Thank you, Representative
Callegos.
Yes.
Representative Henry, yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lindstrom.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Montoya, yes.
Representative Barjuan.
Yes. Representative Suha, yes,
Resentrazas.
Vice chair Ladino.
Yes.
And Mr. Chante, yes, ma'am
do pass on Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 249. Thank you for the
appreciation, sir. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thanks. And, and for
our committee, uh, in the last
week and a half of this session,
please do keep in mind that we
do receive bills kind of on the
fly, so just keep your mind and,
and, and, and, uh, schedules
open that we may have other
bills coming through their
Senate bills at this point and
also we still have uh our, our
tax package as well as capital.
outlay that are still in the
works, so, uh, we will have a
couple of busy weeks or half a
week, but uh I appreciate your,
your work on this committee.
