Representative Montoya.
Representative Pawan.
Representative Silliva.
Representative Terazas.
Representative Kavina.
Here I chair and chair
Representative Lente.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, when
you're ready, let's start on HP
14. Thank you, Madam Vice
Chairwoman. Good morning, uh,
again to all of our folks here
this morning. I told the
Representative Senator Cortez.
That this being the first time
here that I could go one of two
ways. I could warm you guys up.
I could really just get you guys
really upset, so since she's
going after me, we'll, we'll see
what happens.
Uh, I'm here this morning to
present House Bill 14.
And
Let me take you back in terms of
providing some context that
since 2018, this committee has
borne witness to some of the
most creative tax work in any
legislature, any state
legislature to create what is
considered one of the most fair
tax structures.
In the United States.
If you today Google New Mexico's
tax systems.
You would likely find tons of
articles related to.
Progressivity of our taxes here
in the state and or the
fairness.
Of taxes in the state.
Beginning with some of the
lowest property taxes in the
United States. This committee
also put into place again.
been in place over the past
8 years expansions to.
Low income credits
Creations of new child tax
credits and deductions.
A rate cut to the gross receipts
tax over the past 2 years by one
quarter of an 8% 125%, which is
18% rate over the past 22 and 23
calendar years.
An expanded exemption for Social
Security income that helped
those in the upper middle class
income.
Categories
A new tax bracket structure with
reduced rates that we all passed
last year.
Showcased to reduce taxes for
all New Mexicans to make our tax
structure truly progressive so
that when I hear the rhetoric
that we've raised taxes.
Quite the opposite. We reduced
taxes for all the Mexicans,
especially in the work that we
did last year.
Mm
That's what leads us to House
Bill 14 in continuation for
wanting to help New Mexicans
more.
We continue to brainstorm with
my co-sponsor and vice
chairwoman Kadena and many
others on this committee.
Oftentimes partnering with who I
consider some of the brightest
and best economists in New
Mexico and that is a legislative
finance committee economists.
With their thumb and their pulse
on New Mexico.
We've contemplated work to
adjust.
For instance, the low income
comprehensive tax rebates.
Right?
But found that this
Move would have created a lot of
unintended consequences in
regards to cliff effects.
That it almost dis
disincentivizes people from
wanting to make more money
because they would lose more
benefits.
By how much more they earn.
Again, creating good and in
perpetuity this class of of
income earners.
We then came up with this
concept to really just eliminate
personal income taxes.
And put more money into the
pockets of working single fiers
and families in New Mexico.
Really focusing on those in New
Mexico.
That make
From the range of minimum wage.
Up to
$25 per hour.
I think to yourselves back at
home who that includes.
Remedy of the people in my
community, that's a lot of them.
So in, in terms of how we can
help the people back at home.
That's a lot. So,
How this came to fruition is
that
The current Federal earned
income tax credit has been good
for New Mexico.
Expanding on the successful
program really which is
A relic from the President
Reagan era.
The Mexo currently has the
earned income tax credit that
provides benefit to single
fiers.
And working families at the
rates and if you look at your
FIR on page number 2, you'll see
those rates.
Uh, uh, in, in the table on the
first table.
program currently
It was claimed by 195,000 fiers
in 2023.
Has proven itself successful
with an average benefit of about
$500 per year.
It is further
Shown to reduce poverty.
Promote work
Increase health outcomes, expand
economic opportunities for
single parents, increased
childhood educational
opportunities and increase
earnings.
But this expanded HB 14 will do
for the Mexicans includes that.
It expands on
That federal working families
tax credit.
To fully offset state income
taxes for an estimated
additional
101,000 New Mexican workers.
Bringing New Mexico's number of
workers.
That will not see a state tax
liability.
Upwards of about 300,000
workers.
Examples being that single
fiers.
About 45,000 taxpayers with
incomes, again, from minimum
wage up to about $25,000.
These are primarily taxpayers
without children.
We'll see a large benefit.
Those are often times people
without children working minimum
wage.
Maybe working about 25 to 30
hours per week. They don't
qualify for the current tax, uh,
for the federal tax credit.
But are further tax into
poverty, the more they work.
Both on the federal side and the
state side.
On a related side note,
There's a recent LFC legislative
finance program evaluation that
found that low labor force
participation.
Among childless men was a
significant problem in New
Mexico.
It may be one of the key factors
in holding our statewide labor
force partition rate.
At a bad level. Furthermore,
Fylers with children.
An additional 10,000 filers with
children will see a huge
benefit.
Taxpayers with children earning
up to about $55,000 will have
their state income tax liability
completely offset.
In short, House Bill 14 builds
on the strengths of the earned
income tax credit solves many of
the problems by offering an
expansion to include more
workers.
And ensures that those in our
communities that are working the
hardest oftentimes.
We'll see, no.
A liability on a statewide
level.
With that man
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We'll go
first to public comments.
I will start online. Please
raise your hand if you'd like to
speak in support.
Of HB 14.
We'll start with Kurt with
Lutheran advocacy ministry, go
ahead, Kurt.
Good morning, madam. Good
morning, Madam Chair members of
the committee is Kurt with the
New Mexico and we also speak for
the New Mexican Conference of
churches
and we're here to speak in favor
of HB 14, uh, for all the work
we want to thank you for all the
work you've done previously for
the working families in terms of
your tax work previous sessions,
and we very much like this bill,
but the fact that it expands tax
credits to Mexicans and to the
expansions by sponsor.
So we wholeheartedly support HP
14 and urge your support to
thank you for the opportunity to
speak this morning.
Thank you. Next, we'll go to
sovereign.
Uh, members of the committee. My
name is Sovereign Hager from the
New Mexico Center on Lon
Poverty, and we want to really
thank the sponsor for this bill.
We stand in support because tax
credit changes proposed by the
still increased economic
opportunities for New Mexicans
and especially those with lower
incomes. Um, the earned income
tax credit is an extremely
important and effective tool to
reduce poverty and improve the
well-being of workers, families,
and children. The boosting
credits through this bill mean
that more low-income New
Mexicans will have increased
resources to ease financial
stress, finding safe and
affordable housing, purchasing
nutritious food and affording
things that enrich their lives.
The bill also protects families
if they're federal pets, so they
earned income tax credit, um, so
we stranded strong support of
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Any others that would
like to speak in support of HB
14. If so, please raise your
hand now.
OK, moving to opposition if
you're on Zoom and would like to
speak in opposition to HB 14,
please raise your hands.
Seeing no hands, we will come
back to the room.
Uh, please line up if you'd like
to speak in support or
opposition to HB 14.
Good morning, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is OTambaumi, advocacy
director for AARP New Mexico,
um, our ARP Foundation holds
tax-free tax clinics throughout
the country and New Mexico, and
a lot of our volunteers who
provide these services to
individuals see that, um, a lot
of families don't necessarily
qualify or individuals qualify
for some of these tax credits
cause they just make a little
too much for, for those, so we
really believe in this bill to
expand some of those uh
Income increases for, for these
families and help them out and
provide financial stability for
them. So we urge you to pass.
Thank you. Any others that would
like to speak on HB 14?
Mr. Cha, any final comments
before we go to committee?
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for all those that made
comments this morning,
recognizing that this does have
in fact a fiscal impact to the
general fund recognizing that it
will be tabled in this
committee, I think it's
worthwhile nonetheless to have
the conversation this morning
about its its validity as we
move forward to help the
Mexicans.
and representative.
Um, members of the audience,
thanks for being here. It's
early on a Monday, um, for me.
So I just have a few clarifying
questions to get, uh, get
started, uh, get us started
here, um, mister.
Chairmen and Madam Chair.
Uh
Um, there was a question here in
the FIR technical uh question
about the filing status, like
how, um, like in the New
Mexico's, uh.
Uh, personal income tax code
marrying married filing jointly
is often combined with the head
of household filing status, but
I imagine since we already have
a working family, a working tax.
Credit that it is applied the
same way, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative,
it's good to have you here this
morning as well. Um, it's done
exactly the same way.
It's applied the same way just
to expand it more to uh included
additional people in the
different um.
In income levels.
And, um, Madam Chair and uh Mr.
Chair, the.
Yeah, the FIR for tax and rev
looks different from the FIR
that um.
the LFC produce if I'm if I'm
not mistaken in FY.
26, it looks like it's set, this
will cost 73 million, but the
tax and rev.
Um
Department says the revenue
impact is.
Uh, 42 million, Mr. Chair.
Madam Chair, do you know that
seems like a big difference, so
I didn't know which one.
Madam Jerodman and
representative, that's a great
question. And with me today I
have Brendan Gray who is an
economist there in the
Legislative Finance Committee.
If I could have them come up and
answer that question. I think
there's a lot of variables that
initially when we looked at this
concept.
We were looking at a cost of
upwards of $200 million to make
this work out, but it has come
down substantially since then to
a point where I think there's a
little bit of discrepancy
between uh tax and revenue and
LFC, but at the same time, I
think there is a an appreciation
for the both of them come closer
to a number on what this will
cost. Madam Chair
Representative, excuse me, I'm
recovering from a cold so my
voice is still.
Um, I think the chair hit the
nail on the head, um.
When uh we were initially
designing this program in
conjunction with the chair, uh,
we had certain assumptions that
we were making that the tax and
rep department had different
numbers for. Um, we also have
slightly different
methodologies.
Um, if you look in the FIR in
the fiscal implications, those
are kind of discussed.
Where, um, you know, maybe
they're off by a little bit,
maybe they're a little low and
maybe we're a little high. I
think we're still ironing out
some of those details.
And in subsequent versions that
number should be closer.
Madam Chair and Mr. Chair.
Is
Did in our last tax credit that
we gave of this type. Was there
evidence that showed, um, a, a
reduction in poverty for the
folks that received um this tax
creditor, what kind of evidence
around this, um, exists, Madam
Chair and um.
Mr. Chair
Madam Chairwoman, and I'm sorry
I think Brendan and I are
sharing the same goal that we're
getting over, but in any event,
um, it, the, the effects of the
earned income tax credit has
shown again to absolutely reduce
poverty, remote workforce,
getting those folks that don't
want to work off the bench so
they can return back to the
workforce because they know that
every dollar that they're
earning, they're not having to
pay taxes into
The state system, right? They're
gonna keep that in their pocket.
Uh, it increases health outcomes
for those of us that that uh
come from marginalized
communities and communities of
color really expanding economic
opportunities for single parents
that increases childhood
again, going back to the point
that it just increases earnings
for those individuals that are
in these, in these uh levels of
of being able to appreciate a
tax credit like this.
Um, Madam chair and, uh, Mr.
Chair, so it, I mean, it sounds
like it has really great effects
and and I think we're going to
hear shortly about a different
proposal, um, to eliminate the,
the personal income tax and this
is sort of in a sense
eliminating personal income tax
or reducing personal income tax
for folks who make less so, um,
why is this proposal better than
uh eliminating personal income
tax, um, madam.
and, uh, Mr. Chair.
Madam Chairwoman and
representative, that that's a
great question and I don't want
to take away from the thunder
that our next presenter is gonna
bring with her bill with their
bill, but at the same time we
looked at this in regards to our
brainstorming sessions that took
place over the interim since our
last uh legislative session and.
The costume itself was, was very
prohibitive, uh, recognizing
that New Mexico is very much
dependent on the oil and gas
industry and the volatility of
that industry is what helps us
pay for a lot of the programs
today.
And so, uh, the cost of a
program like that.
It's a lot larger than than the
the $70 million per year of
potential tax potential impact
to the general fund.
Uh
Furthermore, you know, in
regards to, I think more of the
The stats on on on who we're
trying to affect the most,
right? Uh, I, I, I, I'd rather
impact those that are blue
collar workers again focusing on
those that are making minimum
wage to upwards of $55,000 a
year.
In New Mexico.
Uh, versus and then having those
people not have to pay state
income tax versus
The millionaires or
multi-millionaires that will
receive the same benefit and how
much more they would save.
How much more they would be able
to save into their bank accounts
versus how much more these
Mexicans every day the Mexicans
that are focused on in this
bill.
would be able to buy groceries.
Or or rents or other things that
are really important to them, at
least when I think about my
community and I'm sure others
can share the same sentiment
with Madam Chair and Mr. Chair,
uh, I, yeah, I look forward to
hearing also the argument for
the other side, uh, eliminating
the personal income tax
afterwards, um, but I think for
now that really does seem um
like some really good arguments,
uh, Madam Chair, Mr.
Representative Silva.
Thank you Madam Chair, uh,
Chairman, thank you for the
presentation. Um, I just want to
uh.
Go to the FIR on uh where it's a
significant issues. It just
creates additional complexity
for the text for the filer, and
I wanted to make sure that, um,
does TRD have programs or um uh
like communications that can
help advertise these shifts so
that filers are aware of the
change, um, and they can take
advantage of that.
Thank you, madam chairwoman and
representative, you know, this
is something that that
Admittedly, we did not work in
concert with the taxation
revenue Department, but I
imagine that that uh with the
benefits that that they already
are are currently providing with
the earning and tax credit, that
wouldn't be a stretch to
continue to
Advertise in the same vein, just
an expansion of
If House Bill 14 is considered
for the tax package to include
that in their advertisements.
Excellent. Thank you, uh,
Chairman and Madam Chair, um, I,
I think this is a really good
way again to bring people off
the bench and into the field and
terms of getting more people
working, uh, and not worrying
about the tax liability they
might incur if they um get
bumped up into a different uh x
bracket. So thank you so much
for the uh for the bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, uh, Mr. Chamy.
I'm looking at the analysis
that's provided by the tax and
rep department and I don't think
there's anybody here to.
this.
Well, anyway, uh, as I was
looking at it.
Wanted to make sure that I
understood that this would be a
stacked benefit for eligible for
federal also get state, so it'd
be a a stacked benefit
that how you're absolutely
great. It's a stacked benefit,
so currently, uh Mexico is at
25%. It would stack that on top
of an additional 5%, so it would
be at 30% of what that current
benefit is and you see the
expense so my my question is, is
that.
He's one qualifies for the
federal portion.
Does that change their tax rate.
For receiving the state. I would
like to ask uh.
Our economist.
help with that.
Madam Chair, Representative, so
you asked.
If qualifying for the federal
EATC would change there.
So
anything
to.
with the
Tax liability that somebody
owes, so the amount that's
withheld won't change, none of
that will change. It'll just
increase the amount that they
get back. Uh, what, and this if
the tax uh department would have
been here, my question would
have been.
If you get the tax, if you get
the federal piece.
That changes your income level,
right? Or it's a tax credit,
then for the current income.
So if we, I'm just curious if it
changes then what you could
receive at the state level
because that value is gonna
change.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
great question. I think your
head is exactly in the right
place. The, the key difference
is that this is a
read it, and so it happens.
taxes, you
have AGI top of the line, and
then you make exemptions and and
and deductions and that impacts
your taxable income, so that
above the line, that impacts
that this is all done below the
line, um.
And in fact, there's provisions
that prevent.
The EITC or the credit
contemplated by HB 14 were being
included in.
persons um eligibility for other
federal state so this won't
impact your SAP benefits.
OK, so it doesn't OK.
So
You all are gonna come back down
what the actual.
Revenue
Madam Chair, Representative,
yes.
Removed. All righty, thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Mr.
Chair.
Um
Brandon, right? Brandon.
Um, thank you for being here.
Thanks for the work, um.
Congratulations again. I think
this is another.
Step in the right direction, I
think we.
Know what this legislature, what
this committee actually has been
doing now for the last 6 years
or so, starting with House Bill
6, the late chairman Jim
Trujillo.
led that effort.
To bring more
Equity and transparency into our
tax code.
And, you know, to one of the
prior questions earlier.
But as an impact benefit as
well, we went from 50th in
childhood poverty to me repeat
that went from 50 to 17th. It's
a big deal.
We've put on average.
Um, well over $2000 back in the
pockets of working for that when
working families get money back,
they're their money back.
Because they, they are working
for working through their
through their labor.
We know that they reinvest in
their families.
They reinvest in their home,
they reinvest.
In our local economy, Main
Street. They're not shipping
those dollars off to some
offshore account.
Um
You know,
To bear interest
You're reinvesting today.
Um, and that's the power, uh,
Mr. Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, and
I know you know this.
That's the power.
Of investing in our family.
I've said it over and over and
over again the last 3 weeks.
Anyone who listened to me.
That
Life is going to become more
unaffordable. We saw it become
unaffordable the last.
18 months or so.
And I'm not.
Sure
That that that that
unaffordability is is.
Try to buy eggs last night.
And I couldn't
They're out of stock.
And if you go find eggs, which I
try to do, mother's store.
7 bucks a dozen.
The work that you were doing,
the work that this committee
will be doing.
Specifically, this piece of
legislation, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair.
Or designed
Make
Life a little more.
Without putting
Future budgets in peril.
Without setting ourselves up to
have to cut budgets in a couple
years, cut healthcare.
benefits for seniors.
Cut childcare for kids.
So
I know that this will get tabled
today, as is the practice of
this committee.
But I do want to.
Congratulate
clearly the two of you because
you've been working on this for
a while.
Um, I think this is the 7th or
8th version of this that I've
seen.
Because you are trying to get it
right.
This isn't just let's throw
something at the wall, see what
sticks. This is a very
thoughtful piece of legislation.
So I do hope it sees the light
of day because I think New
Mexicans across the state.
Rural communities to urban
centers.
Expect this legislature.
Step up.
When the federal government is
in fact not going to. Thank you,
ma'am. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Next we go to Representative
Montoya.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair, um,
Mr. Chairman.
Um, just a question, why, why?
Uh, do away with the working
family's tax credit.
And change it to the earned
income.
I'm not exactly sure why we just
didn't change the.
The levels
Madam Madam Chairwoman
representative.
You know I, I don't
We learned a lot.
I made mention that it's a relic
from the Reagan era and we saw
the benefits here in the state,
but when we talk about
changing things. It wasn't about
changing something that works,
right? We don't want to reinvent
the wheel. We're looking at
doing is expanding and improving
on somethingico.
And so and and that being said,
you know, when you look at
what's changed or what's
evolved, um, bring your
attention back to.
Uh, that table on page number 2
in your FIR in regards to
How it is currently and what it
is proposed to be, right? And,
and looking that that type of
expansion.
Expanding the credits, we're
expanding the offering of who
it's going to impact the most,
right?
And so I don't see it.
This is a cancellation.
Of what's worked. I see this as
an improvement.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And Mr. Chairman, I
To be honest, I'm just not
exactly sure why the name change
was necessary. Seems like this
could have been done. I mean, I
don't care one way or the other.
I was just wondering if there
was a reason to change the name.
Madam Chairwoman and, and, and
representative is not about a
matter of of.
How we define it or what the
name is, I mean we could call
them onto exchange if we wanted
to
I am for that.
But uh but
but but the fact of the matter
is is that this is New Mexican.
This is the New Mexico.
Earned income tax rate we we we
we we're doing something that
Many other states are not doing.
We're doing something now to a
point where New Mexico will be
one of the top.
Uh, in regards to providing this
type of benefit for their
citizens and so I I think
there's a matter of being able
to say.
This is New Mexicans tax credit.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Yeah, I was, I was curious as to
the name change. This is a
pretty popular.
Program, I think nationwide.
And I've seen
Madam Chair and Mr. Chairman,
I've seen uh this expanded in
other states.
Very similar to this.
Um, but
Not
I was just curious as to the
name change. I wasn't sure if
there was anything significant.
So this is just a
Rebrand it as a New Mexico
specific.
Uh, tax break. Would that be
fair to say?
Madam Chairwoman and, and, and
representative. You're correct.
OK.
Thank you, um
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman.
Um
To the discrepancy that was uh
mentioned earlier by
Representative Pajon.
Um
And, and this be a question for
your expert.
Um
I would think tax and Rev might
have an advantage.
On being able to determine the
Tax implications since there's
likely information that LFC
cannot get.
That would that be a fair
statement? Um
Madam Chair, expert.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
um, I think with the caveat
that.
the, the approaches are
different, uh, tax and rev is is
building from the ground
up.payer.
The accessing query and can
model it that way and we're
we're, we're modeling it from
the top.
and there's some advantages to
both ways. Uh, we can make, and
I can get into the details of
the differences.
But I think probably we'll both
come closer.
As we start to iron out those
methodological.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative experts. So we,
we would believe
Probably somewhere between the
two numbers we've been given.
Madam Chair, Representative,
yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, uh, representative, um,
You mentioned something about.
The cliff effect and I wasn't
paying full attention at that
moment.
Uh, how in the world is this?
Help or mitigate with a cliff.
Madam Chairwoman and
Representative Montoya, my
mention of the cliff effect in
my introduction was one in
regards to providing context
about how we and and that was
through just
Brainstorming between members of
this very committee um with some
economists in the LFC about.
What we could what we could
improve on uh in regards to
current programs that we offer
and and and Lichter came up as
one of those vehicles to try to
provide.
Some type of benefit for working
families or some type of benefit
as relates to taxation in New
Mexico and what we found out and
with the
effect mentioned in regards to
Victor Woods is that
But when we looked at amending
it, it created that cliff effect
where it disincentivizes people
from wanting to make more money
because they're afraid to make
more because they'll lose
benefits, right? And so we don't
That's not the intent, I think
of anyone.
Here is that we want to make
sure that if someone can
Ascend to a level where they
can.
The families, we want to see
that happen, right? We want to
incentivize that and and and
this is the vehicle to do that,
but the the.
cliff effect as it retain as it.
Relates to liter was just that
we don't want to set people up.
To have to perpetually stay in a
in an income class, right? Well,
thank you, Madam Chair and and
and chairman. that is a concern,
uh particularly we're, we're
looking at
potentially today raising the
income or the uh the minimum
wage.
And I know that we have people
who are
Lower income
They had they work to a certain
Maybe even a certain date, and
they figure I I have to stop
working at this point in the
year because if I don't, I will
lose.
Benefits
Um
How closely does this track?
If any, with the
Potential $17 an hour.
Um, minimum wage increase, how
would this interact with that.
Madam Chairwoman and and
representative that's that's a
great question and so.
Uh house Bill 14 in itself helps
to smooth the transition.
For those that
That are in situations where if
they're making minimum wage and
they get a $20.03 dollars, uh.
Increase in in in in their
salary, right?
They'll
The way it works currently is
that under the the current
situation that.
The benefit would decrease from
about $700 to about $200.
Under this new scenario.
They would get
About a $600 refund, which means
that they would lose less, about
$100 less in many cases so that
it wouldn't be so drastic that
you know the benefits would be
completely lost, right? It would
be a smooth transition from
earning more.
and and and retaining skills yet
substantial amounts of benefit.
So thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and, and Mr. Chairman.
I guess the issue I have with it
is that
The calculations are federal
calculations since the benefits
are
Federal benefits.
And so I'm just wondering how
How does this change anything
other than the state tax burden
goes down a bit. I'm not sure
that.
That
Once they
Uh
Make a certain amount of money.
And the federal calculation is
there.
Since most of those programs.
Our federal programs. I'm not
sure how this would have any
effect.
On the cliff effect other than
when they lose benefits.
They'd be able to ma
Keep a little bit more of what
they're making state in the
state of New Mexico. I, I, I
don't see how it
I, I wish it would correlate
that way, but I don't see how it
does.
Madam Chairwoman and
representative if if the
question is um what could we do
to eliminate taxes on a on a
federal level. It it sounds like
that's the question if that's
the question, then I would hope
our president would would make
good on the promises he made on
the campaign trail to eliminate
taxes on the federal level,
right? But.
In regards to where we're at
today.
And and the powers that we have,
I mean we can only affect
statewide level programs and and
and state financials, right? And
so this absolutely is the
vehicle.
For those individuals making
again minimum wage up to 55,000
to eliminate.
Their state taxation liability.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
Yes, I, I believe, uh.
The
The cliff effect is something
that needs to be dealt with.
Mm
We do not want to
disincentivize.
Um
We do not want to
disincentivize.
People being able to uh
Kind of leave the, let's say,
Ghetto being stuck on
Entitlement programs.
I've, I've long said that's the
actual glass ceiling is the
entitlement programs.
The, the, the disincentive to
earn enough money.
to escape the titlement programs
also means you lose everything.
At once, so, um, I, I appreciate
this effort. I'm not sure it
does.
Specifically that once again,
qualifying for New Mexico
programs, I see that, but.
Most of our programs are
connected to federal programs.
So
Um, one last thing, Madam Chair,
and, and, uh,
And uh um Mr. Chairman.
Uh, I, I, I noticed when you
were talking about
This bill and and potentially
the upcoming bill.
That uh that we'll be hearing
after, after yours.
That we wanted to make sure that
we
more towards the working class
and not towards millionaires.
And I, I appreciate that, but
there is a big gap.
Between $55,000.
And being a millionaire.
And that gap
Madam Chair and Representative
is the middle class.
Pay most of the taxes in this
state carry most of the burden.
And I, I would like to see us
find.
I too don't believe millionaires
necessarily need a tax break.
Um, but I would like to find
something in between that would
allow
Those families that don't
qualify for any programs that
are paying for
The full amount of tuition if
their, if their kid decides to
not go to a state school.
But
Uh
But they
So many things that are
Somebody making a couple making
$100,000 a year with
One or 2 children, there's some
things that they just don't
qualify for and and I wouldn't,
I wouldn't throw them in the
category of millionaire, so.
I too don't think that we need
to go all the way to Millionaire
class.
But
We, we have to find a way, the
middle class is, is being
Hi
And uh and I, I, I, I, I like
that we have.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Over time, we've targeted.
Working class
At a certain point, we have to
start targeting the middle
class.
It just doesn't get any of the
benefits.
Uh, living here in New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Tarasa.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, for um
Your bill, I actually.
really like it. I like it a lot
I.
You know this is a way more
thoughtful.
Approach to giving people back
money to in in putting money
back in their accounts or in
their hands.
And letting them control their
money.
Um
It's a lot more thoughtful than
than than what I dealt with in
another committee where we had.
Uh, massive, uh,
Um
On
Uh, a massive uh minimum.
And uh a paint, what is it, uh,
minimum, uh.
Wage increase, reading all kinds
stuff sorry.
And uh the minimum wage increase
was 55 bucks across the board
and you can get into all the ins
and outs of all this stuff and
the exemptions that were taken
out out of agriculture and and
what it does to tip wages and,
and which would have been
actually a test, excellent.
Uh, or excuse me, an income
decrease for most of those
people.
But, you know, I, I was trying
to, and I'm glad the speaker
brought up the, the point of how
people are struggling with with
uh.
The cost of living today.
And um
And I was looking at
You know, I think about.
Southwest New Mexico in our area
where we have and it's across
the state, the compression
problems that we're having.
Where what people can afford and
what we can provide as a
business to.
Or had those goods and services
and the higher the more money
that we're having to to.
Uh, the more costs that we bear
as businesses then turns around
and it gets passed on to the to
the consumer where we, but in
our areas there's in in New
Mexico beans uh half the half
the people are on government
assistance of some sort or and
and there's counties like Luna
County where 23% of the people.
are, are making only about
$15,000 a year.
That is
Puff
And so it, you know, I, I called
the local grocery store there,
and I said, hey, how many
employees do you have?
Since I have 70.
Uh
I said, well, I called the CPA I
said, look, I want you to run
the numbers.
On what it is right now, uh.
At $12 an hour and what it would
be at $17.
And the difference was
$11,957.92.
per employee.
Multiplied that to 70 employees.
It's 836,000 almost $837,000.
And you know that they're not
gonna be able to absorb that,
you know, that they're just
gonna increase the cost of eggs
and bread and everything else
and milk.
To the to the people and those
people who are struggling.
Uh, that are only, you know.
Only making $15,000 a year.
It's tough for them. And so
that's what we're dealing with
in Southwest New Mexico.
Uh, we, so this to me is a way
to approach it more targeted.
And the best part of of this
that really caught my attention
is is it's an earned income tax
credit.
Which means that you're working,
you earn that money and you're
getting it back, so I just, you
know, I think.
I think this is a a a very, very
smart approach, uh, in, in a way
of getting people that are
struggling even though they're
on that lower tax bracket, money
in their pockets, so I, I
really, really, really
appreciate this, this bill. I
had a lot going on in my mind.
I'm thinking about, I wanted to
spit out like 50 things and I'm
like.
I couldn't even see uh what I
wanted to start with, but thank
you very much.
There.
representative. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, I could have, uh, I
was just almost to the point
where I've forgiven my
neighbor's dogs for killing my
18 chickens.
And you brought that up.
Mm
You know,
Uh, anyway, thank you, Madam
Cha. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
just a couple of questions for
you and I just want to kind of
educate, um.
My first question would be, can
you talk a little bit about that
41% that's sitting in the stands
that not look, can you tell me.
It has, have there been any
studies done that would entice
them to come out of the stands.
are looking for a job with this.
And I, and I guess the reason
I'm asking, Madam Chair and Mr.
Chairman is, is because, you
know, what the feds have done so
far haven't moved the needle,
and I'm wondering if this is
going to be able to move the.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chairwoman
and thank you Representative.
It's a great question and I'm
not gonna pretend to to know the
answer to that, but the LFC
program evaluation that I
referenced in my discussion was
one that that uh LFC and we have
LFC here with us today, uh,
found to be one of the issues
and
We're all looking for a silver
bullet, right? We want to know
how we get people back into the
workforce and I think that if
someone
That's on the sidelines, says
that I don't want to work for
minimum wage because they're
gonna tax me and then I'll keep
a percentage of what I make.
I'm not gonna say it's gonna be
a foolproof to say that now I'm
all in, but if they know they're
gonna retain a little bit more
than what they would have paid
to the state if everything they
earn in New Mexico.
Related to New Mexico taxation
will have zero liability to
them. They can keep it in their
pocket. That's an incentive, but
it's not the silver bullet, but
related to your question I would
ask Brendan great to expand on
that.
Madam Chair, excuse me.
Madam Chair Representative,
great question. Um, I think the
story behind your question is
pretty simple. If you look at um
New Mexico versus the US labor
force participation rate at
Mexico generally grows at a
slower pace, um, and you can
break that down and the program
evaluation did just that.
And it, and it showed that um
for some parts of the
women with children, um, the
labor force participation rate
has been keeping, keeping up.
with the
US labor force participation
rate, um, and in contrast.
And um yeah, so so that
population has been keeping up
generally.
In contrast, other populations
have not.
Uh, so the chair mentioned um
childless men, and that that
population's been staying flat
or even decreasing.
and
So that's a big problem.
I think this legislation
contemplates addressing, um, and
one step.
Gosh, one stat that I'll leave
you with, um, I think some
researchers found that for every
$1000.
Recipients of the EITC get uh
get back.
Uh, they increase their labor
force participation rate by 3%
points. So that's kind of a
quantifiable, you know, how much
is this gonna do? Well, it could
possibly have that much of an
effect, which is pretty
significant.
So
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
Thank you, uh, Brennan.
So we're, we're, we're seeing
that 41%, so we could.
Maybe get down to 38%, still be
in the stands, but that 3% would
then move into that and I hate
to keep asking questions cause
Madam Chair, I think that's
right.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, one other question for you
on that then, when we're talking
about the phase-out period.
Um
Do we know, have any studies
been done on how long that
phase-out period.
But technically be.
And, and it, I mean, I
understand that, you know, if I,
if I have a $15 an hour job or
$20 an hour job.
And, and I never move up from
that or don't get any pay raises
or anything else. It could be my
entire life. Have any studies
been done on how does it change?
How, how long that phase out
period is, my question.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
great question, that phase out
period is very important, um, I
am not too familiar with
literature specifically on that.
I'll just point out that.
Except that there has been
research on the steepness, what
you're getting at is the
steepness of the curve, the
steeper the curve, uh.
The faster that benefit goes
away.
There has been research that
shows the more shallow that
curve for for different
populations, um, the shallower
that curve, um, the less
incentive they have and the less
lower outcomes I was talking
about.
In this it.
Exactly.
pays out less.
Pretty significantly.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
expert, yeah, I think we've all,
we beat that enough to say how
important that is to uh to get
rid of the cliff effect and give
people a chance.
Taking care of before they get
to that point. So thank you,
Madam Chair.
Anything else from committee?
What's the pleasure of the
committee?
I'm sure I moved to table.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative,
I think we did good. I think
we're in a good spot with
everybody here, still in.
Experience, so without further
ado, we will go to hospital 275,
eliminate personal income taxes,
and whenever you're ready, the
floor is yours now.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, good morning. Uh,
before I get into my
presentation, I would love to
address a previous issue
discussed in the bill before me
and for those of you that cannot
find eggs, the word on the
street is you can now rent a
chicken for 6 months at a time.
So that may be uh an avenue for
you guys to pursue.
Now moving on, Mister Chair and
members of the committee. Again,
my name is Elaine Senna Cortez
and I represent the beautiful
people of House District 62.
My experts here today are uh
Paul Gassing, president of the
Rio Grande Foundation and the
private sector, and Rick May,
the policy director in our
caucus. Again, Mister Chair,
before you is House Bill 275 in
simple terms, this bill seeks to
eliminate New Mexico's personal
income tax.
Mr. Chair, after my introductory
remarks, Mr. May and Mister
Gusing will explain the how of
this spill.
There is one indisputable fact
here in New Mexico today. And
that is people are struggling
financially.
The cost of all lines of
insurance have and the groceries
that we could once afford now
feel like luxuries.
On one notable trip to the
store, my husband and I bought
our weekly groceries, and it's
just 3 of us, me, my husband and
my baby girl of 2 years old.
And we purchased our regular
items. Now let me inform you
these, this was not Wau beef or
caviar. I was a astonished to
learn that our grocery bill for
less than a full cart, Mister
Speaker, I mean, Mr. Chair, with
$600 and as we reflected, I
asked my husband how our single
moms, single income households
and people with large families,
Mr. Chair, how are they making
it?
Well, Mister Chair, the sad
truth is they're not making it.
New Mexicans are making everyday
purchases with credit cards, and
this is driving us straight
toward a debt crisis.
Uncontrolled debt contributes to
an increase in home
foreclosures.
Vehicle repossessions, divorce,
substance abuse.
And even suicide, Mister Chair,
our people are drowning
financially, and now is the time
to throw them a life preserver.
Mr. Chair, eliminating the
personal income tax would
diversify our economy.
It would expand the purchase of
New Mexicans, which means there
is more money flowing in our
economy, and it would be a
favorable environment for our
businesses, Mister Chair, it
would attract businesses to our
state, and it would diversify
our economy.
Mr. Chair, look at the states
that do not have a personal
income tax.
Currently, 9 states have no
income tax.
And that's Texas, Alaska,
Florida, Nevada, New Hampshire,
South Dakota, Tennessee,
Washington, and Wyoming.
New Mexico competes directly
with the states for workers, and
the factor that often determines
where a worker will locate their
family depends on the tax
structure of a state.
New Mexico desperately needs
doctors and mental health
professionals, public safety
professionals, construction
workers and many others, Mister
Chair.
Our tax structure should not
deter workers from relocating
their families to the beautiful
state of New Mexico or cause our
current workers to leave for
other states. Mr. Chair.
Having a favorable tax
environment would attract the
doctors, the lawyers, and the
tradespeople that we so
desperately need.
And Mr. Chair, this would still
allow families that qualify to
apply for the tax credits and
the tax rebates.
In most cases, Mr. Chair, the
money saved would be used to buy
necessary goods like groceries,
gas, rent, those eggs that have
gone up by inflation of 52%, and
in turn this would produce more
GRTs for the state.
Mr. Chair, now I'd like to turn
Of the
Sorry.
We have the highest
Poverty rate, Mister Cha.
Sorry,
is his microphone on, I think
when it went on.
OK, now, now it's on, so I don't
know how much of that we've
missed, but I mean for the folks
at home, uh, we apologize, but
we'll, we'll just continue.
According to world population
Review, um.
Incredible website.
4 of the fastest growing
population states in the nation,
that's Texas, Nevada, Florida,
and Washington have no personal
income tax.
Economically speaking, things
are even more dramatic when it
comes to zero income tax states
in 2023, the last data
available.
5 of the top 10 fastest growing.
states economically had no
income tax. These were
Washington, Wyoming, Texas,
Alaska, Florida, and Washington.
New Mexico has
Serious workforce participation
rate challenge.
eliminating the personal income
taxes a disincentive to work
would help address that issue.
If you're serious about
addressing our work healthcare
workforce problem. These high
earning workers will be more
likely to work in New Mexico
thanks to no.
Income tax and of course New
Mexico is an aging state where
one of the fastest aging in the
nation.
eliminating the personal income
tax would give New Mexico's
economy a shot in the arm and
make it competitive nationwide
as a destinations for jobs.
Businesses and younger workers
to locate.
economic opportunities to New
Mexico.
Thank you very much for your
time.
Mr. Chair, before I turn it over
to our other expert Rick May. I
do want to answer a negative
voice.
In the room regarding a tax
break to millionaires. I keep
hearing about all the talk about
millionaires. Well, I would
I love to bring some clarity,
Mr. Chair.
estimated that only 4.97%.
in
Mexico qualify.
Millionaire households.
So a large purse, a large
portion of those households are
concentrated right here in Santa
Fe.
And Mr. Chair, New Mexico is
consistently ranked as one of
the poorest states per capita.
Which means there are very few
millionaires in New Mexico.
But also, Mr. Chair, to the
extent millionaires to bring
businesses and jobs and high
earners like
Doctors and employers and
scientists.
And they would support that.
The job growth that we so
desperately need here in New
Mexico. I just wanted that to
add that in, Mr. Chair, I'll
turn it over to our other expert
Rick Rick Ma.
That's
Um, the chairman members of the
committee, I'm Rick May. I'm the
policy.
Yes my role here this morning is
to blend the
fiscal policy with tax policy.
And to reinforce the fact that
yes, this is a major change in
Mexico's tax structure, but it
would also be a major.
in the way we do business in the
state.
believe
So make the state budget.
Paul just mentioned, uh, we have
a
surplus again this year under
the
shall we say traditional
definition of the money.
$3.3 billion.
You will notice the
taxation revenue
Department
Yes so the new money that we
generate again it all said.
Primarily from the oil gas
industry does provide us with
those significant
Cushion that the state could
still continue.
The traditional reoccurring
amounts of money.
That would be
teachers' salaries and for low
income.
benefits for Medicaid.
seniors will be be touched.
Because we had this this $3.3
billion.
instead of using it to spend it
for non-recurring spending.
And that that money could be
used
As the representative said.
Mexican
State
Just to give you an idea about
what we're talking about by
eliminating the uh
Income tax.
For a married couple, uh, making
taxable income of about 20%
taxes lower would be about 500
or a married couple making a be.
$739.
They
not be paying
For a single person.
$50,000 taxable income.
Reduction in their taxes would
be.
$1941.
You can see a significant amount
of money.
It would make
Big difference in the families,
but also again,
It's created budget problem.
Again, if we just had a
different, shall we say
discipline?
About how we spend our money.
Instead of spending over the
last 3 fiscal years, including
the budget that will likely come
forward to this body and
by the end of this week.
We have spent over $3.6 billion
each session.
The last 3 sessions for
non-recurringly.
That is really the discretionary
side.
if you will, of the state
budget.
Recurring side again.
goes to
Higher education, public
schools, Medicaid, that's on the
recurring side.
So we have sufficient
flexibility on the non.
inside
Basically provide this type of
level.
And then finally
Representatives should be
commended, I think.
sense of saying it's time for
the state of previous bill that
Mr. Chair.
It's time for fundamental tax
reform.
And I think this discussion
about this bill.
And reinforces that need to do
fundamental taxes.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
We'll now stand for the
presentation this morning.
Let's go to the uh internet.
He wanted support of House Bill
272 people.
people
Jodie Henris. Jody, good
morning.
Good morning and thank you for
uh the opportunity to speak
about this. Uh, my name is Jodie
Henderson. I am with the Mexico
family Action Movement.
And I'm here today in strong
support at possible 275
legislation that would repeal
the state income tax and get New
Mexico's hardworking families, a
well deserved right.
Now, the Mexican families are
feeling the weight of rising
costs.
Groceries, housing, childcare,
and everyday essential.
Continue to take a large share
of household budgets.
Meanwhile, our state
you can get another budget
driven largely by record oil and
gas revenues. This means New
Mexico has the opportunity to
provide real
working families without
jeopardizing essential services.
Recent poll indicates that 70%
of New Mexicans agree that
The income tax should be
repealed, including 100% of
respondents between the ages of
18 to 24.
This highlighting young voters
desire to take home more of
their hard earned money.
Houses 275 would effectively
give New Mexicans an almost 6%
raise, allowing families to keep
more of their hard-earned money.
That's money that can be used to
buy school supplies, pay for
childcare, put food on the table
and invest in their children's
future.
It's about empowered families to
make decisions with their own
money instead of sending it to
Santa Fe.
Eliminating the state income tax
isn't just good for families,
it's good for our economy. When
working people have more money
in their pockets, they reinvest
it in their local communities.
Small businesses thrive, job
opportunities grow, and New
Mexico becomes a more attractive
place for new businesses and
families to settle.
States like Texas and Florida
have been booming. Job growth
and strong economies without a
state income tax. New Mexico has
the chance to follow that proven
model while ensuring our state
remains competitive for job
seekers and employers alike.
Hospital 275 represents a bold
step toward a more prosperous in
Mexico, one where families are
prioritized economic opportunity
is expanded, and the government
stops taking more than it needs
when we already have surplus
revenues. I urge our legislators
to do the right thing. So the
poor New Mexico family.
Strengthen our economy.
And vote yes on 275. Thank you.
Thank you, Jodie.
Larry Sontag.
Larry, good morning. You're with
us.
Larry, good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Can you
hear me?
Yes, sir, we can hear you.
All right, good morning,
maybe it's Larry.
You're on the Mexico.
The uh speaker
real quick. It seems like we
have a bad connection, but.
OK.
Uh,
So go ahead and I don't mean to
stop you, man, but if you want
to continue, I apologize. Uh, it
looks like.
On this side, the
survey that was mentioned by the
previous speaker was conducted
by the New Mexico Business
Coalition, and the numbers that
you heard.
Cross all part, all segs New
Mexico with strong support for
eliminating personal income tax
and encourage you to consider
that.
Also consider that what we're
doing right now is not working.
Billions and billions of tax
dollars have been put into
programs with the intent of
lifting people out of poverty.
Recent
Reports indicate a 3-year
average shows that New Mexico is
the worst in the nation for
poverty.
Putting tax dollars back in
people's pockets would be a
change and something that could
work to help people.
Get out of poverty.
I apologize for the connection
issue and would appreciate your
support on House Bill 275.
Thank you, Larry.
Yeah.
Enrique Nell.
Enrique
Good morning. Yes sir, good
morning. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Enrique Nel, and I am
speaking today on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. House Bill 275 seeks
to eliminate state income tax
and we think that's an idea that
is very much worth discussing.
So we, we appreciate the
discussion this morning. Since
our state tax is really largely
a function of the federal income
tax system. It carries with it
all of the infirmities of that
incomprehensible system.
Uh, representative, uh, former
Representative Jason Harper used
to talk about our tax system
being Swiss cheese and that
federal income tax system is
like Swiss cheese on steroids.
In fact, according to a recent
Gallup poll, it's now the least
favorite tax by Americans,
beating even property tax. Uh,
beyond being unpopular, there
are other reasons to consider
getting off of income tax, uh,
in the first place is taxes,
wealth and discourages
investments and savings, taxes
on consumption.
rather than savings if it's
properly structured result in
wealthier taxpayers paying a
greater share because they buy
more expensive things. Unlike an
income tax, you don't have to
continually chase loopholes and
frankly fraud. Uh, second, it
makes us see more uh a more
attractive place to live in.
Texas and Florida, two of the
most robust state economies are
a testament to that fact. With
our surpluses and the fact that
income tax makes a relatively
small contribution to overall
state revenues.
We should be able to work our
way out of this reliance and
move to other revenue sources
that are more straightforward.
We ask you to support House Bill
275 at a minimum to seriously
consider this idea in the
interim study period. Thank you.
Appreciate you, Enrique. Anyone
else in support?
Online
Nope. Anyone in opposition?
We won in opposition.
Jacob
Uh, yes. Hello, Mr. Chair, um,
members of the committee, my
name is Jacob B Hill. I'm with
New Mexico Voices for Children,
uh, and we stand in opposition
to this bill, um, over the last
several years, this body is made
incredible progress in improving
tax equity and fairness in New
Mexico, by providing smart
targeted tax relief to
hardworking families
through tax credits and rebates,
restructuring the income tax
brackets to benefit all the
Mexicans.
We eliminate the personal income
tax, um, that'd be an
unnecessary and unwise step that
would erode this progress
because the personal income
taxes are the only tax we
collect based on one's ability
to pay. And if we eliminated it,
it would disproportionately
benefit the wealthiest among us,
those who need a tax break the
least. Um, this would cost the
state an estimated $4 billion
annually eliminating one of our
few stable resources of sources
of revenue making us all the
more dependent on volatile oil
and gas revenue.
negatively impacting our bond
rating, affecting our ability to
respond to economic downturns.
And more importantly, this
revenue loss would severely
cripple our ability to fund
important programs and services
that improve the lives of
families and children like
Cradle to career education, job
training, public health and
safety programs, and so much
more. Um, so these vital public
services would either need to be
cut or other taxes that fall
more heavily on low and middle
income families would have to be
increased, making our tax code
more aggressive. So I
respectfully
uh, urge the committee to oppose
this legislation. Thank you.
Thank you, Jacob. Anyone else
online?
Oh
Anyone in the room was to stand
in support of House Bill 275.
Anyone in opposition of House
Bill 275.
We have one which you may
comment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, John Lipshutz
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor, representing tens of
thousands of workers across the
state, including those in our
public sector, um, you know, we,
uh, we, unfortunately do oppose
this bill, uh, 11 statement that
uh the sponsor and and experts
have made, and I think others in
this committee have made, which
we could potentially agree on
is, is that, um, you know, with
surpluses that we are looking
at.
Perhaps some of that surplus
should be, should go to the use
of the people. I think we just
have a very different idea on
how that looks, you know, uh,
right now, our state government
fluctuates anywhere between 20
to 25% vacancy rate. Now, I
would say that one way to solve
that vacancy rate would be to
offer people more money, and
that is something that we would
view as a much better investment
with surplus funds. Um, when our
government operates properly in
a
And efficiently, that helps all
people, uh, in, in all income
brackets. And so for those
reasons, uh, we urge your
opposition to this measure.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else?
If not, let's come back to the
committee now for deliberations.
We begin with Representative
Silva.
Thank you chair thank you
sponsor, um.
First, I just wanna, uh, respond
to one of the things that you
mentioned in
It goes one of the, uh, one of
your witnesses, the, between 2.7
and 3.3 billion that um we have
uh an additional funds that's
not being put towards the budget
this year is not left over or
surplus, like our job is to
insulate the state's economy
from the volatility of oil and
gas. Um, and these boom and bust
cycles that we've seen our
state's economy and since its
inception, and if we were to
spend into these funds, uh, we
would throw
back into that same volatility
and um and then through our
budget cycles into that same
volatility. And that's not
fiscally responsible, um, and
so, uh, I just want to name like
that isn't surplus money, um.
And I'm wondering,
Also, um,
I think HB 14 does a better job
of adequately addressing the
concerns that you name of
working families, uh, lower to
middle income families, uh, who
are struggling right now. Uh, I
think it does a better job of
adequately, um.
Addressing that issue. I'm also
wondering, where can I find your
analysis about millionaires
bringing jobs and job growth,
uh, in regards to HB 275.
Thank you, chair
of Silva, um, my sources came
from and I could give you a
chair and representative Silva
labor stats, the Harvard
Business Review and the National
Institutes, I would like to make
a comment about the oil and gas,
so the big question is,
is resentative Silva, one of the
goals of eliminating income tax
workers, which would diversify
our economy, and right now in
the oil and gas industry being
that I come from oil country,
projections are next 10 years.
So Mister Chair and
Representative Silva, that means
we have a 10-year window to use
this measure, as well as so many
others that we have to solidify
New Mexico's economy to um and
to that.
Uh
Miss Chair Representative, I
think the members of the
committee need to realize that.
The state already has a
considerable amount of
flexibility in dealing with the
downturn in revenues in the
future. For example, we have
about.
$3 billion today, about 30%.
Revenues uh that are in our
state reserves.
We have 9.
We have, as Paul mentioned
earlier, about $50 billion and
our we've got billions of
dollars stuck in other funds all
over the state government so.
There is a lot of flexibility
within the state budget process
that can provide that sort of.
Uh, flexibility to address any
kind of downturn.
this legislature recently has
passed a number of bills.
That have taken out the
volatility from the oil and gas
revenue stream by putting this
money into uh the severance tax
fund, the permit.
Uh, early childhood education
trust fund, so a lot of it.
A lot of the Democrats on the
House Appropriations Committee
and the LFC they've patted
themselves in the back all
summer long, about how they've
eliminated the uh the uh
volatility in our state
reserves. So.
There's been a lot of action
already taken to.
Address that potential downturn.
Thank you, um, sponsor and
witness, thank you, chair. Um,
I'm so I just wanna clarify, no
state agencies have an analysis
that millionaires would bring
jobs to New Mexico.
So is that a question again?
Yeah, just clarifying.
Mr. Chair Representative Silva,
would you like me to repeat what
I said. No, no, I think her
question is, are there any state
Organizations and or state
government like LFC projections
that you claimed that
millionaires would bring jobs
into the state.
as discussed, Mr. Chair and
Representative Silva, um, the
information that I gathered all
of my presentation from again
was from CNBC US Census Bureau,
US Bureau of Labor Statistics,
Harvard Business Review and the
National Institute of Health
and when you bring higher
earners into the state, which
may be were categorized as
diversify our economy.
And I don't know if we're
completely on the same page, Mr.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Another question, uh, this bill
is silent on how to address tax
credits that filers can still
claim. Um, do you, like, is that
correct?
Mr. Chair still um apply for
tax, I'll let our experts also.
Uh, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, again.
If you look at the uh
I assume you have the.
Department of Taxation.
And if you do look at on there,
you will see on page um.
4 of that
FIR
You will notice that it says.
personal income tax returns
would still be filed but for
taxpayers who qualify for
refundable credits under the
Income Tax Act.
Those examples include, and then
you can read that for yourself
on page 4 and 5, all the various
tax credits.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. And one last
question, Mr. Chair, um,
employers would still have to
issue W-2s and people would
filers would still file in New
Mexico, is that correct? Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, they would not be
required to file an income tax
return, Mr. Chair Representative
would not be required.
Now if someone wanted to because
again of the of their uh
eligibility for a refundable tax
credit legislation clearly
states that that people can.
still file a tax return.
As well as obviously.
process those returns.
There would be obviously a much
less.
cause to the department of
processing the hundreds of
thousands of extra returns that
they receive every year.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative Silva.
Let's go to Speaker Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative, thank you for
your legislation.
Um, we, we see these bills once
every few sessions and it's
always a very robust and good
discussion.
Mr. Chair, my question is for
Mr. Guessing. Mr. Guessing,
where does Texas rank on
property taxes?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Martinez, I, I
don't have that off the top of
my head, but I know that Texas
has a
Higher property tax rate in New
Mexico, it's on the higher end,
which would simply make New
Mexico more attractive as a
location for business, then
potentially Texas, so we would
see jobs and economic growth
come here rather than go there.
And Mr. Chair, Mr are guessing
wouldn't send to reason that the
reason why Texas property taxes
are much higher, by the way, 7th
highest in the country, just for
your information, that fact
alone is because there's no
personal income tax. Wouldn't
that stand to reason, Mister
Chair?
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Martinez, not necessarily.
There's uh like we've said 9
states that have no personal
income tax, their other tax
burdens are
Uh
Very widely in terms of how
heavy or light they may be, uh,
I would also note that two of
those states, Alaska and New
Hampshire, not only have no
personal income tax, but have no
sales tax either. So, uh it's
really a function of
Priorities in the legislature,
other revenue sources like we
have oil and gas and uh the way
Texas does things, they, they
may have a reputation as being
universally
Pro free market, limited
government, but that is not
always the case, and efforts are
being undertaken in Texas to
address that, that particular
burden as well. So it's not
It's not as simple as just
Moving the needle, uh, there's
spending and other questions
that need to be addressed. Mr.
Chair, Mr. Guessing, I would
actually argue that it is
actually that simple.
Um, New Mexico ranks 31st in
property taxes, none of the
states that have eliminated the
personal income tax, or most of
them, uh, rather, uh, they don't
compete with New Mexico when it
comes to property taxes. I mean
that's just a fact. I mean,
that's just the number that's
I'm not making this up. I'm, I'm
looking at it as I speak. Uh, so
by eliminating the personal
income tax, taxes as effectively
increase its property taxes,
which means that all of our
constituents, particularly low
income people in rural
communities and in cities are.
I have to experience a massive
property tax increase because of
the lack of, of um of general
fund revenues.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Guessing, why
not target?
Um, your, your tax bill and you
know this this place operates on
on hyperbole, right? We all kind
of generalized statements, uh,
one of them is, you know, tax
cuts for the millionaires and
representative Mr. Chair, you're
absolutely right. We don't have
that many millionaires.
Um, maybe that's a good thing. I
don't know, but I will tell you
this.
No one making $800,000 a year
needs a tax cut.
No one making $400,000 a year
needs a tax cut.
So why not, why not target?
Your tax bill to actually
capture what Representative
Montoya said earlier that, that,
you know, upper middle class,
right? The folks that are making
between 1500 and 200,000, which
by the way, we've done a tax
break for them already over the
last few years, but one I
target, why not target this bill
to help those folks as opposed
to the people making 900,000,
999.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Martinez.
Need is in the eye of the
beholder and New Mexico, as
we've discussed, does not have
that many millionaires or
billionaires. It doesn't have
any publicly traded companies,
uh, in, in the Fortune 500.
Uh, in terms of businesses that
locate here and
Like it or not, whether they
need it or not, uh, people who
have money look for the best
place to invest their money and,
and, and generate a rate of
return, and that has effects
throughout our economy and could
help New Mexico catapult itself
from uh one of the most
impoverished states in the
nation to a much more prosperous
state. So, uh, we can say as
middle class people, um, whether
Someone needs a uh tax reduction
or not, but uh they're going to
take their money and resources
and jobs and economic wealth,
where they need, they, they feel
it's welcome and uh.
Uh, if, if you'll indulge me,
uh, Mr. May.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker.
Get back to your point, a
question to go.
I think the situation in Texas
and New Mexico, Mr. Chairman,
uh, it's very different in the
way we finance our public
schools.
of the how Texas finances its
public schools.
Here in New Mexico, local
property taxes are so low,
typically because it only
affects.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, local
governments.
Very few of our dollars of
property taxes go for financing
of our public schools because we
are one of the few states that
provide almost 100% of the money
that goes to public schools is
through state dollars.
So the connection in New Mexico
between the state income tax and
the local property tax is not as
evident as it is, maybe in a
state like.
Like Texas, where they still use
a significant portion of the
schools. It's a little, it's a
little different. It's not
exactly an apple and Apple's
comparison, but it's a little
bit different than than what
Texas is versus I'm glad you
mentioned that and you should be
the expert, Mr. May, Mr. Chair,
because here's the deal. If
we're gonna get $4 billion out
of the general fund to fund
those public schools, so then we
put it on the local governments.
Raise a property taxes to make
up the difference and so I think
that that's, that's at the crux
of the problem here, right? I
think that um ultimately we are
looking at a 4.
At least a $4.1 billion.
Recurring expense that you're
right, Democrats have patted
themselves on the back, as have
the Republicans uh by building
budgets that are responsible by
building permanent funds that
can offset the volatility of oil
and gas, uh, revenues in the
coming years.
Um, and that's
In good part thanks to the
bipartisan work that's been
done, uh, since 2019 when we
took back the House of
Representatives and we had
Budgets that had been starved at
that time for 8 years.
Um, I remember, uh, Lieutenant
Governor Morales giving a quote
to the newspaper, uh, during
the, uh, we had like a special,
remember that the special
session within a regular session
to cut the budget down to the
bone and Lieutenant Governor
Morales said we're done. So when
we talk about increasing the
budget over the last couple
years, it's because we starved
it for 8 years, and each and
every one of our constituencies.
Particularly those in rural low
income communities.
were starving and suffering.
So, thank goodness for the oil
and gas industry.
We were able to build up those
revenues, but at the same time,
not spent like a bunch of
drunken sailors, and those will
be on appropriations right now
know exactly what I'm talking
about. You are very reserved.
As to how these budgets are
built, and we are very careful
to put money away in trust.
Including the early childhood
care trust fund to ensure that
we can keep the promise to the
people of the state of New
Mexico, even when
The oil and gas industry.
Um
You know,
It's volatility shows up again.
Uh, now, Miss, Mr. Chair, um,
Mr. Guessing.
If we take out $4 billion out of
our budget.
Um, and I know, I think you said
you represent the think tank. So
I'm wondering what your think
tank thinks about where we
should cut.
Mr. Chair and Mr. Guessing.
Mr. Chair Representative
Martinez.
For starters, there are.
Economic growth
Concerns here, I am not saying
that eliminating the personal
income tax will allow us to make
up all of the revenue, but
growing our economy will
generate jobs and economic
growth, so I don't believe that
that final number in terms of
revenue loss would be anywhere
near the 4 billion or 3.8
billion or 3.2 billion depending
on the analysis that we're
discussing here today, uh, that
being said, uh, there are plenty
of areas.
where we can restrain government
spending, we could, uh, really
Consider phasing this in and
constraining the size of uh
government growth in any single
year specific government
programs that we've talked about
include the the film industry,
which is handed checks by the
state of New Mexico, uh, we
could reform Medicaid and
improve the ability to get
people in the workforce and make
their uh lives better by
engaging in, uh, in, in the
workforce.
Numerous other policies that
could be addressed all across
our state budget.
Just needs uh some green
eyeshades and and a little bit
of looking at this.
At each individual program, but
my goal here just to be clear,
is not to
cut New Mexico, uh, government
in the budget.
I believe that this can be done
with the revenues that we have
available to us by and large.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Mr. Guessing
is my kids tell me oftentimes
the math doesn't matter. If
you're going to cut $4 billion
in recurring revenues. Uh, so
you mentioned one program, I
think it's about 150 million
bucks a year for the film
industry, which by your
argument,
Uh, earlier on this bill, it's
incentivizing a bunch of
economic growth everywhere for
about 150 million bucks a year,
I believe, if I'm not mistaken,
uh, the other things you said
that we we should look at our
Medicaid and so can you expand
on how we could expand or rather
how we could reform Medicaid in
order to shore up.
Uh, our budget to ensure we can
withstand the $4 billion in cuts
that this would bring.
Up
Mr. Chair Representative
Martinez, uh.
I haven't prepared fully for a
discussion of Medicaid program,
but we have more New Mexicans as
a percentage of our population
on Medicaid than any other state
in the country, the LFC says
47%, uh, other data show over
40% and the highest percentage
in the country, uh, we have a
federal government that is very
much in the uh vein of
Reducing spending and
constraining the growth of
government, uh, simply putting
in a waiver with the the
administration in Washington to
enable New Mexico to try
innovative techniques that
could get people into the
workforce still getting benefits
we talked to some folks on this
committee have talked about
A, uh, benefits cliff, uh, we
could even address that here in
New Mexico, but I haven't fully
prepared a uh a way to address
all of Medicaid. I will say that
the uh
Uh, if the governor's budget is
passed, we will spend $15.5
billion.
Combined on Medicaid, uh, in
this next budget. That's
obviously well in excess of.
The general fund budget. So uh
there is a lot of money being
spent on the Medicaid program
and it
It could be certainly reformed
and looked at.
Mr. T
Well, Mr. Chair, a lot, uh, most
of the Medicaid money is federal
money, so it's not that we're
spending $15 billion in Medicaid
out of a $10 billion budget.
Uh, most of it, as you know, I
think you know, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Getsing comes from the federal
government, I believe it's a 4
to 1 match. uh, let me keep
going, uh, here, Mr. Chair. So I
think it's clear and it's safe
to say.
That there is not a plan.
To offset.
The cost of this tax cut for
Maybe not the millionaires, but
the
Very, very, very high income.
in New Mexico.
Um, meaning that we would be
should this pass, we would be.
Saddling the legislature for
years to come to figure out how
to cut those budgets unless we
are prepared to tell.
Uh, you know, Grandma Martinez,
that she's gonna have to pay
more in property taxes to not
even make up the difference, but
at least to offset a little bit,
particularly for those local
governments.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Guessing, uh,
you know, I, I, I traveled
around the state a lot.
Um
Over the interim and not even
for interim committee meetings,
I just go on my own and visit
all of y'all's communities.
Um, and I've yet to hear
somebody tell me.
Our income taxes are too high.
What I hear is I want better
schools.
Safety
I want to safe place for my kids
to grow up.
And the fact is we can't have
both. We can't get the state
budget to the tune of $4
billion.
And make any improvements in our
public education system.
Uh, in our childcare system in
public safety.
You just can't have them both.
And and I think that this
legislature in bipartisan
fashion, um, including our bill
on Saturday, which garnered
quite a bit of bipartisan
support ultimately, uh,
including all everybody from the
Republican leadership.
Um
We are committed to public
safety. We're committed to
better schools. We are committed
to improved childhood outcomes,
some of the best work coming out
of this particular session is
work around CYFD reforms to keep
our babies safe.
Um, and that's all work that I'm
very proud of, but it is also
work that is going to cost
money. And so to give
Some dude in Santa Fe who makes
a million bucks.
Huge tax break.
I'm not really interested in
that, to be honest with you. Uh,
what I am interested in is
targeting our programs, our tax
relief programs to the people
who need it most.
Because also the people that
drive our economy.
Um
Mr. uh, and I'm almost done. I
apologize for, for, um, going a
little long here. I don't
usually talk in committee, but I
love tax policy and and this is
like my.
This is my lane.
Um, Mr. Chair and and Mr.
Guessing.
Um
In 2017,
We were belly up.
Um
And gas, the the the the the
price of a barrel of oil. Do you
remember what it was? You may
not. And if it's if you don't, I
can, I can refresh all of our
memories.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I don't recollect the
exact price of a barrel or at
the pump in 2017. $70 a barrel,
and it went almost overnight,
2:15 bucks a barrel.
That's how volatile in in May,
June of 2020.
It was like -30, like they would
have paid us to take a barrel of
oil and stock it up in our
backyard.
Um
That's why this legislature has
been so prudent.
In our spending, and I know we
like to say that the budget grew
by so much, yes, because it was
only like $6 billion.
In 2015, 2016.
We weren't we were hardly
funding government.
because of the work we've done,
because of the budgets we've
built an average family is
saving, Mr. Chair, Mr. Guessing,
$20,000 in childcare costs,
$20,000.
Yeah, we want to gut $4 billion
out of the budget? What is that
going to do for childcare costs,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Guessing, Mr.
Guessing, do you have a
You have an idea what it's gonna
do for Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I, I would first
answer a previous question or
statement about the education
system, uh, there's 9 states
that have no personal income
tax, all of them outperformed
New Mexico educationally, uh,
unfortunately, in the latest
national assessment of
educational progress, the
nation's report with childcare
cost.
Uh
We, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Martinez, we have
uh a permanent fund set up for
that, uh.
That specifically to fund early
childhood care and I would
encourage uh folks to use those
dollars, uh, effectively we
could.
Have a robust conversation about
what.
Benefits and uh you know, cost
effectiveness of universal early
childhood care is again for
another committee, but um.
The week 9 other states are able
to fund their education systems
and outperform New Mexico.
Mr. Chair, guessing you're
advocating for $20,000 a year
tax increase for the families of
New Mexico to be able to put
their babies in childcare. I'm
not talking pre-K, I'm talking
childcare. Somebody watch my kid
while I go to work.
And that's the effective impact
of passing this legislation, so
$20,000 at least tax increase on
the ones who can afford it least
in order to have their kids in a
safe place while they go work,
probably for minimum wage.
So
Um, I appreciate the effort. I
think that this is always a
robust discussion. Um, we were
just commenting, we miss our
good friend Jason Harper because
uh he uh he always had a really
good
Uh, analysis, right, and what
was said earlier in public
comments, his cheese, he never
referred to the federal
government tax system is Swiss
cheese, she talked about the
girls receipts tax.
Uh, which we all agree, uh,
continues to be an issue. It's
getting better, but it's, it's,
it's a work in progress, um, you
know, trickle down economics
just have never panned out for
this country.
Uh, and the notion that if you
just exempt those who can afford
it, uh, from
Contributing to society through
their tax dollars and somehow
that's going to trickle down to
the rest of us. It's never
proven true.
And uh I don't think I would be
able to support the experiment
this time around. So thank you,
Mr. Chair, Representative, thank
you for, for the work, um, and
I'll leave it at that. Thank
you.
Mr. Speaker, let's move on to
our next uh question is
Representative Lindstrom.
Hey, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
and we thank the panel. I had a
couple of questions for Mr. May,
um, Mr. Chairman, if we could,
um.
I'm looking at the bill, Mr.
May, and um it says it would, it
would take effect immediately in
FY 26.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
January 1, 2026.
26. I'm just curious inside the
general appropriation Act, has
there been a framework built for
this?
Uh, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, no, it's not
because they get Mr. Chairman
representative 10 minutes.
In 10 of this legislation was
to.
Bring this issue forward for
discussion.
And to explore uh.
This one idea of as the speaker
as Mr. Chairman, as the speaker
mentioned just.
A few seconds ago, I think there
are other options that could be
looked at.
By using in in surpluses that
could be used touching any of
the.
$10.6 billion fences for the,
for the state government like
there's no phase in for this
bill.
What happens to our bond rating.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative,
I think that's a, that's a good
question.
Uh, our bond rating has always
been a little bit um.
Uh, what's the right word, uh,
shaky.
Because Mr. Chair, because of
Uh, the large deficits that we
the unfunded liabilities that we
face on our pension systems and
of course that issue would would
still be there tremendous.
Impact on the balance our
budget, so.
I mean, again, as, as
representative mentioned, this
would be an opportunity for us
to.
make of state government
spending.
see where we could potentially.
Save money and again, as I said
earlier, Mr. Chair.
Representative
Because of this large surplus
that we've experienced over the
last several years of over $3
billion.
This bill, which would cost,
according to the las dollars,
there would be that flexibility
make some.
Of decisions
Establish some priorities of
where the money should go.
And that there would be
obviously desire to education,
etc.
Cause again, our budget, Mr.
Chair, is divided into recurring
and recurring expenses as
potential budget cuts in order
to finance whether this tax cut
bill, Mr. Chairman.
I'm aware of how it's set up.
a lot of experience with how it
set up.
I was trying to play that you
did. You were the budget expert.
Uh, all the years that I've been
in spurt, so I wasn't trying to
imply that, but I was just
trying to explain that to maybe
some of the other members of Mr.
Chairman and Mr. May, but my
concern would also be regarding
the bond rating is because.
If there is not a way to to
reoccurring.
A reoccurring expense?
I think that affects the way the
bond rating would be evaluated
and our federal match amounts
for federal programming, whether
it's Medicaid, whether it's
Mexico Finance Authority,
whether it's New Mexico DOT.
Because those budgets are built
off.
Uh, especially the federal, uh,
Medicaid or Medi Medicaid and
New Mexico DOT budgets are set
ano, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. May.
So they're a little off from
what we, when we set our
budgets, but the point is, is
that we have to have that money
set aside well in advance,
knowing that it's going to be
there. It's a reoccurring
source.
For things like.
Medicaid.
Things like uh DOT.
And Max cares about bond ratings
or local governments.
So if the bond rating were to go
down.
And local governments had to
make up that difference or
couldn't get somebody to
actually carry, carry their
projects for them.
Uh, I think because I don't see
in New Mexico.
Governments raising property
tax.
I don't see us being able to um.
Take that on, especially in
counties like mine, mis, I want
to say 80% is federally
controlled.
I mean, most of our property in
counties like mine.
Federal
Whether it's um tribal or I do
have a military base out there.
So I'm, I'm curious then.
And we're not getting our pit
tax either. I need to put that
debate with counties now and
that hasn't happened.
Uh, consistently.
So I would be a little
concerned, concerned about uh
about this this bill, uh.
especially because it's not in
the budget for a very large uh
amount of money that would be
taken away from.
I think it would affect bond
rating. I think it would affect
our ability to provide federal
match, and, and they're all
across the board, water and
wastewater, everything, I mean
that we look at.
Um
And certainly I think it would
be.
real
Counties that don't.
Anyway, I appreciate it and
thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Mr. May for answering
my questions.
Thank you. Let's go to
Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
Representative, thank you for
bringing this bill forward.
Um
I don't believe that.
Anyone expected the this bill to
Yeah
A serious consideration for this
budget.
This year.
Um, I, I, I believe that
because, frankly,
I'm a co-signer on this bill.
And uh being one of the prime
sponsors.
Uh, I know the purpose. The
purpose is to to
Um, begin a discussion again,
especially right now, while we
do have budget surpluses.
And if we don't do too much to
harm the oil and gas industry
over the next several years,
those budget surpluses, I
believe, are expected to
continue well into the future.
Um
That being said, um, Mr.
Chairman,
Um, I'd like to direct uh
The next question to um Mr. May,
before I do, uh, I, I know he
was introduced as an introduced
himself as the senior policy
analyst for House Republicans,
but the reality is,
Uh
Mr. May, can you
A little bit deeper, go into
your
Uh, history in
In, uh, even, even congressional
finance in your position
previously as the DFA secretary
for the state of New Mexico. Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, uh.
I don't like to talk about it,
nor do I like to be getting
engaged in a debate with the
Speaker of the House either,
but, um, yeah, my background is
I, I have 43 years of public
policy.
Experience in the
Both state and federal, I've
been the DFA secretary, as I
say, for a nanosecond.
Martinez administration,
but I've also served.
8 years as a staff director for
the house.
Budget Committee in the US
Congress, both as a minority and
majority staff trying to brag,
but just so I mean Rod knows
this.
Uh, I'm the person that I'm
aware of that has been
participating in a process
budget in the 1997 Balanced
Budget Act and also as the DFA
secretary, I proposed a plan to
balance the state budget.
So I'm on, so I understand.
The reality of revenues versus
spending.
And it's been an honor for me to
be part of this.
in many, many years and
particularly the last 5 years as
the.
Policy director for the
affectionately tell my friends
and, and those who are not my
friends, I'm, I'm a budget nerd.
And Representative Lindstrom has
been one of my mentors and.
Over the years because I've
learned a lot from her about how
about the state budget works.
So I again wanted to apologize.
I did not want to apply that she
did not understand how the
budget works. I know she does,
but uh.
So that's kind of my background
So with that, Mr. Chairman, and
um Mr. May.
Um
Could you briefly
Discuss the difference between
Dynamic scoring and static
scoring, and then if you could
further
Discuss why.
Um, questions that have been
asked of you, I think.
are only considered static
scoring, which we have to.
Uh, as, as, uh, uh, legislators,
we have to, we have to do static
scoring, and then I want to go a
little bit into why.
places like Texas, Nevada,
Florida, where they don't have
Income tax.
Why
Even though that is the case,
you're not cutting other things.
So, if you could briefly just
talk about static versus dynamic
scoring
Stay, that's one of the things I
think we as a committee, if I
may, Mr. Chairman, you to keep
in mind that these scores,
these, these revenue estimates
by.
Uh, LSC and the Department of
Revenue taxation is on a
so-called static basis. In other
words, they only look at the
immediate revenue effect. They
do not, as Paul mentioned in his
remarks, take into account the
enhanced economic benefit.
And the churning of if we put $2
billion plus in New Mexico's
economy, Mr. Chairman, about how
that's going to be spent and
respent and respent.
And then generating GRTT.
We've asked LC staff to provide
us with some type of dynamic
scoring.
That's what you wanna call it
again, the dynamic scoring is
recognizing the full blown
economic impact of what that
policy does, rather than just a
snapshot of a.
Beginning of the process and
we've asked LFC to do that, and
they've promised to sometime
over the interim.
So it is a
So therefore, the, the revenue
estimate that says that the
revenue is going to be less than
3 or could be a loss of about
3.2 billion. We would, we
believe it's going to be
significantly less than that.
And I, Mr. Chair, can I quantify
that?
Unfortunately, I cannot at this
moment. But I think it's going
to be a significant number.
And therefore, the legislature
would not be forced to spend, it
would be much more or less
probably, I again, I'm just a
guess, but maybe.
2.7, 2.8 billion.
And again, because we have.
3.6 billion in non-reoccurring
spending that we do here
annually.
That does not require us to
touch anything on the recurring
side.
As a touch anything on the
transportation side. Does it
cost anything on the Medicaid
side.
So that that's the book could
potentially work. So with that,
Mr. Chair and, and uh
representative and Mr. May.
I believe that's why we are
wanting to have this discussion.
This is a discussion that needs
to be had.
Because as
Everyone on this side of the
table is interested in is we do
have to.
We do have to
Constitutionally balance the
budget. Mhm.
And I believe what you were
stating is the 2.7.
Once again
In our mindset
We think 2.7% perpetually.
But the reality is,
And other states where this has
happened.
The initial budget cuts are a
certain amount, but they lessen
over time as economic.
Growth takes place.
So, so that 2.7 also is not
static.
2.7
Billion with
Decrease over time. So, Mr.
Chair, um, to that, to that
point.
Um
Looking at
Other states where people are
migrating to.
The states they're migrating to
don't have an income tax.
New Mexico, on the other hand,
We want, I know it was stated
earlier that we have the most
fair.
And once again, fair is in the
eye of the as, as, as my friend
Scott Eckstein says that bear is
in the eye of the beer holder.
Um, but when you are looking at,
at
Fairness
I think that the most fair that
we can have is where there's the
most opportunity.
Because it allows anyone to
crawl out.
Um
From, from their circumstance.
Um
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, um, and, and,
um, Mr. Guessing.
The, uh, the, the speaker
mentioned that Texas.
Uh
That their property tax is the
7th highest.
Um
That being the case,
Who pays more.
Of the
Property tax.
poor, maybe who are renting.
Or millionaires who's paying
greater percentage or greater.
Amount
Individually
Uh, of property tax.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh.
In virtually all taxation
situations, the wealthy pay much
more uh attacks.
just in the aggregate number
then they would uh.
If you're
less well off.
Lower income person.
So, um, Mr. Chair, I, I believe
the speaker, uh, kind of made
that as a
Causation that Texas.
At a higher
Uh, property tax. I, I believe
what uh Mr. May suggested is
that
Was not causational. It was more
correlational.
Um
That because in New Mexico, oil
and gas pays the vast majority.
Of the cost to education in New
Mexico.
Uh
So, that would not change if
income tax were eliminated
because we would not be pulling
that away from
That burden from oil and gas.
But also to to prove that that
it is not.
Causational
Uh, I'm gonna mention two other
states that were mentioned.
As having no income tax.
That they're
Lower than New Mexico.
On property tax. Florida has
their property tax is less than
New Mexico.
They do not have the, the
Uh
The income tax.
But Nevada is 3rd lowest. They
also do not have an income tax.
So it's not correlational.
It is or causational.
It really is what it, what is
the tax structure and our tax
structure in New Mexico is very,
very heavily dependent upon
Oil and gas.
And so,
It, it really
Comes down to how if there is a
Loss in revenue. How do we make
that up?
Um, for the short time.
But the reality is, I think it's
proven.
State by state.
You lower the tax burden, you
increase economic activity.
I, I would say that in New
Mexico,
If what we were doing were the
right method.
We would not have so many
people.
On government subsidies.
If we were handling and tax
alone doesn't do it. Um, to, to
suggest that tax, tax policy
alone.
can fix uh
poverty, I think is, is not.
It is not fair. Otherwise, the
whole burden of New Mexico's
circumstance would be based this
committee would be.
key.
And I, and I think it goes well
beyond that.
But um
It was stated earlier that
And and a couple of times about
insulating a New Mexico from
when oil, when there is a
cyclical downturn.
of oil and gas revenue. I, I
think that
is what this bill is meant to
do.
Um, so I'm gonna direct this
next question to this bill
sponsor. We've heard a little
bit about
Diversifying our economy.
But without people moving into
the state and without
It it appears the only way we
can get anyone to move into the
state of New Mexico, um, Mr.
Chair and Representative.
Senna Cortez
Is that we have to give a
Tax break.
Every time we give a tax break
to a new
Company
To come into New Mexico, that
means their share of the burden
is spread to the rest of New
Mexico.
Which
Is the middle class. There are
not enough millionaires in the
state of New Mexico.
To cover
There are big businesses.
Generally in oil and gas that
are covering the vast majority
of the taxes in New Mexico.
But there are very, very few
other millionaires in the state
of New Mexico, just a tiny
percentage.
So the reality is, between the
50 or so percent of people who
are not paying taxes because
they're low income.
And the 4.9% that are
millionaires.
There's 45% of the population
that is middle class, and
they're paying the bulk.
Of income taxes.
They're paying the bulk.
Of
All taxes
Purchasing GRT.
Um, there're obviously they're
purcha purchasing more.
As they're having higher
purchases, more expensive cars
than the poor.
Uh, and, and more expensive
homes.
Uh, it just is how that goes.
So, in, in my mind,
Mr. Chair, this bill is meant.
To try and help
Not just the poor, but the
middle class.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, and
Representative.
Did you talk a little bit about
how this.
Really targets the middle class.
Well, just to reiterate what I
had spoken of earlier, yes, it
does. It would help the majority
of New Mexicans and to reiterate
that the millionaire population
at 4.97%. It's such a small
percentage.
um, you know, as I.
talk to constituents in my
district,
owners and what they would tell
you over and over their concerns
are having enough employees to
even staff their stores, and
Mister Chair representative,
what we know is that workers
will choose states where the tax
structure is favorable and the
local leaders that I've spoken
to in my district, Mr. Chair and
Representative, um, and they've
have even spoken to the major
businesses and retailers that.
Site staffing issues are a
concern to relocate to New
Mexico, and I've even spoken to
people in in my class that state
to build my life in New Mexico
and to have a career and a
family, but most of the people I
graduated, they have elected to
go to Texas over New Mexico or
even Florida cause it's even
better than Texas and in large
part it's our state and of
course there's more shopping and
housing, um, Mr. Chair.
Representative, um, I, I believe
that we can all agree that we
need construction workers for
our infrastructure and for
housing and Mr. Chair
Representative,
the rural communities we've said
over and over they need doctors
and lawyers, in short, New
Mexico needs to attract workers
to help build our economy and at
the end of the day to go back to
that question, Mr. Chair
Representative, the people in my
district are hurting
financially. They are using.
Credit cards and and it's at an
all time high and what they're
paying back now is the interest
on those credit cards and so I,
I am beyond grateful to have
this conversation, Mr. Chair and
Representative, but we're trying
to put money back in the pockets
of New Mexicans. Because I I
don't know about your districts.
I know my districts are
struggling and we wanna.
Fight for New Mexicans and give
them more money to support their
family, so they're not just
paying for things on interest.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I'm gonna, I'm gonna wrap
up here. Um, I appreciate this,
Bill. Obviously,
It would be impossible.
With FIR and the information we
have to pass this bill this
year.
Uh, all bills are gonna be
tabled anyway, but the reality,
Mr. Chair, is this is a
discussion that we need to have.
About how we diversify New
Mexico. How do we get to a point
that we can diversify New
Mexico.
And the reality is we're just
not attracting.
Business here. We're not
attracting people here.
Without an influx.
Of people coming to New Mexico,
which over the last 10 years,
We went from or over the last
the last census period, let's
say, the last 10 year census
period of record.
We went from 2 million to 2.1
million 2.1 million people. We,
we grew only 100,000 people in
New Mexico while our all of our
neighbors are growing rapidly.
There's something not attracting
people to New Mexico.
I don't believe it's just tax
policy.
I believe there are other
reasons. I mean, our, our
education.
Is one of those crime in New
Mexico is one of those, but
We have to start on a different
path. We had whatever that
different path is, Mr. Chair, I,
I would appreciate.
Uh, the tax committee, uh, in
the interim, if we could
continue this discussion if we
could
Find a way to get
An idea of static scoring, or if
we can't do static scoring if we
could find correlation in other
states to see as they made a
transition.
What it looked like, I think.
Um, absent static scoring, we,
we can find, I mean, absent
dynamic scoring, we can find.
Uh, at least examples of how it
Uh, change the economy.
And I, and I, I know from my
standpoint signing on this bill
was hopefully so we could have a
robust, robust conversation like
we did today. Obviously bond
rating is is very key. We don't
wanna.
But as we have the surplus, if
we are ever going to look at
systematically changing the
state of New Mexico or the
positive.
It would take us to, to take a
risk, take a chance, and as we
have these budget surpluses that
That risk is much, much less,
and I would, I would just stay
for those of us who can't
imagine in in tax policy, but in
our personal lives.
The way that we as well look at
Our budgets is generally static.
The average person looks at
their own budget and says, I
have this much coming in, this
is how much I can afford. This
is how much I can spend.
But the reality is entrepreneurs
look at things differently.
They want to take.
A risk
In the most favorable
circumstances possible.
And
The reason, so I, so if I wanted
to to then open up a business, I
know I'm taking a risk.
I want to do it in the most
favorable environment that
exists.
And unfortunately, the folks
that are looking at becoming
entrepreneurs.
And taking that risk or avoiding
New Mexico.
I think, like I said, it's for
multiple reasons, but I believe
tax policy is one of those. How
do we become more attractive to
other people wanting to be here.
I think we follow Texas's.
Example, when they did tax.
Uh, restructuring.
What they want to do is make it
favorable for the businesses
that were already in their
state.
To make it more favorable for
them, so they would think about
reinvesting.
As it is, most of our folks in
New Mexico that I know they're
entrepreneurs have 1 ft out the
door.
And they're looking at going
somewhere else. That is why we
are not keeping Mister Chair.
Our college graduates.
They are determining
It is a better environment for
them to practice business
somewhere else.
And because we are, we are so
good, Mr. Chair, with
How we fund
Uh, at least in our state
schools, education, we are
helping all of our children.
To be able to go get a good
Uh, to get a good education.
Unfortunately, we're not
benefiting from that because
they are not finding New Mexico
a good place to build their
lives. So, I, I appreciate this
bill. I hope we can have a
robust discussion during the
interim, maybe a couple of
interims because this is a big
decision, it'd be a big deal,
and I appreciate the opportunity
to have this bill presented
today.
Absolutely misrepresentative
Montoya, before I go to our next
uh question or comment, you
know, I, I, I extend that offer
to anyone if they want to have
that conversation in a more
robust fashion in the interim
and the revenue stabilization
and tax policy community. This
is an important discussion to
have, and I know that we're
supposed to be on the floor, but
I think matters like this are
are worthwhile to have a
discussion here, so.
We'll get an excuse for the from
the floor, so we can have a full
debate on this so that we can
extend that to the discussion as
we look towards the interim. So
next question is coming from
Representative Parajon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, Representative for
presenting today, um.
My questions are precisely on um
what representative Monrea was
talking about, uh, the economic
effect and and what we really
get for this 4 billion because
it is such a a sizable piece,
um, so I wanna, I wanna
recognize you all and for your
years of experience, um.
The argument that I'm, how I'm
understanding it is that.
If you cut income taxes.
The business owners that have
more money to invest in their
businesses, making us more
competitive, bringing in new
businesses, and then, as I
understand from what you've
explained now, that diversifies
the tax base and we collect more
from GRT and corporate income
taxes, is that correct, Mr.
Chair and um representative.
The chair, uh, representative,
yes, very simple, very simple.
It's, it basically what Mr.
Chair, what, what it does
representative is, it simply
makes the pie bigger, and
because the pie is bigger.
also goes up the cuts.
Mister Chair and um expert y'all
in the beginning mentioned some
other states that don't have,
um, personal income taxes, uh.
Which are those that have
changed it like in the past 10
years.
Mr.
Representative.
Mr. Chair members uh uh a
representative.
Pro, uh.
The 9 states that lack a
personal income tax.
Generally speaking, have been
the same 9 states for
Some years, other states are
engaged in.
Serious legislative initiatives
relating to phasing out or
completely eliminating the
personal income tax, uh,
Colorado is one example of a
state that's reduced theirs
recently, Arizona is another.
They're down to a 2.5% rate. I
know Mississippi had a vote.
In their ongoing legislative
session in their house
about uh I wanted to know
specifically, um, which are
those that have no, not the ones
who have reduced it, but the
ones that kind of mirrored this
proposal, so the ones that have
no personal income tax has
anyone changed that in the past
10 years, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh.
Representative Powell, uh, no, I
don't think there's been any new
additions to the zero income
tax, uh, state roster that it's
been 9 states for uh.
For a little last decade as, as
you say. OK,
an expert, uh, I wanted to ask
what year it was that they
changed the point in time, but
if it hasn't been in the past
couple years, um, how, how then
like what, what evidence are you
using from the states that don't
have personal income tax. How
are you, um, correlating that,
um, lack of personal income tax
with the growth in those states.
What metrics are you using to
quantify that?
Mr. Chan
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee in my testimony, I
cited a report, let's see, uh.
Visual capitalist, it's so what
they rank at visual capitalist,
I'm happy to share the
information with you was GDP
growth in, in a given year, and
I noted that in 2023, I guess 24
data are not available yet, but
in 2023, 5 of the top 10 fastest
growing states from a GDP
perspective, uh, GDP being a
representative example of
Rod economy. So those states, 5
of the top 10 fastest growing
are indeed zero personal income
tax states, I'll mention their
Washington, Wyoming, Texas,
Alaska, Florida, and Washington
state, Mr.
Chair and experts, so they're
not, they're, it's correlated,
like if you have no personal
income tax generally then you,
the visual capitalist ranks you
as like a friendlier
representative, Mr. Chair,
Madam Representative.
we just, I just looked at
The states with the fastest
growing economies in that
particular year and correlated
it with the uh number of those
states being zero income tax. It
it wasn't.
Uh, the website wasn't doing
anything specific relating to
the personal income tax that
was.
My analysis, if you will, Mister
Chair, Madam Representatives, so
there's no, um, and sorry to get
into the Mr. Chair expert,
you're the economist, is that
correct?
I, I, I, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, I have a
master's in Business
Administration. I run an
economic policy research
institute based in Albuquerque.
Mr. Chair and Representative, so
is is there an ar coefficient?
On this cause court.
Correlation is not causation.
Right? Expert,
members of the committee or Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
my apologies, uh, economics is a
complicated field with many
different moving parts in recent
years, of course, we know New
Mexico has uh gone from a
significant producing state when
it comes to oil, but now we are
2nd biggest producing state in
the nation, uh, other states.
have things that happen.
Economically to them that aren't
necessarily uh related to
policies that they have on the
books or not on the books, so uh
I do think the fact that 5 of
the top 10 fastest growing
states have no personal income
tax is strong evidence for that
as a policy and I'll, I'll just
quickly note again that these
are not universally red states,
so so called uh or Republican
states, uh, Washington state
being one,
It's uh
New Hampshire is another and uh
Nevada, yet a third, so there's
a lot of different policies, and
this is kind of the conversation
I had with uh the speaker
regarding.
know what Texas does versus what
New Mexico does in terms of
property taxes, uh, simply put,
Eliminating or not having a
personal income tax is highly,
highly correlated with strong
economic and population growth,
Mr. Chair, Madam Representative,
and um expert.
Do you know of any states that
have cut their personal income
tax that have had negative
drawbacks.
Uh
Madam chair, uh,
Madam, Mr. Chair, Madam
Representative, uh.
I don't know of any states that
have had
Significant negative outcomes,
there have been states that have
moved to reduce taxes in recent
years, uh, Mr. May has a, a
thing here.
I think you've, you've told me
this already that have been
decreasing, so the question I
wanna ask, and maybe you already
know which state I'm talking
about, um, I'm gonna ask about
the bro, the brown back tax
experiment. Do you know about
that, about Kansas, Mister
Chair.
Mr. Chair, uh, Madam
Representative, I am familiar
with what happened in Kansas and
they had passed some significant
tax reductions that were later
repealed or pulled back upon,
yes.
Uh, Mr. Chair and um expert, I
just want to make sure I
understand uh.
What happened in the in that
experiment the same way that you
understand, um, in 2012, Kansas
reduced their, um, it was one of
the largest income tax cuts in
the state's history, they
eliminated income taxes for the
owners of 200,000 pass through
businesses and decrease taxes by
25% for the highest income
rates, and then they had to
reverse that in 2017 because the
effects were so dire and um, and
so, uh, Mr. Chair and experts,
is that your understanding also
of, of what happened in Kansas?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam
Representative, uh, that is
largely along the lines of what
I would say happened, although
there are, there are nuances
including uh spending growth
that were effective, uh, it
would cause, uh, in that.
That outcome that related to uh
their inability to reduce or
continue the tax reduction.
Uh, Mr. Chair and expert, that
that's also my understanding,
and I guess, um, you know, when
Governor Brownback promised
these exemptions. He said this
was gonna be um a a a kickstart
for the economy we're gonna see
huge economic growth, uh, but,
but that didn't necessarily
happen and, um, Mister Chair and
experts, that that's one of my
concerns is that, um, we, you
know, we, we are saying we're
gonna do this, uh, you know,
this $4 billion.
tax cut, um, but then you also
mentioned, well, we might get
some back because there's
economic um development that may
happen because that income is
reinvested into the economy.
And um I, uh, Mister Chair and,
and experts, I, I agree that a
more competitive tax code
promotes economic growth and um
um, Mr. Chair and representative
one of the, the big, um,
resources that chair uh Vice
Chair Kalena and I used when
designing alcohol tax was tax
percent if you decrease your um
income tax, what that does to
the GDP, and they mapped that
out, but they've also explained
how, um, it does not necessarily
guarantee that you have the same
economic spur that comes from
the the cut.
And Mr. Chair and and experts, I
guess what what I'm really
asking here is that I agree that
we do need to look for ways to
diversify our economy, um, but
are there better ways other tax
cuts that we could do that
improve our economic pros
prospects more with more
certainty and some of those that
I know of Mr. Chair and um
experts which you all are aware
of probably too are the child
tax credits, um, the earned
income.
tax credits that have been
proven to really um show big
reductions, um, Mr. Chair and
experts, so, uh, you know, I, I,
I, I agree with you and.
That, uh, mic drop. So that I
agree with you, um, Madam,
um, Mr. Cha representative that
we do need to find ways to
diversify our economic um
prospects, what I would like to
see is a little more evidence, a
little more um data driven
solutions that can that can
improve our economic prospects
here in New Mexico. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go right to Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I would love to get away from
the PIT.
It's not gonna happen.
He
But I think this conversation is
a good conversation to start.
You know, if we look at
Ways in which
Other states have lowered.
Yeah
And perhaps we can start
thinking about.
You know, what the benefits of
that are the drawbacks are.
You know, the last thing any of
us want to do is to create
burdens for our hometown.
Counties.
The municipalities. And so I
think there's Mr. Cha, I think
this is a, a great
Conversation
Interim and and work on that.
One and all my questions have
been answered, I think, uh.
that I need him to, but I'd just
like to make one statement and I
think it was made earlier that
this is going to hurt.
The lowest income folks in the
state.
31% of the folks in our state
don't pay any.
Any taxes.
And there's no returns.
So I just want to, it's
3,259,070. I just wanna
Reiterate that they said this
will not.
That were to go
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go Representative Terazas. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, uh,
Representative and experts for
your, for this conversation. I
think this is a great
conversation piece.
Um, and as I'm listening, you,
you hear kind of both sides.
Extremes of what could happen
and what what it could cause
and, you know, and, and you're
listening to it and I and it and
it made me think here. I said,
you know.
The conversation
Could be
That maybe we find something
that's a hybrid.
And where we say, you know, we
leave the we leave things as
they are right now.
And to test the waters, we
possibly say maybe you graduated
from a New Mexico school.
For the next 5 years, you have
no personal income tax if you
stay here.
Or we say, you know what, if
We need certain sectors that
need, cause my dad, my dad
actually.
Uh
Tired because he couldn't find
any workers anymore and he had
been in business since 1977, uh,
in it as a general contractor.
A lot of my family, big
contractors in the southwest New
Mexico built a lot of homes and
a lot of them are discouraged
because of the of the.
Uh, of the uh labor
participation rates.
And so certain, maybe we could
test certain sectors.
That if you come in,
And you and you move in, let's
just say we've talked about the
medical field for graduating
from New Mexico and staying here
rather than saying, you know
what, you graduate from, so.
I've always had a uh a uh.
Converse say New Mexico paid for
your education. Maybe you should
stay 2 years to get back to the
people. Maybe this is the way we
get them to stay. So you know
what?
Stay, 5 years and for the next 5
years because you graduated
here.
In addition to that, we will, we
will waive your income tax.
We can sunset it in case in case
we don't like it, but it'd be
new tax money.
The same thing is, is with um
bringing doctors, nurses, and so
forth.
We could say, you know what, if
you actually move into Mexico
and support our deals, we could
then waive your taxes and we'll
sunset it in 5 years. We can do
it in certain sectors, like I
said, the construction
industries, we can do it in the
medical field. We can do it with
new graduates. It's just a I
think there's a great
conversation.
Um, because I think we can
preserve what, you know, the,
the fears that both sides have
or or or or and, and it would
just the proof would be in the
pudding, we wouldn't be working
on.
Eliminating it altogether and
taking that rolling the dice,
we'll just say that.
And yet it would be new money
that we would be encouraging to
come here.
Invest here
And fill some of these sectors
that where we are hurting the
most, and then, and then if we
see that that's working well.
And we can expand it and then
possibly if it's going in the
right direction.
Then we can work our way
backwards in in the tax code.
Just a thought, Mr. Chair,
Representative, thank you.
Thank you, Representative Rasso,
and just FYI communication with
our next bill sponsors, uh, we
will roll that until Wednesday,
so we'll continue this
conversation, and we'll end for
the day, but I appreciate that
by virtue of you being on this
committee, you are now a member
of the resin new stabilization
and Tax Policy Committee. So
bring your ideas because I think
those things are are great to
have.
Uh, Next on our list is
Representative Vice Chairwoman
Kadena.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, I
really appreciate hearing from
my colleagues here representing
Montoya and Representative
Terazas and certainly what
you're lifting up for me sounds
like where we have potential.
Um, in the couple of terms I've
been able to be part of the
house tax and and revenue
Committee here. It's been really
important to me that we imagine
policy that is pointed and
purposeful, and what you all are
offering certainly could be that
you've heard me talk about the
rural health tax provider
credit, and I said well it's on
the books, everybody should have
access to it, but it certainly
is not what we need to recruit
and retain healthcare providers.
So hearing you all bring these
ideas forward like we can
possibly use the personal.
tax infrastructure to spur
economic development, but it
would have to be pointed and
purposeful, so I really like
what you are bringing forward.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Turning quickly to the bill in
front of us.
That is not what's on paper here
today. Um,
When Speaker Martinez started us
off, he talked about trickle
down economics and that's what I
had here, what we've learned
over decades and we've
demonstrated with studies from
the Rand Institute, London
School of Economics, and others,
that trickle down economics does
not work.
You might imagine a possibility
where.
Money is put back in the hands
of the wealthy that somehow
it'll make it down to workers or
working families and working
communities, and it just doesn't
go, um, mister, Mr. Chair, I'm
reminded of a few years ago.
With this administration
admittedly, uh, we put forward
tax rebates that went to every
New Mexican, regardless of
income. And what we debated and
discussed and certainly tried to
move from the house was a more
pointed rebate so that the
families of less means in New
Mexico got more. I certainly
heard from loved ones and
colleagues and friends of mine
that said.
What do I need $1500 for? It's
going into an account. Imagine
if the woman, the single mom
that cleans my house got double
instead, what she could do to
interrupt her family's future,
what she could do to potentially
provide housing stability, um,
extracurricular activities for
her kids, like those are the
kind of conversations we have
been having here in the house.
Sometimes we're wait out that
year, the governor said
everybody's getting the rebate.
But the data we saw again and
shout out to the incredible
economists on both sides of the
aisle and the folks that work
for the legislature, was it
those lower income families were
going to spend and spend and
respend and that money would
begin circulating in the
economy, but what we knew then
and what we know today is that
those higher incomes, money back
does not move the way it does
for families that have less in
New Mexico. Um, so I, I don't
have questions today, but I, I
just want to end with saying
what's in
this proposal as it stands
today, sounds to me like we're
making a splash in the media.
Um, representative with your
experts here, uh, we talk and I
imagine New Mexico, New Mexicans
would be very curious about this
idea, like eliminating our tax,
what could that do for me?
But I hope that as we continue
this conversation, we're not
silent on the effects or impacts
of that. Your expert here said
something about Medicaid reform.
Every time I hear Medicaid
reform, the ugly truth of that
is a work requirement.
I heard your expert here today,
um, madam, madam Representative
say that um,
We got to push New Mexicans to
live better lives. I
fundamentally disagree with
that.
I know families that are
hardworking, struggling, showing
up for themselves with
resiliency and survival skills
every day in New Mexico, but
also are grateful that their
little ones have healthcare
access because in our state,
we've built a safety net. Those
are our workers. Those are the,
those are the families that are
in our small businesses that are
those are the families across
the state. So.
Yeah, I look forward to
continuing this conversation in
the interim about how we could
be pointed and purposeful, but
as this is written today.
We're undercutting.
The investments we've made in
working families and and New
Mexicans deserve better than
that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you Madam vice chairwoman.
Anyone else questions or
comments?
Second time, Representative
Lustrom.
um,
being new to the committee, I
was curious, Mr. Chairman, if
the, if you as chair and your
vice chair.
Uh, would be willing.
To work with and uh dropping a
house memorial, this session
directing the tax department at
LFC really evaluate this dynamic
versus stagnant, um, scoring.
You know, in my term as budget
chair, it was always, it was not
dynamic.
We had to go with the numbers
that we had when we were working
on these things.
The Reason I say this is because
I am very, you know, the gross
domestic product number that the
panel talked about is an
indicator for um.
Companies to move into a, into a
state. It's one of one indicator
that it's you're down at the
bottom.
You know, that that causes a red
flag for a company that's
interested in moving into your
state. There's reasons for that.
One of many indicators, but I'm
wondering if this committee just
takes the bull by the horns,
this session it's the memorial
and so the staff people, uh, get
on it.
Uh, so it's, so that information
is there when the tax and
revenue Committee starts. It's
just a suggestion, Mr. Chairman,
as I say, I'm new to this
committee, but it seems like
that might be getting the ball
rolling.
Appreciate that recommendation
from Representative Lindstrom.
anyone else?
Related to that question though,
um.
We can absolutely, you know,
have a memorial bipartisan
memorial. I'm of the opinion
that maybe we just ask LFC to to
do the work and not have a
memorial and not make it
political.
And so I don't know if that's
easy enough for for another, I
know you don't speak for LFC.
You'd have to ask Charles, the
director, but I think that's,
that's a function or piece of
work that you guys could do
pretty, pretty easily without
having a direction from this.
It's because I open his water
for
It's because I open his water
at, at the legislature's we.
He
complicated
issues that are, you know, as,
as you know, um, Mr. Chair
Representative.
The consensus revenue estimating
group meets.
Multiple times throughout the
year we're having these.
would be a big step, but
certainly that something we
could consider.
And we are at the will of the,
you know.
Appreciate that. Thank you,
Representative Lustrom. Thank
you, uh, Brendan, for, for that
response, you know, when we uh
started this discussion, it was
always meant to, and I made this
point early on in this committee
that we were uh
We're intentional in this
committee in regards to having a
robust discussion regardless of
party affiliation or work part
of the city you come from,
because when you bring something
of substance to this committee,
we want to make sure that it's
vetted properly and and given
its fair hearing and I think
this today proves that shows
that that uh we had some really
Great discussions about the
entire.
Proposal that you put forth to
us and, and I stand by my
comments that I made earlier in
regards to how far we've come as
a committee and I know some of
you are new and some of you are,
have been here for a while in
regards to the changes that
we've made in this state and,
and, and how proud you should
really be, uh, in regards to
The leaps and bounds in regards
to creating a more progressive
tax code in regards to the
things that I mentioned before
that help every single day in
New Mexicans. I'm reminded that
uh when I think about middle
class that.
I thought it was different.
You know, I, I, I thought middle
class was were those folks that
were making 30,000 or 50,000,
you know, but, but when I'm
reminded that, no, it's actually
the folks that are making 53,000
to about 100.
61,000 and that about a third of
New Mexico, New Mexicans are a
part of that middle class,
right? So if we have a targeted
to by showing Kadena's point, a
more targeted approach to this
in regards to
The points that Representative
Montoya makes in terms of how do
we focus not only just on on on
the lower income earners, but
expanding it to the middle
income earners.
What if we just use, and that,
and that this is your, this is
your bill. I want to put my bill
on, on, on the spotlight, but
what if we just expand the House
Bill 14 to to include an
additional point of that and
that way you target exactly what
we're trying to get to. But in
regards to everything else
that's discussed, discussed now,
I think we have a lot of really
good ideas. You bring a lot of
good ideas to point. Uh, I know
that in some cases some people
may feel a little bit attacked
in regards to when you're on
that stand, but please don't
feel that way. I, I think it's
made to
The point that we want to make
sure that we are completely
vetting these proposals, and
that we will wait for this
decision when the time comes on
whether or not this is a part of
the uh tax package um.
I, I, I can say, and I think
people are have seen the writing
on the wall and Mr. Montoya made
mention of this that he doesn't
see this as a part of this
packages here, uh, perhaps.
Because of the, of the cost of
it, but at the same time, that
goes to the point of the static
versus dynamic scoring and how
does that play into how we move
forward as a committee and how
we're gonna score bills into the
future. So that being said, I
appreciate the discussion this
this morning, uh, and that being
said, Representative uh Chile
and just thank everybody before
we move to the pleasure of the
committee I think we're done for
the day.
Thank you, Mr. Cherry. I move
that we table HB 275.
I second.
Second Representative Silva. Any
opposition? Say none. Thank you
for the presentation today.
Thank you to your experts.
