Representative Lujan.
Representative Maestas.
Here.
Representative.
Representative role metal.
Your.
Representative Scott.
You.
Representative Stansbury.
Representative Strickler here.
Thanks for your.
I'm chairman Martinez.
I am here
Great good morning everybody
good to see all of you after a
long floor session yesterday and
let everybody survived it.
we have
I have a an update for the
agenda today I heard from
Representative Anderson's
provided assistant just a couple
minutes ago and he is busy in
another committee so he asked us
to roll house bill one seventy
four until Monday.
So we'll we'll go ahead and do
that
The other bills on the agenda
our house bill two seventy eight
and I'm not sure if
Representative Harper will will
be able to present that we we
had had a conversation back and
forth that said throw it on the
agenda just in case but we might
have to roll it up to you
Representative.
We have house bill fifteen I
believe we should have an
updated FY are.
That you know that matches to
FIR that match each other and
don't contradict each other.
House bill thirty six I believe
that's been fixed I believe
there's a sub that we can all
live with at this point and I
believe you all should have that
right now.
And then we're gonna start with
two fifty five and after
having after some conversations
with our staff we decided to
bring it back this morning to
formally adopt the committee
substitute that reflects the
amendments that we made in
committee and on Monday I just
felt that that was just the.
More transparent way of of doing
it rather than sending it out.
without formally adopting the
sub in the committee that is in
front of us so hi everybody
should have gotten that sub.
I think yesterday or maybe even
the day before.
so with that members are there
any any questions before we
proceed with today's agenda.
Okay
I'm gonna I'm gonna pause for
secular of I get texts from
our revenue on
Such as having some actual zoom
troubles.
All right.
So let's so there's a massive Mr
with two fifty five
and as I mentioned everybody
should have the substitute all
the analysts of substitute.
The substitute.
matches every single amendment
we made a committee on Monday.
so with that I needed seeing a
motion to.
To me the substitute.
For a discussion Mr chairman the
substitute is not up on the
website.
Okay let me see it should be
should be on Citrix.
Yes chairman is in Citrix and it
it's noted as two one nine seven
seven four point one perfect
actually you.
Okay.
Representative Scott do you see
that substitute in your Citrix.
Right now give me just a minute
or two.
You got it yep take your time.
Okay good to go.
God bless your Chandler if you
could do me a favor can you tex
Representative Lujan she's
having some issues with zoom and
that I think you might be able
to walk her through it while I
well I run the meeting.
Is there a motion to move the
substitute for discussion
purposes so moved.
Okay members so Representative
Maestas this is the committee
subsidies I stated that reflects
all the amendments made a
committee on Monday are there
any.
And there I see a hand up from
percent Strickler process record
go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman I don't
really have a.
I'd like to talk about the bill
once we
Move to.
The staff to bell just pissed it
just a few comments on the bill
to bill itself so.
I'll defer.
Very good is there
our motion to adopt the
committee substitute.
So moved Mr chair.
Is there a second.
Yes so chairman all will move
the.
Do not pass on house bill two
fifty five and that do pass on
house tax revenue committee
substitute for house bill two
fifty five.
Okay that is a proper motion
thank you Representative Harper
their second.
Second.
Second Senator medal.
Representative Strickler got
some comments.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Maestas St yeah
these these a chair or step in
the right direction you know I
still have.
Great concerns
of the impact to the licensees
that no fault of their own
accord  these licenses under
under this current system and I
don't feel like there's enough
protection for those folks and
and I and I know this is again a
very important reform
idea.
And the just the feedback I'm
getting from from my folks in my
area
new licensees said that acquired
an expensive license
never have used it and now it's
you know it's just not worth
anything with if this bill goes
forward so I I I guess my my
main concern is is that this
really needs a lot of work and I
think the innermost be the the
best Avenue for amazement you
made a lot of a lot of progress
on this on this on this package
and I appreciate that so that
that's all I have thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative Maestas.
Thank you Representative
Strickler.
We have a.
Do not pass this motion on house
bill two could I but I do passed
motion on house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
house bill two fifty five.
It's been duly moved and
seconded.
It landed state the roll call
will please.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Harper.
No.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Maestas.
Yes yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Sh Representative Scott.
Representative Stansbury.
Yes.
Representative Strickler no.
Speaker Igor.
Representative Lujan.
Yes.
Chairman Martinez.
Yes.
In the affirmative through the
negative.
All right bye will be in the
affirmative and three in the
negative so Maestas you have a
do pass on house taxation
revenue committee substitute for
house bill two fifty five thank
you members for your indulgence
in for allowing me to bring that
back today I I.
As I said I I spoke to some of
the.
Staff and we just felt this was
a better way to do it so very
well let's move on to it by the
way doesn't look like
Representative Ely has moved
since yesterday I think he's in
the same position let them that
see yesterday yes Representative
we have a.
We have has been thirty six and
I believe you put in a lot of
work with that along with our
staff and and members of your
staff and I believe there is a
substitute that you wish to move
up for discussion.
Mr Chairman yeah and if I could
bring up bill I remind you
Cutler if they're in the
attendees last week and moved on
panelists that would be great
will bring them on right now.
I'm sure that Mr Chairman.
Just want to.
I'm sure do you let it looks.
Thank you for.
okay so we.
We've got a list of Cutler we've
got the live very Representative
Eli.
Would you
Can you give us the number of
the substitute.
Second I think it's the point
reversion bill at in a mistrial
is there he could tell you I
believe it is right here anyway
as the the what is it two one
nine number Mr ivory it's point
five can you head out wow okay
yeah we're at the point I need
the original numbers.
Point two one nine eight one
point five okay so it's two one
nine eight a one point five it's
on my Citrix it should be in all
of your Citrix is.
Give it a minute.
Or broadband is a little slow in
downtown Albuquerque.
Okay.
Members so do you all have
access to the substitute at this
point.
Okay see if you nodding head so
I don't so I don't see anybody
saying no so we'll move on.
Their motion to move but the
committee substitute for
discussion purposes.
Mr chair thank you.
Okay Representative be like
spring substitute please so Mr
chairman members of the
committee if there was ever a
bill that was beyond my pay
grade this is yet what I have
tried to do is bring in all of
the stakeholders including your
analyst but also the community
bankers the banker Association
Mister Walker Mr Anderson
bankruptcy lawyers creditors
lawyers collection lawyers but
the details of that I'm gonna
leave Mr ivory because as you
can tell Mr chairman by the time
we got to point three I just got
lost we did try to address both
the speakers concerns and the
analyst concerns I know what
we're trying to do and I I am
that's why Sanchez the bills
because I'm very supportive of
the goal of trying to do the
people that are in financial
distress have a little more
money to support their families
and businesses but the technical
aspects of the bill I've got a
turnover distracted so that's
what you're.
Distract every.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
Representative Ely and members
of the committee my name's bill
I agree I'm an attorney in New
Mexico I've been practicing
since nineteen eighty four and
I've been on my own solo
practice.
For the last thirty three years
I'm in Santa Fe specializing in.
Representing debtors and small
businesses and consumer
bankruptcies and representing
debtors and small businesses.
And collection cases and
foreclosure cases.
The purpose of the exemption
statute which was enacted the
statute was enacted in nineteen
fifty three was to allow the
debtors were small business
owners so providers to keep a
certain amount of their assets
Before when they file
bankruptcies of the bank which
is trustee could take everything
that this keeper certain amount
of things such as houses
a value of houses cars and
personal possessions as well as
of judgment if someone doesn't
there's a judgment creditor.
And they're trying to seize
their assets the exemptions that
you allows the debtors to keep a
certain amount of the things
that.
Them from from leaving them with
nothing I'm unfortunately this
statute is not really been
amended since nineteen fifty
three other than a few
amendments pertaining to the
homestead exemption which I'll
get to in a minute but other
than that statute really has not
changed so the appropriation
bill was the.
Yes this bill up to current
times and just three major major
changes were made to the bill
the first one is changing the
monetary limits on what you
need.
the numbers values of jewelry
and bank accounts and cars that
you need to nineteen fifty three
are obviously a lot different
because of the cost of living
inflation over the last sixty
eight years that we update these
numbers to make a more
reasonable and what a dedicated
jeep as part of the human donor
car their jewelry and what they
can keep in their bank accounts.
to avoid bankruptcy trustees or
judgment creditors and seasons
these things so we think it's
important to raise the limits on
the personal property
exemptions.
Get get up to the economic times
the current day because the
statutes has not been amended in
sixty eight years as far as the
personal property allowances
are.
The second part of the bill
changes that we made word up
broadened and specify the
definition of what household
goods under the statute it
allows you to accept furniture
but that's that do a lot of
controversy and this but a lot
of litigation magistrate courts
district courts need in the
bankruptcy court on what.
This Bernalillo your statutes
are written in nineteen fifty
three when no such things as
computers and probably
televisions and.
Electronic equipment so this
bill broadens the definition
specifies what is the household
furnishings Act cases and.
District Court before where
judges that read it furniture
exemptions very narrowly and
they actually about judgment
creditors to seize my client's
computers televisions the
washing machines and dryers
does.
The judges not only accepted
furniture like couches and
chairs so this that we this this
bill broadens what I'm
specifically and that is not the
key to what constitutes also
good which I think we'll avoid
dedication future and let judges
and know exactly what a debtor's
about the exam.
the third part of the bill which
is.
The homestead exemption that is
the one part one.
Part of the bill that has been
mandated several times over the
last sixty eight years it was
last amended in nineteen
I mean sorry two thousand seven.
Make a homestead exemption the
state sixty thousand for single
person a hundred twenty thousand
for married couple.
When we originally drafted the
bill we we increase the
homestead exemption pretty
substantially but we got some
feedback from the New Mexico
bankers Association and the
independent bankers association
community bank association
basically just concern that if
we raise the exemption too much
that would limit their ability
to loan money in the future
individuals and.
And small businesses and we're
concerned that community banks
are important part of.
Communities New Mexico
especially rural communities we
have one of them that we were
concerned about.
People being able to get loans
in the future so we compromised
increase the homestead exemption
fifty percent sixty thousand to
ninety thousand for an
individual or a hundred and
eighty thousand for
For a married couple and with
the exception where that the
exception Greece's to one
hundred twenty thousand.
If you're over sixty five or if
you disable number fifty five
the reason we did that is
because.
The exceptional by the equity in
the house and.
Elderly people are more likely
to paid off their house to pay
down your mortgage that more
activities so we thought this
was on.
Important provision to make an
exception for people elderly
people to make their exemption a
little higher.
We think this fifty percent
increase.
Is reasonable and will allow
most Mexicans great last major
medicines houses I'll bankruptcy
or if they R. C. budget we try
to with the people went use
their house
our new exemptions that need to
this bill is passed with.
Keep our state in line with
neighboring states like Utah
Colorado and Arizona secretary
exemption I yield a higher
states.
Would be very comparable and.
I think
there's been a study that the
median house New Mexico last
year in two thousand twenty so
for two hundred forty thousand
dollars.
So with these exemptions would
allow the vast majority New
Mexicans to keep their houses
there are bankers it's.
We another provision we put in
this bill is.
These numbers monetary limits on
what you need as far as cars and
homesteads and jewelry will be
adjusted every two years.
Based on the consumer price
index this probably the late.
This will keep on the scent
exemptions up within the with
the economic times as they
changed and also well this is a
need to amend this bill in the
future since it will
automatically be there we ARE
American Justin's every two
years.
based on the consumer price
index.
This bill has the support of the
A. R. P. the center for law New
Mexico Center for well and
poverty The New Mexico legal aid
as well as the New Mexico
Bactris Association in the
independent community bankers
association they get us pretty
broad support after a loss our
compromise additional.
And what I know this is the tax
committee were before we I just
want to let you know that.
The one exception with
exemptions is that there's not a
provided the New Mexico's
ability to collect taxes went to
Akram exemptions to avoid the
ability of the state to collect
taxes which are similar quite
important since committee.
So we would ask the committee to
support this bill is long
overdue and we hope on.
It's widespread support and I'll
be glad to answer any questions
you committee members
Mr chairman members thank you Mr
ivory.
Mr Cutler would you like to add
anything to the presentation.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee and and
this echo and and say very
briefly we are grateful for all
the the opportunity to
collaborate on this legislation
you know at a particular
sections one and two of this
bill
Yes I in all I'll preface that
I'm not a bankruptcy expert
sections wanted to deal with
with that collection of
garnishment particularly and
section one really makes a
change to just update our
garnishment statute so it's it's
connected with the the highest
possible minimum wage right now
that federal minimum wage that's
a little bit of a loophole that
we're closing with this
legislation in the form for
writs of garnishment New
Mexico's actually statutory in
that section two so that's
amended as well again primarily
to make sure New Mexicans are
important to their exemption
rights and also make sure that a
certain amount of income is not
frozen before for worker has the
opportunity to to claim
exemption so I'll keep that very
brief and again just one echo
that we are grateful for all the
all the opportunity to work
together on this legislation
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr Cutler and you know
I would be interested in hearing
from the community bankers I
don't know if anyone is here
from the community bankers
association but the.
If so please raise your hand.
Okay I see Mr Walker here.
Mister Walker welcome.
Mister Walker you should be a
panelist.
You should be able to speak.
There you are welcome Mister
Walker.
Your muted.
Sorry Mr.
A good morning they are good
morning.
There's a committee we were glad
to be here with you this morning
I want to thank Representative
Eli for his hard work on this
measure and also want to thank
the applicants who we worked
with on structuring this
compromise so we're very
grateful that we were able to
come together and up and.
Present a bill to you that we
can all support but we think
this is a good compromise so we
think it will protect New
Mexicans at the same time it'll
not to disenfranchise so small
business people in particular in
borrowing money to to start and
maintain their business so
Mister chairman we are we
support the bill and we thank
you so much for the opportunity
to speak.
Thank you Mr Walker
Representative Eli anything else
to add on chairman members the
committee know what we will
stand for questions.
Very well thank you all very
much members of the committee.
Mr chairman then make a motion
at the right time.
Mr Representative Strickler this
is the right time go right ahead
I move it to pass Mr chairman
Representative center yeah I'm
looking at the attendees ninety
five hands up is and I read that
wrong.
No you're not Representative we
have taken public comment on
this bill already okay and so
yeah I I think we we've heard
that we've heard from all the
stakeholders on Monday
Representative Strickler so the
motion should be a do not pass
on house bill thirty six they do
pass on house taxation revenue
committee substitute for house
bill thirty six thank you Mr
chairman I I I move in that
matter.
There we very good able the old
bill and and have approved the
renewable thank in okay fair
enough.
There's a motion by
Representative Strickler and
second by by your Chandler.
Elaine please call the roll.
Representative Crowder.
Yes.
Beaker egolf.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
For.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott yes.
Representative Stansbury.
Yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
Speaker Eagar.
Representative Lujan.
Yes.
Artworks that that that.
Your question Chandler.
Just.
Chairman Martinez.
Yes.
Seronegative.
Thank you Elaine by a vote of
twelve in the affirmative zero
negative Representative Eli you
have a do pass on.
House taxation revenue committee
substitute for house bill thirty
six thank you and thank you
experts for you time thank you
so much for that Mr chairman and
members are almost gone to Mr
speaker thank you Mr.
Thank you very much Jim.
No demotions please know the
motions.
Thank you enjoy your day.
We are going to move one to
house bill fifteen folks
let me see this.
This is chairman yes
Representative Lujan
House Bill fifteen.
I know we have Representative
Lujan here.
Representative Lujan do you are
you putting this honor is
reserved just putting it on.
I don't know where
Representative Ortez is I
haven't had any communication
that she wasn't going to be here
today but happy to fill in if
necessary.
She just popped in read as you
were saying they're here right
here all right.
Go all right.
Thank you thank you.
House Bill fifteen we I believe
we have a committee substitute
is that correct Representative.
Yes would you like me to read
that out.
Give me a second let me get
Citrix.
Hold on one second.
Well the members can go to their
Citrix and
What.
Okay good to read the number
please.
Well that's two one nine six
nine nine point four.
God.
Everybody have the substitute in
front of them.
Okay.
So before you begin your
presentation Representative let
me
They make sure the committee has
their substitute you
Representative Harper do you
have that you see it good okay.
Can you move please.
This is due for discussion.
Sorry chairman to create
equipment on mute yes out of the
committee substitute for
discussion.
Very well Representative work
this up please proceed with a
presentation Regeneron go we'll
go ahead welcome good morning.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I actually I do
have two witnesses expert
witnesses here as well well I I
don't know if they've been moved
over.
That would be ten people corn
and Herrell Trujillo.
Repeat the names again.
For the record and Herrell
Trujillo.
Well right to submit.
Thank you.
K. C. Mr through he'll.
And maintenance people court
okay very good.
Please proceed Representative.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee so this bill HB
fifteen replaces the sustainable
buildings tax credit from twenty
fifteen that tax credit has been
instrumental in transforming the
market for new buildings in New
Mexico our New Mexico energy
conservation code was recently
updated and now we need to adopt
a twenty twenty one sustainable
buildings tax credit to make
sure that the tax credit is
given to those who go above and
beyond the new building code so
this bill does two things it
raises the requirement for the
tax credit for those new
buildings so that only the most
efficient sustainable buildings
being built qualify the M. this
affects us to meet the new
standards for two highest the
two highest levels of lead and
the to the top two for builder
in New Mexico to qualify new
buildings are required to be
easy and broadband access ready
secondly and this is a big
change from twenty fifteen it
allows for existing homes that
improve energy efficiency to
also qualify for the tax credits
low income taxpayers will
receive double credits so they
can make what can be very
expensive investments in energy
efficient products and and
systems and reap the benefits of
lowering their energy use and
lower in their sales tax credits
of this type are the best way to
move the market towards the very
best energy efficiency and
sustainable technologies and
building sites so now it's time
to increase the levels that
qualify for the tax credit over
and above the building code
requirements.
And the time is right now to
give middle class and lower
income New Mexicans the tools to
make their existing home
including manufactured homes
more efficient and safe which
will which will result in lower
utility bills many clean energy
jobs in enter are in energy
efficiency and this bill
particularly with the tax credit
for existing homes will provide
jobs for those installers of
windows and doors insulation
water heaters and heat pumps
we've done a lot of work since
the last committee and have an
amended the bill to include
input from industry on this bill
now includes the top two
standards for lead and build the
New Mexico and we've increased
the amount of credits available
for manufactured homes with that
we've gained the support from
the US green building council
the American institute of
architects and manufactured
homes This bill has an annual
cap a sensitive twenty twenty
seven and includes annual
reporting requirements with that
that we stand for questions from
the committee.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative work
best Representative Lujan
any anything to add.
Representative Karen.
I yes meeting.
I appreciate.
I appreciate the time because
this is this is this is this is
the time for us to take action
and what you can do what we need
to do and creating some four
ability around
the issues around the building
for.
More environmentally sound
building and I support this bill
obviously a hundred percent and
I would ask the committee to
support this bill as well thank
you thank you.
Thank you representatives.
What makes as we as we announced
on Monday.
Public comment we're gonna have
a one minute thirty second time
limit per speaker.
And there is a.
Timer that will appear on your
screen as you speak and it'll
kind of give you a little cut
down and then it'll tell you
when time has elapsed.
So give that a give it a second
to get that set up.
And they will go to public
comment we're gonna go to folks
who are in support of House Bill
committee substitute fifteen.
In support of house bill
fifteen.
First on my list is it do not
the four year.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr deployer.
You are muted and we cannot hear
you.
I.
Okay we're gonna move on to the
next speaker.
Stephen hello.
Yes good morning my name is
Steve Hale I am a custom home
builder and program director for
bill Greene New Mexico
I think maybe in the wrong
category as I am of posing this
bill we have tried to work with
the sponsor.
Sir I'm gonna we we are doing
comments in support I'm gonna go
to comments in opposition in
just a couple minutes okay so
what do you hold your thoughts
and I'll come back to you.
Thank you.
Yes.
Next in support I have the.
I have automatic interior I I
don't have a allow us to please
folks if you can put your first
and last name that would be very
helpful but I'll make an
exception McEntee here go ahead.
Well on the good morning
chairman Martinez thank you my
name is Cynthia Figueroa
McIntyre I'm president of the
American institute of architects
New Mexico and we wanted to
Voice our support of this
important bill.
this piece of this bill aligns
with
our goals for our environmental
stewardship
What including supported energy
efficient and resilient design
solutions it supports equitable
communities and we believe that
it will enhance economic
opportunities and help find jobs
in our state as well as the very
important part of lowering
carbon emissions and the impact
that building building
construction has on our
environment we also believe that
it's
Supportive at a national level
with
Brianna Bivens build back better
initiatives and we think that
this will serve our state long
term to help.
Improve our overall environment
and then control the effects of
climate.
Very good miss McIntyre thank
you for being here this morning.
Next in support of house bill
fifteen we have Jennifer gun be.
Go ahead Jennifer good morning.
There.
Yes wonderful thank you Mr chair
and members of the committee my
name is Jennifer can be I am the
US green building council's
state and local advocacy manager
USGBC is a nonprofit
organization dedicated to
transforming the way buildings
and communities are designed
built and operated our flagship
green building system leadership
in energy and Bible design or
lead has been embraced across
the world including by New
Mexico sustainable building tax
credit on behalf of our members
and credential professionals
across New Mexico you should be
C. wishes to express its support
for house bill fifteen as
amended in this committee
substitute we greatly appreciate
the state our team for listening
to the community of building
professionals as well as the
users of this tax credit and
making the adjustments reflected
in a committee substitute we
applaud the state for their work
to address affordability and
housing and the need to advance
the built environment towards
next year we look forward to
working with you in the
legislature to advance this
legislation that will provide
real benefits the residents
throughout New Mexico thank you
for your time and allowing me to
share comments and our support.
Thank you Mr and being.
Next in support of house bill
fifteen Stephanie Han Amado.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee thanks for
hearing my comment today I'm
Stephanie hunt Amato I'm from
Los crucis and the assistant
director of a nonprofit science
educational organization I'm
also a volunteer on the steering
committee at three fifty New
Mexico three fifty New Mexico
supports HB fifteen the
sustainable buildings tax credit
there is an enormous opportunity
to make great strides in
reducing emissions with building
efficiency while not disrupting
people's way of life improving
the energy efficiency of new and
existing buildings could deliver
at least a third of the emission
reductions we need to meet our
goals.
Plus this update to the
sustainable tax buildings credit
would make it possible for
myself and many other homeowners
in New Mexico to help with this
effort as the employee of a
nonprofit which is a field that
does not typically have very
high pay I can tell you that
this incentive would go a long
way in making it possible for my
family to make our home more
efficient although we've
invested in rooftop solar we
would like to go further and
upgrade the heat pump systems
for home heating and water.
We have an electric vehicle but
haven't been able to invest in
making our home very ready the
up front costs for these are two
great even though we know the
help us save on electric bills
in the long term so please I
urge you to vote yes on H. B.
fifteen today and thank you for
the opportunity to share this
information thank you all for
your service to the people of
New Mexico.
Thank you for being here this
morning in support of house bill
fifteen.
Camilla fiddleman.
Good morning Camilla.
Good morning thank you so much
for the opportunity chairman and
members of the committee I'm
speaking on behalf of the Rio
Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club representing over thirty
five thousand members and
supporters around the state we
want to frame our support for
this effort and this bill around
the great success that the
building industry commission and
division thanks to the
governor's
executive order on Climent maybe
over the summer bringing us up
to the current energy
conservation building codes of
two thousand eighteen after bins
being stuck at two thousand nine
for so many years and we think
the update to this tax credit
helps aligned state government
policy in the best way possible
we also support the way in which
the bill provides tax credits
for installation of the fission
product information products in
existing homes and small
commercial buildings that will
help the average New Mexicans
lower their monthly energy
burden by lowering their utility
bills helping to fight climate
change by reducing the emissions
from operating the building at
the home and improving community
health through reduced health
impacts from the missions we
also strongly support that
aspect of the bill that focuses
on low income provisions
including double credits that
are refundable for low income
New Mexicans are Feb and
affordable housing thanks so
much.
Thank you for joining us this
morning.
Next in support of house bill
fifteen can Hughes.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee on can Hughes
representing the coalition of
sustainable communities New
Mexico this morning.
I manage the residential portion
of the tax credit program for
twelve years and community
department for a retired and I
can testify that the purpose of
sharing an example of good
public policy.
That is a tax credit programs
change the billing
administrative practices and
homebuyers decisions towards
more efficient homes.
Of that otherwise would have
been built.
With the twenty twenty adoption
of new building codes the tax
credit now and it needs to move
forward and raise the bar what
deserves a tax credit this bill
does that.
I'm especially glad to see the
bill offers refundable tax
credits for lower income
households and continues to
offer tax credits for those
living and then by manufactured
homes for what every one of
every six New Mexicans little.
Thank you for your support
Energy rhodopsin of the house
bill fifteen.
Thank you very much.
Mark wren good morning welcome.
Good morning Mr Chairman can you
hear me.
Yes Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee on mark Duran
Representative the manufactured
and modular home industry in New
Mexico specifically The New
Mexico manufactured housing
association I speak in favor of
house bill fifteen point
inclusion of manufactured and
modular housing in the bill Mr
chairman
manufactured and modular homes
have been included in the STTC
legislation since its original
passage I think back in twenty
thirteen working with the
Senator Wirth.
With one objective and that is
to be included because we think
it's fair that people of all
income levels provide last
expensive housing should be
included in these type of green
opportunities and so it's really
our policy of position that.
Any bills that include many
and modular housing in these
green building initiatives as
house bill fifteen does of that
we support that legislation for
the reasons I mentioned so for
those reasons we support house
bill fifty thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you very much Sir.
Next we have Amy Miller in
support of House Bill Clinton.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Amy Millar and I'm
representing the southwest
energy efficiency project and
encourage all of you to vote in
support of house bill fifteen.
This bill has many benefits it's
about protecting the environment
it's about helping New Mexicans
save on energy bills and build
upon our of all being clean
energy economy.
This bill also build upon
something that New Mexico is
done well in the past and that's
transforming the market for
energy efficient buildings it
again encourages builders to
meet a high bar in building the
most efficient new buildings
possible but also for the first
time includes work on existing
homes and buildings something
that is so critical here in New
Mexico always has been critical
but even more in these
challenging times thank you for
your consideration of this
important because.
Who are.
Thank you for being here next in
support of house bill fifteen
page not welcome.
All.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Paige knight and I am here
representing New Mexico voices
for children to stand in support
of house bill fifteen I want to
thank the sponsors for this
legislation which we believe
makes some much needed updates
and improvements to the
sustainable building tax credit
and offers the right incentives
to create a market for more
energy and water efficiency and
reduced emissions which we know
is so important to protect our
environment and improve
community house we also if your
sheet the increased credit for
New Mexicans with lower incomes
so that more families can
benefit from this credits energy
efficient homes and reduced
emissions so I urge your support
for house bill fifteen thank
you.
Thank you for being here this
morning.
Next we have Stewart what's
welcome.
Good morning Stuart.
You are muted.
Is that better can you hear me
now we can hear you now okay I'm
sorry I thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee for
the right to speak my name is
Stuart Watson tire position in
Albuquerque a longtime resident
of New Mexico.
You know the world's major for
the past hundred years or more
you can meet and separates and
for the last fifty years people
being warning about the need to
make changes and finally now the
environment is making the front
page no takes is all to make
efforts to reverse the course of
this damage House Bill fifteen
is a drop in the bucket and we
will need to add all the drops
we possibly can I support that
we make this effort to advance
this legislation I support the
statements made in positive of
this bill and for the second
time do not say much more thank
you for your time and efforts
and service one step at a time
for the sake of the plants that
we all need to live together on
a support and hopefully you will
all support house bill fifty
thank you.
Thank you very much Stewart for
being here let's go to.
John buddy yeah welcome in
support of house bill fifteen.
Good morning Mr chair are you
able to hear me.
Yes go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is John by
the other I am an architect
practicing here in Santa Fe New
Mexico been in practice for over
twenty seven years now in New
Mexico I am also a member of the
American institute of architects
A. I. New Mexico chapter as well
as the national chapter of the
American institute of architects
I'm here to speak in favor of
House Bill fifteen this is
stable building tax credit as it
aligns with our national
statement of values in reference
to climate action it also
clearly states that we stand for
a sustainable future at the time
when the world is feeling the
damaging effects of carbon
emissions in the atmosphere the
A. I. A. continues to advocate
for policies policies that
protect the environment that is
why we advocate policies that
lead in energy efficiency carbon
in new car carbon efficiency and
carbon neutral buildings so I'm
here to speak in favor of house
bill fifteen and ask for your
consideration of this is stable
building tax credit at this time
thank you.
Thank you for being here.
John Wishart.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members thank you for
your time my name is Josh wisher
with protests the immediately
professional license architects
in principle and our local cons
consultancy for I also hold
elected positions are community
including the American institute
of architects Albuquerque
chapter.
In the associated general
contractors of America
construction leadership council
steering committee I'm speaking
today on behalf of myself as a
private citizen of New Mexico
sustainable building tax credit
is really important incentive
that encourages the development
of energy efficient buildings in
Mexico directly stimulates our
industry.
As a licensed professional I
have seen first hand how this
tax credit supports include
contributes to a healthy economy
that is good for both our
environment and for the people
it is my hope that this bill
continues to inspire builders
designers and stakeholders by
seeing a direct benefit well
indirectly lowering carbon
emissions footprints
contributing to better air
quality and reducing energy
costs well please consider
approving also fifteen for all
of New Mexico and thank you for
your time this morning.
Thank you for your time we
appreciate it.
Next in support of house bill
fifteen step be wise to bird.
Good morning good morning Mr
chairman and committee members
on behalf of three fifty New
Mexico rural advocacy group we
are strongly in support of house
bill fifteen which will save
homeowners money and reduce
greenhouse gases from buildings
as rural residents we
particularly commend the
sponsors for.
The including broadband access
ET readiness and net zero water
and also for manufactured homes
in the bill speaking personally
as someone who is installed heat
pumps which are keeping us nice
and toasty on this cold day and
an Eevee charger I also applaud
the tax credits that will
provide these features for
existing homes and I'm glad that
this bill will extend the same
opportunities to low income New
Mexicans thank you very much.
Thank you for being here next in
support of house will fifteen
Charles good marker.
Good morning Charles.
Charles good morning united good
morning sorry Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you very much for this
opportunity want to thank the
sponsor or Representative Ortez
I'm speaking on behalf of the
policy solutions to this morning
to encourage you to support this
bill
it.
R. S. particularly because of
the equity provisions within it
where are the tax credits for
low income New Mexicans are
actually double
that for other income groups so
it does address a major concern
that has been raised by a lot of
folks focused on equity that
some of the environmental
measures being taken are just
gonna support people and some
income losses over others this
obviously does not do that it
does provide equity and
accountability and one other
little point in that regard the
electric vehicle hook up
provisions I think that's very
important across the board it
would apply to all the homes
this is been stated mobile homes
and others so that and that's
important for equity to because
as the major manufacturers
across the nation like General
Motors by twenty thirty five
every single car they're gonna
make as will be electric vehicle
so we wouldn't this will help
every New Mexican to not be left
behind as the situation changes
thank you very much.
Thank you for being here
Charles.
Next we have have yet or one
though.
Good morning Sir.
Good morning.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak I am the co chair of the
American institute of architects
committee on the environment New
Mexico chapter I stand on the
personal level in support of H.
B. fifteen our members are
design professionals university
educators and manufactured
representatives committed to
providing healthy and safe
environments for New Mexicans we
congratulated governor Lujan
Grecian.
And the construction industry
commission for moving from the
two thousand nine two the twenty
eighteen international energy
conservation code for the state
tax credits rightly should apply
to construction that goes beyond
COVID and incentivize these type
of healthy building put on
there's investors and developers
we particularly favor
incentives for low income New
Mexicans and existing building
retrofits thank you again for
the opportunity to participate
in these wonderful democratic
process.
Thank you Sir for being here and
and thank you for
you just made my heart jump a
little bit by thanking us for
allowing you to participate in
the democratic process that's
exactly what we do what we do
and that's why we're doing it
this way it's too bad we can be
in person it's always better to
get shake hands but for now this
this is what we're gonna be
doing so thank you for making
the time for us.
in support of house bill
thirteen let's see I've got a
couple more hands so that will
go to opposition Carla.
Creating for and I'm sorry fight
is pronounced your name Carla
crew have for.
Thank you Mr chair of I still
don't know how to pronounce it
correctly so no worries Mr chair
members the committee on behalf
of the centre for CENIC policy
we support H. B. fifteen the
sustainable building tax credit
we believe that this legislation
will help lower the energy bills
to low and moderate income New
Mexicans as well as aligning
with our environmental goals and
we also commend the sponsors for
writing provisions that not only
meet qualifications but go
beyond and there you to saving
for families and I also want to
echo the previous does a fire
and think that the chair for
making always that the committee
such a welcoming space thank
you.
Thank you for being with us.
Last on the list in support of
house with the team is Kristin
fox.
Good morning Mr chair can you
hear me.
We can hear you good morning.
Thank you so much and fantastic
to be here thank you so much for
hearing me
again my name is Kristen fox I'm
a resident of Santa Fe and I'm a
practicing architect I'm also
the elected president of our
local AAA American institute of
architects after a Santa Fe and
I'm I'm here to echo a New
Mexico supportive stance on H.
B. fifteen.
I I want to commend the concept
of equity that are included in
this bill environmental
responsibility should not be
unattainable for those with less
income and H. B. fifteen
recognize this and allowed
people of all income levels to
participate and the
responsibility that we have to
make sure that our impact on the
the earth is minimized.
I also don't want to act out
there that funding five percent
of the electricity produced for
the US is used to power building
so this is the Mexico really
leading the charge and I'm very
proud of the state for
considering the well again I'm
growing in my wholehearted
support for each be fifteen
thank you so much.
Thank you for being with us
let's move on to those in
opposition to house bill fifteen
and I'm gonna look for the
gentleman who inverted Lee
jumped into the.
Support latest Sir if you could
raise your hand again that would
be super helpful.
I see three hands in opposition
so far there you there you are
Steve hello I'm gonna call you
first since you were first on
the other list.
Mr Steve hello you are on the
line.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members and thank you
for allowing me to speak.
Really would like to support
this bill but as revenue it is
truly unsupportable.
And of I would like to go a
little bit into what is going to
happen this bill will cut up
between eighty and ninety
percent of the single family
homes that are currently allowed
under this program and let me
tell you a little bit about a
green building program.
The first level which the Energy
code of covers is energy
efficiency so think of this is
the building shell the outside
walls and the ceiling roof.
That's what the energy
efficiency bill of our energy
efficiency code covers in New
Mexico with bills building brain
we take the next layer which
would be indoor air quality if
you're gonna make a type
building you need to have proper
ventilation and exhaust that
goes to the outside and then the
next layer which is perhaps the
biggest difference concerning
energy efficiency as a
performance level so we take not
just the building shall we take
the equipment high efficiency
for heating and air conditioning
and we also look at water
efficiency which is extremely
important in New Mexico.
very last layer then would
consider renewables so what you
have the building correct you
have indoor air quality and you
have the mechanical equipment
correct then is the time you go
into renewables and the photo
will pay this is just but one
portion of the many important
things for building bring.
Thank you.
Thank you for being with us here
Sir.
Next on the list in opposition
to house bill fifteen is Laura
Vassar.
Good morning.
Good morning thank you chairman
Martinez and Representative
Ortez and committee for bringing
this bill however I have six
talking points that I want to
speak to on this bill I am
opposed to it as it is written
while I applaud the intent for
it here's here's my six point
some would go really fast first
of all there is no crisis in the
sustainable building tax credit
as indicated in the FY are
brought that we're gonna pay
people to build coal to code as
Mister Hale expressed there's
much more to our robust bill
green New Mexico program and the
programs and just energy saving
measures secondly we have a
program federal program that
also got more money is added to
it for the low income non
affordable housing or affordable
housing as is expressive actors
over twenty five million dollars
available with twenty twenty one
and that's just federal monies
so those are all there to help
the low income non affordable
housing is a very good program
has done an amazing amount of
help for both manufactured
housing and low income of folks
that are looking to increase
energy efficiency secondly this
bill focuses exclusively on the
energy saving and cherry pick
manner which is like misters Mr
health that is illogical to
consider without other aspects
of the building science where
with we would in fact making the
homes.
Possibly unhealthy with air
quality except and I still got a
few more I'm gonna go a long we
had absolutely zero help for
existing homeowners low income
or not is this bill as written
and factors are we done did
allocation of our money's
because utilities paper a bunch
of these aspects as well there's
still confusion over the bills
the way it's written now in the
legislation it talks about
thirty and forty percent of
threshold for being able to
address this this utility point
so in essence the way the bill
is written I cannot support this
and this will do zero help for
existing homes nine hundred and
seventy three thousand in the
state of New Mexico they will be
helped by like heap though so I
think our funds in New Mexico
could be better spent elsewhere
thank you very much I apologize
for going all thank you we
appreciate your time let's go to
Jack
me Mellark and I apologize I
butchered your name Jack Miller.
German good morning Jack mark
representing New Mexico home
builders association we are
opposed to this bill we believe
the concepts addressed in the
bill do have merit but the way
they're addressed we believe
just simply won't work.
instead of helping the concept
that everybody is talked about
and being so successful in
supporting we believe the bill
as currently drafted and will
actually ruin the program.
I would like to say that highly
efficient homes that never get
built it just misses the point
and we believe that's what's
going to happen with this bill
we stand ready to continue
trying to work with the sponsors
and the proponents to get this
right but at this point this
bill is a problem in the round
would we think it'll be very
detrimental instead of helping
thank you.
Thank you for being with us next
on the list is Adam Walker good
morning.
Good morning Adam.
Sorry can you hear me now I
apologize yes we can hear you
thank you Mr chairman as I was
saying on mute.
I am a hers raider and green
verifier amongst other things.
So I I certify the phones right
I I go out and do third party
testing on the sums to make sure
the builder says they're doing
what they're going to be doing I
believe this bill is well
intentioned.
It is misguided it's going to
have the unintended consequences
of.
Leaving the especially the new
home stock in New Mexico less
energy efficient
by dropping the sober levels out
of the single building tax
credit one huge misconception is
that.
This you know that the state
adopted the twenty eighteen code
therefore discover levels are
just on par with code.
As is been discussed by the
previous people who oppose this
bill.
That's simply not the case even
with energy efficiency what the
twenty eighteen code does not
address is mechanical equipment
so you can put in eighty first
eighty percent efficient
furnaces boilers that kind of
thing you cannot do that was
sober you have to the silver is
is way above the bar even with
the new code and you have water
efficiency you have right on
litigation you have indoor air
quality there's so many things
and it for me I think the big
thing is third party testing I
go in and I failed I think is
yes and and that means they each
got contractors to go back and
fix the stuff with with this
bill and so many homes dropping
out of this program.
People like me are not going to
go back go back and yes these
homes to make sure they're being
billed as stated again I think
it's going to it's gonna be very
harmful to the overall energy
efficiency of Mexico homes I
have no doubt thank you for your
time.
Thank you next on the list in
opposition to house bill
fifteen.
I believe this is the home
builders association of central
New Mexico H. B. A. R. CNM let's
see if I got that right welcome
good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman my name
is John Garcia executive vice
president home builders
association central New Mexico
HB fifteen attempts to move the
bar for encouraging builders to
build energy efficient homes as
the original parent build it
years ago now the state is
passed the twenty eighteen code
and we agree we need to change
the values and the
sustainability tax credit
incentive for builders is good
and it did move the market as
many have said before however we
are concerned that raising the
bar B. on what is practically
achievable really may work
against the legislative intent.
We had good discussions with the
proponents of this bill and.
You know given the current
values it they just won't meet
the mark no one will get credits
including low income housing
Oakes among others so we're
willing to work with the Sanchez
moving forward but at this point
we which we stand against this
bill there's new monies attached
to this bill so I'm assuming it
will probably go to to table it
at the at the least but we help
you do not support the bill
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you for being with us next
is Ryan Elliott.
Good morning.
Good morning Ryan.
You need to and we.
Ryan we still cannot hear you.
Okay we're gonna move on to Jane
Whitmire and then we'll come
back to you Ryan.
Earning Jane.
Good morning.
Can you hear me I'm not.
Apparently you can't all right
yes HB fifteen as written will
do much more harm than good and
removes the incentive for
builders to build the much
better homes that are being.
Qualified to build green New
Mexico only for homes at the
silver level.
The current stable building tax
credit helps to reimburse those
builders for expenses at all
levels.
And without that assistance
typically builders install
furnaces and air conditioners
and water heaters as Adam Walker
stated that are at least thirty
to fifty percent less efficient
that equipment will be in those
homes for the next fifteen to
twenty years.
And will not.
Perform at the level that is
required at even the silver
level much less gold and and.
Four eight for homes and and
build three New Mexico homes.
There is other funding available
which I strongly support for
existing homes.
Taking the money from the new
homes program to support
existing homes is redundant and
unnecessary and will compromise
the new homes being built.
For the life of those homes.
As a hers raider and rebuilding
verifier I see.
Pardon me on a daily level.
The effectiveness that these
third party rated homes have
compared to the existing stock
out there including the existing
stock in my own home.
Thank you very much please vote
against this bill as it is
written.
Thank you for being with us
right now only at please.
Go right ahead good morning Mr
chairman and committee.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
I am I'm hers raider also
and agreeing verifier in New
Mexico
I believe that everybody on this
weapon are everybody's hearts
are in the right place but
unfortunately it's going to it's
going to backfire for our state
in a sustainable building.
The way it's written it's going
to be very difficult for any low
income families to purchase a
house the it's the it's you know
able to use these credits.
Therefore they're gonna end up
with the home did that needs the
two thousand eighteen ICC only
which therefore is going to have
a larger carbon footprint and
they're also gonna have larger
and higher energy bills and
water bills
For that matter.
I don't I don't see how anybody
can support this the way it's
written if you guys please
listen to us and do not support
this bill.
Thank you for being with us
that'll be the conclusion of
public comments folks
Representative Ortez reserve
Lujan I apologize but I do not
allow your.
experts to introduce themselves
so I will do that at this time
Mr through he'll and then it's
people corn please briefly
introduce yourselves before we
go to committee for Q. and a on
the bill Mr you people corner
first.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
having me here today I'm Tammy
people corn and the New Mexico
representative for southwest
energy efficiency project or
sweet we are honored to be
working on this legislation with
Representative Ortez and we
appreciate you hearing this bill
this morning we're here for
questions if anybody.
Thank you New Mexico here please
briefly introduce yourself.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
I am I and engineer in the
energy minerals natural
resources department and I
provide technical assistance to
this program thank you.
Thank you for being with us
representatives or doesn't want
anything else to add before we
go to Q. NA.
I think we're okay well we're
ready for the questions thank
you Mr chair.
Okay very very well members of
the committee.
Yeah hold off.
Okay there we go we got to get
that to care
you have the floor thank you Mr
chairman and and I think if you
are Representative Artes and and
Lujan
we are.
You know I I do this myself
I'm I'm I'm mainly only gas cap
but I'm a remodeler and and I.
I understand the goals of this
this adjustment if you will is
kind of a we had a successful
program.
that would pass in twenty
fifteen I I support it then.
This is an expansion of that and
and my my concerns are are with
the builders these guests are on
the frontlines and I work with
construction folks all the time
and in our I wanted to share
with the committee and and with
Representative Ortiz in our
community the same account we
have a lot of old houses and the
and the house is that I work on
our our our were built in the
late fifties and I need a lot of
upgrades you know they need they
need installation that said that
special discount the first thing
that we that we do for energy
efficiency they made
we need to replace single pane
windows which we do in most
cases.
And then we we try to upgrade
the
the pharmacist you know the we
usually have to replace the
furnace
the the air conditioning which
we usually go with swamp coolers
because very inexpensive in our
area they work very well in in
the hot water heaters and so we
try to use high and are you know
high energy efficient what's
happening in our area because of
the pandemic in because of the
shutdown of a lot of businesses.
Mainly the.
retail and and restaurant
businesses and tourism we saw a
great surge in remodeling I I
don't know you know what's going
on the demand for
remodelers is just off the
charts home depot and Lowe's in
our areas are doing booming
business and and would to you
now and selling materials
the the people out there I guess
they have a little extra cash
and they're putting it into
their homes it's kind of it's
just kind of an anomaly
the construction.
The industry is just booming in
our area and we're seeing
similar homes being built to so
as I discussed Mr chairman and
and Representative in the energy
committee that that it really is
important that the kind of get
this right and and really work
with the builders because.
they they know they know that
they know the business very well
and I think that's kind of
what's lacking right now and
also you've asked for an
increase in funding
that needs to be you know we
need to see if we have capacity
in our budget I think the
current the current threshold I
then a year and it's been very
successful.
And I think this new bill as for
additional two million a year
and we're gonna have to see if
we have that kind of capacity
so.
Excuse me for sampling of the
allergies are killing me this
morning and
hope hope everybody else is
healthy I'm sneezing like crazy
but I'm in a safe place I'm in
my office so that's really all I
have a is really not a question
I mean I think the points that
are raised you need to be taken
seriously
and may we have lowincome.
Tax credits that the the PNM and
and the other utilities gas
County New Mexico put in and and
they're very very helpful and
and maybe this just nasal more
work so with that Mr chairman
and and Representative about
yield.
Thank you Representative
Strickler next we have
Representative Montoya.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman and our
representatives
Just a little bit of concern
that the the builders who are
the ones who are are benefit to
great degree from this have have
basically stated that they're
they're against this.
I mean have you had any
discussions with with that group
to try and overcome some of the
objections there and secular now
I'm gonna ask two questions and
and give you the floor to answer
those two and I have a follow up
but that the second question
being
Some of these
What we have been incentivising
in the past has now in many
parts of the state become part
of the building code.
And I'm just wondering why we
would spend money to
incentivize.
Something or or in different
parts of the state point already
mandated I mean just the same
seems like we're gonna use
incentive dollars to try and
dollars to incentivize behavior
if that behavior is becoming
practice.
and requirement.
It just doesn't seem to make
sense to me that we would
continue incentivizing.
When it's it's mandatory
Whoever wants to answer that
would like to hear answers.
Thank you.
Mr chair and representative
Montel a at all answer your
first question and I also want
to open it up to the experts to
give more detail we we've talked
to the folks who were in
opposition at eight and had lots
of discussions about what we
could do to.
To make this bill work for them
and we've we've taken a number
of their suggestions in fact I
think we believe that everything
except for one from hold home
builders association
but I think the the the reason
why they're still in opposition
is sort of is the answer to the
next question really which is
that you a matter of the
incentives you know the these
incentives are through the tax
credits really they they you
know we've talked about moving
them market rate if they make
homes more efficient than what
the code requires we're creating
incentives to make it you make
those homes even more efficient
and and that see you know that's
how these incentives works to
work that's how they work so we
don't want to give an incentive
to you know to to somebody who's
building to code that is just
that doesn't make sense right so
I'd like for Tammy and miss corn
and Mr Trujillo to it to give
some more details about you know
some of the the reasons why we
you know we we could meet all of
the demands and asks from from
all of the builders.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Montoya I agree
with Representative Ortez we
have had extensive meetings with
the home builders in addition to
the architects and other
building professionals that are
now supporting the bill and I
just want to point out so in the
past we've had three levels of
certification that were eligible
for this tax credit with the
changes to the state energy
conservation code we are taking
away the bottom level so we
don't want to incentivize folks
to do what they're already doing
what they're legally mandated to
do so that's the rationale for
this bill only having the top
two tiers of credit ation for
both the bill gray New Mexico
and the the accreditation
programs and there seems to just
be a disagreement about the
purpose of these tax credit.
Modernist I see tax credit is a
way for the government to
incentivize a mover
transformation in the market is
stable buildings tax credit
should be available for the most
sustainable building techniques
require innovation changes in
the status quo I do not believe
it to good use of state funds to
provide financial incentives to
continue using widespread
building techniques state of New
Mexico tech but should not be
considered part of the basic
economic projects being built
the same way they have been
built for years.
Rather than should be providing
builders an incentive to reach
further implement new building
and planning is tax credit
should be a way to get building
projects to increase the state
ability in projects not
underwrite the status quo and
that really is is that
explanation of the difference
between the opponents and the
proponents of this bill.
Thank you for that answer
I'm also wondering if there
should be some.
Price point on a home.
Where we would not incentivize.
I mean I'm I'm in real estate
that's what I do for a living
and as as a Representative
Strickler mentioned of this year
COVID COVID has been amazing for
the real estate market.
people sitting at home staring
at their four walls somehow must
make some sort of
dissatisfaction.
You want to get out and then if
they can't get out to some
different maybe they wanted to
give new home I don't know what
it is but it has been crazy
I know there's no a number of
folks who have been and escaping
some of the big cities and
looking in New Mexico.
In big cities across the country
but the it's my experience.
that the people that I show that
are that are spending a certain
amount of money
on home you know four hundred
five hundred thousand dollars.
These things are built into
those homes already as a matter
of fact if they don't have like
two sources of electricity it's
it's it's a negative point on
that home.
and if it doesn't have energy
efficiency they're just buying a
home at a sub standard in your
mind.
and the water heaters that
they're putting in there are
already super efficient many of
on going with the what our hot
water on demand for just heated
up as needed instead of keeping
a heated the entire time.
A lot of them are are going with
in for heat which you know you
don't have to keep over and over
and over he didn't hold for a
long time in the in in the US
flooring.
So it seems to me there needs to
be.
Some point.
With so many taxpayers New
Mexico not
being wealthy.
To some degree at some degree
these folks who are in the
custom home market.
There's no reason to subsidize
them on this first off they can
afford to pay for it and
secondly they already demanded
in their home so and and then
thirdly from a legislative
standpoint.
It appears to be that we're
doing that we're we're taxing a
group of people.
Who are in a lower economic
category subsidizing that of
people who were gonna pay for it
anyway.
it is is that something very
amenable as a change to this
legislation.
Mr chair representative Montoya
I'm going to let me answer that.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Montoya I agree
with everything you just said I
you know one of the things that
we make sure within this bill it
was in the original bill is
still in this is a two thousand
square foot but limit for new
homes so we are not
incentivizing large you know
mansions those are not something
that we need to be supporting
with state dollars in my opinion
I also want to point out that
the existing credit has mostly
gone to multi family units and
so we want to make sure that we
continue to have this credit for
those multi family units a large
portion of them are are folks
that are low income or moderate
income and so that's been really
a pleasant part of of looking
back and seeing how this credits
going is that the majority is
going for multi family and a
manufactured homes those types
of of structures not new fancy
homes.
Thank you for that the.
Answer.
The.
I don't know if you've priced
home in Santa Fe.
Two thousand square foot home in
Santa Fe or implicit this.
but.
That is not the same as buying a
two thousand square foot home.
In Farmington.
that that price point is double
or triple.
so and and a lot of the folks
were building in in those
locations it's not even a first
home it's it's a second home so
I I still think a some sort of
price point.
might what would be worth it to
add into this just I I
understand that with two and two
thousand square foot home on
average even Albuquerque the
price of two thousand square
foot home the new new
construction is substantially
higher than.
Los crucis
You know it so
it just I want to make sure that
if if we're trying to hit a
certain target that that's the
target we here not to people who
are gonna pay for it anyway and
so I'm not sure if that's
something that that the the
Sanchez could support but that
that is a conversation I'd like
to have maybe offline and make
sure that that we're not
incentivizing people who don't
need incentive some thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Representative Montoya
next on the list as
Representative Romero.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for bringing that
Representative serving in the
bill forward I've got a lot of
feedback and information from
many members of my community
like Representative Strickler
and men's way at you know the
building industry something that
I absolutely interact hunted day
to day basis that's what my
family does so this is an area
that
We know a lot about a group on a
job site so this is important to
me one of the things that I
think and hearing some of the
testimony in a lot of the
feedback as to why this is being
done and I think that gets lost
in some of the conversation is
that
this is about incentivizing the
the proper building up front
which is always going to be an
added cost until the market
excuse me until the market.
Evens itself out on the costs
were more people are buying the
types of goods that we think
will actually create the
the savings at the end of the
day the ten years from now the
over the over the course of time
why that in this investment is
more expensive right now is to
create that savings for a family
over over that period of time
the question is how do we how do
we pay for that right now and
this is what this bill is
actually seeking to do is create
that opportunity and take that
burden off of the the early cost
for for that but looking to
where we've moved from twenty
fifteen to twenty twenty one in
the building industry and we're
we're these materials and what
we're talking about in
reinforcing
Why we've heard from architects
and other folks about why this
is important as is being able to
move the marker on on those
buildings like Representative
Strickler spoke all of the
housing stock in my community is
as well not only is limited in
affordability but it just to it
all together and so Madam R.
excuse me Mr chair
representatives you know can we
talk about why that incentive
exists from white why move the
needle from twenty fifteen to
twenty twenty one and what that
means for for the industry and
where that's where that's headed
and why now is the time to do
that I've heard from our our for
many many folks about why that
is but to to have it just on the
record Mr chair
Representative.
Mr chair representative program
at a at ten you think can speak
as to this.
Mr chair representative Romero
thank you for that question yes
I agree you know I think that we
just last year had a major
update to our state energy
conservation code and that
really brought us forward we run
two thousand nine energy
conservation code levels and now
we are on twenty eighteen energy
conservation code levels that is
a huge job and efficiency and
sustainability for building and
given that job we think that
it's really important to now
I'll make this tax credit go
above and beyond that you
baseline the last thing we want
is for state tax money to be
used to incentivize status quo
or are basically.
Really needing code are are
barely exceeding code so we
wanted to bring this forward to
find a new bar for these tax
credit so that builders are
stretching further and the
feedback we've gotten from the
architects and the USGBC and
folks that use the lead program
is that that is a great move
I will point out in the last say
six years we've had four
thousand four hundred and eleven
search to do think it's given
out under this program and of
those about thirty percent would
have qualified under this new
program so we are moving the
needle forward we just need to
provide additional incentives to
get us there so that we see a
lot more not only homes but
multi family units commercial
buildings all new buildings
really needs reading those
reaching those new levels and
again this bill also includes.
Asians for existing buildings
and existing homes that are very
very important most New Mexicans
live in existing homes and most
New Mexicans do not have the
funds to do the types of
upgrades that we're talking
about in this in this bill
insulation improvements doors
windows heat pumps heat pump
water heaters those are really
important to be able to manage
your energy burden particularly
for low and middle income New
Mexicans and so including that
in this bill we think is a
really important part really
help all New Mexicans reach you
know not only climate goals but
also reduce their pocketbook
expenses every month so that
helps Representative Romero.
Zero Mr chair Representative and
Tammy yes I think when we're
talking about the economics of
how we make this work and why we
have type incentives like this I
think it's important to
understand you know why we're
why we're moving the needle now
on on setting a higher bar for
that and while we've done that
as a state for energy efficiency
I feel like we have to meet that
demand through matching those
incentives
Eight at in the same in the same
way that we're we're we're
trying to push the needle so
thank you Representative Mr
chair representative I've I
support your bill thank you.
Thank you Representative Romero
Representative Harper.
Thank you chairman.
Appreciate the opportunity I
won't take too much time
Representative thank you for
reading the bill forward but
just a couple clarifying
questions and maybe a general
comment.
so it's it's interesting to me
that.
I mean it seems like everyone in
the room
has the same motive the same
goal which is to improve energy
efficiency of of our homes and
buildings you're in the state
To me that.
the two certifying groups weeds
and builder in New Mexico are
posted bills drafted.
And I guess my.
My first question is.
No I believe very strongly that
you know there's a hundred ways
to bake a loaf of bread.
And especially you got people in
the room with the same goal.
There's gotta be a win win.
so Mr chair and representative
can you speak to me about your
engagement twists the certified
groups and is there room
to make this legislation a win
win for everyone.
Mr chair representative for
We have had a lot of engagement
with with the builders and due
to that and and those
conversations we had led to some
amendments which which got a US
green bit of business council
and and the building Council on
board leave a a manufactured
homes on there still some
sticking points with.
What with home builders I I want
Tammy Abraham Herrell to both
talk a little bit about some of
those details of of how you know
why they're not on board and and
what we can do what we have
done.
To get them on board.
Yes.
Representative go ahead Harold.
Mr chairman
Representative just to put a
little bit of perspective on our
database we only had thirty two
homes last year and twenty
twenty that participated in the
programs the major participants
are the corporate taxpayers and
currently the purpose of the
corporate applications were of
course our.
Multi family the twenty seven
percent of those are already
meeting our platinum I think one
of the major concerns is
building a home that is
sustainable you know we should
take a lesson from the last few
days where we've had an
electrical emergency in Texas
has been devastated by that you
know it has shown to we have a
very brittle energy system and
hopefully you know this
improvements in legislation
would help us make a more
sustainable buildings thank you.
Mr chair Representative Harper I
will just quickly go through
some of the changes that we have
done to alleviate concerns from
the home builders if that would
be helpful we did have in the
original bill that we were only
going to go with the top level
of certification for both needed
and they'll bring in Mexico we
heard pretty strongly that they
really wanted to have that
second here in the bill to allow
time for them the market to move
further so we did add that back
in we also change the definition
of the bill green New Mexico
program to something that that
seems to work for those three
New Mexico
and we also extend the time
frame for the twenty fifteen
credits through April first
twenty twenty two we still have
to have it started by the time
that that
that code is the code is being
implemented but we wanted to
give them more time to finish
projects that were started in
that time period because we
heard that that was originally
not enough time so we have tried
very hard to
Legislative responses to each of
the there are concerns that were
raised but again that the
sticking point is whether or not
the third level of certification
should be included in this tax
credit it was in twenty fifteen
the market has moved
substantially and now we feel
that it's time to take off that
third level in just incentivize
with state dollars those top two
tiers.
So Mister chair representatives
and the.
Trujillo and and Mr speaker
point thank you for that I.
Yeah the I guess the you mostly
answered my question the
question is really the
certifying groups not so much
the home are the builders why
the certifying groups are
opposed.
and I think Miss Vigil our new
you got close to answering that
please.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee Representative Harper
so I just want to be clear there
are two types of certification
in the bill one is LEED
accreditation and we did hear
from you STTC that is the group
that does that certification are
in support and the other
certification in the bill is
building New Mexico and that is
where the opposition comes from.
Thank you Mr chair.
I appreciate that.
So
I guess the other question I
have
thank you for sharing what has
been done I think there's a lot
more that could be done I really
I guess I really do believe
there's.
Away for a win win here.
but could you have I heard
testimony saying that
silver is equivalent to code it
is that really true.
Mr chair representative Harper
at this is definitely something
that Mr Trujillo can can speak
to give us some of those
details.
Mr Chairman Representative
Harper
ace a strict analysis would be
needed
But at this point you know it is
somewhat equipment to the twenty
eighteen code they're very
different strategies that are
used a in terms of meeting
requirements that was pointed
out earlier the lead processes
or the rebuild Mexico processes
you know at other things like
information proficiency and
things like that but the Energy
code choose based bottom line
you can always improve things
from the base bottom line when
you build a home to meet code.
Yeah chairman and and
Representative says Mr Keogh.
I don't think we need to have a.
Full in depth analysis my my
readers correct code and we're
still raises that Sobers at
least twenty cent above code at
this point.
so so I don't think it's
accurate to say their equivalent
if you want to say that your
bank twenty percent isn't enough
and you want to only see this
credit for people going to the
next level.
I think that's it.
That's an acceptable thing to
state I don't think it's correct
to say that so over in the
corner equivalent.
So.
So I guess at this point this
does make a quick comment so I
we can.
I move on sheer but folks who
have been on this committee for
awhile though that I like to
call myself an equal opportunity
credit here.
I'm and it it doesn't matter I
can attest to that I can just
long thank you chairman
and maybe I'll go to a little
more that's if we have time
occurs talk about the next bill
on on why have that position.
I really do believe that
The vast majority of incentive
credits do very little to move
the needle and really are are
working in industry.
Thank you know state picking
winners or losers.
That said this committee has
done a very good job the last
several years of making sure
that any credits that you come
out that are incentive type
credits.
That they are well drafted
vetted legislative contained a
sunset clause.
A reporting requirement.
And I guess my my question Mr
chairman and representative is
I'm here to have an opportunity
here got a little time.
to to be able to look this bill
over.
And maybe again talk with
stakeholders.
but do you have a the reporting
requirements and the sunset in
this legislation.
Get Mr chair Representative
Harper we do.
The sunset is twenty twenty
seven.
and we have reporting
requirements as well.
Also so chairman and and
Representative I want to commend
you on that I think that's
that's a great policy
and we've yes sunsets usually
between six seven years or what
we've been targeting so I'm our
our I want to say that's that
puts you're you're doing a
better position we start looking
at all the bills that have a
fiscal impact which ones that
we're going to take off the
table and if you want to
position this even better I
would just encourage you to
again.
Look this over west your your
stakeholders and and
and any other support you can
garner would be helpful.
Or right so that's thank you
very much for Mr chair
representative.
Thank you.
Harper Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman
representatives and experts.
To to the.
To the concept of a cost.
Benefit component.
To the subsidies and.
From the conversation.
That we've got a bit.
The requirements.
And that is now.
Associated costs.
The way the subsidies which is
causing.
Some of these hello.
Builders of these homes and
multi family facility some
heartburn would.
Would
you representative for one of
the experts here to address that
concern.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Scott Tammy would
you like to address that.
Thank you Mr chair members.
A yes I I don't believe that we
have had any heartburn from any
of the multi family or
commercial or manufactured homes
That are included in this tax
credit I'm not sure I completely
understood your your suggestion
that the benefits were
outweighed by costs so and I I'm
not sure I'm answering that
question but I will say that
Most of this of the interested
parties in this bill are
supportive of these changes and
and of continuing the tax credit
at the higher levels.
Let me rephrase of Mr chairman
miss court my questions
particularly with respect to
multifamily.
Issue.
The O. K.
Since the requirements you had
cost of the project.
That may be sensitive to how
much rent you can get at the
rate of return are you able to
establish on.
On the project so to the extent
that.
You've raised costs to the point
where you can.
Raise your revenue string on the
backend of.
Is it possible that the
subsidies are not making out all
of the difference which would
lead to lead to the concern.
Mr chair representative Scott
thank you for restating I think
I have right now so that levels
in this bill for the tax credit
are meant to provide
Large portion of that
incremental cost of building
from status quo to going up to
the highest levels I will point
out that about thirty percent of
the buildings that have got the
tax for the past reach the
higher levels and most of those
were multi family unit so I
don't see any issues with multi
family units reaching the gold
or the emerald levels within
leave a majority of those rules
levels I'm sorry a platinum
levels have been multi family
units so I don't think that
they're having any issues
reaching that.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative
answered all my questions.
Thank you Representative Scott
next we have Representative
calendar.
Thank you Mr chair
representative I appreciate the
conversation today I just have a
couple of follow up questions
and yes Mr chair representative
I seem to be in some alignment
with the representative Lente up
for the second committee meeting
in a row but I also had a
question about where that price
point eight and as many of you
may remember I on third would
share with our previous
character hill in the thirty day
question an electric vehicle tax
credit and part of our big fight
and to be on the floor with
about who we are incentivizing
but those credits apply so while
I appreciate all the
consideration to try to make
sure New Mexicans of different
income program to participate in
matching the value with their
home buying or renting the
decision it's really important
to me that we discussed that a
little further
one eight why you all elected to
not have a rate cap so I I heard
the part about the two thousand
square feet but also again being
here and budget for the session
understand how much money could
be spent on the two thousand
dollar home the can you can you
just explain why you did elected
not to do that and if there's
any room to also put a price cap
and in the in addition to that
thank you thousand where do.
Thank you madam chair.
Mr chair and representative
Kevin I
This bill does have you I really
like about the school so much is
that it has those
those funds available for
existing homes in fort for low
income folks so I mean I I just
I want to address and how how
important that is for us to you
really need a bunch of articles
you know I I don't think we're
completely opposed to a price
cap but I know for sure that
that is definitely not wait a
way for us to get home builders
on that might pose some
challenges there but I'd like
for for Tammy to to give us a
little bit you give you a little
bit more the reasonings why.
The gentleman here this time.
Thank you Mr chair that
we we didn't put one in here
because there wasn't one in the
twenty fifteen bills that is
there the real answer since this
tax credit came into existence
many years ago we the state has
been sent if they wanted to
instead of us smaller buildings
and with that two thousand half
two thousand square foot cat
that has been the mechanism for
doing that again I
am not opposed to a price cap
but I would again echo
Representative Ortez is comments
that they if we're trying to
bring folks together and bring
all the interest interested
parties together I think that is
not going to work for some of
our supporters are some of the
the interested parties I should
say.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative I certainly
appreciated when one of you are
the expert brought the important
question and I think sometimes
we get over that the legislative
process but you're really flesh
out what the purpose of this
legislation is I appreciated
that but I and overwhelmingly
support the intent of what you
are doing I still have been
trying to keep up knowing that
I'm not a builder I've never had
a home build bills but trying to
figure out the key point that
seems to be heart of the debate
here that relate to the silver
level and whether or not that's
already required or whether or
not we did that divide folks to
do with already required but for
me when we talk about what the
purpose of the bill at I've been
sitting with something else and
I'm it's just my my point of
concerns but would love to hear
your flesh this out.
Is it possible that in
Defining this credit to go and
you all have called in your own
own word Mr chair representative
up go to people that are doing
above and beyond that that group
of people become smaller and
smaller when I think about the
overall impact of of building in
New Mexico.
I think about what our
responsibility is to think about
like the greater good and and
how we build a bigger mass of
folks that have building that we
feel more confident about and
have a smaller environmental
impact so just to say that a
different way and and apt get
more the question
in in ensuring the best credit
to really focus on those going
above and beyond are we
potentially creating a situation
somewhere around the discrepancy
under in what section they
actually require and and it
seems like the top of that the
money we heard from the first
couple of people making public
comment that there's things that
are yet part code but matter a
lot in getting the ability to be
efficient though is that a
possibility that that we lose
some of the mask that was coming
along with it credit in order to
incentivize smaller group of
people doing innovative thank
you.
At Mr chair representative
Cadena I think we are we are
expanding and contracting here
you know we are creating
incentives for those who go
above and beyond and they meet
that may have an impact you know
on the number of new homes that
that qualify for this credit but
we're we are expanding the tax
credit for those existing homes
in for that and I think really
importantly for the energy
efficient products on that that
can be installed in existing
homes and and that double credit
for for the for low income folks
so it's you know it's it's a
it's a a tightening of the
circle I think and at least
initially for those folks who
will qualify for the new homes
but really it's an expansion
because those those folks with
existing homes weren't allowed
in before
I want to I'd like for for Tammy
to address address that a little
bit more detail and and the
issue of of silver can you had.
Mr chair representative Cadena I
I do think that there will be
some
shrinkage in the number of
projects that are going to
qualify in the least in the
first couple of years under this
new tax credit I will point out
that this tax credit is sold out
every year and so we have a lot
of demand for it I think that we
have about thirty percent of the
folks that are already building
for these levels and they will
continue to come to get the tax
credit and I expect because we
have set the levels for the gold
certification as such that we
were actually just a suggestion
of the home builders on those
levels that that will provide
incentive for the folks that
were already building it silver
level to increase their
sustainability and go to the
gold level
it should be noted that one of
the benefits of of silver
accreditation which is still a
good thing it's got a lot of
sustainability measures in at
one of the reasons it was
included originally was because
it required things like a blower
door test and up lasting that is
now required in our state code
and so we've raised the bar for
everyone to get much better
homes and now we need to raise
the bar for this tax credit to
provide it for the folks are
going above and beyond and I I
keep saying homes but it's
really multi family units
commercial and homes and so we
see it as as potentially slowing
down this tax credit a tiny bit
so that we're not selling out
every year but we are also
making sure that money goes to
the it that fast the most
sustainable and then again the
inclusion of existing buildings
is really.
I expensive opportunities in
this bill to help you every day
average New Mexicans like us
that are living in existing
homes and help them reduce their
energy use help manage their
energy affordability and also
the chronicles.
Representative Ortez good I
something to that.
With this our credit is
oversubscribed for twenty one
and twenty two and twenty three
we already have plenty of
applications to be taken up in
those years thank you.
Thank you Mr chair
representative are that they
just have one more question to
make sure I'm understanding
that.
I hear the simple but when we
look at the server level most of
what infielder has already now
become code in required but we
also heard the first one or two
public commenters stated a
couple of things on the over.
That connect to the
accreditation that are not
required to encode is there a
small gap between between this
over accreditation and code and
at least in some parts of New
Mexico I just want to be very
accurate about what what's
happening there and then my
follow up to that is is there a
possibility that we will have
left home built to that whatever
that gap is if it exists
without this incentive to back
it up.
Not that I mean Mr chair
representative thank you.
Mr chair representative Cadena
Tammy.
Mr chair representative today
There is there is
the ability the building to
silver right now will choose
whether they want to stop
providing green homes and and I
I'll just so this is on homes
because we're not hearing these
concerns from commercial or
multi family apartment sector.
So the folks are building homes
right now to silver will have to
choose whether to go down to the
the code level or they can go up
to the gold standard and again
we've we've price the gold tax
credits in such a way that
provides all the incentive that
they would need to reach that
next level I'll point out that
the folks that are building to
silver have been building
additional over for several
years and so you know the point
of a tax credit is to help them
get to that next level but it's
not to underwrite them.
Rather so they've been building
silver in the state of New
Mexico the majority of builders
for some time it's time for them
to move to that next level local
level.
Mr chair representative I just
but not quite the question and
I'm very much reporting that
they do I just want to
understand the key point it's
been said that now the builder
accreditation basically matches
what that code I just want to
know that is the exact like
carbon copy match they get
everything at the silver level
also in building code today or
at some of the committee to
express are there a couple of
things that relate to energy
efficiency that are not yet code
across New Mexico and currently
in the silver accreditation
level.
They're not I agree with you on
the the philosophy of how we
incentivize tax credit what the
purposes I just want to
understand if there's a gap
between I think building codes
either statewide or in certain
areas and within the silver
level thank you madam
Representative.
Madam chair representative Kevin
idea that Mr Trujillo can answer
that question
Mr chair representative it's
it's difficult question to
answer now because it really
depends on the level of
development that the bill green
New Mexico program has so if
their current development can
prove you know that it is better
you know then of course is going
to be higher than code but at
this point we don't know that
don't know that she knows that
something that would be it needs
to be studied I hope that helps
answer the question.
Representative Cadena are you
there.
Yes thank you madam chair and
representative I am that and and
that I'm here with local that we
just don't right now thank you
thank you very much speaker
egolf.
Thank you madam chair I have to
say yes I am biased on this bill
because this was legislation
that I first introduced in two
thousand twelve
and have loved the concept
especially as it relates to
remodel and renovation of
existing housing stock that is a
tremendous opportunity for us in
my neighborhood here in Santa Fe
during that can discuss a little
bit Representative Montoya is
comments madam chair.
Only last year it seems like
every block and my neighborhood
has at least two houses under
renovation or remodeling over
the last year and I would love
for it yet the future work on
remodels to have some tax
incentives for them to improve
their energy efficiency I don't
know if it's possible.
Madam chair for lane to let me
share my screen save something I
leave the I have a visual aid
from all the way back refers
presented this bill that I
think.
Would be helpful for the
committee C. is it possible for
so let me share my screen.
The land is that something we
can help the speaker with.
We're certainly gonna try just
promoted to to co host okay so
let's try this.
Okay here you go okay so.
These are these are old numbers
but the principle that that it
illustrates I think is is
helpful this is soums a.
Twenty million dollar tax credit
allocation so we're at a lower
level that the what we did to
generate these numbers is look
at if twenty million dollars
were spent to renovate and
remodel houses to improve energy
efficiency
and these are five year old
numbers that we expected that
there would be about forty six
hundred jobs created you can see
here that in order to get twenty
million dollars of credit you
have to have just over two
hundred eighty million dollars
of construction spending.
I need additional hundred forty
million of induced spending and
then we look at the tax revenue
to the state and local
governments that came from it
and so at a twenty million
dollar level this is the we had
construction spending was over
two hundred eighty million
dollars.
I have for that again in
indirect in these number of jobs
in the total amount of revenue
now.
this is for house bill one
seventy seven had all the same
people supporting it they're
here supporting the bill today.
But I think it it it goes to
show that.
And I met and I and I show this
this graphic because.
I'm sure there's a question from
Representative Montoya about it
do we need to limit the value of
the home in order to look at
this tax credit I would urge
strongly that we not do that are
we not cap based on the value of
the house because the the real
beneficiary of this tax credit
in terms of dollars is not a
homeowner it's the construction
workers and it's the companies
that supply building materials
and is all the folks that do the
work to allow the tax credit to
be claimed.
And we do have it two thousand
square foot limit so if you are
a twenty thousand square foot
four million dollar house you
can only claim a tax credit for
two thousand square feet.
Of a large home in the.
Construction workers the
plumbers the electricians the
carpenters that are doing the
work
are being paid to do work.
Yeah and it doesn't really
matter I don't think if if if we
have and the skilled labor is
working on an expensive house
were modestly priced house the
point is we want those skilled
labors to have good work and and
have a good of a job so I think
to me the square footage
limitations is appropriate but I
I don't think we should get into
the value of the house also
because I think it the value of
the home is very subjective I've
got in the district I represent
some extremely modest homes a
very small size that are valued
in the billions of dollars
because of the fact that they
are on upper canyon road or if
they are on community sometime
there or they are on a seeking
Madre street here and they are
all you know family homes
eighteen hundred square feet not
on two acres and they're
probably going to be valued in
excess of two at three million
dollars.
And yes there may be some
unintended consequence regular
dollar value as well so I would
just encourage as we consider
this
to stick to the two thousand
square foot.
Limitation be mindful that the
it the it yet Lee said the vast
majority of the beneficiaries.
Of this program are the
construction workers
electricians to plumbers and not
really the homebuyers or
homeowners and I do think the
question about you know a silver
need is it additional ready to
be incentivized I think that's a
good question to ask I course
don't know the answer is silver
doesn't need to be incentivized
and we should have it we should
will those funds consumers the
cap tax credit we should madam
chair have those funds available
for those who are getting to the
gold and platinum levels yeah we
don't want to take money that
could be used incentivize people
going to the highest lead levels
it will it take money they could
be going they're given HBO
they're getting a tax credit for
doing what the law requires them
to do.
And madam chair I think chairman
Martinez explained to the
sponsors that we have built like
this you know get temporary
table and rolled and so as we
roll this is we look at rolling
this into the overall tax
package maybe this sponsor could
get this information
from some of the.
Builders to support the bill on
your hand assessor that silver
Level tax credit is some thank
you madam chair for the time and
are for to supporting this as it
enters into hopefully our tax
package is what are the
committee later on in the
session thanks thank you for
those comments I do not see any
other hands raised and I believe
we're ready for a motion and the
motion I think should be frame
something along the lines of a
do not pass on house bill
fifteen.
In a temporary table on
taxation and Revenue substitute
etcetera etcetera so anyone
interested in making helping us
with the motion here.
And I just met the motion you
just may madam chair.
The.
But.
Madam chair I I want to if we're
not can if we if we're not gonna
do pass on the substitutes
a do not pass on the bill will
have I think the unintended
consequence of killing the bill
for the fire station our.
Not tension Mr.
I think I think we we just do it
separate cable on the bill and
and we can have the committee
staff
you wear that as you look at the
overall tax package that they
would consider the language in
the substitute.
Thank you Mr speaker I thought I
was being very clever without
objection.
So I'm happy to entertain a
motion to temporary table house
bill fifteen.
So.
There is second.
I will say.
I believe the motion was made by
Representative Lujan on and it
was seconded by speaker egolf
Elaine would you please call the
roll.
Representative covenant.
Yes.
Speaker.
Yes.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lujan.
Yes.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Scott yes.
Representative Stansbury.
Yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
The term Martinez is
representing another bill at
this time so that means we have
twelve in the affirmative zero
on the negative.
Great.
The bill will be temporary
tabled on we are now on house
bill two seventy eight
Representative Harper are you
prepare to present today.
So so madam chair I
but I'm also happy
the way to the next committee
meeting.
I I don't expect us to take a
lot of time but I wanted to make
sure we all freshen real answer
ask questions so I'll defer to
you.
Well with that said then I'm
happy to roll the bill to our
next meeting and that's in line
with your desire is.
Right right so we have finished
our is agenda are there in any
other business that we need to
address the lane or others.
All right this meeting is
adjourned thank you thanks for
your participation today.
