Okay.
Okay.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Ortez here.
Representative Scott.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Townsend.
Thanks chair kidding yeah.
chair let's think it.
What we have for important we
get Representative Scott as a
special guest doing this morning
thank you for what you Mr
chairman
Senator.
This is a student at sea tac.
Limitations
and halls she is
What is mechatronics.
Which has something to do with
one.
She wants to go to college.
That's the.
This morning the check up north.
I hope you enjoy your time and
enjoy the fantastic knowledge
you'll be soon gaining from our
presentation this morning as as
mentioned last week of my my
intent in this committee is to
continue to be as transparent as
possible give everybody this
very analyst committee members
everybody here update as much as
I can in advance on what bills
we would be here for the week
and so without further ado I
just want to have as federation
at for our information here on
the on the panel
I have Wednesday and Friday
bills are going to be here so if
you want to jot these down feel
free we have on Wednesday house
bill thirty two
eloquence date household thirty
eight will be heard two bills
that.
On Friday we will then go to the
house bill sixty seven.
And that house bill ninety nine.
It'll be for for Wednesday and
Friday of this week okay and if
there any questions and and
those of you that are on this
committee that ask to our
requests to roll your your bills
give me a holler let me know
when you want to reschedule
those will get you back on on
top of this you know do we begin
but until I hear from you all
just considerable and that will
be of that the time is
appropriate okay so that being
said we do have a presentation
Mexico tax policy all of you
should have your presentation in
front of you and I are.
We are welcoming folks from the
LFC and the taps and Revenue
Department cabinet secretaries
in morning reinterment good
morning members of the
committee.
Well if if I could have and the
floor is going to be your but if
you can introduce yourself and
then the floor is yours two
budget presentation for the
morning of the day after that's
what questions and they will
come back and then we can have a
live Q. and a half okay perfect
can you hear me is this Mike on.
Okay perfect so I'm Jennifer I
mean a condom instead the LFC we
also with us here is meant for
is to keep the contest at the
LFC and secretary Schardin
Clarke at taxed Rav so I think
Ismael's gonna kick us off.
Mr chair just checking to make
sure Richard that made me come
in a little late so.
I think I'm gonna kick us off
here if we'll just trying to
slide to this the agenda of what
we're gonna be speaking about
today.
And we're gonna start off just
in general talking about New
Mexico's revenues if you want to
turn to slide four.
This is a pie chart showing FY
twenty twenty four estimated
revenues as estimated by the
consensus revenue estimating
group so frequently if you
attend our hearings on the
revenue projections you'll hear
a lot about the consensus
revenue estimating group it's a
best practice nationally to have
both legislative and executive
branches come together to
develop an estimate for the
revenues which is the basis for
the budget for you all in the
coming year and that's made up
of economists from the taxation
and revenue departments the
department of transportation the
department finance
and administration and us at the
LFC and here's the make up of
your state general fund tax
revenues here and in general I
would say states have typically
a three legged stool they have
personal income taxes sales tax
and property tax you can see New
Mexico has treated property tax
for oil and gas taxes primarily
so about a third of our general
fund revenues here coming from
the G. R. T. or the sales tax.
For the first time New Mexico's
history the next largest share
these oil and gas revenues
director oil and gas revenues
and then after that is income
taxes making up about a quarter
and then a really other unique
feature of New Mexicos revenues
are are investments these are
the land grant permanent fund in
the severance tax permanent fund
which make up almost fifteen
percent of general fund revenues
most states don't have that type
of revenue stream I find.
Interesting for many reasons but
the way I think about it when I
think about it from a tax lines
is this is actually fifteen
percent of the revenues that
don't have to come from taxes on
New Mexicans right so our tax
levels can be fifteen percent
lower for the equal spending
level because of these
investments and that's obviously
a.
Benefit to New Mexicans.
Okay so now we'll go sort of
line by line on these revenue
streams if you want turn to
slide five.
First covering gross receipts
tax as I mentioned the largest
revenue and the general fund and
it's.
Mexico's in it in a unique
position that are gross receipts
tax it's very broad based unlike
many other states it applies to
most goods and services in
general that can be a good thing
because it can mean that our our
tax level can be much lower
because it applies to a lot more
transactions.
did Chris receipts tax.
Is split into a state share and
all local shares so the state
shares you all know if you turn
to slide six.
Is.
At five percent right now due to
the first G. R. T. rate cut in
forty years that happened last
year and there will be another
point one two five cut coming in
the future here.
In the municipality though we
also just send one point two two
five percent of our state share
to the municipality for activity
occurring in that area so you
just spell your state share
right now is actually three
point seven seven five percent
and again it'll go down by point
one two five next year.
In the remainder of the county
or in out of state receipts
though R. G. R. T. rate is five
percent and you'll see that.
When you staff the local options
on top of the state options the
highest rate right now is nine
point four three seven five
percent another recent change in
gross receipts taxes we
currently do what's called
destination sourcing instead of
what we were previously doing
which is origin sourcing what
this means is the tax is applied
to the destination of the good
or service and not the location
of the state or the origin of
it.
Another interesting quirk
because our R. G. R. T. applies
to services we have something
that other states may not face
and this is what we help here
meeting so when I sell a service
to a business the page here to
to me maybe that business sell
their service to another
business in the page here to on
that and then eventually by the
time it gets to the consumer
gets had a G. R. T. pure
maintenance on top of itself and
raising the effective rate of
that tax on those transactions
so that's something that I'm
sure you will talk about more
and and Jennifer will cover in
her slides.
Hold harmless General also cover
this in her sites but with the
elimination of the deduction of
G. R. T. on food and medical we
provided a distribution to local
governments in order to help
them hold harmless from the
reduction in that revenue so
that's another interesting
feature of the gross receipts
tax.
Moving on to slide seven.
We have the compensating tax or
use tax so if you're a purchaser
of a good and and you're not
paying the G. R. T. should be
paying the compensating tax
I've already talked a little bit
about municipal and county taxes
those increments that they're
allowed to impose are controlled
by you all are are authorized by
you all the legislature.
G. R. T. is is the largest
revenue source for most
municipalities.
And tribal taxes in general if
and and secretary Schardin
Clarke can speak more to this in
general the I would say the tax
revenues and a great job you can
see twenty tribal entities are
partnered with the tax
department now so they collect
their sales taxes on their
behalf and in general the state
takes a quarter of the twenty
five percent as our State share
of collection on activity on
tribal land.
If you want to turn to the next
slide this is personal income
tax now and.
It's common to hear that our
personal income tax P. backs on
the federal personal income tax
so on the federal side you
develop your adjusted gross
income and that's where we pick
up and to that gross income we
make our changes so we you know
what loan medical low and middle
income tax exemption you may
have other deductions or credits
and that's how you get to New
Mexico personal income tax
liability.
If you'll turn to slide nine
you're the current personal
income tax rates they are
currently ranging from one point
seven to five point nine percent
and I think Jennifer is going to
talk more about that.
All right
Let's see what else should we
talk about on this page I know
Jennifer is going to cover a lot
of this so I'm gonna turn
actually to the next slide we
want to corporate income tax.
So these are corporations LLCs
nonprofits and there's only two
tax rates of corporate income
tax level four point nine and
five point nine percent of
Corporation earning under five
hundred thousand dollars is
taxed at the lower rate and
above that amount is taxed at
the higher rate and you can have
listening or that means New
Mexico has the authority to tax
you through
physical presence employment or
economic listening so that's
determined by putting the
slightest physical presence in
New Mexico.
All right turning on to slide
eleven oil and natural gas
taxes.
We actually implement many
different types of severance
taxes on oil and natural gas so
the first one oil and gas
emergency school tax goes to the
general fund.
The oil and gas severance tax
goes to the severance bonding
fund severance tax bonding fund
and that's used for capital
outlay and then if anything's
left over after we pay our debt
that we issue from capital
outlay that moves on to the
severance tax permanent fund so
in recent years we've decided
that the amount being used for
bonding should be higher and
higher so the amount reaching
the permanent fund is less and
less so before I think nineteen
ninety nine about fifty percent
of severance tax revenues into
the bonding fund went to the
permanent fund and fifty percent
was used for debt service that
has crept up in at one point was
about ninety five percent and
it's come back down up to eighty
six percent and it's stuck there
without any new legislation.
So these other taxes down here
are often referred to as in lieu
of property taxes so they
benefit the locals in most
instances or local school
districts.
If you'll turn to slide twelve
these are those same taxes but
for natural gas in the.
I think the one difference here
well there's there's a few but
there there's a differential
right so often times the oil
like in the case of the oil and
gas emergency school tax is
lower than the tax on natural
gas although it is higher in
print production apple orange.
If you turn to slide thirteen is
the last line I'll cover up we
also have an unemployment
insurance tax there are many
lenses with which you can look
at taxes and one of them of
course is business
competitiveness and this is one
place where New Mexico excels in
our payroll taxes we have a
quite low unemployment insurance
tax in New Mexico we rank
usually in the top ten for the
best payroll taxes in the
country I will say though that
the pandemic drained our our
unemployment Trust Fund and in
the calculation for these taxes
it's a statutory formula.
We take a look at the last
twenty years and we we say those
I hi is draws years in the last
twenty years determine how much
your taxes will be in because we
had such a high draw here during
the pandemic that will be
included in the calculation is
causing our employment
unemployment insurance taxes to
rise in the next couple years
and that and that'll be a
feature of our unemployment
insurance tax for twenty years
so that's a recent development.
And with that I'll hand it over
to secretary okay.
Morning members of the committee
I'm again I'm Stephanie Schardin
Clarke and the.
And secretary the taxation and
revenue department can you hear
me OK okay great so I will first
be covering just some basic tax
policy principles that we and
the LFC and the tax research
institute all try to keep in
mind as we evaluate different
proposals to change the tax base
or the right door the infants
so those are principles are laid
out on slide fifteen basically
Revenue should be adequate to
provide for state and local
needs they should be efficient
taxes should be efficiently
collected in a way that
interferes as little as possible
with the private economy we're
talking here about taxpayer
burden and also administrative
burden on the taxation and
revenue department but we wanted
to be easy for taxpayers to
voluntarily comply with their
tax obligations what I find at
the tax and Representative
department is that the vast
majority of taxpayers really
just want to know how to
voluntarily comply there are of
course a few bad apples who are
trying to evade taxation but
most of them just need the tax
system to be easy and and so
we're always looking for that
equity has to do with treating
taxpayers that are similarly
situated equally that can be
horizontal equity here but
equity it can be across incomes
across types of tax payers
across business sectors there's
a lot of ways to measure that
but I will always be pointing
out if there is a proposal
that's going to give one group
of taxpayers an advantage over
another that might not make
sense or be equitable again
simplicity again has a lot to do
with voluntary compliance and
the ability of taxpayers to just
know what their obligations are
easily so this has everything to
do with the aware of laws are
written the way regulations are
are drafted and making sure that
our forms and procedures are
simple as possible and our forms
and procedures that taxed have
mainly mimic the statutory
language so we will always be
working together with the
legislature to try to advance
simplicity comp taxes should be
Capri.
Sieve just making sure that we
taxes brought a basis possible
that everything is accounted for
and sometimes you know when we
pass a bill we might find out a
year later that something wasn't
comprehensive that will come
back to you with the clean up
and then accountability
exceptions to the tax code
should be rare and carefully
evaluated and justified I'll be
talking in a moment about the
tax expenditure reporting that
we produce for you actually less
than a moment and there.
I'd slide a seventeen the bulk
of my slides are about tax
expenditure reporting and for
anybody who's relatively new to
tax the the term tax expenditure
might seem weird you know you
make a probation and probation
lead to expenditures how could a
tax how could the tax code lead
to expenditures with that's
really referencing is that
there's there's sort of a tax
base and then we carve out from
it and so choosing not to
include something in the tax
base or giving preferential
treatment to something or
another it's sort of like making
an expenditure through the tax
code and that's why they're
called tax expenditures and so
every year since twenty twelve
taxed Rapp has been creating and
publishing a tax expenditure
report it's the if any of you
don't have it all I'll send you
a link to where you can find it
online or we can arrange for a
big the copy of it to be printed
for you on the tax committee you
might actually want the hard
copy
but it's a several hundred pages
thick document that goes through
every single carve out and and
preferential area in the tax
code and we make our best effort
to estimate the amount of
revenue that's forgotten as a
result of that and that can be
anything from a multi million
dollar forgotten revenue to debt
down to you know a thousand
dollars whatever it is we
estimate that to the best of our
ability based on the data that
we have and so and and actually
this year I'll be talking to you
later about a bill attacks and
read HSD bill that would make
tax expenditure reporting
mandatory right now we've been
doing it since twenty twelve
based on a twenty twelve or
eleven executive order we're
actually not required in statute
yet to produce that and I think
it's good policy to do so and so
we'll be bringing you that as
whatever agency bills
let's see I think I've covered
all of that so going to slide
eighteen and I want to talk a
little bit about the difference
between the types of tax
expenditures because I think the
general world.
Uses these terms interchangeably
but as a tax committee you know
we have to be precise with the
way we think about these things
so an exclusion from the base we
won't talk about X. we will use
the term exclusion very much in
legislation but it's basically
anything that carves out
something to define the tax base
and and we don't really count
those as tax expenditures
because they're pretty much
always just required by law
there are certain things we
cannot tax for example because
we can't do to the federal you
know federal regulations we
can't do something that just
taxes the federal government for
example or sometimes exclusions
are just to prevent double
taxation that wouldn't make any
sense like for example we have a
motor vehicle excise tax that's
in place of the G. R. T. so when
you say that the sale of
vehicles is not subject to the
G. R. T. that's not a tax
expenditure it's just
referencing that there's a
different tax that that deals
with that so exclusions are by
and large established in law and
not changing very frequently
okay and that the next two
exemptions and deductions I'll
talk about together
mathematically they're very
similar and the difference just
has to do generally with the
taxpayers reporting obligation
to the department so if you
think about I'm gonna talk about
things in the tax liability
being above the line and below
the line
in general you always have Tax
base and might be your income or
your business's receipts let's
say income for for this example
you got your income times your
tax rate equals your tax
liability right above the line
is something like an exemption
or deduction that reduces your
taxable income are you taxable
business receipts it takes
something out of the tax base
versus a credit as below the
line it you you calculate you
have your taxable activity your
income or your receipts times
your tax rate equals your tax
liability a credit reduces your
liability bill.
All of the line
so with that kind of the picture
in exemption is something that
reduces a taxpayer's Tax base so
it might be in my reduce your
income or it might reduce your
business's taxable receipts
an exemption though the special
thing about that is that it need
not be reported to the
department.
So we are sort of blind to what
is being accepted we can guess
but there we don't have great
data so for example some of the
bigger exemptions we have in the
tax code would be for nonprofits
you know we are all disorder
generally know that nonprofit
receipts are not taxable but we
also don't receive a return that
says our receipts were million
dollars and we exempted Office
just they don't even report that
to us and so that reduces the
tax payer burden which is a good
thing for the taxpayer but it
also reduces your ability as
policy makers to be able to
evaluate whether that's what you
know revenue that you really
want to forgo other exemptions
for example are the new social
security income exemption and
the military retirement
exemption that were enacted last
year so it removes the reporting
burden on on those taxpayers and
induction works in the same way
mathematically but it generally
does need to be reported to the
state so for example.
If I am a business and I have
there I mean there are dozens of
gross receipts tax deductions
but whichever ones I
and eligible to claim as a
business I report all my
receipts and that I say these
are my deductible receipts and
and therefore get to my taxable
receipts and that's all visible
on the the gross receipts tax
return some deductions have to
be by statute separately
reported which gives you
complete visibility into what
was deducted and how much
revenue was forgotten some of
the most of them the the vast
majority do not need to be
separately reported and so taxed
Representative has this huge
amount of deducted but no which
deduction was taken returns and
again that reduces the tax payer
burden but it gives you less
visibility into what's happening
in the tax code so those are
exemptions and deductions and
then last our credit credits
again are below the line so the
tax payer the business or the
individuals who are in the
income they tell you what the
receipts or their income are
multiplied by the tax rate to
get their tax liability credits
are generally taken dollar for
dollar against that liability.
All right so next on slide
nineteen will go on to the
different type of tax
expenditures that we report out
in that tax expenditure report
the largest by far especially in
the most recent year are for
citizen benefit the reason
citizen benefit is so large in
FY twenty two has to do with the
rebates that we've just
concluded issuance up we issued
nearly a billion dollars in
rebates in the summer of twenty
twenty two and those all were
coated accounting wise as FY
twenty two tax expenditures but
some of the other major citizen
budget include things like.
You know the working families
tax credit the lowincome
comprehensive tax credit other
things that are intended to
benefit lower and moderate
income New Mexicans another
major categories economic
development on these are these
are tax expenditures that
stimulate investment or job
creation of a certain type or
tracked certain industries
moving down the list we've got
environmental and conservation
related tax expenditures like
for example solar tax credit or
maybe a preferential rate for
for wind or solar or something
like that health care is another
big one we do all kinds of
things are the tax code to try
to make the cost of health care
lower more affordable or trying
to make care more accessible to
especially rural areas and then
last we have highly specialized
industry
that we're trying to target in
New Mexico for example uranium
mine might fall under there.
Okay this is a big at a big
question that comes up often you
know you you hear one of one of
the areas of what I would call
lower in New Mexico tax policy
and when we're talking about tax
reform is we talk about how we
got all these hundreds of tax
expenditures in our tax code is
like Swiss cheese and it is and
that you know we should melt it
down and if we just got rid of
all those we could raise the
revenue to that we needed to
lower our tax rate and that is
true to an extent but when you
look at the tax expenditures
that have real real money
attached to them
we would be hard pressed to find
anything on this list of the top
ten tax expenditures that would
be comfortable repealing or or
doing without
for example the the single
largest year after year except
for the non recurring rebates
tends to be on the the food and
at deduction and hold harmless
that is by far the largest it
was four hundred and twenty
three million in FY twenty two
and that's pretty well in line
with history but to to do away
with that of course would allow
us to bring down the G. R. T.
right I like half a percent but
then you'd be making a choice to
tax food and that's not an easy
choice to make some of the other
ones similarly are not things
but you know they're they're
well justified I think in the
tax code for example would you
that lower the G. R. T. right by
starting to tax prescription
drugs in oxygen probably not
would you would you increase the
tax on hospitals probably not
that's going to increase
everybody's health care costs
nonprofits are another one again
this is an exemption so it's an
estimate but you could
theoretically raise about a
hundred thirty million dollars
in revenue per year by taxing
all nonprofits that then you're
reducing their ability to
fulfill their commitment their
missions which are important and
and on and on so when you when
you get down this list to
anything that anyone would
probably want to live without
there's an.
Not a ton of revenue to be
raised anymore.
So I'm slide twenty one
you can see the difference of
the tax expenditures the amount
of revenue for gone and state
versus local this is something
we've added to the report in the
last couple years just for more
transparency so what you see is
the vast majority of tax
expenditures are made by the
state rather than local
governments compare that about
sixty percent of G. R. T. comes
to the state and about forty to
local governments but a lot more
than that of of tax expenditures
are made from the state of
course the state partially holds
local governments harmless from
food and medical deductions
which are very large but that is
partially phasing out to over
the next several years
all the all the personal income
tax and corporate income tax
expenditures come from the state
not locals because there is no
local income tax so that's
another reason the state shares
higher.
And I believe that's return back
over dizzy.
For Jennifer or Jennifer.
Yeah.
All right I'm gonna pick it up
here Mr chair members of the
committee and discuss a little
bit about how LESC approaches
tax expenditures so again we're
only talking about the things
that is basically spending from
the tax code so it's credits
deductions exemptions and the
LFC has a handful of tax
expenditure policy principles
and basically what I think it is
kind of a checklist for due
diligence making sure this
exemption kind of suits best
practices and this list matches
a lot of list you might find
online they're very similar to
the New Mexico tax policy
research institute kind of best
practices and you'll see these
on every single FY are that we
produce board tax expenditure
bill LCS right at the back of FY
are we've literally fill out a
checklist Act I want to kind of
talk about how we feel that out
so you're not surprising to see
this
so starting from the top of this
let's let's step on page twenty
two.
we look to see if the tax
expenditure has been vetted the
way we do this is basically look
and see if that I've been heard
added interim committee so this
is usually the it's usually rest
have the resignation Tax
committee sometimes these things
will be heard LFC and basically
this just assures us that it's
been discussed experts have
weighed in on it there's been a
debate about it it really just
assurance the LFC that members
you all committees have had some
time to think about it have some
time to vet it had some kind of
I hold the needs it's just best
practice.
Moving on we want to see that
these expenditures are target
usually these expenditures are
for specific industries for
specific group of people as we
want to see that they are
targeting people they're
supposed to target not including
other people that might not need
this tax break or have this
extra expenditure kind of geared
toward.
and the way that we look to see
if it's targeted as we look for
purpose statement or long term
goals are different kind of
performance measures included in
the bill and this is pretty
unique you don't often see these
participants in bills but we do
look for it and this also helps
throughout history so as time
progresses often times these the
reason these expenditures were
created gets lost and we don't
remember why this is passed we
don't remember who was targeted
for so it really helps to have a
stated right in the bill have it
right in the tax code why this
was put into place and it really
helps policy makers
legislature's of the future
as well as the public understand
what this was for and I'm moving
on to the listening to the next
you kind of side by side in its
transparency and accountability
and so.
The secretary mentioned a lot of
these expenditures are completed
in the tax expenditure reports
but oftentimes policymakers and
it'll just need a little bit
more information to really
evaluate the effectiveness of
these bills so you'll often see
and this is something we do see
quite a lot.
Our annual report is required
I'm usually to the interim
committee usually sells the rest
have it get I was a little bit
more information so who's taking
it what is the amount is it
targeted is efficient and so
that really helps us also
evaluate whether these are
working.
And the last two whether it's
effective and efficient so.
This is just basically
evaluating whether this
expenditures doing what it's
supposed to do and doing it as
cheaply as possible is this the
best use of money to target this
specific problem we're trying to
solve or develop disincentive
you're trying to develop it
really the best use of taxpayer
dollars.
On the next page this is what
our checklist looks like on FIR
Singh added we will fill this
out with comments we will
explain why the tax center may
or may not have met the desired
principles and offer comments on
how it can be improved.
Twenty four I'm gonna touch on
some recent tax reform which I
know is everyone's favorite
topic I'm not going to last
three years or so and then talk
a little bit about opportunities
for reform moving forward.
And I know this is a hot topic
especially this committee but
generally it last couple years
tax reform is been a really
really hot button issue and
there's debate about what tax
reform really is and a lot of
people think tax reform requires
us to blow up the system
completely redo the tax code
it's a complete wipe out and
rebuild lot of people think it's
kind of a more incremental step
by step approach changing the
tax code and the answer is yes
they can be all of those things
and some years tax reform is
really dramatic it can be really
over hauling it can change a lot
of things at once and in seven
years it is more this
incremental approach as I
administrative some examples of
kind of different ways we
restructure the tax code and I
want to comment that in my
opinion tax reform does kind of
alter the fundamental structure
of the tax code I'm offering a
new credit or a temporary rebate
Tim and my mind is not really
tax reform it's not changing the
structure is not changing the
underlying code of how we tax
New Mexicans.
So moving on.
It go through fairly quickly
some of the larger tax reform
steps you all taken is eight the
legislature last couple years
I'm not going to get everything
that's on the slides and is
going to point out some of the
major ones so starting in twenty
nineteen run page twenty five.
One of the largest things you
all have done in terms of taxed
last couple years what
subjecting online sales D. G. R.
T. and changing G. R. T. to a
destination based sourcing
this really level the playing
field for in and out of state
businesses and also really
helped prop up our state
revenues when the pandemic hit
so a lot of our economic
activity moved online when our
local economies kind of shut
down we can go out here
it allowed us to tax a lot of
those out of state purchases
that normally would not happen
it really help keep us afloat
during the pandemic so we could
not you got past that at a
better time you pass that twenty
nineteen right before the
pandemic.
At nineteen also saw and you
five point nine percent income
tax bracket added to the very
top of the personal income tax
it did not touch the lower parts
of the income tax brackets which
I'll talk about in a little bit
and.
Some other key changes like
raising the motor vehicle excise
tax and reducing capital gains
deductions but I do want to call
out M. expanding the working
families tax credit this is an
example of a very highly
targeted tax credit that
benefits the lower income
workers with children.
It did not cut taxes across the
lower income kind of spectrum of
taxpayers it really targeted a
specific demographic it's a
great example of a targeted tax
exemption.
Twenty twenty was a little bit
of a lighter here moving on to
page twenty six.
After I really have to twenty
nineteen twenty twenty with
little bit slower we're also
keeping opposing the pandemic at
this point is the.
It was really focused on relief
and then there was a smaller
tech transfer credit that was
passed in twenty twenty.
Twenty twenty one I'm a twenty
seven.
This year brought us cannabis
legalization in taxation as well
as another expansion of working
families
and that working families
expansion full increase the
benefit amounts as well as the
beneficiaries so broadened my to
filers so filers the don't have
a social security number well
file under the I. ten and it
brought them in it also brought
in some younger childless
workers into the working
families tax credit
twenty twenty to twenty twenty
one also start expansion of the
low income comprehensive tax
rebates as well indexing that
rebates to inflation and what
that does is it ensures that
this budget doesn't a road over
time as prices rise.
The twenty eight so last year
was a huge huge tax year our
house bill one sixty three was
the tax package that came out of
the committee.
and I can't hit on everything we
could even fit everything on the
slide was included in this tax
bill it was really massive it
did a lot of different things so
I was going to touch on some of
the larger pieces the first and
the I think the kind of largest
impact piece of legislation that
was included in the house bill
one sixty three was the first I
G. R. T. rate cut forty years
and it is these head on this a
little bit earlier but it cut
the G. R. T. by quarter over two
years so an eighth went into
effect in July last July another
eight percent will go into
effect in this July and and it
also that bill also included
some into peer meeting for many
factors and some business to
business transactions.
So personal income tax is also
subject to reform last year
would quite a few tax cuts for
specific groups again these
exemptions that were highly
targeted and that included
excluding social security income
from income tax for those
earning less than a hundred
thousand dollars exempted some
military retirement pay from the
tax base it created a child tax
credit and that's a kind of a
graduated credits between twenty
five and a hundred and twenty
five dollars per child depending
on your income.
And it allowed past entities to
pay for their personal or
corporate income tax directly as
an entity
and it.
We allows taxpayers to bypass a
federal tax deduction capped.
So.
The page twenty nine.
I want to highlight a resource
that we have in some of our LFC
and.
Publications I think this
specifically is in our
possession the last year's
procession document and it
basically tracks.
Dollar for dollar every single
tax bill that has been passed
every tax impact eight twenty
nineteen and have a split by
recurring and non recurring I
can show you where to find that
online we'll publish another one
after this session with whatever
is passed out during this
session but here is just a kind
of a snapshot of just some of
the personal income tax changes
over the last couple years
it's a huge help to build a see
it kind of all it out for you
and we've done the work to do
that and I want to highlight on
this page a major tax
expenditure that we haven't
talked about yet sort of
secretary Schardin Clarke
mentioned it briefly and that's
the nearly one billion dollars a
temporary rebates that have gone
out over the last year I think
they're still trickling out I
think a couple couple million
more dollars coming out but it's
basically concluded I haven't
included in previous lives on
tax reform again because there
one time non recurring spending
that don't doesn't affect the
tax structure moving forward but
you can see they are very
expensive and they've been a
popular option to spend off them
but some excess tax dollars
without reading the base
permanently.
They can see the bottom is the
total these taxes again this
isn't even all of them this is
just kind of some heavy hitters
and you can see almost a billion
dollars in twenty twenty two and
between two and three and out
and twenty three through twenty
five.
Where to opportunities for
future tax reform
I'll start with the G. R. T..
And of course the work is never
done so on page thirty this
graph shows you that combines
Year two tax rates for a handful
of municipalities throughout the
state so this is the combined
rate both the state right with
the local options kind of
stacked on top and then you can
see that that one at the bottom
the really dark color blind
right around five percent that's
the state based right.
and as you can see in the chart
the combined here to rates have
been climbing for the last
twenty years
but it's not the state right is
not really what's driving this
and that is if you mentioned
earlier the state removed food
from the G. R. T. tax base the
state allowed locals to increase
their their option at that led
them to increase their
income is on top.
Hold them harmless to
there's several payment but I
basically let them to recoup
some of the revenues that they
would lose from losing food out
of the tax base and you can see
that big jump that's in the kind
of four oh five time frame for
all the local spike their rates
to make up for those lost
revenues I found that cities
have been kind of incrementally
jumping their rates up over time
kind of reaching their maximum
range and then at the very end
of the graph you can see where
the state that first eighth of a
percent drop everybody's right
kind of dropped a little bit I'm
so we'll see another one of
those this July and then I'll be
curious to see what the locals
do if they will continue to to
raise.
We've talked about a variety of
tax principles throughout this
presentation.
One of people mention a lot
that's not included on our list
necessarily it's competitiveness
and really were time a
competitive competitiveness
we're talking about business
competitiveness.
General New Mexico Affairs
fairly well across the tax code
compared to other to other
states in their tax rates but
here to really is our source
them
Our rate can be high but it's
related to parenting I'm the
kind of stocks on top that makes
the effective tax rate for
businesses quite high in
rankings from places like the
tax foundation typically place
New Mexico overall in kind of
the middle of the pack but when
you really drill into the weeds
were quite competitive with
other taxes to our personal
income tax I think it's in that
in the top corner of states in
terms of rates our property tax
always ranked first or second we
have very low property taxes but
R. G. R. T. are less ranking was
forty first so it really hurts
us when it comes to these
rankings in one businesses use
these to make decisions G. R. T.
is really what's hurting us.
One.
Thirty one this is one of
Elsie's favorite grant we have
it in almost everything that we
published and this really
illustrates one of the key
fiscal challenges and
opportunities facing the state
and facing this committee and
that's revenue volatility and
revenue stability.
So the black one on this graph
shows revenue growth of the last
two decades and you can see and
if you're you're growth and you
can see that it really whipsawed
back and forth over the last
twenty years.
I mean it ranges from nineteen
point seven percent last year we
had huge revenue growth last
year but it's been in the
negative eleven point six
percent in the red during the
eight oh nine recession and then
the bars on this graph the blue
and the red bars this shows
recurring appropriations grosses
your budget growth year over
year and again this illustrates
the challenge you all of what of
the Legislature provided course
have budgeting through these
really volatile revenues.
And at the mentioned New Mexico
relies on the three like at
school I've tax revenues and all
most states that the sales a
personal income tax and property
taxes we rely on we've traded
basically first property tax for
oil and gas and as you all know
oil and gas at the very ball
tile industry impacting at this
point are we nearly forty
percent of our revenues are kind
of packed to the oil and gas
industry makes is very very
vulnerable to price and
production booms and busts
mostly price bus production is a
little bit more stable of the
oil and gas industry and it's
not just our direct revenue from
oil and gas is not just our
severance it severance taxes and
royalties it's also R. G. R. T.
and I think is the problem is up
top is that how much of our duty
subject to or like us and our
personal income taxes well so
there's a lot of money that's
that's kind of tied impact the
oil and gas industry and it's a
huge challenge to be able to
budget through that it creates
more stability and there is
opportunity to increase revenue
stability and some of the
mechanisms you all put into
place happen I'm really helpful
also a couple years back you
instituted you know the five
year average
rules the basically what that is
is severance taxes over the five
year average of those revenues
are diverted instead of going to
the general fund they go to the
early childhood trust fund or
the tax stabilization reserve
and that's really helped
insulate the general fund
but in recent years that the
sport needs have skyrocketed
that five year average has
become much less effective and
in just a couple years we won't
be seeing any diversion into the
early childhood trust fund and
the general fund is going to
take all of those heads and be
subject to all the swings that
straight.
And again it's really just
highlights the importance of
evaluating every single new tax
expenditure or tax cuts.
Whether it's cutting G. R. T.
you are providing a new income
tax credit.
Through the lens of stability
and reliance on gas every time
we car about revenue from a
stable revenue source we have
the state become more reliant on
oil and gas.
Thirty two.
Representative personal income
tax for a minute.
Chart on the left was created
using tax or twenty twenty one
income tax data that we receive
from TRD the lighter yellow bars
tell you the percentage or the
share of the total number of tax
payers per bracket the.
Percentage of people that pay
taxes that fall into each
brackets.
You see that first bar forty one
percent of our taxpayers are in
the first bracket and the first
bracket makes less than fifty
five hundred dollars a lot of
those taxpayers make zero
dollars they have no income
coming in I'm.
That's a look the largest share
of that tax bracket is here I
come orders.
and then looking at tax records
two and three you can see again
the bill of ours you can see
that only eleven percent of
taxpayers fall in those brackets
and that makes a lot of sense
when you look at how small those
brackets are the second bracket
is only from fifty five hundred
dollars to eleven thousand
dollars and then that third
bracket is
Eleven thousand to sixteen
thousand the very low income
earners and very very narrow
brackets so makes sense there's
not a lot of people sitting in
those brackets.
The tax bracket for is our
largest bracket in terms of tax
payers at forty six percent and
that makes again a lot of sense
when you look at the structure
of that bracket that racket is
for incomes over sixteen
thousand all the way up to two
hundred and ten thousand dollars
so obviously the largest
taxpayers are in that bracket
given how brought it is the last
bracket which is the new tax
bracket the five point nine
percent it's only three percent
of our taxpayers and so moving
to the kind of darker orange
bars the estimated percentage or
share of the total personal
income tax revenues paid by age
bracket and that's after credits
sections exceptions so for
example the first tax bracket
well it has a range of one point
seven percent after applying to
numerous low income tax breaks
such as elector or working
families
the bracket is actually negative
which means when on average when
this when someone and this tax
bracket file their taxes they
actually get a return from the
state of the lot of these
credits are refundable they're
able to kind of get some money
back from the state.
I'm again given the condensed in
compact nature of the brackets
at the bottom the second and
third rockets paid very little
income tax also eligible for a
lot of these credits so while
they might pay throughout the
year they're withholding or they
might have payments DO they
often get some back under
liability still positive but
greatly reduced.
And then the line share of our
rate revenues comes from that
point income tax bracket at
eighty three percent of our
income tax revenue.
Again it makes a lot of sense
that it's people paying incomes
of sixteen thousand two hundred
ten thousand dollars are paying
the majority of our taxes that's
the majority of our earners in
the state's majority of are
working
Taxpayers yeah.
I think it well only three
percent of our tax payers
contribute about twenty five
percent of our tax revenues.
So basically that the pet
brackets.
Structure renders the personal
income tax effectively flat
you're either paying nothing for
your paying the four point nine
percent except for a very small
proportion of people at the very
bottom in the very top
there is opportunity here to
make personal income tax
structure more logical
just a little bit smoother and
more progressive.
and I want to talk about that
we're progressive just a minute.
This is something we look at I
know tax roadblocks that it I
know the LFC looks at it.
and I want to get into what that
means because we use that word a
lot it is a political word way
we use it it is not is a
technical work for tax and
basically what this means
It's a measure of texture by
income so progressive tax means
that incomes rise.
A larger share of that income is
paid to tax basically this is
because your ability to pay is
increasing as your income rises.
Our personal income taxes and it
is an example of a progressive
tax the rates rise as incomes
rise your effective tax rate
rises as our incomes rise and
now regressive tax is one that
shrinks the tax burden of
incomes grow and this is often
confused with the proportional
tax you'll see that the bottom
and that's when everybody pays
the same percentage of their
income regardless of their
income so one example of this
confusion is the G. R. T. so
while it appears to be a
proportional tax everyone
regardless of income pays the
same rate on the same goods from
the same area severance Santa Fe
pays the same G. R. T. on the
same pair of shoes regardless of
how much they make.
However it's actually regressive
tax the very very regressive tax
because lower income earners
typically spend a March much
larger share of their income on
daily consumption than higher
earners higher earners typically
have a lot more rate deceiving a
lot more put into investments
I'm not spending as much of
their income that subjects G. R.
T. G. R. T. in reality it's a
very regressive tax.
So I will conclude on this last
slide on page thirty five and
this is an analysis from is
needed taxation and economic
policy.
It shows our entire tax systems
tax burden it shows the
progressive eighty in twenty
eighteen compared to now so I'm
the orange bars are twenty
eighteen the blue bar that kind
of after recent policy changes
and you can see that our tax is
becoming aggressive especially
for the first kind of half of
the distribution you can see
that tax rate is increasing I
think comes rise but then it
starts to become aggressive kind
of higher incomes
there's a few things that are
contributing to this we have a
capital gains deduction a lot of
really higher earners earn a lot
of their money from investments
business investments in
otherwise.
we deduct a lot of that
if you want to get into the
really really nitty gritty the
last page of the appendices of
this shows each tax in New
Mexico that show the progress
any such as personal income tax
property tax and sales tax and
you can see what's contributing
to this I just hope you read
this graph a little bit I'm
looking at the blue bars you'll
see that lowest twenty percent
that's the lowest twenty percent
of our taxpayers by income the
lowest twenty percent of income
seven point two percent of their
income in taxes each year.
moving on the second twenty
percent K. five nine point two
percent and so on and so on so
we have to do it at this
kind of progressive itty issue
over the last couple years we've
become our progressive those are
the lower end and again a lot of
that was these exemptions lot of
this was the working families
expansion a lot of this is
elector I'm really helping.
You know increase progressivity
at the bottom so I will conclude
their Mr chair for questions I
think we're all here to answer
questions.
Thank you so much that that it's
a lot.
With that again this morning.
Yeah.
You know at this point that that
at this point you able body
because is adding this this role
at times of new friends right.
I say we have as we that you
know we have a great idea
everybody does and it's not
bashing any of their ideas but I
don't see anyone in this room to
try to figure out what what the
impact is going to be you know
and so I think that's the funny
part about why we're here in New
and having this that help us to
make good tax policy and be
mindful about this is we make
you will have an impact on what
you're gonna present the next
five years or ten years but that
looks like so that being said
let's open it up for questions
the start here the left the.
I was just got.
Our.
Gentleman.
Madam chair.
Of course the.
The flexibility I don't.
Twenty point two the.
And your point.
And that Mr chairman and
representative Scott will look
that up but
I do know that that for FY
twenty two it was a lower amount
so it it that will will look it
up and get back to you
throughout the questioning
hearing committee but it is
another large number in past
years it has been in the top ten
but in FY twenty two it was not
part of the reshuffling in FY
twenty two again is those
rebates you've got to non
recurring things that took up to
out of the top ten slots into
that kicked a couple things
lower we'll look at a.
Yeah I'm Representative Scott in
twenty twenty two it was
Marshall I think maybe around
sixty million and I didn't quite
find it yet but the I think what
you're remembering is in the out
years we do expect it to get to
that number so likely starting
in twenty five to twenty seven.
The.
Consequence of that shares in
this.
We.
You yes Representative.
Order by fifty million dollars.
Twenty eight was act is going
on.
On the.
I was laying on the long.
Absolutely it takes about two
years Mr chair for those tax
credits to hit on and as I
recall the projection.
Those
reserves.
dollars.
all.
Right that.
I wanted to be more important.
Mr chair I have it right here I
FY twenty seven the group
estimates that only two hundred
and sixty six million dollars.
Not quite two hundred million
dollars in tax credits being
paid out each year.
The.
What we do.
We.
I.
There working families tax
group.
Low income.
Program.
That amounts to about.
A hundred million dollars a year
those are actually refundable
tax credits will transfer.
I had and Mr Chairman
representative that you're
correct there refundable tax
credit.
And then.
Very last question.
You madam secretary on page
forty one.
What would we.
level one I.
Year over year.
Twenty.
Twenty.
Twenty one one point eight
percent that was the issue.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you representative
Gutknecht let's have a
Representative Harper.
Thank you chairman and the
secretary and this you Jennifer
thank you so much for presenting
this it is kind of a drinking
from the firehose enrollment and
a gentleman if it's a.
Open I just like to spend maybe
just ten minutes kind of going
through here insurance of things
that I learned was
Representative mccamly together
when we were freshmen on this
committee.
that might help or other people
who are here for the first time
just how to.
Get a good foundation is out of
sorry.
All right so so thank you
chairman so let's let's go to
slide for and I'm just gonna
repeat something that one of the
table here said already but
really was very helpful to me
when I understand.
So you look at this pie chart.
And and.
And you compare this to other
states right how are we are we
different have you heard this
three legged stool analogy right
so most states have three years
to the revenue they have income
act sales tax and property tax.
Well our state gave up one of
those ladies.
It's the property tax lake
at the state level the only
property tax we get is from the
general obligation bond every
two years when you go in New
Mexico at and the state test for
senior citizens and no for
libraries in test for
university's whatever that is
really the only property tax
that this the governor of the
state level.
Interesting that's very
different than almost every
other state most of your
property tax goes to
counties to cities school
districts.
Yeah we get that one late so we
should have to but we actually
have four legs this year we have
is we have we've been very
blessed with natural resources
so we get a ton of
tax from that industry but also
you look at the investments like
here this is something that most
other states don't have and this
is one of the most brilliant
sings the legislature did back
in the day they decided we're
not gonna spend every penny we
get and we're gonna invest so
this will and gas industries
into permanent funds endowment
funds.
Yeah and I I just think that
this was amazing because there
will be a day when that
investment earnings the state is
greater.
That the Energy payout to the
state right and and that
actually happened for a couple
years about five or seven years
ago when the oil and gas
industry taint we actually got
more money to the general fund
from our permanent funds well
gas so that's amazing right
really just kudos to the
legislature vaccine for doing
that but that's really were four
income streams come from.
The other is just new ones I
want to mention here you look at
income taxes This twenty two
percent.
This includes personal income
tax and corporate income tax.
But if you had if you kind of
the corporate income tax on
their good you'll at all teeny
sliver right we normally get
between forty to a hundred forty
million in corporate income tax
rate and you put that up against
this twelve billion dollars
news.
There is like a dozen people.
That pay corporate income tax in
the state that's that's not
exaggeration that's that's about
right.
So where do all the other
businesses pay their tax that.
They pay it through the personal
income tax and and this was a
revelation to me I don't know
how this works but it's called
it's called a pass through
entity because what they do is
your most of your LLC's your a
lot of her partnerships I mean
really almost every single
business in New Mexico they pass
through that income up to the
business to the owner and the
owner reports it on their income
tax the person who is.
So that's that's kind of how
that works when you look at the
income tax years.
Really it should be brought into
three parts a little sliver for
permanent tax.
And then it's actually kind of
hard to tell how the other two
slippers should be but I would
say probably roughly half but
what's left is personal income
tax for people like you know the
the.
That way to replace and the
other half is probably.
Business income.
So I hope that helps you can
understand I would.
I have okay so let's go.
Let's go to page six years just
a little bit on.
Your TD.
Really my first question was
what is your T. why is it
different than sales tax and why
is it so bad.
And it's so interesting history
is not on the street but we
developed our state developed
the gross receipts tax in the
twenties thirties timeframe when
other states will developing a
sales tax so we were kind of
ahead of the curve we started it
before sales tax became a thing.
this might be one reason why we
have instead of sales tax but
the big the big differences.
Sales tax is designed to tax the
last step of the transaction the
business change right
Representative gross receipts
tax taxes every step.
So a good example is
like if we're gonna make a cell
phone.
Right this is a sales tax.
The consumer will pay tax on the
cell phone they pick it up from
Verizon or T. mobile.
But under gross receipts tax
regime.
You have a a business that sells
the raw materials to you know
the the manufacturer that's
taxed you have to the company
that developed the the drawings
and the the plant for that's
taxed and then you tax the
manufacturer for assembling it
and then you tax the distributor
for taking it and sending it
over to two of rises thank you
for the tax ID and rise so you
you you tax it several times
along the way.
At and so your effective tax
rate isn't the eight percent
average it really is I mean some
industry it's closer to twenty
percent through effective tax
rate.
So it's a great way to hide a
tax.
I don't think that's why they
did it was just that's that's
what they did but to.
That's that's why you can cure a
lot of people say Office
receipts tax as awful at least
of this pyramid and so that's
that's how the disadvantage of
that but
just wanna make sure people
understood difference to a sales
tax and gross receipts tax.
okay so I'm going to go towards
the end here just sure a couple
more things right.
Let's
Let's go to slide.
Twenty seven.
A lot of.
I just a couple slides also
talked about a lot of great
changes that we've made over the
recent years to work at this
point is that a great job really
a lot of changes.
I want to talk for a second
about.
The working families and working
conference of tax rebate those
kind of things.
So.
What I would suggest is that
we've made some good changes
here but they have been data
driven.
What I mean by this is what I
was talking to the committee
before about the working
families tax credit I mean
that's a that's a great program
right
But we increased it from ten
percent to twenty five my
question was.
Is twenty five the right number.
Should be nineteen should be
thirty one and the answer was
well.
We don't know what we twenty
five sounds great
but we have in the state a real
problem let facts.
Click affects our we need
someone you know gets a raise or
or whatever their income reaches
a certain threshold and they now
do not qualify for benefits and
so there effective income goes
down it's called falling off the
cliff right.
And so I very much would ask us
to you know as we're we're
considering tax policy to be
more data driven.
And look at you know I mean it.
Would be like a a months long
project to have a nice table
that says okay you're income on
one axis your dependence on the
other access and the staff bars
for all the programs that we
have you know elector tennis
snap you know section eight
housing and and then you'd see
this interesting kind of
service.
And at.
Would be very smart of this
committee to say okay let's make
sure that our tax policy.
Is not encouraging people to not
work.
Right our tax all she should be
helping people who are having a
hard day.
But not analyzing them for
getting a job I'm looking.
So so just just something to
think about.
And I guess the.
Last couple things here
good on slide three.
this is also brought up by the.
There's a great job by the way
that huge balls in order for.
was when the tax to move the
state with the tax on food.
And we did that we gave all the
counties municipalities three
eights off the top and we came
back later with hold harmless
please know we gave carries
extra three eighths given the
cities an extra three eighths.
And and really.
And if I ever write a book on
tax policy that no one would
read
the taxes on chapter because it
was just it was just such a
games as a centrist sure no one
lowered how much money the
government was spending right
that we we remove the tax on
food.
We increase the tax on
everything else so that
governments can still spend the
same amount of money.
So what we ended up doing was.
Those folks who were already
getting snap benefits and not
paying tax on food are now
paying more on diapers and cover
players and everything else
and so we just.
Again we just have to be stopped
full
And some some comes with with
with a great idea ladies work
the actual quantitative
consequences of that issues with
the rate goes up that makes
permitting even worse so that
was really this really makes our
small businesses so I'm
competitive
and I guess that that was me to
my my last thought.
which there was a study done by
Ernst and young statewide study
this was
The twenty a lot of twenty nine
something like that.
And the.
And they were basically talk ten
different business types and
kind of virtually planted them
to each state.
S. and rather tax policy goes
madam.
how did the state's fair.
And I'm I'm I'm sure it's.
You know it's not hard to guess
we don't we don't get fifty just
we got fifty first because
included the district of
Columbia.
But when LFC and our our tax
department will look at the
study there like.
Did they do this wrong they
missed all kinds of our
exemptions adoption credits and
and the state actually paid or
is known to redo the study
working with them to make sure
we got it right.
And interesting result we got
back was no looking at our
regional states.
Four we were just the worst we
work twice as bad as the next
worst.
But after they re ran the study
we were middle of the pack.
So that to me screams to lessons
right.
The first is if the experts
Ernst and young got it wrong the
first time what a mess and how
complicated our tax codes.
And the second is if you don't
qualify for some exemption
deduction or credit.
How on earth can you compete.
So that's why we see all these
bills coming up every year
asking for injection adoption
credit to add another holds or
Swiss cheese
and and we've been doing a great
job of reforming I think we need
to actually fell down this block
of Swiss cheese not poke or
holes into it but to I just want
to thank you secretary it is the
Jennifer for a great
presentation helping us
understand these things and at
all all to defer to the
secretary here but I I hope kind
of sharing with you some of the
things that I learned my first
couple years will will really
help all of you get to a better
start on this committee than I
did thank you thank you
secretary thank you Mr chair and
representative Harper I just
kinda want to feedback on what
you see here really great
explanation appear meeting you
know the taxes on a tax on a tax
and just take that one step
further to point out that to the
extent permitting is a problem
it's a bigger problem for
smaller businesses which of
course are the lifeblood of our
local economy because it the
smaller the business the less
likely they are to have all
those services in house if I'm a
really large business I've got
in house human resources IT
financial you know accounting
all that stuff in house so I
don't have to procure it from a
contractor and he G. R. T. on
and but if I'm a small business
I'm probably I've got employees
that do our core mission
whatever that is produce
whatever widget but I might
contracted rate G. R. T. on all
those other ancillary services
like HR and engineering and
financial assistance and I do
all that kind of stuff so to
Senator meetings a problem it's
an extra big problem for small
business.
Thank you.
With our but having a team.
I want to represent us about
the.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
witnesses or experts we want to
call you and thank you for
everything hospital thank you to
my colleague Mister for all of
his expertise as well but I just
had a couple of quick questions
you week we're looking into the
tax reforms taking place for the
past few years very excited to
get was a more I'm mostly how
those tied to what the governor
has outlined its for economic
development pardon parties or
strategic plan on where they at
all.
As we look at you know that kind
of what's important are looking
with that are as well I'm sure
Lente a and Representative
Serrato I I think it's a more of
a test and I'm answer so if I
would I would say that although
there are a lot there are a lot
of details as you saw on the
slides of of what we've
accomplished in the last four
years tax reform and tax policy
changes a lot of it off the bat
was focused on making our income
tax system more progressive and
as you saw on the slide that
Jennifer went over
a lot of the big items were
expanding the working families
tax credit creating that new top
five point nine percent rate
expanding elector and other
things along those lines
and I would say that then it has
sort of shifted to overall G. R.
T. reforms that helps everybody
when we reduce the G. R. T.
right or deal with your meeting
that helps everyone of New
Mexicos individuals and everyone
of New Mexicos businesses so you
know it's it's it's good for all
and so
at the moment the only item that
will be in the governor's tax
policy package that she alluded
to in her budget and and talked
about in her state of the state
address there's a a personal
income tax proposal you know I I
Jennifer mentioned all that
we're the brackets are but we
haven't mentioned is that those
have not been updated for
inflation since two thousand and
seven so it's people's incomes
have naturally risen with
inflation and then they've risen
unnaturally with a high level
inflation the last year in the
expected next year people have
crept into higher brackets more
and more of their income is
being taxed at a higher bracket
and so that has reduced the
effective tax rate and some
the governor's proposal for pit
is to adjust all the brackets
for inflation and then also to
expand
and the four point seven percent
third bracket so that more
people will fall in that very
right now narrow four point.
And percent bracket instead of
everybody being in the four
point nine percent.
That's available thank you Mr
chairman thank you for that
explanation actually you get to
the point that I was I wanted to
ask about and perhaps my
colleague brought up earlier
that that fourth bracket is so
broad right now you know just
media at the difference between
so making seventeen K. versus
two hundred nine K. Y. but worse
the person making stipulate less
is also getting other.
It's rather once the tree has
won the past we have a look to
breaking more or is it just kind
of what you're freaking out we
just have an updated its.
I believe chair and
Representative Serrato that the
last time we really adjusted our
personal income tax brackets.
On purpose condensed them down
to that level so on its face yes
we have a progressive personal
income tax right you know where
you move up through five
brackets I think it is but as
you've seen today almost
everybody who has any income at
all is in one four point nine
percent bracket and that was you
know something that was provided
around two thousand three or
four to take condense them all
down like that and.
I I tend to agree that we could
make that a more fluid move
through the brackets Mr Chairman
representative at the all add to
that that before we added this
five point nine top right I
think we had eight eight nine
brackets and the change at that
time was to just remove the top
brackets and and that's how we
got stuck with sort of compacted
lower brackets and need maybe a
reason offer why that hasn't
changed is it is it can be
expensive because so many folks
are in that flat flat four point
nine percent right.
To move the lower brackets
wider date this and pay less tax
it happens quickly so that you
know in the shape of the bell
curve everyone in the middle as
you move you catch a lot more
people as you lower their tax
rate so it's it can just be
quite expensive.
Okay thank you the last question
is two years Miss Mister
chairman and experts
you have this data on the
taxpayers by county I'm just
curious as a representative of
Santa Fe I feel like they're
very they're far as fewer folks
that are in that one bracket
versus the four pack or three
pack in my district just curious
if you have that right to Monday
and Representative Serrato I
think it's something that we
could produce from the tax
return data but it wouldn't be
easy you know when when we take
in a tax return they do tell us
their mailing address which
might be a PO box and so we
could use that code data or
something like that but it would
be a project that we need to
time to complete thank you Mr
that's the move to
Representative Ortez thank you
Mr chairman thank you for
representation I have a question
on the panels and fairest us to
not taking.
Right.
but there are communities that
charge that collect more G. R.
T. hi Representative one of
those tasking valley on the edge
of task and hospitality that
close for three seven five
percent so.
That differential the in the
five percent base rate that the
state collects and whatever
revenue in between five and nine
four three seven five what
happens to that money that
revenue is the proportions the
way the five percent proportion
to sixty percent of the state
forty percent to the
municipality tell me a little
bit about that and much no
there's no great question
greater and Representative or
two
so when taxed reverie seeds A.
G. R. T. return that every
taxpayer on every return puts a
location code on it and that is
what directs us how to
distribute the revenue so we
they'll tell us location code
task you valley and we know okay
this than we got ten thousand
dollars it's inTaos again alley
so we but.
I put here the equivalent of
five percent to the general fund
or less because of the municipal
one point two two five percent
we send them out to them you
need them out to the county and
so when I said that forty to
sixty percent split between
local and state G. R. T. that's
average across all but for
example in municipality like
tusky valley we're going to send
a higher percent than that to
the community and and so it's
it's all on distributed exactly
the way it should be based on
what tax rate is imposed in each
individual locations.
And you can imagine how
complicated that is an origin
tax system.
Thank you sure.
And on that Representative I I
do think the purpose of this
committee to have this type of
interaction is so that we can
all ask those questions in a
safe space right what was used
to be at the at the the
committee goes on we should all
be able to ask questions that we
need field compares to about and
not feel embarrassed publicly
because it's important we
understand these things will be
as we move through the process
of representative Duncan is next
then we'll go to Representative.
why for.
I just need to.
are yes.
Well this.
Mr Chairman representative
Duncan the land grant permanent
fund in the severance tax
permanent fund are really what
we're talking about here and
those get revenues also from the
oil and gas industry the land
grant permanent fund from
royalties of.
Action on state land is is the
beneficiary or the resort the
revenue generator there in
severance tax as I mentioned for
one of the severance tax gets
passed on I think we're at
twenty two billion in the land
grant permanent fund and seven
billion in severance tax
permanent fund.
Any yeah if I could add to that
Mr chair and representative
Duncan the beauty of that
so we've got this
constitutionally protected
corpus of the fund it's managed
by the state investment council
so it more or less tracks equity
markets which is a wonderful
diversity can diversification
away from oil and gas market the
other thing that's so special
about that and and you know we
should all be so thankful to the
policy makers who establish
those decades ago is that what
the general fund gets from the
corpus of the fund is another
five year market value average
so equity markets might go up
and down you know twenty percent
per year but the general fund
can rely on a fairly stable five
year average distribution and
that's great for budget
planning.
Is there.
That.
Matrix or whatever.
Yes I'm Mr chairman and
representative Duncan
the amounts that go into those
permanent funds obviously are
are just dependent on how much
revenue comes in whether it be
from the severance tax for the
severance tax permanent fund or
for royalties on production and
you know so those are
automatically taken and put into
those funds I think they're also
proposals that I don't know you
know it's more of a budgetary
question attacks question but
their proposals to create a one
time injection into those funds
and Mr chair if I could add to
that we actually with the
consensus revenue estimating
group look at that over the
summer for the first time both
the revenue stabilization and
tax policy committee and the
legislative finance committee
requests from your economists
that we look at how much we
could lose from oil and gas in
the long term how much would it
take to replace to replace that
revenue and that we we developed
a number of scenarios as
secretary Schardin Clarke
mentioned in the LFC
recommendation for the budget
there is a distribution of the
permanent fund to help but
actually
Senator Gonzales has a bill
proposing this session that
would accomplish the goal that
you mentioned set sort of a cap
on on oil and gas and using
general funds and the rest of
the permanent funds so that they
can spin offs sufficient revenue
to offset the losses so it's
something that we've actually
just just been really talking
about in the last year.
Thank sure I representation well
we have those.
Yes.
Thank you representative
Representative break.
Thank you Mr chair and my
colleague the Sir yes Ortiz
appreciate her comment because
it really was in line with my
thinking thank you for your
presentation I have a question
with regard to G. R. T. taxes
which one city county and state.
At that's basically what they
survive on and so I'm wondering
if there's been any thought
process regarding how that could
change over time because as
revenues collapse you know our
budgets go up is revenues go
down our budgets go down
Especially during the COVID
you know what was really tough
for the City of Albuquerque to
balance our budget and thank god
for the American rescue fund
because that helped us balance
of billion dollar budget.
And it was really tough because
at the same time and also the
hold harmless helped us with
that.
But I just wondered if you guys
had any thought process
regarding now and just and I
know there's discussion on this.
So I just wondered what your
thoughts are and Mr Chairman
representative will to go we do
we we do you think about that
and I'll mention that.
you know back to the food
conversation.
Unsurprisingly food is the most
stable.
Form of consumption that people
make and so the limiting food
from gross receipts tax
increases the volatility for
everyone for the state to the
cities for the county so that's
certainly moved maybe in the
direction that you have on the
scene with when it comes to also
add that we don't talk a lot
about property taxes because at
the state level we don't see it
but we do know across the state
a lot of municipalities and
counties have
not implemented property tax
increments that they're allowed
to implement for operational
purposes so that is an extremely
stable revenue source that is an
opportunity for you disparities
as well also mentioned you know
last just last year with the
past you all passed a change to
hold harmless payments that
allow.
More municipalities have.
A flat.
Hold harmless payment rather
than a declining over missed
payments that certainly will
help those in a positive one
and.
Mr chair and representative
break I'll just add to that
it's hard to talk about tax
policy and local governments
because there are no to local
governments that are like
there's a whole spectrum of them
that are you know very tight
budget to you know very well
reserves
but I will say in general of all
the tax changes that we've made
since twenty nineteen session
on in total we estimate that
local government revenues have
risen by about three hundred
million dollars across the mall
since twenty nineteen we're
state revenues have decreased by
a recurring two hundred plus
million so in the reasons for
that you know the state of
course has made recurring cuts
to its tax base through things
we've been talking about like
working families tax credit
elector locals have not
participated in that but locals
have been a large beneficiary of
the taxation of internet sales
that we put in place as well as
there's now a local option
compensating tax that there
didn't used to be and Care
benefiting by about fifty
million dollars in total from
local compensating tax so I just
want to kind of put in context
to that the state has been
making massive investments in
recurring tax cuts and local
actually have the revenue has
increased by about three hundred
million per year thank you Mr
chairman and I continue.
So this is a little different I
thank you for that that's really
important and I think it's
something that we really need to
look at Mr chair is how
possibly a little bit with I
move to the property tax might
help
this is a little different
context with regard to comment
has there been any discussion
about eighty tax rebate like for
businesses or personal tax
rebate in light of people who
lost during the COVID.
I I just wonder about that if
there has been any sort of
discussion.
To clarify the question chairman
and Representative but when you
say they lost you need financial
losses yes.
Love to hear from the LFC
economists to but we've we've
addressed those so far in a
couple different ways of course
the personal income tax rebates
the the billion that was put out
benefited something like eight
hundred and seventy five
thousand New Mexico taxpayers
that's basically every resident
taxpayer
but that was you know
proportional across the board
and not directly related to
certain industries for certain
industries for example we did do
a four month restaurants and
bars tax holiday a couple years
ago that I think that about
fifty million dollars back in
the pockets of that specific
targeted HSD that did have such
large losses
and then another thing we did
during the pandemic was we
offered a the penalty and
interest grace period for most
tax programs giving a lot of
taxpayers about an additional
year to pay knowing that they
had a cash flow crunch right you
know right in twenty twenty
thank you so much thank you I
love the store I decided that Mr
chair we also offered up I think
up to five hundred million
dollars from the severance tax
permanent fund for basically no
interest loans to to businesses
who could demonstrate financial
loss from pandemic thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative
the other questions or comments
from committee.
All right well thank you all so
much we appreciate your
presentation at it may ask
before we do the do you have an
electric copy of this
presentation and if so can you
send it to Tasha that perhaps
Tasha you consented to the
committee so we can have this is
awesome we have as a reference
point move forward to the to the
session so thank you again at
this point you're welcome to do
to be dismissed real quickly
couple housekeeping rules for
the committee
that it at it and see what I
want to do.
just just just for for the
information of the committee we
will be hearing the following
bills this week on Wednesday
we'll be hearing once again
house bill thirty two and house
bill thirty eight on Wednesday
and then on Friday we hearing
house bill sixty seven and house
bill ninety nine option two will
we'll be sending those to you
know so yes Representative this
point as well.
And
I think that's it so I wanted to
have we'll see you all on
Wednesday for our first official
hearing on legislation thank you
all.
