Representative Romero I hear
good morning good morning
Representative Scott.
Representative Stansbury.
Representative Strickler.
Chairman Martinez.
And I'm here.
We have a.
Thank you good morning members
so happy last three days of the
session J..
In all celebrate at once
We have the we have a packed
agenda today we're gonna try to
get as much done as we can
whatever we don't get to will
will push back out to to Friday
or if we have to call a meeting
between now and Friday we could
do that as well we're just gonna
try to plow through
you know at least for the next
couple of hours I know people
are busy with other committees I
know several people are tied up
in in the Senate as well so
people being in out and will
we'll play bite here
Representative Harper and I had
a good conversation this morning
about the agenda today
and I think we're gonna do with
the plan will forward its with
as much as we can.
and just plow through so
Representative Chandler rescue
Chandler I believe you're
putting on House Bill three
hundred and eight.
Yes please yes yes Mr chair do
you have any expert.
Who are they I'm W. secretary
John Clark and secretary Alicia
keys.
Got it I've got secretary Lee
she keys and I have.
Clark.
Thank you very much Mr chair I
will be very brief this is house
taxation and revenue committee
substitute for house bill three
OO eight in as many of the
members will recall health bill
Levin had eight funding
mechanism for large we don't
projects in the threshold of
three hundred and fifty million
dollars
this bill is very much like part
of that bill that was pulled out
in the Senate and what the bill
does it allow those fifty
percent of the state's
construction G. R. T. to be
plowed back into that very large
project as well as fifty percent
of the municipalities or
counties construction G. R. T.
to be plowed in and of course
they would get solve all and
Terry and it would need there
would need to be agreements in
place and so on and with that
I'd like to turn the floor over
to W. secretary Clark.
Welcome W. secretary Clarke and
welcome secretary keys and I see
Mr Clark and I see Mr Senator K.
good good morning good morning
thank you Mr chair I think if
you don't mind I'll get go and
I'll start and then I'll hand it
over to W. secretary Clark.
So thank you Mr chairman members
of the committee and
Representative Chandler of this
bill allows us to decide
together EDD the county and the
municipalities if we need to use
this mechanism to attract bigger
deals that we can't land
otherwise all three have to
agree or there is no deal so it
is optional for local
governments the changes in here
from what you saw previously and
approved in each B. eleven are
minor and change the local and
state G. R. T. share from fifty
six point two five percent and
seventy five percent to instead
both being equal at a flat fifty
percent this version also adds
some additional reporting
requirements for us and clawback
provisions for the company for
the companies on the advice of
the legislative analyst's
otherwise this is what you have
seen before the bill provides as
a critical tool to be able to
incentivize large companies like
big pharmaceutical companies or
manufacturers to come to New
Mexico by providing fifty
percent sharing of state and
local G. R. T. revenues only
during the construction phase
and out the approval of the EDD
and the selected County and
Norman this holiday so huge game
changing economic development
projects sometimes pass New
Mexico by because we don't have
this mechanism to complement
existing leader funds and allow
us to compete with other states
if a company needs to make
location decisions in June they
can't wait until the next
legislative session is over for
us to consider it and to provide
the necessary funding so we need
to operate on business time
frames and oftentimes we really
just have a week or two to put
these presentations together
and I don't know why.
Whether it is COVID and big
companies wanting to get out of
the cities but we've never had
so many big projects looking at
New Mexico and this bill gives
New Mexico a tool to compete and
get in the game for these
projects that could bring
hundreds of millions or billions
of dollars into the state and
create thousands of jobs so with
that I will turn it over to W.
secretary John Clark for some
additional comments thank you
thank you thank you Secretary
and before you proceed W.
secretary Clarke my apologies
members.
Can you read it the total number
of bottoming substitute because
we have a committee substitute.
and if you could read this will
to number and then somebody can
move the substitute for
discussion.
Mr chair Kelly read it it's two
zero eight three two point one
So at.
Thank you everybody should have
it it should it was on should be
nonsense tricks as of yesterday
I believe so if everybody's on
that same document we cannot
proceed to W. secretary clerk.
Great thank you so much Mr chair
and committee members of this
bill takes half of the new state
and local G. R. T. revenues that
are generated during
construction and allows them to
flow back to the projects
through the normal legal process
although as noted this bill now
strengthens the existing
reporting club act requirements
that already existed lead.
This still allows half of the
new revenues generated to flow
to the state's general fund into
local governments so this is a
win in terms of jobs and
investment but it's also when in
terms of revenues again this is
for very occasional really big
projects that we can't win
doesn't.
If we keep doing what we've been
doing we'll keep getting similar
results secretary cheese and we
need to think big and enable the
state's response to business
time frames if we want a chance
to really propel the state
forward and restore I some
livelihoods of New Mexicans
there are huge projects looking
at New Mexico right now and we
need to prove we're the business
friendly location we always
claim to be this bill gets is
there for these large deals I
urge the committee to pass the
house taxation and revenue
committee substitute for house
bill eight and give us a chance
to compete for these jobs we so
desperately need without a be
happy to stand in in answer any
questions I would also ask that
R. ET Division director mark
Roper be added in as a third
expert witness.
Very well W. secretary Clark
Then if you can find Mr Roper
there yes good morning Mr Roper
would you like to add anything
to the presentation.
You are muted Mr Robert.
Thank you Mr chairman I believe
the secretary and deputy
secretary of expressed it well
the only thing that I will add
it is it's important to
recognize that without this tool
there's a strong possibility
that these companies would not
happen to come to New Mexico so
when you look at the fact that
you may be giving up fifty
percent revenue are giving up
fifty percent of the large
number as compared to a hundred
percent of zero so it it's a
it's a very good mechanism to
allow us to get into the game
with these types of projects.
Thank you for being here
anything else buster Gellar
no Mr chair thank you.
Okay thank you let's go to the
audience is there are there
members of the audience in
support of.
House substitute for house with
three oh eight.
Can't hands up.
Hi remember we have a minute
thirty second time limit on
public comment it be great if
you can abide by that but by all
means speak your piece I will
not cut you off unless you go
super long.
First on the list I have Ashley
Wagner with the New Mexico
chamber of commerce good morning
Ashley.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we are in
strong support of this bill this
whole session we've been
preaching the need for economic
diversity and expanding our
workforce this bill does that by
giving New Mexico one more tool
to bring large capital projects
into the state it is one of the
few bills we've seen this year
that doesn't just aim to fix the
problem of COVID but invest for
the future and operate on a time
frame that is in line with what
the business community needs to
compete with other states we
also appreciate the clawback
provisions and how it still
allows for local control thank
you so much.
Thank you Ashlee.
Next let's go to.
Condit and associates good
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Brian Condit
executive director of the New
Mexico building construction
trades council we represent
fifteen construction craft
unions throughout New Mexico we
stand strongly and support of of
this legislation all in our view
is it is a potential for a game
changer are we've we've
established a little momentum
and we think it is full time
that
we proceed with of competing
with other states so we stand
full support of thank you.
Thank you.
Next we have Mike is pretty to
good morning.
Gore Mr chairman members of the
committee my guess preview I'm
the president of the Russell
Chavis county economic
development corporation we are
support of this legislation
encourage your support of it as
well this is a game changer this
is a tool that we just really
need to help attract more
companies to New Mexico to put
us on the competitive playing
field with other states
surrounding hours.
Legislation such as this is
beneficial to creation the
creation of many jobs and the
indirect jobs created as result
we fully support encourage your
support as well thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee.
Thank you very much next G. D.
Billings and good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee this is JD
Bullington representing the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce which supports house
bill three oh eight members of
the committee we need a large
parcel of tools at our disposal
to effectively recruit companies
to New Mexico and for especially
large projects sometimes of Leda
investment alone isn't enough to
close economic development deal
so having the option to commit a
portion of future local and
state gross receipts tax
revenues to the project makes
good sense it's an incentive
that will generate economic
activity that would not
otherwise occur thank you.
Thank you.
Next read more.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Brent
more I am a registered lobbyist
for Albuquerque economic
development we stand in strong
support of House Bill three oh
eight really appreciate the
speaker keeping this concept
alive in using one of his dummy
bills to to move forward with
the concept the yield of house
bill three oh eight is that it
gives us a tool towards very
large projects and we think that
that is a needed tool in the
toolbox so to speak with the
Economic Development in AD
stands in strong support thank
you very much.
Thank you.
The jar good morning.
Mr Chairman my name is Dennis
are and I represent both levels
health systems and Intel
corporation both said standing
strong support this proposed
measure not only would this
allow us to compete with other
states but other nations I would
add to the comments of the prior
speakers by pointing out that
Colorado Oklahoma Texas and Utah
do not tax construction services
or construction labor and
Arizona has a limited exemption
for construction labor we thank
the sponsor of the members of
the committee and urge you to
pass this bill.
Thank you.
We have Mister speaker here good
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Mr Currier and I sat on the
New Mexico partnership board of
directors we ask you to please
support this bill it will allow
New Mexico to better compete
with other states especially our
neighbors and attracting
additional quality and
sustainable economic base jobs
thank you for the opportunity to
testify.
Thank you.
Next with Eric when Marie.
Thank you Mr chairman names
Montgomery on the vice president
for business development within
the C. a valley economic
development alliance down and
donated County we stand in
support of house bill three oh
eight.
As all of you are well aware to
New Mexico's incentives work
very well in helping us to
diversify our economy to buffer
times.
Like we are going through
currently.
One of the biggest pain points
in any large project is the
construction G. R. T. we are not
competitive with many other
states with which we compete for
projects this helps us to
address it both on a local and
state levels through partnership
in the economic development.
Projects and we encourage your
support thank you.
Thank you next Jennifer Grasham
good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Jennifer grant some and I am
the interim president and CEO of
economic development corporation
of Lee County we stand strong
support of this bill and believe
that it will have a significant
impact on the economic
development efforts in both we
County and New Mexico we ask you
to please report the spill thank
you.
Thank you and my apologies for
mispronouncing your name agency
requests are.
Next we have cheese gentry.
I'm chase gentry Mr chair
committee representation tree
with Clovis economic development
and I'm on the board of New
Mexico idea we stand strong
support of house bill three oh
eight the bill will be
beneficial to economic
development efforts throughout
the state and also to Clovis and
curry county we're working on a
project right now it's about a
billion dollar project and this
will help us compete against the
state of Texas to potentially
recruit that project to New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you thank you for being
here anyone else in support of
house tax committee substitute
for your house bill three oh
eight.
Okay anyone in opposition.
Very well let's go to the
members of the committee members
of the committee your question
is is there debate on this
committee substitute.
Representative Harper followed
by Representative Strickler.
Thank you chairman
Representative and US secretary
and W. secretary it's great to
see you again this morning
Thank you for bring this forward
I was.
a little perplexed why the
Senate remove this from house
bill eleven
well maybe they just wanted to
focus on the COVID relief but
Kind of the other side of that
coin is making sure that we can
grow our economy the as we try
to come out of the COVID issued
so I'm glad to see this this
back.
Chairman and secretary R. W.
secretary can you I'm just going
to a little detail on the
clawback provision.
Certainly so Mister chair
representative Harper do
additional contractors provision
it's in here additionally says
that beyond the clawback
provisions that are in place for
traditionally to projects where
if the company doesn't perform
as intended in as they promise
under the contract the.
EPA is what we call the contract
that we can take the funding
back in addition to this as look
this is intended for projects of
over three hundred fifty million
dollars in construction and
infrastructure investment if a
company over promises on that
side and they don't hit three
hundred fifty million dollars
within ten years that we have to
go in and a claw back the funds
that were given to them through
this provision because they
didn't deliver on that part of
it so beyond just providing jobs
to get legal funds they also
have to make sure that they are
hitting that three hundred fifty
million dollars.
Chairman W. secretary thank you
for for help me understand that
and and does it specify at a
particular percentage or amount
I know that.
When I.
Work on the original clawback
provision we we included the
word proportional just address
flexibility there for department
it wasn't entirely prescriptive
because things are different
case the case what did you have
a formula and here or or
specific amount Mr Chairman
representative Harper there's no
specific formula in the bill as
with the existing clawback
language this language also
would provide a some flexibility
to figure out you know
proportionally what makes sense
based on how much of their homes
they were able to live up to.
Yeah chairman and does a great I
really appreciate hearing that
because you know what if what if
the business came really close
like three hundred million and
they were able to just make that
last fifty million we take all
of the support back that just
doesn't make sense so I'm glad
to hear that to be structured
that way that they're very
thoughtful.
And then I guess the.
I guess the other common I'll
just
mention
Yeah it's it's true that to
we're the only state in the
region that taxes construction
services.
and and I think that's probably
a good part of our tax code we
want to tax the last part of the
transaction not all the steps
along the way we don't
permitting but we should tax
everything.
and I.
I think.
You know I I've made it clear
that I.
I don't so much like
tax incentives to bring
businesses here I think we just
need a good tax base to bring
businesses here.
But I do believe that.
These big projects we can be a
little creative find a little
bit of help them
The you know.
Know that that might just be
worth it so I'm I'm going to
support this legislation again I
liked changes you've made.
Thank you chairman.
Thank you Representative Harper
next we have Representative
Strickler.
Mr Chairman can you hear me I
wanted to put on my headset.
We can hear you good.
You're good to go Representative
we can hear you fine.
Thank you Sir.
I just want to ask just a couple
questions there's a couple of
big projects are on the drawing
board one in San Juan County.
It's a carbon capture project
for units about one point two
billion dollar capital outlay it
also Holtec
and and lead Eddy County I think
it's a three billion dollar
project with this with this with
those two projects be eligible
for this
Lida
Project whatever you want to
call this a methadone.
Mr chairman and Representative
Strickler more group in our
office is the lead expert on
exactly what that qualifies what
doesn't so I would be happy to
turn it over to him to take your
question thank you.
Mr Chairman representative
Strickler both of those projects
would would be qualified
entities under the local
economic development act so they
would potentially qualify for
assistance under lead a I I will
point out that.
This particular legislation as
as for projects in excess of
three hundred fifty million in
construction.
And so it's important to note
that even though those projects
may be one point two billion
dollars that might be eight
hundred million in.
say nine hundred million dollars
in equipment which would not
make them quote qualified for
this gross receipts tax share so
it is only on the construction
we are sharing.
The tax on on capital
expenditures outside of extra
construction such as rolling
stock equipment etcetera.
If I may Mister chair to add
that those projects would also
need to comply with any
environmental rules and
regulations that are set out IBM
retirement.
Okay.
So there's some other incentives
I believe on capital projects if
there's a big capital portion on
these two facilities there's
some other the tax incentives I
don't know if it an hour be
would be
exactly right the government
gross receipts tax I think
there's some there's some other
incentives up I believe maybe
you can expand on that but
appreciate the distinction these
are these are construction have
a construction oriented projects
but a lot of hardware is
required especially for the
carbon capture it looks like a
refinery basically.
Maybe you can add a little bit
to that
this force other incentives it
might be applicable to those
school large industrial fraud.
Yes Mr chair Representative
Strickler you're correct in that
they would the they would be
qualified of recipient of our
bees if if the issue and that is
either the city or the county in
the area of were us.
Wanted to do and I are be there
it would be a an eligible I. R.
B. all of our other statutory
incentives are in place of by
the New Mexico legislature
such such as the job training
incentive program such as the
high wage jobs tax credit rural
jobs tax credit those those
would all be apple Google to is
J. tip is the kind of the
gateway to to most of the
statutory.
Tax credits in addition other
qualified immunity that would be
it would be eligible for
traditionally to
I just point out that if it
doesn't meet the three hundred
fifty million dollar threshold
for construction that wouldn't
be eligible for the G. R. T.
share okay thank you for that
clarification and and we're and
I really appreciate the economic
development team for the state
of New Mexico being so
a keen on on the competition
because our surrounding states
are are doing quite well and we
need all the help we can get to
compete for these projects we
have so many.
I think that Mexico has some
great opportunities here we've
we've you know we you can't beat
the weather here and we just
need to have the proper
incentives to to bring these big
projects here we need that we
need the jobs we need the
construction jobs especially I
know we're we're shot we got a
couple solar projects of cooking
and San Juan County near near
are power plant infrastructure
complex with it has a wonderful
transmission lines so it's just
a win win.
Only's to large industrial solar
projects that they they don't
they don't make the three fifty
I mean they're they're under
that there probably two hundred
million dollar projects which
will take we we certainly made
the the diversification and
are you know our neighbor states
are doing quite well and we need
to we need to pick up pick up
the pace so thank you Mr speaker
Mr chairman and thank you a
panel.
Thank you Representative
Strickler next we have
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman Madam
chair secretaries.
Her question.
I suppose for Mr Roper.
When do we know.
Construction phase of the
project.
It's concluded to.
Mr Chairman representative Scott
that's a very good question so
there there's two points there
one is by by this statute it has
to we're we're only going to
count concern.
Happens within the first ten
years us there is that deadline
first of all the ten year more
additionally when we when we do
enter into one of these
agreements the construction
phase as well as job rampage or
will be up.
Memorialized within the project
participation agreement and
those deadlines and and
milestones will be established
in the contract but for sure no
longer than ten years by.
Thank you for that Sir.
Mr chair madam chair Mr Roper.
Would.
Projects.
Do.
Thank you examples of Hey large
wind generator project and
transmission line project.
Be eligible for this program.
Mr chair representative Scott
members of the committee those
two examples do not meet the
qualifying Energy standard
established in the local
economic development act law.
So no they would not be eligible
for this they would be eligible
for an I. R. B. if the local
county would be willing but they
would not be eligible for LEED
under existing statutes.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Roper for your answers that's
all I.
Thank you Representative I don't
have any more heads up
and I think that.
As as been stated by my
colleagues you know we
appreciate your diligence on
this and and that trying to make
sure that these continues on a
path you know we know that
they're projects that you know
that are potentially coming here
and we've got to make sure that
we do our best to.
You know to continue to to
attract those specially in these
times and you know this is one
of three times.
when now it seems like members
of both parties are actually in
agreement on on on a big thing
like this so I'm I'm proud I'm
proud of the discussion thank
you members and thank you by
your Chandler for bringing four
with that what is the will of
the committee moved to pass on
the committee substance
chairman.
A second that Mr Chairman.
Okay so.
The motion is on a do not pass
on House Bill three oh eight
body do pass on house taxation
and revenue committee substitute
for house bill three oh eight
it's been seconded by Senator
metal.
Lane can you please call the
roll.
Yes.
Speaker eva.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative on this.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Maestas yes
please.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Stansbury yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
Speaker eager.
Representative Lujan yes.
Vice chair Chandler yes.
Chairman Martinez.
Yes.
Reporter permitted during the
negative.
One of twelve zero you have to
do passed on Leicester Chandler
thank you W. secretary Clark Mr
Roper secretary key scripts you
all again.
The rest of the day thank you
very much.
Members next ramble on to Senate
bill forty three and I believe I
saw Senator souls in our
attendee list.
I will.
Good morning promoted there he
is Senators souls good morning
how are you I'm doing well we
had a late night last night at
I'm up refreshed again.
All right it looks like you've
got some of.
Good with the yucca plants back
there right behind you well
that's my you were very
possessive that's my beautiful
organ mountain desert peaks
monument that I with that I
probably attitudes that to a
more professional background.
And now works for me and that
gives me a it's it's kind of
chilly here today so give me
some good feelings you got
Senate bill forty three please
take it away.
Thank you Senate bill forty
three and it always feels a
little we're trying to describe
this because I'm very much about
schools and education and this
is a bill that tears down
schools it's that the demo what
did for the demolition of school
buildings and facilities that
are no longer in use in New
Mexico the public school
facilities authority is
responsible for all of our
buildings and every not every
district many districts have
facilities that are no longer
useful of the district continues
to have to pay taxes on those
buildings that have to pay for
insurance on those for some
maintenance and security on
those buildings and that's money
that comes out of the classroom
this is a bill for the public
school capital outlay oversight
committee
and that public school
facilities authority in New
Mexico when we build new school
buildings each district get a
state and local match the state
pays for part of the cost the
local district pays for part of
the cost through local bonding
it's very difficult ever passed
bonds to tear down a school and
so many of these facilities
continue to be a burden on the
district and suck money away
from the classroom what this
bill does is for districts that
have those facilities that are
no longer useful that are not
cost effective.
That instead of having to have
the state and local match that
the public school facilities
authority the public that out
public schools are capital
outlay council will pay the full
cost for the demolition of those
that's a win win for everybody
we get them off of the the rules
for insurance and other costs
and shift money into the
classroom and for that reason
this is
Bill that enables the public
school facilities authority to
pay the full cost for demolition
of unused I needed
our public school facilities.
Thank you senator souls
appreciate the presentation of
appreciate the the privative as
well do you have any experts
that need to be let in.
I don't know of John Donovan
Champlin with the public school
facilities authority is on but
you know we tell you what I just
told you we've done this several
times yes so there's not a whole
lot more to be done with this.
All right so like you're the
expert.
Let's go to the audience we have
the anyone in opposition or
support
for House Bill Senate bill forty
three we have a couple hands.
till the end welcome good
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman.
The members of the committee
thank you for allowing us to be
here today my name is Joe again
on the executive director of the
New Mexico school boards
association we represent all
eighty nine school boards in New
Mexico I also have been a
service chair of the public
school capital outlay council
and we're here in strong support
of of us Senate bill forty three
that would provide for funding
of demolition of unusable
buildings.
Of based on a couple of criteria
but mainly to say save
operational costs are forced
districts that have to pay these
insurance the premiums for these
dilapidated buildings there's
quite a bit of need for this and
we've we've seen that through
the applications that we receive
at the pub public school capital
outlay council there's an
estimated one quarter of all of
our districts have.
These buildings that need
demolition so again we start
standing strong support and
thank you for your consideration
of our comments.
Thank you Joe next Chris bugs on
a good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I'm Chris balls
on on on the register lobbyist
for Los crucis public schools Mr
chairman Oscars public schools
is one of the many school
districts in our state.
that the now follows under under
the conditions that the Sanchez
stated during the presentation
of the bill this bill does saves
operational cost and also shifts
the fund in the right direction
we appreciate the sponsor bring
this and we are standing for
support thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Chris anyone else's
report of Senate bill forty
three.
Anyone in opposition.
Okay.
It's good to members of the
committee members of the
committee any questions or
debate on Senate bill forty
three.
Okay I've got a couple hands
here I don't know who went first
so I'm gonna go with the one
that is listed first on my list
and it's Representative gonna.
Good morning Mr chair I just
this this bill hit so close to
home and I just really want
appreciate Senator souls for
bringing at our our small town
community and big city New
Mexico style Los crucis we
certainly felt personally the
weight of having
an elementary school that that
isn't safe anymore for our
students and for our incredible
The staff and educators in that
building and to make sure we
have the mechanisms in place in
the situation of the next to
responsibly and reasonably move
forward with the funding needed
it's it's going to be truly a
lifesaver for for people and and
students and families in our
community so just want to
appreciate Senator souls for
bringing this important
legislation.
Thank you Representative.
Next week Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you senator
in Farmington we recently
demolished a the old formed in
high school which later became
Tibbetts middle school and it
you know sit right in the middle
town great location and and they
they they went ahead and
demolished it
and they course say they have
built a new brand new junior
high kind of west to town on
some of your land management
property that was donated to the
school district so we've we've
had a lot of big projects and
and Farmington
northeast elementary was tore
down and rebuilt built a brand
new facility Hermosa middle
school was kind of a partial you
know tear down and and remodel
our our the facility so
this bill is to light for
Farmington high but this would
mean
if this bill was in place then
the cost would have been covered
to demolish the old
formed in high school tubist
middle school for example I I'm
estimating is about a seventy
eight year your old
you know facility and the great
location I'm sorry that they
weren't able to tear down and
and just you know and rebuilt on
site that's we did Farmington
high school
Mr speaker and and etcetera
souls
it we had a big forty acre
campus right in the middle town
so we're real fortunate that we
had enough land to you know tear
the darn thing down and rebuild
it so
So what this bill will day will
take care of that situation is
that is that right Mr speaker Mr
chairman and and Senator souls.
Mr chairman and Representative
Strickler yes what the times
when it's actually a tear down
and reconstruct on the same site
that is part of the the whole
project of the initial one if
that the building was rebuilt
elsewhere this would have
covered the cost of the
demolition if that building was
no longer to be usable
had able to be sold to someone
else some other way and so to
get it off of the the insurance
will all of all of these also go
through the public school
facilities authority and that
public school capital outlay
council as to whether they meet
those criteria the facility and
that the plans for how to move
forward.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you sure souls you've
answered my question I
appreciate it.
Representative next let's go
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr.
Just a couple of questions.
Requirement in this legislation
for in a local matching funds
for the demolition.
Is the state's going to pay for
one hundred percent of the work
is that correct.
Mr chair representative that's
correct normally all buildings
go through the state local match
but on the demolition it tends
not to be terribly expensive and
it's good for everyone and so
instead of districts having to
make the decision whether to put
in any local match to tear down
and and making those
calculations demolition provided
it meets the criteria of both
the local district and the
public school capital outlay
council pays a hundred percent
of the cost to the state.
Mr chairman and senator what
becomes the land once each.
Watch the demolition spent.
It.
Mr chair representative that
really is outside the scope of
this but if the land is owned by
the district the district still
owns the land.
Thank you Mr.
That was.
Thank you recess got those
actually my question is what
what happens to the land
afterwards so that makes sense
any anyone else
Anyone else with questions for
senator souls.
All right what is will the
committee.
I move it to pass Mr chair I'm
trying to pull up the bill
number.
We might passed we have to pass
on Senate bill forty three do
you know forty three Mr chair.
All right second second
seconded.
Who seconded Ms R. Chandler on.
It will give it to will give it
to Representative Lujan
Representative Lujan seconded
lane please call the roll.
Yes.
Speaker.
Representative Parker.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Sure Representative Maestas yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Romero yes.
It is.
Representative Stansbury.
Yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
Yes.
Chairman Martinez.
Yes Representative twelve in the
affirmative thank you
all right thank you senator
soldier unanimous do pass good
luck the rest of the way great
to see you thank you for thank
you Mr chair out of great St
Patrick's day.
Like what.
Next on the list we have Senate
bill for ten is amendment is
amended and be senator Byrd with
us.
If he's not chairman I'm a I've
been asked her on the floor I
can present.
His what are you.
he's okay so it Senator Burt
good morning welcome.
Your muted can't hear you.
We still muted senator Byrd we
could see here name on the
screen but we can't hear you are
you ready to proceed on your
bill yes Mr chairman I apologize
I had a phone in my other here.
The gentleman that I am ready to
K. C. okay before we do that I'm
gonna have by your Chandler take
the gavel I've got a job on the
phone real quickly as well so
vice chair Chandler please take
it away and please present your
bill Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
chairman.
Thank you for the time this
morning as we grow short here in
the session
this is Senate bill fourteen in.
Is does one thing it simply
aligns New Mexico's large
partnership tax audit process
with federal tax audit processes
and procedures this is a better
question accountants and CPA's
and and I guess auditors as well
around the state.
If if we online again with the
federal
policies and procedures then
they know how to do the taxes
properly and again this is for
large partnerships these are for
partnership center one hundred
people or more doesn't affect a
whole lot of people in the state
but but there are people the
state your partners in other
states and there are a
partnerships within the state
that have some members here in
the state it's it's basically
fix a bill madam chair and in
this passed through the Senate
tax and finance unanimously and
also off the Senate floor
unanimously and so that's my
presentation to you this morning
on the stand for questions.
Very good thank you senator Byrd
let's go to the audience.
Anyone opposed to this bill.
I don't see any opposition
anyone in favor of this bill
please raise your hand.
All right I see a hand raised
Leri haraam.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Larry heard and
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico society of CPA's we
appreciate this the Senator
bring this bill four we worked
with Senator Burt and also the
multistate tax commission and
Helen hat to craft this
legislation to to align New
Mexico law with federal law on
how to deal with these large
partnerships and audits and an
amended returns and so truly is
a technical fix and we
appreciate the committee support
on the legislation thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Mr vice I don't see
any other hands so let's go to
the committee any any debate.
Mr Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair
And Senator Burkett issue here
this morning
And the I see that we actually
have this is hacked in the the
participant list I guess I just
want to give a shout out and
maybe for folks who are new on
the committee and don't now.
hello and hectic and Richard
Anklam.
One of our go to tax experts
nonpartisan tax experts and they
actually have a long past in New
Mexico starting at the tax
department and then
going into a private practice
but now Helen is actually.
The general counsel for the
multistate tax commission in DC
which is amazing that no one of
our own New Mexico grown you
know is in that position.
And the.
And
Insurance Senator you you would
mention the multistate tax
commission this this legislation
is really built off of their
model legislation that has
already been adopted by a dozen
or more states if.
Time correct madam chair and
representative yes that is
absolutely true it's it's a
model that has been working and
this is being worked to you know
this concession seasonal run the
United States is to being worked
in multiple states it's already
don't hold me to this was a
twelve thirteen states.
And and something is quite
frankly long overdue it needs to
be consistent in all that they
do again which helps out the the
CPA firms as well as the.
Senators and in the account so.
Thank you madam chair and and
senator I think that the last
thing I'll mention is.
well obviously if we don't pass
this is not the end of the world
but just so folks are aware the
reason why this is important is
I think was back in two thousand
fifteen the bipartisan budget
act the fed's changed how their
auditing of these bigger complex
partnerships that would into
effect on two thousand eighteen
and starting last year the fed
started actually enforcing this.
And so what this bill does if if
we do pass it it requires
folks who are in New Mexico who
are under federal auditor of
change their returns based off
this process to also notified
New Mexico.
And that way
We're not losing out on revenue
based off of a federal audit.
Or
Yeah I just actually just
keeping us apprised what's going
on a federal level at the state
level so that to
everything's kosher so I think
this is a really important
element.
Glad glad this tax was
So help us out to get this done
and thank you Sir Senator for
for caring at.
And the chair and representative
thank you for the kind words and
and I will tell you that Helen
act that is usually all of this
and and it was I think the late
in life she's finally popped on.
is the experts expert quite
frankly and Richard yeah he's a
local guy I don't be now he
knows the stuff shape is the
director of this tax research
institute so I got through it in
helping us through the whole
process.
Thank you.
And that thank you resent Harper
and I do and I have but we have
checked your address you want to
say a couple words okay.
Yeah.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you members of the committee and
thank you Representative Harper
Senator Burt for those kind
words and yes it's a joy to work
with all of you on the tax
committee I know you're
this is a hard the these are
complex issues but this one we
feel really good about that we
were able to work across the
aisle and also with the people
from around the country on this
issue and get it done so thank
you very much for considering
this bill.
Right thank you.
and that apology Senator
predicted to take a call it did
we did we do public comment
already yes we did.
I imagine there was maybe.
Droves of people come.
Well as such a broad based a
piece of legislation Mr chairman
you are going to.
Larry hearing and it did make a
positive comment and so I guess
he got my checks I think we're
okay.
That's going to stay the kid
that not the case of that no.
What we.
And there you know we love you.
let's a any other questions or
comments from the committee.
Okay what is the will of the
committee.
We'll do passed second Sir.
Late please call the roll.
Tell me who seconded the motion
please.
I believe that was Chandler
thank you.
Representative.
Speaker.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Stansbury yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
Representative.
Yes please.
Speaker you got.
Yes.
Chairman Martinez yes.
Representative twelve.
All right vote of twelve zero
Senator Bridge of a do pass good
luck the rest of the way great
see you thanks for your work
thank you Mr chairman madam
chair as well and and all of the
committee members thank you for
getting us from so quickly we
certainly appreciate it have a
great day.
Next let's go to Senate bill
three twenty eight Senator
Gonzalez.
Good morning senator because
that is the do you have an
expert with you.
Good morning bill.
Mr chairman members so I of the
probably will be you know they
can just be very brief.
You know I can go ahead and
start with the house bill three
twenty eight.
Hello Mr chairman and all
members of the committee with
the house bill three twenty
eight what it is system two
thousand thirteen it was still
it was enacted to be able to
have on water sanitation
districts imposed eight point
two five percent of the gross
receipts within though.
Commercial businesses that
reside within the district.
And part of that is why it came
out about is some.
Well water sensation districts
are fairly limited you know as
far as the revenue and without
commercial businesses they
require more infrastructure than
a regular residential so this is
how it became all the acted.
The at that time we'll do is
place that on every six years of
goal of the boulders and
basically what they're asking is
just remove that provision of
when they have have their
elections and some one County
Dona ana county inTaos county
they have being over bond we
approved.
And they just feel it's an added
expense to them which they have
a hard time financially you know
with.
With you know of anything that's
beyond in on their budget of the
probably what is more alarming
in a school prior to this the
water sanitation districts were
holding an election for
approximately seventeen hundred
dollars and within the last one
with the new change we're all
the elections are well combined
together the experience of the
pain as much as twelve thousand
eight hundred for the lection
and they just feel that it's
just an over burning art you
know on their part and with that
Mr chairman and members so I
will stand for any questions and
I don't know if you have money
expert witnesses on on the chat.
I chairman Martinez asked me to
take over and if you could
repeat the names of your experts
Senator we can see if they're
around okay you would be able to
be Mr Bob or metal or Mr John
painter.
Elaine do you see them in the
attends all no madam chair I do
not see them in the attendees
okay with that then I suggest we
go to the audience anyone in
opposition please raise your
hands.
No one in opposition
individuals and support please
raise your hand.
Well this is a controversial
bill Senator there are no hands
raised what so ever.
So let's go to the committee any
questions comments from
committee members.
So I do not see any hands raised
on this item is there a motion.
Are people awake of but I'm sure
move a do pass okay and that
madam chair do passed for
Representative Maestas and the a
second but from Representative
Romero.
All right lane would you call
the roll please.
Representative.
Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Stansbury yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Speaker.
Representative Harper.
No.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative Montoya.
I'm yes madam chair sorry had a
hard time getting that switched
over to my Bluetooth earlier.
Madam vice chair yes.
Herman Martinez yes.
We have eleven in the
affirmative.
One in the negative.
Senator you have a do have some
good to see you again have a
good day to see you thank you
very much of Madam Mr chairman
and members thank you thank you.
All right thank you thank you
for good to see several Stallis
and thank you for for covering.
You can can you can you take it
again vice chair thank you
absolutely Mr chair we are now
on.
The next item is Senate bill
fifty nine Senator Stewart and
Senator Stewart with us yes I am
madam chair great all right I'm
good to see you again.
if you'd like to present take it
away all right thank you this
bill does is something
Very minor to our reserve funds
we have an operating fund and we
have the tax stabilization
reserve fund well we can't
really use the tax stabilization
reserve fund it's now a close to
two billion one point six
billion in our research is from
the tax stabilization fund all
this bill does is allow us to
have a little bit more in our
operating reserves so that we
can use it in our appropriation
process for you said if we need
to so currently the operating
reserves a cap is at eight
percent this move set up to
fifteen percent we think it's
about a fifty million dollars a
year more into the operating
reserves and less into the tax
stabilization act remember that
tax stabilization act is that
one point six billion dollars
and that's what it does.
Thank you for that
let's go to the audience do we
have anyone in opposition.
I see one hand raised Mr
Billington.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is JD
Bulkington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce which has a
difference of opinion about
Senate bill fifty nine chamber
believes the tax stabilization
reserve is a savings and
stability mechanism correctly
designed to provide a check on
the legislature's easy access
significant amount of money in
any given year and the chamber
believes it should be preserved
to the greatest extent possible
the chamber also believes excess
oil and gas emergency school tax
revenue should continue going to
the rainy day fund and not the
operating reserve the chamber
does not believe there is a
sufficient enough reason at this
time for the state to so greatly
increase the amount of money
held in the operating reserve.
Concept of keeping more money in
the rating day fund and lessen
the operating reserve made sense
when this fund was created and
it makes the same sense to the
chamber today thank you.
Thank you Mr Billington I see no
other hands in opposition
anyone in support.
I see no hands in support so
would you like to add any
additional comments Senator
before we go to the committee.
You know there there's nobody
support because nobody really
knows or understands this and
they don't understand the tax
stabilization act there is
absolutely no damage to the tax
stabilization act that says been
thoroughly vetted with the LFC
Dawn Iglesias actually helped me
come up with this so this just
give us just a little more
flexibility all it does so I am
ready for questions great thank
you senator I see Representative
Harper stand up.
Madam chair.
Representative Romero was first.
I'm sorry I didn't.
I wanted to I'm so sorry that's
fine madam chair I'm I'm
interested to hear what
Representative progress the
state as well so always you do
clean up Representative Romero
after trying to confuse as all
of us so go ahead Representative
Harper.
Of madam chair that's never my
intention the.
Thank you madam chair and the.
This is a pro tem welcome to a
tax committee.
Twice in the.
But I know and and none of these
on solar no.
I finished for now was so.
R. that's that's awesome thank
you are.
Chair and senator
So I I have a couple questions
just to kind of make sure I
understand the impact of the
legislation and maybe some
recent comments.
So.
I'm not sure the.
Is this
legislation do any saying with
regards to the mercy school tax
distributions to the tax
stabilization fund.
You madam chair so I think what
they do do this does too is that
moves them first to the
operating reserves and then they
will go from the operating
reserves to this tax
stabilization fund once that
operating we're services fifteen
percent.
Easily early.
Yes so madam chair and senator
I.
I believe that's correct that's
my understanding as well maybe
just to help folks who are you
on the committee don't even know
what a tax stabilization reserve
in is in the process these kind
of.
Two pockets that we have could
you just explain that process.
So madam chair and
representative from no this was
our former representative Larry
lacked Larry there in the office
idea and his bill I think was
house bill one ninety one if I
remember in twenty seventeen
that set up this tax
stabilization act so that there
would be more stability in our
predictions for what we could
spend and there would be more
stability in our reserves so
it's very hard to spend any of
us it takes a two thirds vote of
both the house and the Senate
and the governor's
approximation so these funds are
the most stable in our reserves
so there are no changes to that
that still remains solid it's
going to go up every year when
we get this federal money it's
really gonna go up so it's it is
a true rainy day fund and this
just gives us a little bit more
flexibility what they're
operating reserves we we just
what we brought our producers to
zero in the last few years
because of the impact of the
economy so it doesn't mean we
can spend it doesn't put it into
the spending column it puts it
into the savings account rather
than your four oh one K. you
know you've got the tax
stabilization reserve you can't
really get into it the operating
reserves you can.
Yeah madam chair and the Senator
thank you just I think that's a
really good description I like
your four oh one K. to savings
account analogy.
and and I see that Miss Iglesias
is is joined us.
That manager would be
appropriate to ask her for for
this kind of the the some mail
on how this money flows.
And and why when you look at our
reserve number.
some of it is accessible in some
of it is what successful.
certainly in Representative Miss
Iglesias if you'd like to answer
that question.
Our madam chair and and
Representative Harper so as you
all know we have several buckets
in our reserves and the the
first primary back it goes to
the operating reserve when what
that means is that anytime that
revenues are in excess of
expenditures in a given fiscal
year that excess money is that
out of the General Fund and
deposited into first the
operating reserve the operating
reserves currently capped at
eight percent of the prior
year's appropriation anytime
that that excess money isn't
that bond if it brings that
balance of the fund more than
eight percent of prior year and
anything in excess of that eight
percent currently gets
distributed then operating rates
excuse me to the tax
stabilization
What this bill would do is
increase that cap for that flow
of funding so with that money
gets swept into the operating
reserve it would look back and
say are is that balance eight
percent of exceed fifteen
percent of prior year
appropriations for that money
then get swept into the tax
stabilization reserve and you
can see an illustration on page
two of your FIR distributions to
the tax stabilization reserve
over the last few years the
operating reserve cap has been
the primary source of transfer
funding into the tax
stabilization reserve over the
past three years it's possible
for about eighty five percent of
the transfer.
There's two ways of the tax
stabilization it's funny the
transfer from the operating
reserve for in excess of that
cap and the excess distribution
of the oil and gas tax and the
operating with your cat has been
the primary.
I'm
Iglesias yes.
Yes Representative measurements
Iglesias so so just to make it
super simple we have a certain
amount it's appropriated house
bill two every year.
And if the revenues ever in
excess of that.
The first bucket it goes into is
the operating reserve.
And if the money in there
exceeds eight percent of the the
expended budget.
Than extra money on top of that
goes into the tax stabilization
reserve.
And that has some protections on
the the first bucket
the legislature can.
You do just that as this as they
will it can be used to expand if
there's.
fall in revenue those those
dollars can quickly be used to
take care of it the tax
stabilization reserve has some
protections on and and share.
and and Representative I'm sorry
Senator Stewart
you mentioned that there is a
two thirds.
Folks requirements on the
exclusion reserve I believe
that's that's during the sunny
days we'll call it right when
there's not a shortfall in the
budget.
it if I remember right is there
also a second trigger that if
the reserve if the numbers are
not looking good that answers
just a simple majority to access
those dollars to I remember that
correctly.
Madam chair.
I think that's correct but it
has to be also proclamation by
the governor and it has to be as
severe enough that we're
basically out of money
everywhere else.
And we did that in our special
session in June.
Mr Harper Representative Harper
here muted.
My apologies thank you chair and
senator thank you for so that's
my recollection as well the
manager to ask Miss Iglesias to
to add on to that if that's
appropriate certainly.
Sure and madam chair
Representative Harper it that's
that's absolutely right so
there's there's two mechanisms
by which the tax stabilization
reserve can be accessed one is
if the Legislature simply wants
to appropriate from the tax
stabilization reserve then on
the governor has declared
necessary for the health peace
and safety of New Mexicans and
the legislature has to vote with
a two third majority in both the
house and the Senate in order to
simply appropriate from the the
rainy day fund however there's a
separate provision that says if
revenues are projected to fall
short of expenditures and given
fiscal year or in the following
fiscal year then with an
emergency declaration by the
governor that funding can then
be accessed from the tax
stabilization reserve to meet
the budget shortfall.
yes thank you madam chair and
Miss Iglesias so so I I'm hoping
that helps us understand now
The lay of the land so we can
actually have a conversation
about how this changes things
because madam chair and senator
like you mentioned we we did
this during the special session
and and this fund was designed
this way that during the sunny
days when when dollars are
flowing it's really challenging
to get into it two thirds vote
of the house and the Senate.
But just simply when revenues
are expected to meet the
obligation and the governor
makes a proclamation of
emergency or or whatever Senate
just a simple majority and we
did that
and I believe.
Madam chair and senator that's
one of the reasons why we had
such.
this current fiscal crisis that
we're going through because of
COVID was not as bad as it could
have been.
Because we're able to exercise
this mechanism and then tap
those funds Mr speaker.
I'm sorry chairman Senator do
you have thoughts on that.
You madam chair it seems like
we're all just saying the same
thing yeah it's a great to have
it and we used it appropriately
and that's great so all this
bill does is keep a little bit
more in the operating reserves
remember we talked about one
point six billion that is in
that tax stabilization act
that's only been set up for the
last three years and this bill
would keep about fifty million
more in the operating reserves
one point six billion over three
years fifty million a year in
operating reserves so I don't
know how else to explain it I
think I've explained it the same
way Miss Iglesias is explained
that as Representative Harper
has explained that.
Now so so thank you madam chair
and senator so so that help me
understand the the fifty million
dollar that that's right having
a little confusion if we're
going up from eight percent
reserves.
To fifteen percent.
and the operating
that and a budget that's almost
eight billion dollars eight
percent to fifteen percent
sounds like more than fifty
million dollars to me so help me
understand that.
Madam chair that's the F. I. R.
that's been produced by miss
Iglesias that's what it looks
like so and you know frankly we
have a raise that cap on the
operating is served in many
years and several people have
said we should raise that we put
in place legislation tax
stabilization act so that's what
it produces another seven
percent just look at your FIR if
you don't believe maybe then you
can just ask
Miss Iglesias will tell you the
same thing.
And then we'll be repeating each
other more.
Madam chair representative
however would you like me to
follow up.
Be wonderful thank you right I'm
so the FIR reflects only the
distribution from the excess oil
and gas school tax revenue
that's the most immediate impact
of this bill that's in within
the budget years within the
forecast period expected to have
an impact so it only reflects
the distribution from the excess
oil and gas school tax in
December from the twenty
nineteen estimate was estimated
that that access school tax
revenue would be about fifty
million that number is coming
from in the February thank you
in the February twenty twenty
one update that new estimate is
now about a hundred and twenty
six million so that's reflected
in the current F. I. R. so that
changes as our revenue estimates
change
but that reflects the trend the
distribution all that school tax
now to be operating reserve
instead of the tax
stabilization.
Eight eight secondary but
separate issue and as the cap
amount and the reason that's not
rejected in the FIR is because
we do not expect the operating
reserve to meet the cap with in
your the original eight percent
cap within the forecast period
so therefore there's no
anticipated fiscal impact of
raising that cap Representative
Harper you are correct eight
percent of our current our prior
year budget would be around.
Six hundred million style and at
fifteen percent of the current
budget that would be near one
billion.
Yes so so.
Madam chair and senator this is
I think this is really important
for us to understand is that we
are significantly changing the
funding slow in slow to the tax
stabilization reserve.
Because now instead of around.
Six hundred million in reserves
being the trigger to start
funneling money into the tax
stabilization reserve we're not
gonna be going closer to a
billion dollars in reserves four
triggering that in order to the
Texans nation what was a cabbie
out of the well emergency school
tax knowing aspect was going in
there.
so.
And and what I also just for our
madam chair and senator is that
we're not even dissipating this
year that will hit those numbers
so we're not expecting.
much of an increase in the funds
into that tax stabilization
reserve over the next years is
is that correct.
Senator Stewart madam chair
would you like me to take that
question later.
I'm absolutely madam chair
representative Harper so we do
it this legislation aside we
would expect that the tax
stabilization reserve to
continue getting funding for the
excess school tax and aims at on
investment earnings throughout
the Syrian in fiscal year twenty
one as you all know because of
our revenue shortfall we are
actually as authorized the June
special session anticipating
calling from the tax
stabilization reserve in order
to meet the FY twenty one.
I'm and what that means as well
empty out the operating rates
and and have to also tap into
the tax stabilization just to
pay for fiscal year twenty one
we anticipate based on the
current budget recommendations
in FY twenty two that revenues
both we exceed expenditures
therefore it will not require a
dip into reserves we within need
to be rebuilding that the
operating reserve at that point
so it would have very little
funding in the operating reserve
as of fiscal year twenty to
based on the current mechanisms
so if this legislation were
approved then that that funding
for the excess school tax
revenue that would be flowing
into the tax stabilization
reserve would then go into the
operating reserve helping to
rebuild that balance which will
is now being mostly emptied out
in the school year twenty one
but the tax stabilization
reserve would continue to
receive investment earnings.
Yes so.
Madam chair Senator and spaces
thank you for that so so will
not have really any inflow of
funds but because it's invested
I assumed by the treasurer.
we will see a small
the increase from whatever we
get from those investments and
madam chair representative
harbor if I may add that's
invested by the state investment
council is expected to have
about four to four and a half
percent return on based on
current balances were
anticipating probably about
fifty million dollars or so in
additional funding into the
reserve based on the investment
earnings.
Just one other thing that I'll
point out briefly
is that the excess distributions
that occurred from the operating
reserve to the tax stabilization
reserve in eighteen nineteen and
twenty were because largely
because revenues came and so
much more than expected in the
in the revenue estimates with
with oil doing what it was doing
it was hard for the revenue
estimates to keep up so if there
were unexpected there were I
expected revenue increases
amounting or resulting in a
significant amount of additional
revenue that were distributed
into those bonds and therefore
tree right triggering that
transfer so I would just point
out that yes that Things
recovered sooner than expected
and happened to rebound faster
than what's anticipated in our
current
revenue estimate that it is
possible for that operating
reserve tended to begin
regaining its balances that
sooner than we currently expect.
I think madam chair Senator miss
Iglesias
As always I appreciate your your
deep understand these issues and
helping us to understand them.
So.
I guess the.
The reason that we thought this
was
a good.
Watch when action house bill one
ninety one Representative
learning auga this was a non
Democrat controlled legislature
passed this legislation.
chair and senator was that
We had listened to DrPH.
who was presented several times
two revenue sterilization Tax
committee.
About the volatility of our.
Revenue streams and the
challenges that we are seem to
face very often.
as we ride roller coaster
feeling gas industry.
and that is
I think you to the mast was
something like eighty percent of
volatility in our Revenue could
be directly tied to the oil and
gas industry.
And she recommended that we have
a mechanism like this where when
when times are good we siphon
off some of those funds.
And and that would make it hard
to access those funds when times
are good.
And that when times are bad
accessing it is not a big deal
and and we can use it.
and.
And I really think.
That was a wise suggestion New
Mexico is a wise thing that the
legislature did and and madam
chair Sir I understand that
you're not touching.
That particular statute but you
are impacting
substantially by impacting the
flows that go in there and and
that's for my my concern is that
we're.
Now moving in the opposite
direction were
That we're pushing more of these
monies into funds that are
easily accessible the operating
reserve.
and and not into the fund that
is designed to help us when we
see one of these oil and gas
Troughs.
Senator madam I am I reading
this completely wrong.
Madam chair and representative I
just disagree with you mean over
the last few years when that tax
stabilization act has gone up
and up and up and we have
struggled.
To get out of Yazzie Martinez
because we never put enough in
the schools I started asking
about this and I asked.
the DFA secretary David about it
and she said to me yeah we
probably put too much into it so
I have for years tried to see if
we can adjusted a little bit I
had a bill last year I never
really followed through with it
I didn't understand that I
couldn't explain it.
I'm so I abandoned it and then I
went to David Abbey in Donna's
last year.
And said you know how can we you
how can we address this just a
little bit because it's just so
frustrating to be under this a
lawsuit and not be able to get
out of that and so they came up
with four different options and
I took the option that did not
touch the tax stabilization act
did not touch the mechanisms for
using the money kept the two
thirds and one of their
suggestions was we haven't
raised the cap on the operating
serves in many years that
certainly perhaps should have
been done when we did the tax
stabilization act but we did not
and so I chose this option
moving it to fifteen percent I
do not think it will affect it
because if we don't if we don't
do anything at all with the
federal dollars and that the oil
and gas coming back maybe that
that fund is just going to go
for a bigger bigger bigger and
we want it to go paper I agree
with the rainy day aspect which
is why I I don't have the bill
that undermines any of that I
think this is a small
flexibility measure that will
put a little bit more into
operating research doesn't mean
we gonna spit we're gonna spend
that it just means there's a
little more flexibility.
Madam chair and senator thank
you
For that I I appreciate that and
understanding where you're
you're coming from.
I I just.
I think you're right we we we
have a disagreement I do
believe.
I'm grateful that you're not
touching that statute of but I
do agree that or do believe that
this bill does.
very directly affect that and I
think that it's worked this last
special session that it works we
we came in the governor had the
proclamation our revenues were
projected to be lasts and and it
worked.
And so I I I think opening up
this way so we can spend more
money this is.
It is moving in the exact
opposite direction.
and so I'm I just.
R. thank you for.
The time I'm I'm sorry I'm not
goals for this.
Madam chair hi I yield.
thank you representative
Representative Romero.
Thank you I'm Senator madam
chair and and Dawn thank you and
thank you Representative Harper
for a lot of those questions
which covered a lot of the this
program that I was looking for
I am more interested in some of
the logistics of this just a
process that we've gone through
to get to this point
so I guess I'm I'm we we do see
a lot of revenue step
stabilization efforts typically
proposed by our
you know our our house
when my saying appropriations
and finance committee and so I'm
I'm I'm curious as to how
you know looking at the
stabilization recommended and
some of the process that this
had gone through is our is our
chairwoman Lundstrom on board
with this piece of legislation
as well madam chairman xi is by
Sanchez she's by my house
sponsor this came out of
probation that I don't know what
the vote was this this probably
will be a partisan issue but
Representative Lundstrom
chairwoman Lundstrom is my house
sponsor of this bill I
appreciate that thank you madam
chair thank you senator on the
only other questions I have a
record and I loved the fact of
the decision tree and the it's
even about that but if fans this
is is very clear cut as to how
that happens except for the fact
that I'm I'm really confused
still what happens because we
are in ebbs and flows of course
still with the way we've
designated our our economy and
we we receive revenues so when
we do when we do fall short and
I appreciate analyses about the
F..
I'm more interested in the wins
when we fall short of the
appropriations and I and I'm
asking this question because we
went from seven to fifteen
percent so that's over you know
doubled the sort of amount that
we had had
you know for that stable as a
stabilizing mechanism so if when
we're in that situation how does
that decision tree play out and
at the levels that were allowing
to sort of upped the ante of
what happens then with this
increase.
So madam chair representative
this does not affect any of the
mechanisms for the tax
stabilization act of we would
still be able to use that
we would possibly have a little
bit more money in operating but
maybe not because it go it's
going from eight to fifteen but
if it's not even at eight you
know nothing happens so the tax
stabilization act is growing day
by day and it will continue to
do that and when we have another
downturn it will be there in
case we need to so all of those
procedures are still in place.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator so I appreciate the the
fact of the sort of contingency
and I guess you know the ones
are when we we're always we're
worry some about the the fact of
the matter so I guess just to
how did we land on fifteen
percent for the increase for
this and I understand that part
of it was so that we don't have
to come back and do this every
year as we have within the
specials and such SO you know
I'm I'm just curious as to how
we got this this is not.
Madam chair representative so a
first of all for your for your
last comment we still may have
to come into special session
because we still have the tax
stabilization act doesn't allow
us to get into it so except for
in these emergency but
Us so let's see the question was
the first part of your question.
Madam chair representative I was
just curious we know we are
doubling the the amount so I'm
just yeah over.
Madam chair when I went to David
Abbey and talk to him about this
and then he sent me to Dawn
Iglesias Adan went through a
gave me four options and
and this was one of the options
and so this is the one I picked.
Madam chair representative
American a follow up.
I'm absolutely so Senator
Stewart did come to us asked how
this could be adjusted so when
we were looking at the the total
reserves announced we look back
to the history of the eight
percent and what total reserve
targets tended to be there was
never an official reserve target
at the time but at when
operating reserve was initially
set at that eight percent are
typical the school year total
reserve amount was typically
targeted at somewhere between
five and ten percent for total
reserves and so the operating
reserve at that time was
intended to be the primary
bucket upon which was the house
of most reserves now granted
this is before the tax
stabilization reserve was
transferred to ensure repeat a
fine and the LFC is very
supportive of the tax
stabilization reserve and it's
any day I mechanisms we do also
recognize that to the extent
that the legislature has a
reserve target which now because
of stress testing is around
twenty to twenty five percent
depending on whether or not
we're in lower cost here
but we have a high reserve
target now recognizing the
outstanding need for that given
just help all of oil and gas
revenues I'm and as a production
has skyrocketed it's increase
our general fund share of oil
revenues that we recognize that
we need a higher target but the
fact that what has been the
affected both FY nineteen and
twenty and going into one is
that the extent that the
legislature has reserved the
five percent and then the tax
stabilization reserve receive
more and more of that signing
the tax stabilization reserve
was about taking up about
seventeen percent so all of the
total reserve balances which
meant that the flexibility
within each fiscal year was
reduced given that reserve
target now if there were no
reserve target and there would
be no issue you could have as
my.
Did you wanted in the operating
reserve and as much as you want
tax stabilization out to the
extent the legislature has a
reserve target there is the
possibility to grow the tax
stabilization at the expense of
the more flexible operating so
we offer a few different
suggestions of where that taxed
liquor you read that operating
reserve could be increased may
it be ten percent twelve percent
or fifteen percent we did not
suggest anything above fifteen
percent because and even though
the operating reserve prior used
to be the primary bucket into
target we did recognize the need
to maintain a healthy tax
stabilization
and and would not want at this
point the tax the the operating
research and take up the
overwhelming majority of the
reserve balances in order to
maintain that that rainy day
right glass in case of emergency
type of fund
so you know up to fifteen
percent was impacts that we felt
comfortable suggesting it was
the the suggestion.
Part ran west for this proposal
we are not opposed to to that
again I'm I'm here not in
support or opposition of the
bill that simply to explain the
functions are but that's part of
the reason why that fifteen
percent once was as a potential
and when we're looking at the
overall reserve targets in
general and the historical
relationship between the target
of the Opry researcher and the
overall risk.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator and thank you miss
Iglesias that's very helpful
just to understand the sort of
you know the process and the
decision tree that I think
Senator Stewart went through as
far as being able to do that and
I just want to commend Senator
Stewart for her initiative in
making that decision and and
pressing forth on this issue to
have that and I think it's
really you know important that
we understand their options that
this was one of the best ones if
not the best and that it's one
of the the decisions that we get
to make today so I appreciate
the the sort of history and with
that I I do support this
legislation I think it is very
responsible and how we move
forward in trying to stabilize
our revenues and and do this
thank you again Senator thank
you is yes yes for the for the
background and for the in but
and and informing how we make
these decisions I appreciate
that thank you madam chair
yield.
Thank you very much
Representative Romero we now go
to Representative Strickler
thank you madam chair and thank
you Center again she can
you know my mic my question is
yeah I'm looking at their file
right now and it looks like
we're going to shift a hundred
twenty six million dollars
from the tax revenue
stabilization fund to the
general fund operating reserve
and then FY twenty three it's
seventy six million seven.
And then it it invented to kind
of flattens out at fifty one
million forty seven million.
And I really appreciate your in
discussion
the Senator on where you came up
with a fifty percent my first
reaction is why so so hi.
one not two percent why not you
know ease into this a little bit
and
In a and that that was just
strike point that you picked and
and the options that you were
given
also want to.
mention that the board of the
COVID said that kind of advice
us in Dawn Iglesias can can lab
right on this.
That we need to keep a twenty to
twenty five percent reserve you
know reserve account because of
the volatility of only gas and
may want when times are good
board times are good when times
are bad they really it really is
back at and so this reserve
Tax stabilization reserve is
really doing a good job.
At the right time because we
were experiencing a little mini
boom in in twenty nineteen and
then here comes a pandemic here
comes the Saudi Arabia of
Russian price war and it was a
double whammy we we saw thirty
two percent drop in all gas
prices.
Fifteen percent decline and and
just production so a related
socket to us but thank goodness
we had like a thirty three
percent
cash reserves a is that right
center or maybe Dawn can right
can remind us that we had a
really good reserve about it was
at thirty three percent
of
Senator a maybe Dawn can can can
remind us all that Madam chair
representative yeah it's good
it's going to continue to be
good because we still have the
tax stabilization act and if don
would like to do more direct
answer that be great.
Absolutely and madam chair
representative Strickler the FY
twenty ending reserve percentage
was thirty five point four
percent of which the tax
stabilization reserve
representative about twenty four
point four percent of total
appropriations that year.
So we were living a charmed life
that was that was awesome maybe
never I don't since I've been
here fifteen years never if we
had a thirty five percent of
reserve profile
and then lo and behold.
You know all hell broke loose
and and the pandemic at in the
in the price warhead and we were
able to withstand that that
hurricane or that some nami you
know I think I think we're
really blessed and in that
regard so anyway
Just getting back to the fifteen
percent Bob I would love to see
it ten ten percent maybe twenty
percent cap in this play it safe
I think fifteen percent is a
kind of a bridge too far so
with that that that that close
my comments appreciate you
center and and Dawn is always
good to say it.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative
Representative Scott.
Representative Scott are you
muted.
Thank you madam chair takes me a
minute to get all this always
electronic gizmos I get up and
running.
Madam chair Senator.
Miss Iglesias.
We are and.
Good.
She is simpler for.
Loading on ocean of federal
money now.
The revenue projections based on
the.
Forty something dollars oil look
conservative at this point.
The question would be I suppose
one now.
Madam chair representative
Scott.
I've been working on this for
three years and now I have a
bill I understand and it's a
sixty day session those are my
answers.
I think don and other members of
the LFC really a looked at in
detail at what I was asking and
I in our rejected proposals to
change the tax stabilization act
at all and
you know it seems like the
operating tab hadn't hadn't been
raised or adjusted we've we've
adjusted everything else you
know we've we've found a way to
take billions of dollars
and put them in a rainy day fund
that's not going to change so
it's now because I heard from
secretaries in the interim that
that we probably had just maybe
a tiny bit too much going into
the fund it took away the
flexibility this just gives us
more flexibility that's all it
does doesn't mean we have to
spend more it's not it doesn't
go into our pockets it goes into
our savings account it takes a
little bit out of the four oh
one K. puts it into the savings
account and I will say.
That's it.
Thank you madam chair Senator.
And Miss Iglesias but this.
Not true
All the money.
We would need to.
It might be available for that.
I need to all the money.
Will be intercepted.
For the reserve account for the
foreseeable future is accurate.
No no madam chair I could have
done answer that question.
One.
Sure madam chair
Representative Scott so for the
foreseeable future right now
with our forecast period we
don't anticipate the reserves
getting the eight percent cap
anyway.
So by changing it to the fifteen
percent on a strictly scoring
basically it wouldn't affect the
forecast period because the the
operating reserve with either
positive or of that up until it
gets to the eight percent in any
case I do understand what you're
saying though that by increasing
it to fifteen percent it is that
harder or increases the trigger
by which funds get deposited
into the tax stabilization
reserve so that the operating
reserve would be able to receive
more funding until it gets to
the fifteen percent prior to it
being triggered to the tax
stabilization
I would cabbie ought to say
within our current forecast
period because we do not expect
at this point the operators to
be able to regain its initial
eight percent we don't
see it happening
At an impact that would be
scored in the fiscal impact
report.
Thank you madam chair.
Senator and Miss Iglesias so.
The only revenues going to.
The rainy day fund would be
those revenues and I'm planned
out for the foreseeable future
or until.
Revenues.
The first revenue research fund.
To go to fifteen percent the
only revenue.
Going into the rainy day fund
would be.
Revenues generated by the
investment return thank you.
I could have done industry
professionals absolutely
Representative Scott that is
accurate.
And.
Mister chairman Senator and Miss
Iglesias.
We have routinely I think.
In the last few years.
Money from the reserve fund.
To increase spending.
I'm not mistaken we've gone from
a little over six billion
dollars now what we're
projecting at seven point four
billion dollars over just the
last three or four years.
Miss Iglesias could you answer
that for please.
Madam chair representative Scott
the answer to that is sort of
two fold in the passage of each
of the legislative session it
was expected that we would need
to draw it down money from the
operating reserve in order to
cover the budgets that were cast
at session mostly due to one
time spending in that special
session not largely due to
increases in current projects
that for one time spending there
were anticipation of deploying
into the operating reserve that
however as you can see in your
chart in the FIR revenues beat
expectations and all three of
those years the expectation
eighteen ninety and I think we
actually did not need by the end
of the fiscal year to actually
pull anything out of the
operating reserve and not only
do we not pull anything out
because revenues exceeded
expenditures by posited in the
operating room exceeded that cap
and where the deposited into the
tax stabilization
in the last few legislative
sessions we've anticipated to
point Representative point of
order to cover one time spending
however that did not actually
end up being the case by the end
of the fiscal year when the
revenues beat the expectations.
Mister chairman Senator miss
Iglesias here certainly appears
to have been.
Willingness on the part of the
legislature.
To pull money from the operating
reserves to meet anticipated.
Is that a hacker.
Mr sorry madam chair
representative Scott yes that is
accurate I will also add to that
answer that the legislature has
also maintained a target of
twenty to twenty five percent in
the last few years and when the
willingness of the legislature
in those years two X. to call
from the operating reserve in
order to cover those budgets a
still maintained those target so
that the reserve balances at the
time were in excess of that
twenty to twenty five percent
get and pulling from the
operating reserve was done to
cover one time spending but
still brought the legislature
and that I'm twenty to twenty
five percent target so I I
recognize that that that it is
not in statute the extent that
that are get exists there could
be both there could be a
willingness to draw from the
operating reserve to cover one
time spending as well as a
willingness to maintain high
risk.
Madam chair Senator and Miss
Iglesias would it be accurate to
say.
Our part twenty five percent
research number would need to go
all.
Right along with the projected
spending in order to maintain
that percentage is that
accurate.
Madam chair representative Scott
yes that is accurate the
percentage the amount increases
each year as the budget
increases because the percent of
that would increase the amount
that that so we we could
maintain a consistent percentage
say twenty five percent all the
time but still had increasing
reserves if twenty five percent
of a bigger number results in a
vigorous need.
There and lost my concern.
Madam chair Senator miss
Iglesias in that the.
Ready to fund needs to be
increased.
In order to maintain the twenty
twenty five percent percentage.
To accommodate.
Six percentage.
As a proportion of spent.
Thank you.
Thank you senator and thank you
madam chair furniture more
questions that's all I have
thank you Representative
Representative Stansbury please.
Thank you madam chairman and
good morning Senator Anton needs
to see you guys
I am just wanted to make sure
that I fully understand this
proposal especially in light of
some of the discussion this
morning I know a lot of this
ground is been covered but if I
could kind of explore a little
bit and rephrase things a little
bit I think that might be
helpful for myself and other
members of the committee so
madam chair and senator my
understanding of kind of what
we're proposing to do here is
really about increasing
liquidity and our reserves
because the rainy day fund
specifically requires statutory
authority in order to unlock
those funds is that correct.
The madam chair I think that's a
good way just say it.
Okay so you know one of the
things that I think is been a
little bit confusing and the
discussion this morning is that
and I think I heard Miss
Iglesias referred to this
multiple times but just to make
sure that it's clear for
everyone alright over all we
have multiple reserve accounts
the rainy day fund is not the
only savings account of the
state of New Mexico we have
multiple reserve accounts of
which the rainy day fund is one
in which funds go into it and
then require authorization from
the legislature
then a pretty hefty I think are
to get money out of that account
we also have other reserve funds
that have more liquidity and
that are subject to
appropriations and have a lower
bar and we use those reserve it
counts in order to fund our
budget especially in times of
need and madam chair what I
understand is that what Miss
Iglesias and Madam pro ten have
to M. explain to us this morning
is that our overall reserve
level is set at a very high
level we are ensuring that we
are putting enough money away
and our savings accounts so that
if we do have another fiscal
crisis crisis amongst all of
these accounts in their
totality we will have enough
money to ensure that we can even
out the crisis is that correct.
Madam chair that's a great way
to explain.
Thank you and I think you know
the other the other kind of
piece of this that I really I
think what we're hearing a
little bit par staff Mrs
question this morning is really
a philosophical difference and
what it boils down to is you
know how how much money should
the state spend on programs what
is really this is the role of
the state and and the state
budget and as I understand it
and I think Miss Iglesias and
just address this in her
previous comments I my
understanding is that over the
last three to four years because
of the boom in the Permian we
have seen the largest single
amount of revenue coming into
New Mexicos accounts ever in our
history because of the oil with
them and a significant amount of
that money got locked into and
this rainy day fund which is
great that it's there but it's
not liquid in order to be able
to fund her budget and so
philosophically speaking and I
was really glad to hear madam
chair and and madam pretend you
address this in your comments a
few moments ago.
What is the point of having
these funds for children can get
an access can get access to an
adequate education we can't
funds the operations of keeping
our environment clean here in
the state of New Mexico we have
families that are going hungry
what is the point and role of
state government if we're not
funding our basic programs to
ensure the basic needs of our
people are being met.
Really I think that's what it
boils down to.
So madam chair and madam pretend
I want to say I fully support
this proposal I look forward to
it passing I look forward to us
being able to fully fund our
programs and do so in a way that
is stable and insurers the
prosperity of our communities so
thank you for bringing this
forward thank you.
Thank you for those questions
Senator I understand your four
sessions about the start do you
do you need to leave at this
point I need to leave pretty
soon okay I'll out five minutes
all right college eyes but okay
I've missed on my morning
committees and our for and we a
lot of house bills passed.
So let me just give I believe we
have one last
panelists who wishes to ask a
couple questions some questions
and that's chairman Martinez
thank you madam chair thank you
senator I I probably will be a
little longer than five minutes
I don't know if you want to come
back Senator.
You'll be longer than five
minutes probably.
Yes eight well can I ask
Representative Stansbury to
stand in my place.
I don't know we come back I
don't know what you mean by come
back.
Senator if I if I mean if you
want to roll it over I mean if
if or you can have a reserve
Stansbury stand in for you it's
up to you yes we willing to do
that and continue to have some
Miss Iglesias there I would very
much appreciate that.
All right thank you all thank
you so much Senator good luck
thank you madam chair thank you
senator.
and miss Iglesias and thank you
for the center for standing in
or sitting in I guess I should
say.
and and a at all of your
questions to miss Iglesias so I
I first of all I think words
matter and you know we call this
a rainy day fund it's the tax
stabilization reserve fund and
that's what it is you know for a
long time the land grant
permanent fund was erroneously
referred to as a rainy day fund
it is not a rainy day fund
But Representative Stansbury and
madam chair you are absolutely
correct that
You know we do have a lot of
funds and I agree with you
representative Stansbury
with your comments madam chair
that we need more liquidity we
do.
My question madam chair and Miss
Iglesias is why did I not see
you is in the revenue
stabilization and tax policy
committee during the intro so
because this is a revenue the
tax ID which is stabilization
reserve fund I'm a little
surprised that it didn't come to
the in trump can you expand a
little bit on that.
I.
Absolutely miss madam chair and
representative Martinez
So I I again I'm not here in
support or opposition of the
bill this is not an LFC bill and
this is not a bill that we had
been purporting
the the sponsor of this bill
Senator Stewart came to us with
this question I think it was
late November early December and
asked for ideas and proposals on
what could be done in the next
session so I think that it has
to do with timing and that the
the tax stabilization committee
had probably already there had
its last agenda set I don't
think that we had a draft for
Senator Stewart for this bill
right when this session began
the proposal was brought up at
the beginning of December but it
simply wasn't formed by the
senator in time to bring this in
front of the tax stabilization
committee otherwise I am certain
that she would have wanted that.
Thank you madam chair is less is
was this up I know this idea was
run by you and Mr Abbey was I
don't remember I don't recall it
in the LFC agenda either over
the course of the interim was
represented during LFC.
At Madam chair representative
Martinez no it was not presented
during the interim again this
this idea was brought to us as
staff it was not brought to us
as an issue to be are out.
Reviewed and
in a hearing so we we prepared
various communications with
Senator Stewart over the course
of the end of November and and
and early December in order to
flush out of a proposal that she
wanted to bring forward and then
had a bill ready up right before
the beginning of the session it
was not something that LFC had
heard either again I think that
if this is something if this
works and that had been formed
sooner the LFC would have wanted
to have a hearing of this sort
or would have offered it to Pam
Stokes or possible presentation
for president so I think it was
just due to timing of when this
proposal was brought forth I
will however say that we have
had various meetings on
stabilization mechanisms and
fiscal stability of both in LFC
and and rest up as you recall
one of the things that were it
was discussed in that hearing
was the importance of this
distribution of the excess oil
and gas school tax revenue and
how important it is for
stabilisation are we also
discussed
the the federal mineral leasing
revenue and how that now has a
similar mechanism that will
start taking place in your thank
you when this proposal was
brought forth by us that was one
of the things that we discussed
in terms of need necessary to
maintain so there were there
were various ideas floating
around about what could be done
I can say that as staff with
very active of that
stabilization mechanism both for
the excess oil and gas school
tax revenue as well as the
federal mineral leasing revenue
from the fiscal estimating
standpoint as one of your
members of the consensus revenue
estimating group I can't say
that that particular mechanism
has been incredibly helpful
through the various changes in
the state and that is something
that we wanted to be sure with
maintained in any version.
Thank you madam chair and music
lessons that that's very
helpful.
you know it was mentioned in I
mean the sponsors not here so I
I can't really.
Pinned down on the question but
that the comment was made
earlier that you know we have
Yazzie Martinez we've got to
make these investments in public
education what what is our
operating reserves what what
what what where the at right now
as it's proposing HB to.
I'm.
Mr chair the operating reserve
budget it's proposing HB to will
be completely utilized as well
as a significant chunk R. H.
chunk of the tax stabilization
reserve as you know our revenues
to decrease anticipated to
decreased eight percent there is
not enough funding available in
revenue this year to cover the
FY twenty one budget or is there
enough in the operating reserve
to cover that budget as well and
in order to prevent substance a
budget decreases especially with
a a bounce back in economic
activity expected in the next
fiscal year the legislature
decided to maintain the FY
twenty one budget rather than
cutting the budget therefore
that is being paid for out of
the operating room as well as
the tax stabilization reserve as
authorized special session.
Madam chair and miss Iglesias
In and and I I understand you're
not here for against the bills
do you
What what what is the.
What is the impact of
All of the
can rescue plan funds coming in
and I I I understand it's one
time money but what is the
anticipated impact of the one
point six billion dollars coming
into the state in the next few
days or a couple weeks.
Mr chair
it is going to be an incredible
revenue influx to the state that
the federal government has put
very specific
Strains if you will on exactly
how that funding can be spent
and and in some ways those
strings make it a little
difficult because they they
basically put strings to say we
can only spend that money on
things that they have already
made their own distributions
from the federal government to
so it's it's hard to find other
things that they haven't already
funded that require additional
funding with that revenue
however with that being said I
know in in the bills that have
gone through we've made some the
legislature excuse me has made
some preliminary distributions
are are allocations how some of
that funding can be spent on
anything that could be spent for
the legislation that is going
now what anticipate being put in
the reserves until it could be
allocated if not in that bill.
so we would increase the overall
reserves to the expense that
were allowed to sit in reserves
and to the extent that we were
not able to spend it in this
current fiscal year but I would
say that it puts the state on
significant funding for not
having to helpful the cap much
into reserves again for the
following fiscal year because
there is so much federal money
available that it does better
per pack our reserve now I being
able to use that federal funding
for a variety of things the
state needs.
Thank you madam chair and Miss
Iglesias so.
Given given that reality is this
an idea that back up given that
reality.
In light of that reality.
Is it fair to say that this
policy idea the policy of.
You know changing making these
changes to the function of the
transfers.
Can be taken to the trump vetted
by the LFC whether bipartisan
LFC vetted by the revenue
stabilization Tax Policy
Committee.
and come back in twenty twenty
two with an idea that is fully
baked an idea that really takes
into account the different
the different issues that have
been raised here today is it
fair to say that that's.
That's a fair path forward.
Madam chair and and miss
Iglesias.
Can I answer is well please.
Well I guess since you're
sitting in for the Senator I
mean you may Representative
Stansbury.
You madam chair I feel as sense
of responsibility since I've
been tacked it to carry this
filter there just the committee
to respond as I think the
sponsor would would want to
respond which is you could say
that of any proposal any
proposal could be taken into the
interim and vetted more fully
and brought back you know next
year is eight governors slash
budget here and so I think the
question is it's it is a policy
here is that makes sense to try
to move this proposal forward
now so that it's a tool that we
have when we needed and then
I'll take it to.
I miss Iglesias to answer as
well.
Mr chair representative answer I
think that was an excellent
answer.
and thank you madam chair miss
Iglesias representative
Stansbury
the that was as good that's a
good answer I mean I I agree I
think I think what we're I'm
coming from though is
You know that there's been I
don't know
what are we up to the House Bill
three hundred eighty years
unlike that much lower than in
other sixty day sessions because
we have I believe it.
But any of those bills can be
taken to the intro I mean that's
the thing that's sort of a.
You know this case there my
point here is that.
I I have a hard time really.
Understanding why something like
this which is potentially
critical and and something that
is good policy in terms of how
we manage our finances.
Was not taken through that
process
and you know.
Just to to to allude to a
previous bill we've got we have
the gross receipts of sanitation
district will make sure that be
taken to the intro.
Probably not I mean you could if
it doesn't pass just to get it
get it out there
but in terms of the policy
impact of that bill
you know I mean I think I think
it's fair to say that we can get
it out and and and or or or or
table it in you know I'm not
sure that there's a huge impact
necessarily.
But something like this I feel
you know I I feel like it it
just I I I really don't know why
it would be I get it you know if
if there is no time to do that
and it kind of got caught up you
know towards the end of the
interim when everything is crazy
with the holidays and whatnot.
and and so that begs the
question again why not take this
to the intro and come back with
a very tight proposal next year
by the way I mean I don't see
anybody from the executive on
here.
Madam chair music less yes
Representative
Is there.
It is is this something
executive wants and if so why
are they standing up in support
of the.
Mr chair
this is not an executive bill
however I can say that the
fiscal impact reports put out by
DFA were very positive I
apologize they're not reflected
in the in the current FIR from
the time for these being updated
but there it DFA did look
positively on this particular
bill.
Thank you miss Iglesias and and
I I get that I I did read the
FIR I'm just wondering I mean
they they stand in support of.
Many other bills that are not
their bills
and I I they didn't show up
today is there a reason for that
madam chair and and Miss
Iglesias at Mister chair I can't
answer that.
Madam chair and and
Representative
And and miss Iglesias
I remember when this fund was
created I think it was in
sixteen or seventeen
I know we had to come in and
make some adjustments I I don't.
I don't dispute the need for
investments.
I think that
I think any statute that sits
idle particularly in the fiscal
space.
Is is not a good idea I think
these things need to be changing
with the times that's why I I do
agree with resistance risk point
about liquidity
you know I had heartburn of
voting to put you know two
hundred fifty million dollars
under the mattress for you
childhood when we could have
just invested three hundred
fifty million dollars in your
childhood
You know I'm I'm one of the I'm
I'm I'm one of the folks who I
think since I've been in the
legislature has been talking
about why we have such a high
operating reserve
you know we could probably bring
that down and put more money
into it to the local economy
versus stashing away.
and that's a point of contention
and it's a point of fair debate
you know I think the executive
has really made it a point to
maintain reserve levels at a
array at a percentage that I
believe is probably too high
I know my Republican colleagues
probably would disagree with
that they probably want to keep
it that high they probably agree
with the executive that it
should be that high I would
disagree with that I think we
can we can come down quite a bit
and put that money into K.
twelve into health care into you
know one time investments so I I
just I I get it I know why we're
doing this it makes sense to me.
I just.
You know I I think that there's
more work that needs to happen
met madam chair and and and and
Miss Iglesias and
Representative.
and look you know I think we
still have a few more days left
you know maybe maybe
conversations can be had and and
whatnot but that you know at
this point time out of the gate
can support this thank you
madam.
Thank you chairman Martinez I
see us scrabbling hand up
Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam chair
so Representative and and on.
or maybe this probably is a
question for don if if elected
and aspect madam chair
Eighteen percent.
I'm not sure why fifteen percent
what was chosen as it appears to
be a fifteen percent.
We will never put money into
this reserve fund again that at
fifty percent of the I believe
that this year if we if that
were the number we we have to
have a almost one point five
billion dollars of a.
The excess funds.
Before money would go into this
into this rainy day fund.
and maybe that's not exactly
right but it's in well over a
million.
I'm sorry well over a billion
I'm sorry dollars would have to
be in excess before money would
go into this fund.
S. R. so.
Why was fifteen percent chosen I
mean I I I think I'm with.
with chairman Martinez that.
We've seen the growth in this
pretty quick so I think eight
percent is probably not the
right number I think it just it
probably is.
in in in the.
In the realm of discussion but
but fifteen percent I think just
guarantees we don't putting more
money into this fund.
so I.
Kind of a long question.
Miss Iglesias but.
Could you answer that.
Mr chair madam chair and
Representative Montoya
again because this is not an LFC
bill in a L. LFC did not use it
fifteen percent for this target
we gave potential options to the
sponsor I think fifteen percent
was the most that we felt
comfortable with in terms of
possibly suggesting
given the historical
relationship between the
operating reserve and the total
reserve targets fifteen percent
would still
in terms of that historical
relationships still allow for a
greater percentage in terms of
what would be held in the tax
stabilization reserve compared
to historical targets where the
eight percent operating reserve
cap compared to a prior
his but I get about ten percent
reserves and the primary reserve
block it would be the operating
rates are
by increasing it to fifteen
percent with the typically
twenty five percent target we
were still recognizing that we
still wanted the tax
stabilization have a greater
distribution all share than in
the past in terms of the the
amount of the total reserves
that is capped at that target
I'm as far as why you know again
when we offered the options we
said it could be ten percent
twelve percent as high as
fifteen percent fifteen percent
is the target that the that the
sponsor.
I'm I cannot speak for the
sponsor in why specifically to
fifteen percent L. as in
previous testimony she has that
because we we offered as an
option and so I can say what
part of the reason we offered it
as an option as I think it's
it's the highest that we as
staff would.
Recommending but not necessarily
because fifteen percent is the
the absolute end all be all
number that it should be.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Adan for that answer I think
that goes to the point of
chairman Martinez asking if they
should go to an interim let LFC
which is a lot of members and
both chambers and both parties
pandemic two revenue
stabilization and tax policy in
the interim where once again
more members from both chambers
and and both parties would have
a chance to chime in on this
because I that's my that's my
heartburn is one person coming
in and as you stated it's the
highest allowable that you even
offered as a possibility and
that's what was chosen I I'm not
sure that that's how we want to
do things here I think this is
such a a big deal that
that members in that more
members I need to be too need to
have their hand in this
Any any thoughts that
Representative Stansbury.
Thank you Representative Montoya
since I wasn't involved in the
development of this bill I don't
have any history other than what
I've heard this morning just
like you some.
Thank you and I I think that's
the point thank you madam chair
I think that's exactly the point
that that chairman Martinez was
making
and it's not like this Fund this
ready for day fund does have a
mechanism to take money out of
it it it's not like it's there.
you know with cobwebs there is
there's a mechanism there for
the purpose that it was designed
which was.
to be there when we have a
dramatic shortfall and
we have more money coming in
this year the the the amount of
money is coming from the federal
government.
I think
Makes this even more premature
that would during the regular
year because those dollars are
coming in they're going to be
spent on needs.
So in my opinion I don't happen
often but I find myself in the
in in strong agreement with
chairman Martinez that.
I don't think one person should
make this decision as to as to
what's before us I'm not even
sure if we were to go ahead and
and trying to mend it down at
this point that that's what we
want to do either because I
don't know what number is the
right number and I think having
more folks.
Have their hand in this I think
is is the the way we should
analyst so I I I stand with the
with fourteen as I think this
needs to I think this needs to
be to go to interim committees
allow the folks in LFC hello
folks from from revenue
stabilization and tax policy
allow the administration to
chime in on this and see if.
Maybe we come back with fifteen
percent but I don't believe
there's a great need for this
year we have those dollars
coming in this can wait till
next year
to to be done in that thirty day
session it so it I stand with
your Martinez I I don't believe
we should passes out today I
don't think this issue is done I
think we need to revisit.
And we have time we we have a.
A large amount of money one five
four one point six billion
dollars that's going to be
coming from the federal
government this year that we
know is coming I don't think
this is the time to to make this
decision without any vetting so
thank you madam chair.
All thank you Representative let
me to see if there any other
hands I see none
anyone prepared to make a
motion.
Can I move the bill if I'm.
Okay I'm impacted.
I I think you can move move the
bill if you wish Representative
Stansbury okay I ain't I would
like to move Senate bill fifty
nine for it to pass thank you
good.
All of us to the table Madam
chair of the substitute motion
to table Elaine would you call
the roll on the motion to table
a yes will table the bill I know
obviously will go back to
discussion.
Representative.
Speaker you got.
Okay.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lujan.
No to table.
Representative Maestas no.
Representative Montoya.
Yesterday was.
Representative role metal no to
table.
Representative Scott.
Representative Stansbury noted
table.
Representative Strickler yes to
table.
Representative Scott is yes to
table.
It's thank you.
Representative covenant.
Representative Hernandez.
Know what.
Who was that I don't know if
that Representative have done
this all at all I heard is
soliciting no women.
So that's that's not good I
don't approve of that.
Our.
The.
Mr Chandler no to table.
Elena.
I don't know what's going on
with my iPad but I'm a test to
table.
Thank you so much Representative
I appreciate that.
Chairman Martinez.
Madam vice chair we have.
I.
In the affirmative.
Six in the negative.
Bill is not tabled
I believe prior to the tabling
motion there was a motion of the
past made by Representative
Stansbury seconded by speaker
Egolf a leading would you call
the roll please.
Yes Representative covenant.
Speaker.
Yes.
Representative Harper.
So.
Is Representative and then this.
Representative Lujan.
Yes.
Representative Maestas.
Yes explain about.
Representative Montoya.
The.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Stansbury yes.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative.
Your Chandler yes.
Chairman Martinez.
No I would like to explain my
will please.
Madam vice chair we have six in
the affirmative six in the
negative motion passes
Representative Maestas you wish
to explain your vote it's a.
I'm sorry what point to point of
order madam chair Elaine can you
please repeat the vote I I I
thought I heard is six six.
That's correct chairman Martinez
the vote was six from six and
the negative.
She.
All I motion does not pass
shell I hand the reins back to
you Mr chair learn about how it
should I'm sorry Mr
Representative Maestas no thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative Stansbury thank
you Senator Stewart who
hopefully will listen to this at
some point.
But there is not a Senator
sitting here in front of us
we're all at the Dyess the
chairman of this committee is
opposed to this bill yet held a
fair hearing and how to vote on
it without a Senator sitting
here that is classed as what's
called having class.
That's what's called the decorum
that's what's called democracy
that's what's called being a
dignified human being in this
building so I would ask that
might senators who are
completely funding to fight
yesterday and had no class
yesterday and we're just only at
the mouth with arrogance listen
to the that last ten minutes of
a committee hearing yesterday
and listen to the last ten
minutes of this committee
hearing today and learn
something about democracy and
what the people demand with our
time up here in this building
thank you madam that chair.
Thank you Representative Maestas
of a chairman Martinez
thank you madam thank you madam
vice chair all all explain my
board and take over take over
the the gavel thank you I think
that this is a proposal that
has some legs I think it's a
good proposal I a I do have
concerns that it was not vetted
through the intro through the
revenue stabilization Tax Policy
Committee and through the
legislative finance committee I
understand that time is is is is
tight sometimes and I understand
that the idea maybe was floating
around sometime in November so
we didn't really give it a
chance to get into the agenda of
those interim committees but I
do feel like you know in the
sixty day session for something
as
is consequential as as changing
the way we we do our reserves
deserves to be vetted by those
two bipartisan committees that
quite frankly have the the
subject matter expertise to
really do again in a very
substantive way over the course
of the interim
so with that madam chair we do
have a floor session at one
o'clock so I'm going to adjourn
this meeting subject to the call
of the chair
so please keep your your phones
on so that we can reach you in
case we have to meet.
Discussed more bills over the
next couple of days with that
members we are adjourned.
Chairman thank you.
Thank you.
