Vice chairman then.
More.
Here.
Representative government get on
the land great great
So just a few preliminary items
and sorry for a bit of a
surprise I was contacted by the
secretary of taxation revenue no
she has an item that you would
like included in our tax package
so
because of that we're we're
working vigorously on
the committee so that now is
going to be a point eight.
Last night we we develop the
point seven which removes the
municipal and county moratorium
piece which
I know that many of us have been
talking about amongst each other
and I did touch base with
Representative Harper about that
fact he's aware he's aware of
the point seven version so I
just wanted you all to know that
at the moment we're on point
seven but we will be
Talking about a point eight
version assuming we can get it
here in time so with that I'd
like to change the order of what
I had thought we were going to
be dealing and start with Senate
bill forty thereby giving us
some time to work on on this
other smaller items that we need
to address and in the tax
package so I see are wonderful
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino if you
would like to begin on on Senate
bill forty that be great.
I'm sure will and members of the
committee.
This is a very simple measures
you you will recall that a
couple of years ago we created a
new program called the.
Health care quality surcharge.
Yes and there was a measure that
was supported by the
administration and by the
nursing home and assisted care
living facilities in the state
they are they are together
referred to as the New Mexico
health care association.
Those facilities had been having
extreme difficulty maintaining
the quality of care four in fact
we had a number that in doing by
the sense during their
evaluations for Medicare
spending because Wally and
slipped and what was when we
came clear was that are
reimbursement levels were worse
we're not sufficiently high to
enable those facilities to fully
staffed and to maintain quality
standards.
Thanks come forward to
suggestion that the state tax
them.
An additional amount.
actually ending that strict
Medicaid money a portion of it
will be measured Medicaid money
some of it goes to the general
fund.
And in the Medicaid match and
the and the portion of the tax
committed to that match would
then be returned in the form of
payments one one we
automatically other would be
based on maintaining levels of
care.
That program has been in
existence now for at least two
years it has a sunset clause.
That sunset classroom is what
we're after in this bill is a
simple bill and simply says this
program is working is easier and
minister the state levels of the
administration loves it and the
nursing homes and assisted care
facilities lower than to attest
to that level on Valentine's day
we have with this the number of
the secretaries of the from the
thank you departments and I
guess we'll start with the
secretary Stephanie Schardin
Clarke.
Thank you madam chairman and and
sponsor members of the committee
it's pleasure to be here with
you Tax and Representative
cannot say enough good things
about Senate bill forty the bill
to extend and make permanent the
health care quality surcharge
and we fully support this
legislation we have collaborated
very closely with Human Services
Department since twenty nineteen
when this was first enacted just
to set up the IT system to
collect and distribute the
surcharge I'm happy to report
that Klopp compliance and this
program is extremely high we
have a unique situation here
where the state knows exactly
how much taxes owed and
therefore can confirm that the
exact right amount was collected
a lot of it is voluntary
reporting on the part of
taxpayer and so we don't have as
good a compliance and most
programs I also want to
highlight that the
implementation of this was
extremely innovative and we
really took into effect our
customer the taxpayer because
state agencies have all the data
necessary to figure out exactly
how much surtax surcharges to we
went ahead and program or system
to pre populate their tax return
for them so that they go in and
check it and knowledge it but
it's really reduce their filing
burden and that is such an
innovative thing that we've
actually highlighted it at
national tax conferences and
gotten feedback from other
states that they want to know
how we did it so they can
replicate I want to just finally
emphasize that the continuation
of the surcharge has no
additional cost to taxed Rav
we've already built this I. T.
system and hope to continue
using it for future years thank
you members of the committee.
Thank.
Madam chair woman the next
to the secretary of the health
and Human Services department
started in this race for like to
speak on the bill.
I thank you very much madam
chair members of the committee
I'll be very brief and asked
Kerry army out to make a few
comments but the thing I like
best about the program is we're
actually paying for quality
improvements in nursing homes is
this paper performances a
direction we would like to I
take all Medicaid Medicaid
payments and so we're getting a
great start here and that
Kerrier me out what is the L. as
the one agency who is sort of in
charge of this project and also
hearing bill for and I think
she'll have a few comments about
our financial how this is work
for nursing homes our state
thank you madam chair.
Good morning thank you Secretary
I'm so sorry good morning.
I see there we have a W.
secretary.
For such a little bill we have
the of the building that the
eight out thank you.
Sure go ahead ms our meal.
Madam chair and happy
Valentine's day to all of you I
I just wanted to make one final
point which is the financial
application of Senate bill forty
does not pass currently we're at
the revenue associated with the
surcharges about thirty million
we're using that to drive down
about ninety two million per
year in federal match the
federal Medicaid dollars so
Senate bill forty does not pass
than the surcharge program would
terminate and that would result
in a net loss of about eighty
six million in federal Medicaid
funds for our nursing facilities
and facilities that serve people
with disabilities in our state
without all stand for any
question madam chair thank you
madam chairwoman finally we have
the representative of the health
care association the the
legislative representative AT
some facilities Senator of our
test.
Yes good morning madam chairman
members of the committee my name
is just part of us on the
executive director of the New
Mexico health care association
Mexico Center for assisted
living we represent
sixty two of the nursing homes
that do that you participate in
this program we appreciate the
the sponsor and the agency for
upbringing this piece of
legislation the data does show
that nursing home care for
residents and clients has
improved and continues to
approve and therefore exist they
are the most important part of
this whole project is the
improved health care for for
clients and residents therefore
we stand in full support of this
legislation thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Vargas back to our
sponsor Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
thank you representative madam
chair one with that will stand
for questions I don't believe
that.
The secretary of the Asian long
term Services Department got on
well yeah she did she we want to
say a few words to madam
chairman.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Katrina
how term Lopez and the cabinet
secretary for aging and long
term services for those of you
who don't know we we run a long
term care ombudsman program as
well as adult protective
services and we are quite often
in long term care facilities and
this this additional revenue
helps our facility staff uptick
specially in terms and the times
of crisis they've been hit very
hard with COVID and finding
staff to come into these
facilities is been challenging
at best this opportunity to
continue this additional revenue
means that we can pay staff more
and that our residents are
receiving better quality care
and I think as
Mr Vargas is already stated that
we're seeing more positive
outcomes with this revenue with
our residents and then before
and so this is really important
and we urge you to support this
legislation thank you.
And madam chair when we'll
Senator Christians.
So thank you I think madam chair
is on a call so I'll continue on
in our behalf so let's go to the
audience and see if we if we
have any any attendees who are
against the bill and if you are
please raise your hand.
So if you are against the bill
please raise your hand.
Hey that's sitting in the stands
raised against the bill we're
gonna go to those participants
who are in the audience who are
who want to speak in support of
this bill.
Please raise your hand.
I see one hand raised.
And that is for Jeannie Hambrick
Jamie you have the one minute
please for state.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm Jane hammering and
A. R. P. New Mexico volunteer
advocate A. A. R. P. New Mexico
supported the twenty nineteen
enactment of the health care
quality surcharge Act we
continue to support quality
improvement efforts in skilled
nursing facilities to protect
residents and contribute to
their quality of life we stand
in support and urged passage of
SB forty thank you.
Thank you miss Hambrick next
we'll go to Charlie markets.
Charlie you may on mute and you
make you have the floor.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Charlie mark is
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico Health Care New Mexico
Centers for assisted living
I think everybody said
everything needs to be said it's
a great program and I would urge
your support.
Thank you Mr Marquez I don't see
any other hands rates so now
we'll go to the committee are
they any committee members who
would like to speak.
I see Representative Scott.
You madam chair she turned
presenters.
Yes what's not to like you're
imposing thirty million dollars.
Taxes on the.
On this industry and generate.
Another nine million dollars in
revenue.
Yes.
Shop like quite a lot of
leverage but it does have.
Senator Ponzi scheme
and I'm wondering if there is
any concern you have to stretch.
Will catch on to what.
We are doing and wondering
whether this is common practice.
In other states.
Madam chairwoman and and so
Representative Scott an
excellent question.
The result include with the
fence but let me different to
one of the Human Services
department in the secretary to
deputy secretary to respond.
Thank you thank you senator at
Madam chair representative Scott
the program has received full
federal approval that was the
first thing we did back when the
bill was first passed in two
thousand nineteen was a submit
that for federal approval it has
received full approval and
surcharges up like this are not
uncommon in other states
actually as a way of generating
revenue a for that then gets
paid back.
Us is not uncommon type of
program is innovative but not
but not inconsistent with
federal regulations.
Thank you.
Okay that was my only question
appreciate cancers thank you.
Thank you so.
I'm back vice chair I can I can
take over
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair good
morning it's a great to see
everyone here today
So I I remember when we.
First in the put this program
into effect and I know there are
lots of questions about you know
whether the the the feds would
tolerate this kind of saying and
and I and I think that's why we
put the the sunset on the the
legislation can you madam chair
and Senator and secretaries
perhaps just go over a little
bit of that history and why we
had a sunset the first place.
Yes Representative a and again I
would urge you to either carry
on you know the W. secretary or
Dr Scrase I think you're
absolutely right we will first
we want to test out whether this
is going to produce anything any
good results in as whether it be
difficult to administer it is
not and whether the judge
rejected and they have not so I
would let either of them Human
Services Department Medicaid
authorities on board respond to
you as well Cherry.
certainly thank you madam chair
Representative Harper
I wasn't having I use my
understanding that the bill
included a sunset because of
part of its intention was really
to achieve these quality results
and so it was a little bit of a
yes we wanted to see whether
actually financing those dollars
in the sense that you would
really achieve the results the
desired result being that we
would ultimately improve
outcomes for New Mexicans who
live in the facility it's not
just be raising revenue just to
pass that on to prove that
really with the intention of
achieving that at those
improvements in quality of care
and and the data show that the
program is achieving that
desired result we have and we're
seeing the trend lines really
move in the right direction on
all of the quality metrics for
the program which is actually
quite a feat in and of itself
given that the program started
just before the pandemic so
really great results so far in
this program and you know strong
justification to continue.
And madam chair and senator Dr
Scrase wish to add anything else
on his hand Dr Scrase.
I think I carry covered it well
I believe that the original bill
didn't have the sunset and it
was added as an amendment in the
committee I don't remember which
committee of Y. as in I think we
were so confident and the
program has been running and we
wanted to memorialize after
getting CMS's approval that we
accepted that amendment as
friendly and now we're back with
the proof that this was really
an effective program thank you
very much madam chair members of
the committee.
Grace yes thank you so
Yeah I I don't I recalled the
conversation and and yes
yeah that the sunset wasn't
party Rachel legislation but we
really were just want to make
sure that we revisit this that
things were working well and
that
my recollection was there is a
significant concern from the
prior administration that
the fed might not like
this program and so I'm I'm
happy to see
that you know years later
things are.
progressing and in the best way
they could have.
so I guess my my last question
is then and and thank you for
for the answers.
so I believe it was stated that
We're we're receiving about
reusing these these dollars to
leverage in receive about ninety
million.
from the Feds which is is great.
but the the question always
comes up you know when we we
talk about adding a tax to a.
receive matching dollars is well
who ends up really paying for
that tax in the end and is it is
that is that tax is being paid
worst the benefit so could you
maybe talk a little bit about
that
you know are we are we
offsetting that tax increase
Medicaid rates you know is is
the end user actually paying for
that tax or how is that to how's
that being a minister in a way
that doesn't affect the the
people actually receiving the
service.
Questions Madam chairman and
Representative partner I I
wouldn't.
What has it in answer I would
like to linndale Dr Scrase
respond to that because what
you're getting at is.
In just the whole underlying
principle behind the federal
match in the Medicaid program so
Dr Scrase.
The other two aspects to this
tax madam chair members of the
committee Representative Harper
I think it's a really great
question I actually the nursing
homes brought forth this idea to
us many years ago they actually
pay the taxes a broad based tax
so they pay it to the state and
as you heard some that money
comes to at all of the money
comes HSD and it it obtains a
federal match so in the state of
New Mexico the nursing homes
themselves are paying the tax
and then that forty one federal
match of course is paid by all
of us our federal tax dollars go
to Washington and come back as
part of that match in general
though New Mexico tends to get
about two federal dollars for
every one dollar we pay to
Washington through all the
different programs and course
taxes and that is the way the
United States is set up to
redistribute that federal
Revenue.
From I'm.
State to the much higher average
income to stay to the much lower
average income so it's really a
two part I tax the personal
income tax you pay to the Feds
the nursing home's drive the
other tax and they all actually
come out I had as a result of
this program thank you and of
course we all come out I had
because quality in nursing homes
and groups as well thank you
very much madam chair and
Representative Harper.
Yes thank you madam chair and
senator and secretary at my my
understanding is and it sounds
like from your your responses
correct is that to this tax is
not passed on to those who are
receiving the service and this
this Medicaid so that are
generally not paying
But because of the leveraging
federal dollars we're also able
to help the hospitals or that
the nursing homes in this case
so that
they actually come out.
A little bit ahead which is why
they came with this proposal and
so
it's it's an interesting thing
to think about how an industry
would come and asked to be taxed
and so I just make sure that we
understand that here because I I
I suppose I supported this are
originally and I and I support
removing the sunset now
especially seeing that it's
turned out the way we all.
Expected to I guess the the
last.
On a common question is I know
that when we've done things like
this in the past.
you know I'm I'm sitting
hospitals here most recently we
we increase the tax on.
hospitals with the promise that
we would increase their
reimbursement rates but I think
it was.
Maybe a couple years later when
that promise was actually filled
And yeah I think I'm thing about
to.
Yeah when was this can't carry
calls was house bill six.
But there was at least one year
where we had increased the taxes
on.
on hospitals but did not return
rate increase the Medicaid
reimbursement rates.
and in that case I felt you know
super
You know we had we had we done
wrong not honor the commitments
that we made.
and so madam chair and and
senator and secretaries I mean I
feel free to comment if you like
but really I just want to say
that when we we committees
arrangements we just really need
to make sure that legislative
and executive that we are
honoring these commitments
because when we don't it could
really end up hurting the very
people that.
We reporting to at one CEST.
Chairman or chairwoman and and
Representative Harper I you're
you're making this point I I
think that's why the putting on
the sunset clause in in
retrospect was a good idea to
give us a chance to see if it
was going to work out the way we
thought it would it has and so
we're coming in saying this one
is working we can speak for all
the other information yeah
something similar this one is
working and and we'd like to
take a sunset clause up now.
Sh.
Yeah
thank you madam chair thank you
senator and thank you everyone
for for being here today I
appreciate having this
conversation and I look forward
to supporting legislation.
Thank you Representative Harper
I do not see any other hands up.
B. to entertain a motion.
They do not.
All second chair.
Move to do a do pass has been
moved by Representative Romero
seconded by Representative
Harper
really we you call the roll
please.
Yes.
The representative Cadena.
Yes.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Lund thank.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Yes.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler.
Yes you'll.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
We have an eleven there about.
Excellent well thank you senator
Ortiz Y. Pino was good to see
you this morning if you have.
Thank you madam chairman and
members of the committee.
Thank you.
Okay we're ready to go on to
House bill one sixty three that
is our committees on the best
tax bill I'm gonna hand over the
reins to vice chair Herndon
while I present on the bill.
Ready vice chair I'm ready thank
you madam chair great
Well first I want to thank
everyone for working with me on
that on this bill I had a number
of conversations with the
ranking member Harper about it
and he's been very helpful and
offering many good suggestions
about how we proceed so I
appreciate that cooperation and
it is I'm very pleased to be
presenting this year's taxation
revenues tax package it's a
proposal that serves a large and
diverse number of New Mexicans
From low and middle income
seniors who are receiving social
security benefits.
To families with children.
It supports our renewable energy
goals and acknowledges the
tremendous and arduous work of
our nurses who cared for our
families during the COVID.
And it also acknowledges that
feminine hygiene products is a
critical health care item by
providing a G. R. T. deduction
for women who required those
products.
Wesley the bill begins to
address
our tax reform needs we're not
there yet of course but it does
make some progress in doing so
by reducing the G. R. T. and
compensating taxes by a quarter
point as well as
eliminating a little bit of a
pyramid in for manufacturers
who require services in
purchased services in the state.
It also recognizes the
volatility of our income stream
by adding I trigger to the to
the cap which I'll talk about a
little bit more as we move
forward.
So I just like to talk about
each section very briefly madam
chair if I may section one is
the income tax credit for nurses
that we heard about last week
it's a one time tax credit
thousand dollars for nurses who
worked in hospitals during the
crisis.
section to is the child income
tax credit we heard about that
proposal on Saturday although we
have changed a little bit and
gone back to Representative
Cadena is and my bill from
twenty nineteen House Bill
eighteen it it the supplements
the credit is a little bit
smaller after having seen the
fiscal impact of the proposal we
heard on Saturday we thought it
prudent to make it to slim it
down a little less section to
section three is
exempt social security income
with income cap so individuals
filers with income of a hundred
thousand dollars or less will
have their social security
benefits income exam
I alert married filing jointly
the cap is a hundred and fifty
thousand and married but filing
separately as seventy five
thousand that section three
section for is the sole we're
income solar development income
tax credit that
The sponsor ask for an extension
on it is refundable and it is
transferable credit as as
outlined in the our our
proposal.
Section five
is is a little fix to the
sustainable building tax credit
that we heard about I think it
was Friday or Saturday where
there will be a gap in the
credit if we don't if we don't
address it in in our in the
proposal so that is section
five.
Trying to remember what sections
six is.
Moving along.
I'll provide section six in on
the act eight seven eight and
nine order is this the G. R. T.
cut with the trigger and the
compensating Tax section seven
is the manufacturing amending
sections so with that madam
chair on happy to address the
package after we hear from the
public.
Thank you thank you very much.
Madam madam Representative
chairwoman.
We'll go to the audience now if
there is anyone who would like
to speak all those who are in
favor of this bill please raise
your hand.
And to be recognized.
Yes the number of pants and
favor I'm gonna first go to a
Brian Moore.
You may I'm using you have one
minute Mr Moore thank you madam
chairman members of the
committee Brian Moore of New
Mexico counties we want to thank
all of you on the tax committee
this morning especially chairman
the chancellor for listening to
local governments and understand
the predicament that we could
have faced with a five year tax
moratorium we don't ever want to
raise taxes but like the
triggering this up in in Senate
bill five we want to make sure
that we have all the options we
may need in the future thank you
again madam chair members of the
committee.
Thank you Mr Moore next I see up
Larry program.
Maybe Mr ran you have the floor.
Mr Moran are you able to meet
and speak thank you madam chair
I just got the prompt Larry
around registered lobbyists for
the New Mexico municipal league
the cities of Los crucis in Rio
Rancho and also stand while
County I want to thank the
sponsor madam chair and
representative of Martinez and
all the members of tax committee
for what's not in the bill it's
what it's what Mr more talked
about and and that moratorium on
local governments we appreciate
all the conversation in the
openness to allow us to come in
and work with the committee and
and have a good tax policy
discussion to allow us to have
the flexibility if we need to
deal with our local issues and
we support the pieces in the
legislation that remain and
appreciate the state reducing
the gross receipts tax rate it's
just this is one of those times
of the system worked and I
really appreciate madam chair
Chandler for all the tough
conversations that we went
through to flesh out this tax
policy issues we stand in
support of this legislation
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr Moran.
It says the Susan Loubet.
Miss thank you thank you madam
chair can you hear me we can
hear you miss the bay you have
one and that thank you I'm Susan
Loubet a I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
women's agenda and we are in
support of of getting rid of the
tax on menstrual products as
because they are a necessity and
we thank the sponsor and the
committee for supporting them
thank you.
Thank you Mr bank next I think
Justin green.
Good morning madam chair to
thank you to the Sanchez I stand
in support of the earlier
version of this bill which had a
restaurant tax holiday as was
set up in last year it was a
very successful program easy to
administer for tax and Rev and
for restaurants to do so I am
the owner of dashing delivery
restaurant delivery service here
in Santa Fe and most or all of
my partner restaurants were able
to take advantage of this as a
small way to make themselves
whole after a
terrible two years of COVID if
that kid is with was section six
can be put back in the bill we
would greatly appreciate it and
we hope for your support in an
amended bill with section six
and the tax holiday and there
thank you very much and good
luck in the rest of the session.
Thank you Mr green agency right.
Carol right yes I'm here madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Carol white I'm the
CEO of the New Mexico
restaurants the association and
I represent three three thousand
three hundred restaurants in New
Mexico.
First of all I want to thank you
for your generosity and last
year session the industry was
able to use the money from the
gross receipts tax holiday last
year to bring back in please to
pay for inventory and generally
to use the money to pay bills
that were impossible to pay well
the restaurants were shut down.
This committee was considering
the restaurant industry gross
really gross receipts tax relief
and I just want to say that the
pandemic is not over for our
industry we're still dealing
with staff shortages that are
considered considerably
exacerbated by the spike in the
only crime variant.
We're dealing with wholesale
price increases of twelve
percent over two thousand and
nineteen prices and of course
everyone's aware of the price of
fuel which thank you Mr our.
Thank you very much as for your
comments Mr Scanlon you have one
minute.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Scott
Scanlon registered lobbyists for
Los Alamos County the city of
Farmington the City of
Bloomfield and San Juan county
and are we to thank the chair in
the committee Representative
Harper for removing the the five
year moratorium we think this is
a good bill we supported and so
again on behalf of the city of
Farmington.
City Bloomfield San Juan County
they support the bill and of
course Los Alamos County
supports their the bill and
their favorite legislator thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Mr Scanlon Bill
Jordan.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee of Bill
Jordan with voices for children
we really want to thank the
members of the committee for
their good work this year our
families are still struggling
our rate of child poverty is
still too high and most
importantly this year we have
the opportunity for truly
transformational change both in
the state budget and the tax
expenditure side of the budget
we're especially appreciative
the new child tax credit is part
of your strategy to tackle both
poverty and inequality.
It is a commitment to our
children that will truly make a
difference to all of our
families across the state we
also appreciate that the gross
receipts tax cut has a circuit
breaker this is not only good
tax policy but could also
prevent you from having to come
back in a few years and cut
those transformational budget
investments that you're making
this year we really want to
thank you for stepping up in a
big way thank you thank you very
much Mr Darden we really
appreciate your comments.
Next we have J. D. building to.
Mr Billington you have one
minute.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee this is JD Paul
intense speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce though there is tax
relief in this legislation which
is the basis for the chamber
support most of it does not
solve our most serious tax
challenges and that is somewhat
disappointing in the chambers
view that trigger provision
which will almost certainly
scrapped the one four percent
gross receipts tax rate
reduction is unnecessary it's
cost is easily absorbed within
the eight point five billion
dollar budget this bill also
lacks serious impairment in
relief and unfortunately the
single sales factor legislation
has been left out which would
bring greater business
investment to our state the
chamber also does not understand
why there's no willingness to
provide social security tax
relief across the board the
chambers glad to see a social
security exemption of any kind
in the bill but it really should
apply to all social security
recipients thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Mr Wellington we are
of on those who are in support
of the bill I just want to make
sure if you are in support of
the bill that you are at your
hand right now.
I'm going now to mark Mickelson.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
mark Mickelson I'm the vice
president of the New Mexico
branch.
I'm sorry can you hear me yes we
can hear thank you hi mark
Mickelson I'm the vice president
of the New Mexico branch of the
national active and retired
federal employees association
and we stand in strong support
of this bill and want to thank
the committee for including the
section on the social security
tax exemption which will benefit
not only our members of both
current and future retirees but
all public employees thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr Mickelson Russell
Hernandez.
Madam chair members of the
committee I thank you for your
time today I am a small
restaurant owner in southern New
Mexico and also president of the
restaurants association this
year I do stand with Mr green
and Mrs Y. as a spoken already
what was the request to bring
back section six into the bill I
will say from a personal
standpoint that this.
relieve I helped out
tremendously and the last year
and would definitely be needed
and this year and support so
many restaurants and other
hospitality businesses as it did
in the last year we are not
through this as Mrs Whitehead
said and I'd and we know that
variants are definitely coming
through and shutting down
businesses and we can definitely
use that extra support so I do
ask that you help there if
possible thank you for your
time.
Thank you Mr Hernandez Allison
Smith.
Miss Smith are you yes thank you
very much I just got unmuted R.
thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Allison Smith.
This for The New Mexico
restaurant association the
restaurant association as you've
heard from our agency by before
Mr and Mr and on this we do
support adding back in the G. R.
T. tax relief that was in the
original version of this bill
the pandemic is not over for
dine in restaurants to take a
big hit due to unprecedented
closures than in restaurants are
still trying to get back on
their feet trying to be open to
full capacity I'm trying to
bring staffing levels back to
normal your team tax relief
would go a long way towards
helping the small bomb and I
restaurateurs giving them one
more tool to help them get back
to full capacity as they welcome
New Mexicans and visitors back
into their dining rooms please
support that Mr to tax relief at
least for that into the next
version of this bill thank you
for your time.
Thank you Mr Jerry Harwell.
Yes madam chairman this is Jerry
Herrell doubly restaurant though
and see a I'm chairman of the
board of the restaurant
association this year.
I just want to remind the the
the chairwoman then the members
of the committee that if they
saw the headlines and will serve
as a newspaper that's beginning
a session about twenty
restaurants closing repeat that
for all the cities and towns
across New Mexico the the
session six the is desperately
needed and we urge the committee
to reinstate that section and
help the many many employees
continue working in the
restaurant industry listed in
Mexico thank you madam chairman.
Thank you Mr Herald a Charles
good marker.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity I'm speaking to you
be our behalf of New Mexico
Public Health Association in
support of this bill glad to see
rebate in there although it's a
little bit lower than we and
some others would have liked but
especially appreciate the child
tax credit it's going to help so
many New Mexico families take
care of some basic needs and
what our basic needs are taken
care of our health improves but
of course also reminded the
educational attainment is
directly tied when speaking of
populations in general to
poverty and a lack of basic
needs being taken care of so we
applaud the sponsors of the bill
for including that in we urge
you to pass thank you.
Thank you all right so brewpub.
Yes thank you thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee my name's Patrick hope
there would and I'm the owner of
the party to brew pub in Los
Alamos and the loyal hound of in
Santa Fe.
I am very much full support of
your bill but I desperately
would like to have section six
added back we are already
looking at a minimum wage
increase in Los Alamos of twenty
one percent the food increase of
twenty percent and alcohol
increase of thirteen percent and
as these costs keep going it's
hard to be able to.
Raise the prices and and still
get the same amount of service
that we could before
please.
Listen to The New Mexico
restaurant association a miss
white they work really hard and
really intelligent about the
restaurant's needs thank you for
your time.
Thank you Marco Gonzales.
A good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Marco Gonzales and I'm a
registered lobbyist for McKinley
County we thank the sponsor and
madam chair for bringing this up
piece of legislation forward and
for all the reasons that had
previously been mentioned by the
New Mexico association of
counties in New Mexico municipal
league the various cities and
counties who have expressed
support for this we want to
thank the chair for her bringing
this forward and we support
those that aspects thank you
very much.
Thank you read make them.
Thank you madam chair this is
Fred Nathan executive director
thank you Mexico we are also in
full support of this bill and
specifically the inclusion of
the social security compromise
this is great news for middle
class seniors all across New
Mexico many thanks.
Thank you mark Duran.
Thank you madam chairman Marc
Randall Representative City of
Santa Fe on behalf of more
Webber and the City of Santa Fe
would like to stand in support
of the bill for the many reasons
that have been expressed by
other cities and counties again
it's along the lines of what is
not in the bill but there are
also other many sections of the
bill that we're supporting and
so we stand and support the bill
thank you.
Thank you.
Okay but only.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee T. the only
advocacy director for a a RP New
Mexico and we stand in support
of this bill and I appreciate
including the social security
tax elements of this bill as it
affects our our fifty plus
population here in New Mexico
thank you so much we were just
for this bill.
Thank you Linda single.
Madam chair.
Members of the committee.
We can hear you miss person I'm
sorry thank you Linda Siegel for
the New Mexico nurses
association I just want to thank
you so much for that for the tax
credit for the nurses of New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you miss where there any
attendees who were in opposition
to the bill.
Seeing no hands raised will go
to the committee now.
All right I'm sorry I had my
hand up to speak in favor may
yes I'm sorry is this George
done three.
No this is Stephanie sure and
Clark the secretariat Tax and
Representative.
I'm sorry miss are not I don't I
didn't see you please proceed no
problem thank you members of the
committee I'll be really brief
you've heard a lot of great
testimony I'll focus my comments
just on two aspects of this bill
that our priorities for the
Lujan Grisham administration
first by reducing the gross
receipts tax and compensating
tax rates by a quarter percent
with that would represent the
first cut to the state G. R. T.
in forty years and find over a
hundred ninety million dollars a
recurring tax relief to benefit
all New Mexicans businesses and
consumers Tax Policy tells us to
taxed everything at a broad
right and that a broad based on
a low rate and that's what we
would be doing here we expanded
the based include internet sales
and it Hospital G. R. T. reform
in twenty nineteen and now we
can follow through by lowering
the rate just for a moment on
social security on the piece
that's included here exempting a
portion of social security for
low and moderate income New
Mexicans would provide help to
tens of thousands of middle
class seniors across New Mexico
the federal formula for taxing
these benefits does not changed
in over thirty years but just
lead to more seniors are paying
more tax on those benefits and
those seniors are expected to
spend that more discretionary
income from the tax savings in
their communities resulting in
greater economic activity a
greater G. R. T. collections for
state and local thank you.
Thank you.
Is there anyone else who wanted
to speak in favor or against the
bill that we have missed.
Sen no hands raise we will go to
the to the members of the
committee madam chair could I
just clarify a couple things if
I might just because I'm getting
some text.
And and madam chair I I
apologized interrupted we hear
from Mister gentry who looked
like he was raising his hand in
opposition.
Go back and see Mr Jack Mr
Gundry.
I want to give you up please
that pertain to the speak you
have one minute.
Thank you madam chair my name's
George Gundry I'm the owner of
the policy does restaurant Santa
Fe in Albuquerque in nature
school cafe and bar
I oppose the bill purely for the
removal of section six and urge
you to put section six back into
the bill I'm right now for
restaurants is actually the most
uncertain time of the pandemic
why I personally am not
concerned about the virus so
much the combination of the
supply chain and the
the labor shortage is making it
very very difficult for us to
stay competitive you heard about
how we have to raise our prices
significantly and that G. R. T.
R. forgiveness will definitely
help us with some cushion
through this very very uncertain
here so I urge you to put
section six back into the bill
thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Gundry.
Madam chair if I could just make
a few clarifying comments so I
appreciate all the comments made
by the attendees on it and I do
want to point out that we are on
house committee substitute point
two two two six zero eight point
seven okay so point seven was
crafted it
last evening in in it in it we
remove the moratorium that was
mentioned in some of the
comments by the attendees so
there is no longer in this
version the moratorium on cities
and counties were raising their
G. R. T. so that's out of the
bill I just wanna make sure
everybody understands that for
purposes of our our conversation
so with that madam chair on I'm
happy to answer ten questions.
Thank you thank you very much
Madam chair representative for
that class basin so we will move
to comments by questions from
the committee I see
Representative Harper with the
San rates.
Madam chair I'm I'm happy to
speak I think I'll just first
move the substitute for
discussion if we haven't yet
just to make it official but I
think there are several other
reps with their hands raised
before mine.
let me see I'm just in the way
that coming up on my screen
Representative part we go back I
don't want to Representative
Derrick J. Lente I see this now
thank you very much.
Thank you madam chairwoman thank
you Representative Harper for
seeing that I just want to
commend the children in this
committee for recognizing the
outcry from many of the
committees within our state to
take out the the the five year.
Work program on increasing the
G. R. T. C. R. I think that I've
heard from many of those
communities as well as many of
us all have specifically one of
the town of only a which is in
my district where they have not
in the past five years increased
any of the taxes on any of their
residents and and I think
there's a lot to say about that
and where the we live in about
seventy percent of their jet
skis to fund their their general
fund so I I just want to.
Appreciate what we're what we're
aware this committee is because
come from and appreciate the
gentleman in taking that out of
this bill so that is the right
all my comments thank you madam
chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Lente and I
apologize I didn't see that list
Representative tar lu Han.
Thank you madam chair appreciate
the time
I just like to
Actually address the concern
with the restaurants and maybe
that may make more commented
anything and your have some real
concerns of what's going on with
our our with a restaurant
industry and asked it.
We we listen to what was said
today from them and you know
that the cost of goods due to
inflation alone and and the
chain of supply chain issues are
are really really concerned and
I just hope that we can have it
media listen to them and talk
about what's going on that's a
big concern for me I I didn't.
I used to work in restaurants
nice to be part of of the
service industry myself and I
understand how our services and
goods all come together and I
think that this is something
that I hope we can just listen
to them I don't know if there's
anything else we have going on
to help but I think that there
are tax package I really
appreciate we are with it right
now I I I had.
We've had lots of discussions in
a lot of opportunities to talk
but you know I'm just listening
to them today it remains brings
up to concern and and I really
want to say how much I
appreciate the
The tax.
Credit was given for the child
tax credit that we decided to to
move input into this bill and I
just really appreciate that we
did that and then some of the
work we do today with the
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino spill I
really appreciate that
appreciate that
we're taking into consideration
help means are really affecting
still affecting us through this
pandemic and you know there are
still concerns and I just that
is section six is it has been
removed and it's just a really
concerned so I think we might
need more discussion around that
and.
Really for our our low income
families I don't know if that.
That is an address I think you
the tax credit and I just can't
speak about saying how much I
like a lot of what's been going
on with this and just taking out
the also the the G. I. G. R. T.
issue with our local governments
thank you for revising that as
well
Madam chair and.
You know just what mostly
committee that have any other
questions other than you know to
ask if we we can look at section
six again and have some
discussion that thank you madam
chair create time.
Thank you Representative Lujan
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair and madam
chair
I just have a few questions
through the bill
That just first let me just
commend you and and all that
works on this here in our values
as we saw the different bills
come to this committee and
evaluate them I just you know
when we discussed some of the
where we are budget hits our
values this is the other side of
that and I just really
appreciate the thought process
and and the comments that have
been said so far but just
championing again the things
that I think we are we're we're
we're seeking to continue to
promote and improve across the
state this is really part of
that I do have a few questions
can you just describe I know we
saw many different social
security bills through this
committee can you please
describe the wind that is
included in here and and how it
works and so that we're really
clear on which version of the
tax deduction we're seeing
today.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you madam chair Romero for that
question actually it's a
modification of the bills that
we've been seeing to my
knowledge and I can't say that I
know every social security bill
that was filed madam chair and
representative in the session
but to my knowledge I had not
seen one with the cap there may
have been what I I can't swear
to that
this this cap that we are
proposing was
I through conversations between
the house and Senate Tax chairs
and leadership we felt it
reasonable and correct to
support lower and middle income
individuals and
the concern of course was that
high income earners
Probably can absorb the taxed
fairly well and that it it would
not affect the exempting it for
high income individuals we have
very little impact on their
lifestyle or or purchasing power
in in the light but it would
have a significant impact on for
lower income and middle income
individuals who will likely
spend the money and circulate
the money in the economy madam
chair and madam chair.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair.
I I'm really grateful to hear
that you know I know there was
some concern with that sort of
gap in the budget and and the
you know sort of gaping hole
that would have created as we're
we were worried about where we
were going to find that funds I
really appreciate that the
thought process and and taking
care of you know the most
vulnerable in our communities on
that fixed income that only rely
on a fixed income for this so I
I really appreciate how that
came about
again just want to commend the
the you know Greenville in tax
credit the tax really fun on a
feminine hygiene products and so
on and so forth the last
question that I have I think is
really surrounding the removal
of the the restaurant holiday no
that was discussed as something
that was really focused some of
what you I don't know still
happening I know that there's
question about what the hydrogen
bill was meant to be paid for
through tax deductions as well I
don't see that in here which is
I think a hundred twenty five
million so when we saw the tax
impact of the tax holiday and
we've heard from several of my
constituents on the phone today
just discussing you know that
thirty five million dollar
impact ice on the F. I. R. but
if I I saw the technical issues
being about the hold harmless I
just wonder you know is there
any place for us to to have that
discussion wondering how we can
you know really target some of
these businesses that have been
hard hit by the pandemic and and
of course you know we we love
coming to Santa Fe to to have
that experience at center and
across the state I'm just
curious madam chair you know why
that decision was to remove it
and if there's any flexibility
in this to to have that
discussion again thank you madam
chair chair.
Representative.
Representative Romero and madam
chair certainly we can discuss
it but this bill must get out of
committee today for us to have
make it through the floor and
get to the Senate there are
opportunities to amend and there
will be opportunities to confer
with the Senate on the bill I
would point out that there was a
concern that that that program
was not well utilized during the
last iteration of the program
and that was in part that we
rationale for for not including
it of course there's also the
cost we have a look at we have
budgeted a certain amount of
money for our tax expenditures
this year in the program we came
up we thought we got we would
get the most.
What you want to set bang for
our Buck but we are it's a it's
a program that I want to say
this addresses a number is a
broad based program that that
trust that addresses a broad
base constituency thank you
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair for that I I
understand the urgency and and I
respect you so much for for all
of the effort that's been put
into this they I do agree that
we do need to get this to the
fore I I the you know the
ongoing discussion is important
and I know we need to get this
done it's our responsibility as
legislators this session so I I
appreciate that I hope we can
can find the way to do this
that's effective and and and
efficiency but that said madam
chair I I it brings me great
disappointment to do that
hearing somebody for from folks
from my community thank you
madam chair and madam chair.
Your muted vice chair.
Thank you I now see
Representative Harper stance.
Thank you madam chair and madam
chair I am.
Would like to echo and and first
thank you for the great work
that you.
And this committee have done
you've really done an amazing
job this first year leading this
committee and and being very
fair and working west.
With us both sides of the aisle
and it's it's been a pleasure to
be in this committee with you so
thank you for that.
And I want to thank you for
including in this
House tax revenue Committee tax
package several items that.
folks on.
Are so they'll have been
championing for for several
years and and really in a
bipartisan way we we've all been
championing for for several
years.
there's the anti permitting
provision and and I understand
that is a very small piece but
it is the first step in that
direction like you said and and
I anticipate it will have some
great reform next year so I have
taking that step I'm grateful
for that.
The.
G. R. T. rate reduction this is
something that we've all been
talking about for a long time.
again a point two five percent
you know I I did the mass that's
gonna save my family six dollars
a month.
but again it's a step in the
right direction right so
I I do have some concerns about
the trigger I understand why
it's there but in my mind that
makes this not really a genuine
tax decrease it's more of a I
can campaign on a tax decrease
in any year to later it
automatically gets real backing
off to take it for that vote.
but none the last it is a tax
decreased so I'm I'm grateful to
see that.
The social security tax.
I think it was mentioned earlier
that there's a cap that's this
isn't really a cap it's really a
means test.
just to be precise in our our
language here
and I think that makes sense
because the arguments for it
we're really a lot of the
arguments were based off of you
know this is you know impacting
the poor which it's not.
so this means yes we can clearly
say this is a a tax cut for
middle class retired.
Folks in.
Okay so
you know it's something that
folks my son the I've been
advocating for then and then
also we mentioned you know that
of all the things that were
tabled in our committee this
year nursing that that's thank
you to nurses seem like
something that would be really
good to include and and Madam
I'm I'm so grateful that to that
was included in there so lots of
great things in this package.
And and then maybe just a
another come before us correct
in part question.
And just to focus on the
committee understand you know
how this how this works for the
many many years
you know we have the bills that
are temporarily tabled and we
work together in a bipartisan
way to put the package together
and this is I mean it's
challenging because there are
lots of good things that we can
include I'm in the restaurant
here to was was mentioned but if
you look at our list and I have
a list of all of the bills we've
tabled.
You add up the total amount
there.
Your greater than a seven
hundred and fifty million
dollars.
and obviously we didn't have it
built into house bill two you
know eight hundred million
dollars for all these credits
and and so we have to decide
what's with the limited capacity
we have what's best and and
obviously I'm not happy with
everything that's in there but I
think the chair did a great job
of balancing all of the
different needs and making sure
that
you know the major which is the
prerogative but that's how this
you know Representative cover
works that they have
the greatest state but that's a
minority still has a voice and
included some major components
such as west manager.
Superferry great job on on the
tax package and I understand
that some great things we're
we're does not include and
that's that's just that's how it
works.
So Madam we've seen almost
everything in this bill in
committee in one form or another
bills we've heard and and we're
tabled.
the.
The one I've been here that I
think just deserves a little bit
of discussion that was not heard
just so we understand what's in
their.
Is the disclosed agent portion.
this is or disclosed Agency
questions section seven.
And madam chair if it is to be
appropriate maybe we could ask
you or the secretary to just go
over what this is and and why we
feel it's important to include
in the tax package.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I'll take a stab
at it and then I'll but the real
experts speak
this bill this item I have you
sleep madam chair and
representative is something I
would prefer it was a technical
fix and what it has to do with
is when there is a you might
call a middle man who's who's
involved in a transaction
they're not really.
Like a lawyer someone that
really just passing money
through and there's been
confusion as to whether that
transaction should be taxed the
middle transaction with G. R. T.
and so and that there's been
rules and litigation and so on
and this just settles the
question for good and it adds
additional certainty in our code
but I will now turn the forties
secretary Schardin Clarke
because I know she can do a
better job than I just yet in
terms of explaining it.
Madam chair and madam chair I
think madam chair did a great
job on that
Defining disclosed agency and
the gross receipts and
compensating tax act is
something that will put to rest
decades of a source of decades
of frequent litigation between
taxed Ravan taxpayers and there
there was a two thousand and
three court decision and then
that combined with some overly
broad rules arguably they were
adopted by tax and
Representative decades ago have
really complicated what a
business needs to do to avoid
the money that just passes
through an agent
having to also have another
layer of pyramid gross receipts
tax so the example that I think
is is best to get would be a
temporary staffing company so if
a temporary staffing company
gets hired by like a hospital or
a maybe a construction company
they go out they provide the
staff the staff and work for us
through that temp agency they
work for that the construction
company let's say and then in
return the construction company
sends the wages for those temp
employees back through the agent
the the temp staff company to
the workers and if they don't
plan their taxes just right they
might find themselves
unwittingly owing G. R. T. on
them out that simply pass
through them really for for all
purposes the only part that
should be taxable would be
temping temp agencies commission
and that would remain taxable I
hope that helps.
Madam chair and and secretary
you you both gave a great
description of that and a great
example.
I think this is yes a technical
fix because we're we're trying
to make sure that we don't have
lawsuits and folks understand
you know that would basically
codify what's in practice.
At the same time I think this is
really important to understand.
This is another.
Kind of up.
That in the direction of chart
of turning our gross receipts
tax into a broad based retail
sales tax.
And you add up all these little
steps like this we've done over
the years this is why I I I are
you and why you know national
experts say that our our gross
receipts tax really isn't a true
gross receipts tax anymore it is
more like a produce retail sales
tax and this again falls in line
with what we've been doing over
the last several decades so I
think this is a a good change
and.
and and appropriate to include
in the package this year.
Okay otherwise virtually
everything else in here we've
we've we've talked about or is
it is it's pretty simple to
understand.
and and Madam I'm gonna support
this legislation in other parts
of that I don't like.
Because it is the the tax
package and because we work
together in a bipartisan way to
put together.
and there are things in here
that I do like and then for you
and I spoke about this last
night any any real good tax
reform bill is gonna have stuff
you like and stuff you don't
like but overall it's a it's a
move in the right direction it's
it's important to support each
other in that effort that's why
I'm gonna support this
legislation this year.
But chair just a closing comment
and and I'm just gonna be very
very candid and this is no
reflection on you
but just very candidly.
With with four hundred million
dollars
We could have done a lot more.
To actually reform our tax code
so that we could help.
Grow our economy and grow jobs
so that we have less folks on on
Medicaid or are receiving all
these benefits but are actually.
You know fully employed and and
feeling like they're
contributing to society and
helping to.
Pay into our tax rules.
and and so in in my view.
this this legislation is.
more of a.
Governor preelection giveaway.
Then a legit tax reform bill.
But I.
I understand the situation and
for the many good reasons I
mentioned earlier I will I will
be supporting your legislation
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative.
Mr mentor you have you removed
your hand now.
Madam.
Vice chair aside first time
speak.
Thank you Mr Montoya
Representative Lente are you you
have the floor.
Thank you madam chair
Chair woman Chandler I I would
also like to reiterate I think
you handled the the committee
fairly I think you.
This year you've been very.
congenial with handling of the
of the of the committee
but unlike
Representative Harper who who I
think is doing this as a glass
half full and I think I'm doing
this as a glass half empty.
and madam chair I I there are
some some things in here that
are good we fix some some
technical issues that need to be
fixed
I like the last.
Addition.
That I believe we're gonna be
adding of the previous bill that
was the brought forward
I think that's a good fix.
as well once again concern to as
as a.
Representative Scott is that
it's.
A.
Smells of a Ponzi scheme in but
as long as the government's
gonna let us get away with it.
It it's in our favor so I I do
appreciate that but.
Madam chair at the I'm not gonna
read reiterate much of what's
been said but I do want to talk
about two items I think.
Where it were it's a swing and a
miss.
And I think that is that the
social security tax break.
Is just a partial tax break and
once again it as Representative
Harper mentioned it does it it
is means testing instead of just
doing away with that we still
remained one of twelve states
that.
Are still going to be taxing
social security so I I do
believe that that's a mess.
and.
The automatic G. R. T.
reversion.
that's unnecessary that the
point I believe when that
Decision would be made if you
know relatives from what I
understood of the timing of it
looks like it will be in
session.
Every year so I think they're
they're they're the reversion
date is like February first.
and so madam madam chair we
would be in of.
We would be in session every
year at that time seems like
it's a kind of us punting we put
it in place so we can take
credit for it and we put an
automatic reversion even though
we would be in session.
when this consideration would be
taking place and we could easily
make that consideration and
remove it.
And as remove the change says
would be in session I'm kind of
a third I think a swing and a
miss Representative Harper just
yet on this is a real
opportunity this year to do some
big things and instead we did
some real small things and I I.
This is.
To some degree better in in
instances but for for myself I
just I don't think I can support
this because I I think
The couple of ones that are in
here the couple of things that
look to be a good policy
we didn't go far enough and
and and and as a case of the G.
R. T. reduction
We don't even have the guts to
deal with that in the future on
our own if if we have to revert
it and so we put in this
automatic mechanism and I I
think it's smacks of the
political cowardice in that way
so I I appreciate your work and
once again
I understand we have a a bunch
of people clamoring.
For tax policy changes.
I I think you you take a stab at
it I appreciate your work but
once again unlike Representative
Harper I see the glass as half
empty and I I cannot support
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair if I could just
close on a few comments
As I noted earlier this bill
represents primary it primarily
A version of bills that were
filed during this past session.
Every member in this house has
the ability to file a bill and
offer creative ideas for tax
reform.
That could have been done
and what we did was evaluate
those proposals that were
presented to us we modified some
to make them better in my
opinion the reversion of the
area of the trigger Clause is a
plus.
We don't want to ever be in a
position where we're we're
this very very short on funds
it's gonna be very hard to read
reach that trigger amount
because it is when G. R. T.
revenues dropped by more than
five percent so that's a
significant amount of money and
it's it's a safety net for our
state.
as to the social security
issue compromise and that's
really what it is it's a
compromise and that's how
legislation is done personally
I've been very skeptical about
exempting income social security
and income from taxation have
just have no the number of other
members on this committee
including Republicans on this
committee so I feel that it
represents a fair compromise it
goes it will help middle income
seniors in a way that I think we
would all agree we should be
helping them so on that point I
think we we are moving in the
right direction.
What I am particularly proud of
and most excited about in this
bill is the child income tax
credit.
The the federal government hand
such credit until I think the
end of last year it's expired
unfortunately the dysfunction at
the state that the federal
capital has because that credit
to expire without being renewed
and I think we all should be
proud on this committee for
being proactive and offering
legislation that supports all
families all families are
eligible for some portion of the
credit and I think
We're we're we're doing cutting
edge later legislation as far as
that goes lastly I would point
out we all knew that this year
was not going to be the big tax
reform here I don't know how
many members of the committee
have have have that knowledge
that on both sides of the aisle
and we're all looking forward to
collaborating some more
over the summer to talk about
more extensive tax reform for
our state but given that it's a
thirty day session I think it
was very unrealistic to think
that we were going to rewrite
the tax code this year
with that madam chair I think
I'm done.
Thank you thank you Madam chair
representative we are ready for
motion we are looking for a do
not pass on house bill one sixty
three and a do pass on the
committee substitute for house
bill one sixty three and madam
chair I would note that speaker
Egolf and floor leader Martinez
would like to vote on that so I
have texted them but if we we
may have to hold hold hold the
vote for a few minutes while
they're coming on but you can
start the vote madam chair.
All right thank you will our I'm
sorry you have.
Representative Harper no I was
just a going to make the motion
that you asked for madam chair
and and verify it is this is the
this is the point seven version.
That's correct right so all of a
do not pass on house bill one
sixty three and a to pass on
house tax revenue committee says
substitute for house bill one
sixty three point seven version.
That.
I'm sorry you made the second.
Representative Fernandes.
You representative Fernandes all
right miss programs would you
please call the roll.
Mr raise your mute it.
Sorry about that.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lente.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative Maestas yes.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
No.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Scott.
No.
Representative Strickler.
No.
Yes.
Chairman chairman.
Yes and I understand the speaker
is logging on and he will be
available momentarily to vote.
I see the speaker is getting on
Kimberly if you give her give
them a moment.
The enrollment manager.
Cared.
Speaker you got that we can get
your vote please vote yes.
We have an eleven to three two
passed.
Thank you very much committee
and I appreciate all of your
support and assistance in
putting together the package and
I'm looking forward to working
with you as we move forward
thank you what to to to.
Six zero six zero eight point
seven and thank you.
Thank you I will take the over
the home again vice chair
Herndon we are now on Senate
bill one thirty eight Senator
Kernan.
The madam chair I will be
presenting this today for
senator Gramm great very good
Representative Cadena.
Yes please thank you good
morning madam chair committee on
I am here today with SB one
thirty eight part of the reason
Senator Kernan asked me to lift
this as you all probably
remember I also had a bill H. B.
eighty two that addresses
amendments in the same section
of law Senator Kernan says a
little bit different and that
she has introduced cleanup
language that's technical in
nature related to nursing homes
and hospice care providers and
clarifying ambiguity in the law
of the to make sure that they
will continued to be eligible
for the G. R. T. deduction as
they have been since two
thousand five so this is cleanup
language technical in nature
other ways but what it seems
from the FIR hearing from TRD
the the TRDs favorite part of
this bill is it also adds
clarifying language around Max
Medicare administrative
contractor is technical in
nature but the US government
doesn't make the payments
directly to Medicare they come
through Medicare administrative
contractors so this is also
clarifying language that TRD
supporting an appreciative of in
SB thirty eight at one thirty
eight with that madam chair I
believe that I still have
experts on from earlier this
morning on the health care
quality surcharge tax here to
answer any questions if they
arise but otherwise we're ready
to go to the committee very good
well let's go to the audience.
Are there attendees who wish to
speak in favor of this proposal.
I don't so I do see one hand.
Is this Sunday Vargas please.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Senator about us and
executive director for the New
Mexico health care association
New Mexico Center persisted
living
many of our members in the
nursing home industry to our
take advantage and are eligible
for this tax credit it is it is
definitely important for their
operational capacity so for that
for those reasons we stand in
support of this legislation
thank you.
Thank you.
I don't see any other hands
raised in for wishing to speak
in favor anyone wishing to speak
in opposition to the proposal.
I see no hands rates will go
back to the committee.
Yes Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative.
I'm I'm seeing secretary
Schardin Clarke is still on the
line I'm I'm don't know if I.
She is elevator
on issues.
Thank great panelists there
there we are thank you sorry to
catcher for secretary
I just well I was hoping you
could give us a little bit of
the history and
background on this my
understanding this goes all the
way back to kind of the
HealthSouth's.
Issues that we had and and
really this is.
We're not again changing any
saying this is existing practice
but it's a little.
How the statue was written I I I
know we all meant to to say what
what we thought it said but it
might not say what we thought it
said and we're just making it
more clear could you give me
just give a little bit of
background so we understand.
Sure madam chair and
Representative Harper I'll be
happy to tell you what I know
which isn't the the full story
but I I think you're right that
the genesis goes back to case
law and as you say it sometimes
tax code gets written in a way
that at the time we think it
makes perfect sense but
different people can can read it
different ways and so the I I
don't know the whole backstory
but I do know that our staff
look at this very carefully and
they were in agreement that the.
Was changes to statute clarify
and just basically give
taxpayers in this in this
situation peace of mind and we
welcome the changes thank you.
Four
you
The Madam chair representative
and and secretary and I
No just looking at the the the
language in the bill itself
it looks like you know if I'm
understanding this right there's
on on.
I guess it's on page one section
a.
in schools or to page two what
we're really doing is we're
we're just sharpening the
language in that section.
And then removing some language
that kind of it is in there but
could be argued that doesn't
really applaud you know this for
medical or other Helsinn and
plaintiffs misses by hospitals
or nursing homes which really.
Does not really.
I'm and session is about health
care practitioners.
And so now the question as well
for this.
hospice or nursing homes to be
included in this do they have to
be health care practitioners I
think that's what the question
is
and and so by striking that
hospice and nursing homes out of
the section that's really
talking about health care
practitioners and creating a new
section will be the talks about
hospice and and nursing home.
Payments independently.
We're we're really making it
crystal clear that yes hospice
care nursing homes are follow us
in this statute but they don't
have to be run by health care
practitioners.
in my understanding that
correctly.
Madam chair.
Representative and secretary.
Madam chair secretary looking at
you if you like to jump in on
this as well but it's certainly
the understanding I've had so
Madam chair representative like
you I try to poke into the
background and context of how we
landed here I was able to look
into a pretty significant SB six
from two thousand sixteen where
this language was actually
altered so prior to that since
two thousand five it was a long
list that name doubt provider
types and facility types as part
of that overhaul in twenty
sixteen there is cleanup that
happened most folks went into
their own standalone section as
they eliminated the long list
that was all in a paragraph
basically and what seems to look
like here you you put it on the
point with the repeat of the
health care practitioner
language twice in in section
eight here it raises this
ambiguity it potentially is only
needed the second time but
you're right if you see health
care practitioner we've defined
that starting for it is defined
starting on page five nursing
home and hospice facilities are
not part of that there defined
separately so yes that that's
for the ambiguity comes from is
is it some confusion that was
created in the twenty sixteen
bill but it they have not been
assessed this liability since
two thousand five I appreciate
that the department
undersecretaries leadership has
clarified that they they don't
see that there's a remaining
liability here so again it is
that peace of mind to make sure
that folks understand what the
legislative intent was all along
and making it happen here.
Madam chair representative
harbor if I may just support
with the sponsor just said that
she's absolutely right and the
reason that this bill has no
fiscal impact is because it's
just codifying in statute the
current practice the tax payers
and tax and rubber already have
already blessed.
Madam chair representative to
carry thank you for that I think
we all have the least least I
that help me
and I think we have a better
understand what this legislation
does and why it's important so
chair thank you for the time.
Thank you Representative Harper
hello Representative Rod Montoya
your hand up.
Yes madam chair
I'm just gonna just ask the
secretary a couple of questions
chair absolutely.
So.
Secretary
I'm just wondering if you this
hospice care in nursing homes
have not previously.
Been recognized in the
legislation that are the the law
as it currently exists but it's
been current practice could you
could you explain that to me to
because I as I was reading this
site when I first saw this I'm
getting going how could there be
no fiscal impact we're adding
two separate categories that
have not previously been.
considered.
And so.
Yeah but I'll let you respond
looks like you're jumping at
that response thank you Madam
are you Madam chair
representative Montoya act you
know unfortunately there there
are tax lawyers on our staff
that have looked at this in
greater detail than I have so I
don't know that I can address
that in as much detail as is
you're probably wanting but
perhaps the sponsor can I know
that you've looked at it much
more closely.
Yes madam chair and and
representatives I impart waste
which I provided you with the
twenty sixteen language ahead of
time because that's what it took
for me to see this these
facilities where name since two
thousand five as be eligible for
the G. R. T. deduction over a
long period of time it was
cleanup language attempted to
address other situations and
really get some clarity and
focus in this legislation it it
looks to me like some help there
was a bit of a title one might
say because they included this
health care practitioner
language twice it creates this
ambiguity because these
facilities are not in the
definition of health care health
care providers but if folks are
interested it's on page twenty
six of Senate bill six from two
thousand sixteen
it's yes page twenty six and
just as an example here is when
they added receipts of a health
care practitioner but then they
struck also it's of pieces like
it said and other health
services by medical doctors
osteopathic physicians doctors
of oriental medicine athletic
trainers chiropractic treatment
physicians dentists it goes on
and on and on for the rest of
the page and then they again put
in health care practitioner
with the date that the language
and it so what happened is that
then many of those folks got
their own section of law but
these facilities did it in part
because they were they they were
not a health care practitioner
they they existed in the statue
in a different way so it really
is that health care
practitioners listed twice in
there like receipts of
receipts from or are from a
health care practitioner and and
and then again they're just not
in that definition so here is
just to add a section of law but
it was the legislative intent
since two thousand five that
they not be assessed this tech
let tax liability and they have
not been since.
That.
Thank you madam chair and and
Representative so when so you're
saying was in to see two
thousand sixteen you think
they're in vertically removed or
left out.
Well to be clear it's it's
ambiguous because of the way the
definition section exists but
yes it was in two thousand
sixteen that the ambiguity was
created when the other folks
we're we're up stricken and then
considered under the health care
practitioner piece they they
clearly left them in here so it
to me the legislative intent was
that they still are trying to
name them in section eight that
they were to be eligible for the
G. R. T. deduction but it's
really about the placement of
the health care practitioner
language twice and the multiple
amount of the word or so it just
creates like did you meet us or
did you not and and it's been
the practice of TRD to say we
didn't see the legislative
intent to eliminate this
deduction but you know folks and
and business owners that are are
frankly worried that one day
with the different secretary
administration someone could
come back raise this ambiguity
and potentially be leveling this
liability that that wasn't
intended.
Thank you madam chair
representative
So so hospice care nursing homes
do not fall under the definition
of health care providers.
Practitioners know our this did
defined as different entities
and and starting on page five.
Okay just curious to me just
because.
Anyone who's had a family member
in a nursing home.
Or are in hospice
there's nurses there are doctors
doctors usually coming in are
their own doctors but the.
I'm just surprised that's not
considered health care
practitioner I mean I guess
maybe that's why I am a part of
my confusion should they not be
considered in the greater.
Greater definition of health
care providers are
practitioners.
Madam chair representative it's
my understanding that yes they
are licensed to to deliver
Medicare services so that's how
they come into the statute but
they also provide other services
outside of that scope including
residential services including
end of life services that that
are not considered medical in
nature but that are addressing
the other needs to be honest
that the clinical care and the
Medicare services for patients
in those facilities.
Okay well I'm actually surprised
about that just the way you know
I I in the last ten years I've
lost both my parents and not
numer at well bunch of aunts and
uncles along the way as well and
you go on there and and they're
receiving health care I mean
that's.
Some of its comfort care
obviously this housing
so I I can see that but the
portion that they do that is.
Health care I don't see how that
can be considered anything else
so anyhow I'm just surprised
that that's maybe a discussion
for another time but
I agree they should continue to
receive this
This.
Ability to use this answer taxes
thank you madam chair and thank
you now sponsor.
Thank you Representative Montoya
I don't see any other hands
raised happy to entertain a
motion.
Representative.
Would you be willing to make a
little emotion for us.
Madam chair I make the post what
do pass and all second madam
chair.
Thank you it's been moved I am
vice chair Herndon second by
Representative Parker we pass
for do pass Kimberly would you
take the role please.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Speaker.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lente.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Romero.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative did you need to
make a vote
yes please.
Madam.
Yes.
Thank you very much going now to
item House Bill.
The C. one ninety five.
I believe Representative black
is here okay very good good to
see a representative.
Morning madam chair good morning
floor is yours thank you madam
chair so house bill one ninety
five is basically a
clarification currently one
hundred percent disabled
veterans are to be exempt from
property taxes I'm so one ninety
five is just clarifying that it
would make that exemption
immediate once they produce that
are.
Certificate I'm to the county
assessor it was going to affect
immediately verses what
currently current practices that
it does not going to affect
until the following tax year.
So I'm.
A couple of different instances
that I've seen yes I actually
had a constituent who purchased
a home I'm in two thousand and
twenty the title company failed
to pay the taxes that were due
at the time so the
Taxpayer gotten the two thousand
twenty one tax bill had the full
year of delinquent taxes from
twenty twenty and the twenty
twenty one taxes due I'm a
hundred percent disabled veteran
that it moved into the community
so she was unable to get that
taken care of so she was on the
hook for two thousand dollars
and and property tax.
another instance that I've seen
is were a veteran how percent
disabled veteran will.
Purchased a new home.
Move from their old home and the
county assessor will not move
that exemption in the middle of
the of the year so what and
evidently happens is the
purchaser of the old home gets
to take advantage of that
veterans exemption but they're
not actually entitled to the
veteran.
These will not move that
exemption until the next year so
I'm in hopes that we can get
this past so that it's actually
intended for the veteran who is
a hundred percent disabled
they're able to move that
exemption so that they are the
ones benefiting from their own
exemption.
in my County roughly I have five
hundred and twenty one
one hundred percent disabled
veterans out of a population of
sixty nine thousand residents so
we're looking at less than one
percent I don't believe that
this is going to be a at a major
issue I'm we have very few one
hundred percent disabled
veterans so I just think it's
the right thing to do madam
chair and so with that I'll
stand for questions.
Thank you Representative black
before we don't questions I'll
go to the audience and C. C. F.
ask any attendee wishing to
speak in favor of this bill
please raise your hands.
Okay.
Richard moody.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee Richard
moody on the CD one vice chair
of the New Mexico veterans and
military families caucus and a
member of the rural caucus we
strongly support this bill to
provide immediate tax relief for
disabled veterans in the state
it served our country honorably
at least we can do is help them
out when it comes to paying some
of their taxes so thank you very
much for your time and.
Thank you Mr moody I don't see
any other hands raised in the in
support anyone wishing to speak
in opposition.
I see Laura Montoya stand.
All right.
Montoya good morning madam chair
this committee knows me very
well and that I love our
veterans but I believe that this
bill is a particular county
issue between the assessor and
the treasure the second
example is actually a bill that
you already passed where a
hundred percent disabled veteran
can actually move their
exemption in the middle of the
year to another house if they so
choose if they move so that
might be something that the
assessors I'm aware of but it is
already in statute and for the
second part from an
administrative perspective
veteran has until thirty days
after the notice the value to
turn in the veteran docks to the
assessor and if they turn it in
the application during that time
they wait on the VA assessor
will or should honor the date of
application I'm so I think this
is an issue that's going on in
that particular county that
needs to be addressed but I
don't believe it's something
that's a statewide issue of
concern and that could cause
problems with confusing veterans
when they get their tax bill and
it be incorrect if it's after
that date of time that we're
mailing out the tax bill.
Thank you Mr toys.
Back to the committee miss black
did you want to say anything
else before we go to the
committee Representative black
sorry.
Thank you madam chair I actually
I will disagree with the with
that.
Why I'm and your mind to it and
I are actually friends.
so that's what it's kind of
funny that and I know that she
is she does stand against it and
I.
I respect that she feels it
maybe just a one sided issue but
I I would like to clarify it
throughout the so that thirty
three county assessors are clear
on how it needs to be done so
thank you madam chair.
Representative Representative
Harper.
Thank you very much madam chair
and Representative black it's
good to see you in taxed good
morning.
So I would like to just
understand this a little more
deeply because
it property taxes kind of those
interesting
Areas of our tax code where
there is like a very well
defined schedule that happens
every year and we've talked
about this a little bit before
just even in the session that
you know if the folks have a
particular.
benefit your tax benefit against
property tax there's or or if
there
Value rises and and it should
not have risen that much there
is really a window where one can
apply for that benefit or are a
yield
the the assessed value and and
if you miss that window
you really have to.
Wait for for the next round.
So.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative black I I know
that you kind of are involved in
this for a living could you
maybe just give us the very
reader's digest version of this
schedule
What what happens when.
Sure thank you representative
madam chair so the county
assessor had starts assessing
properties January first of the
year the rendition rendition.
Yes this morning read this
period is between January first
and April first I statute by
April first each county assessor
must mail out the notice of
value and there's a thirty day
window from when you receive an
email that notice a value I'm.
Until they said it ask your
ballots so you have thirty days
to disagree with that with the
county assessor pure exemptions
aren't showing or or whatever
the case may be you go to the
county assessor suicide this is
rock so within that thirty days
so virtually may first
I'm David how may first if
you've not done that then
basically you agree with the
value that they've given you and
moving forward that's what
you're you're taxed.
Bill is going to be based on
that value with the exemptions
without exemptions eccentric so
may first that the value
processes set then DFA will
actually go through the process
of calculating the mill levy and
all that fun stuff I'm and then
in September DFA sends those tax
rates out to Karen's of the
county assessor goes before the
board county commission they
agree with that then October is
when the tax rolls actually that
assessor the treasurer it
together and those tax bills are
then mailed out by November
first of that tax year.
Madam chair and representative
black that's that's perfect
that's the exact level of detail
is looking for this kind of
helps us understand the process
and and and again when you say
that DFA determines the mill
rate what's really going on
there is DFA is making the yield
control calculation.
And then DFA tells all the
counties this is your new mill
rate you'll control calculation
and the counties voted to accept
it but they actually have to
they cannot vote no.
I actually carry to build my
very first session when I
learned about yield control to
give them the option of their
act actually don't know if they
wanted to but that passed the
house unanimously but Akhil
Senate and that it was my very
first bill off the house floor
and they are trying to figure
out how to make me sing what
song to sing to that and they're
like this is the most boring
bill how do we catch to give
anything and finally they are
they settled on making me seeing
rock a bye baby in the style of
Jerry Garcia.
And and I I as like okay let's
show them what I'm made of you
know and then I.
That's right got a reputation
for a long time anyway
that the point of all that
building now.
Chair representative
so there really is just this
this window.
And we have lots of
You know little little sings the
property tax you know like head
of household
just Representative disabled
veteran
I mean there's others.
Are you aware madam chair and
representative.
Black.
Do any of these other
Every tax benefits have this.
this this issue that you're
seeing or or a mechanism that
you're proposing here or will
this be a new saying.
I'm actually.
All exemptions in the law start
the following tax year I'm and I
don't see that that.
Generally be an issue I my
biggest issue is that if a
hundred percent disabled veteran
buys a home in August.
Then there are a lot they're
they're on the hook for for the
next several months I'm so so
that's really what I'm trying to
do is so because what's clear
hundred percent say when
measuring should get.
An exemption from property taxes
I'm so and and like you said
that's what I'm trying to
accomplish here is you know they
by their house in July.
Then they would be exempt the
following months.
Yeah madam chair and
representative black I mean I I
agree with you right I mean one
of my best friends is a hundred
percent disabled that lots of
that's my family I mean we've
never on this committee respects
our vets and obviously Tax Code
does too because we have this
exemption plus many other things
and and there's lots of federal
benefits that they receive as
well I'm just asking you know
trying to be objective you know
if someone does not file for
head of household exemption in
that particular time frame.
they're kind of in the same boat
my understanding there come in
the same boat as if.
Disabled that did not file for
this exemption in in the time
frame right.
Yeah okay but I will say
excuse me had a household
expansion are right now is two
thousand dollars so roughly in
my county that equates to about
fifty dollars a year.
So fifty dollars a year.
It is it you know I'm we're
looking at a veteran that may
have a thousand dollar per two
thousand dollar tax bill for
that year so that's really what
I'm looking yeah and and madam
chair Representative black I I
totally understand and agree
with your right there's there's
a difference in scale here.
The.
But I'm just I'm just again you
know trying to be the protector
of our tax code and make it an
administrative to flee as.
you know a few speed bumps as
possible you know what I'm
thinking is you know if we're
gonna make this change should we
not look at all of the
exemptions and benefits out
there and apply it to all of
them versus just this one right
are we no are we just know we
try not to have legislation that
focuses focus on just one issue
you know because when we do that
like what happened when speaker
Lujan decide if you want to help
some people in Santa Fe we ended
up essentially destroying.
The the the great system we had
for for evaluating properties
for the entire state and and
we're and it's just so hard to
roll that back.
and so I'm just thinking here
okay if this is a good idea if
we really want to move this
forward should it not apply to
other things in the code that
are the same.
And and if the answer is no then
we have to say okay was this
really a good idea or was this
just
You know.
they got under our saddle you
know what I mean.
So so that's why Mike what's
women exploring this chair and
representative black so I mean
your thoughts again you you you
do this for a living.
should this what you're
proposing be extended to
all.
Of of these benefits.
You know I I question that
myself I really
thank you for that
representative madam chair so I
you know I'm I'm on the fence on
the fence because as you know
you know it's the property tax
cut is kind of a.
I'm a mess anyway.
and so I just.
So wait it's I I'm I just really
don't know at this point maybe
it's something that we look at
two and include all those but I
guarantee you representative
madam chair that the push back
that I I will get.
From the county assessors in the
county treasurer's on an on
including all exemptions would
probably be tenfold what it is
now.
I'm also provided that you know
I don't like exempting like you
said it affects yield control
so that's where I'm kind of on
the fence yeah yep Madam chair
representative black not now
you're now your understanding my
questions and and knowing
exactly where I'm coming from
right because
yeah when you look at I'm the
reason why you have this window.
Is so that later when you do the
control turn the cranking into
the range out.
everything is is kosher if we
kind of open it up so that folks
could start changing valuations
and benefits in their taxes
through the process.
Then the the chances you're
you're you're County could end
up with less money than it
should
because the the evaluation at
your control is based off of
changed.
During the process so.
well
Let me just say Madam chair
representative black
I I complete understand you're
saying I I do think that patrons
can
Switch their attention to
another property during the year
we we need to explore that make
sure that's right that that's my
understanding let's make sure
that's right.
and and I'll just say as well
I've.
Spoken with that chair Chandler
and and several others about
running that revenue
stabilization and tax policy
committee differently this this
interim and really working hard
to develop a good tax reform
bill and ensure Chandler
mentioned that earlier in this
committee that you know asserted
a was not you know before it was
not the time to do this we're
really.
T. not for the sixty day I think
even if we pass this bill today
getting off the house floor
through the process in the last
couple days it's just it's just
a challenge but I'm really
grateful that we've had this
conversation about this forward
because.
I think it makes sense for us to
have a property tax day during
the interim and you know talk
about you'll control talk about
the three percent cap and we can
add this as something that we we
talk about as a committee
and and really understand surly.
And if if we agree that you know
this might be an important
mechanism that we apply to
everything we could talk about
that or or maybe we say you know
all those things would just
break you'll control but maybe
this is important to us because
of our veterans we find some
other solution but
you madam chair I just want to.
Thanks a representative let me
ask these questions so we can
kind of all be on the same page
and add to the order for some
good discussion during your
trip.
Thank you madam chair.
Are there other questions I see
Representative Montoya is hand
up but I'm not sure if it's a
residual hands or new hands.
If I had the op if I to be able
to make it to where we can show
what was a
maybe if we have the option to
slash mark or something.
Other than the other thank you
madam chair Representative black
Representative Harper is correct
about the the fact that it's
gonna be hard to get this
through
same time I don't think it would
be a.
A huge problem if it did go
through
I had the likelihood of getting
all the way to the end of the.
All the way to the to the finish
line is.
Virtually now what we did on
remember that we had with the
speaker.
on on Saturday was that that
that was the last batch of house
bills that would get through the
only way that that this would go
through as if there were some
sort of a.
Consent that we did to to let
allow this and some other bills
through which is unlikely just
released a stamp perspective yes
you know very unlikely I don't
think it hurt to pass it out if
we want to have further
discussion but the likelihood of
it being heard on the floor as.
Not likely and because of that I
would like to to and I've made
this a suggestion on a bill that
I I presented which was on
vehicle excise tax and using all
those dollars for
For for to go the road of funds
and I've asked that that be
heard through the interim so I
would like to ask the chair that
that this if if we as we take a
serious look at taxes and
potential tax reform this this
interim I would ask that we look
at this as well
I because I do see Essie the
merit and I and I see that
disadvantage simultaneously and
I see the merit and disadvantage
simultaneously if it were
applied to to to everyone.
It does it is.
It does seem to be kind of a.
Hello the whole that exists.
and so I I think we should take
seriously that this and the so
madam chair even if we pass this
out I I it's really probably not
gonna be heard I don't know
that's necessary to table it I
don't know that it's necessary
to.
But either way.
Representative black it's very
unlikely
near impossible I would say that
this gets hearing on the floor
especially to gets all either
side so I'm I would say if
you're gonna introduces again
next year.
I would introduce it early.
because at this stage of the
game is just very difficult so
thank you madam chair.
So what is the pleasure of the
committee what I'm hearing and I
think it's a very realistic
statement that Representative
Montoya raced just didn't chase
Representative Harper and that
is.
We are late in the session I'm
and we we my preference would be
to just hold it in advance and
we can consider it during the
interim as suggested by
Representative Harper
the likelihood you could get a
bill to this bill to the house
floor amendment through the
Senate and so on so forth so if
it's alright with you I would
suggest we just take no action
unless there's any objection.
From anyone I see no okay and I
see my ranking member giving me
the thumbs up so I hope you we
did want to give you a hearing
Representative black because I
know this issue is important and
it was a good conversation that
we can continue I would propose
that we roll the next bill as
well now let me just our
memorial actually want to talk
to you a little bit about
scheduling and the like so we
may get some Senate bills and if
there of consequence them then I
will confer with Representative
Harper about scheduling a
hearing it could be on the call
of the chair so I just want to
throw that out there we'll have
to look at our agenda as it
comes through in addition just
as a courtesy to Representative
Roger Montoya he has a bill
that's house bill one seventy
three it has to do with the
rural infrastructure crisis fund
our title along those lines he
had presented that bill to
appropriations it has not
formally been referred to a
committee and we would not be
taking formal action on it
obviously for the same reason we
would not be taking action on
Representative black still but
he has asked that we here the
bill and the issues associated
with that there are significant
rural infrastructure sorts of
issues out there and it would be
just another another item that
would be discussed I would
imagine during the interim but
it would give us a preview and
so I would like to schedule a
discussion of that item on
Wednesday I would not expect
that we would be passing the
bill out but I and I will talk
to the representative of that M.
of that that that that's the
likelihood but just in terms of
starting to elevate the
conversation around rural
infrastructure I would like to
schedule that and and and if
there is a Senate bill that we
are getting very tight on
Wednesday but there we.
Are so they'll be one item of
discussion on Wednesday there
may be a call of the chair if
there's Senate bills we really
need to push out but that's
where we're at any questions or
comments from the committee.
I see none sounds good very good
thank you so much for your
attention and I appreciate your
support on the on the best
package thank you and we are now
adjourned.
Thanks Madam thank you.
