Good morning, everyone in the
room, and all they're tuning in
online. Thank you for joining us
on this Monday morning. We can
begin the process with uh roll
call, Madeleine, please.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Gallegos here.
Representative
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lundstrom.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Parajon.
Representative Silva.
Here.
Representative Terazas.
Represented, uh, vice chair
Kadina.
Here.
Mr. Gerante.
Alright, we have a quorum. Good
morning again, everybody.
Madam Secretary, if you would
please.
Oh
Committee members and those in
the audience, we've uh invited.
Stephanie Sharton Clark, the
cabinet secretary for the
Taxation and Revenue Department
to provide us uh an overview of
a couple of bills that um have
been presented in the tax
committee for the Senate.
And the reason why I've asked
you to come here is because in
the past we've been uh at a bit
of a disadvantage because we
don't see what they see and and
vice versa, but nonetheless,
this being an administration
bill that, that she's going to
present to us. I wanted to make
sure that we have a preview of
what's been presented there in
the Senate Tax Committee, so
that we can um based on on on
their expectation of what they
would like to see in the tax
package might see on our end as
well. And so without further
ado, she has a couple of bills
to go through and then it's a
lengthy packet, but I don't
think we.
we want to go through
everything, but I will allow you
and the floor is yours, Madam
Secretary, whenever you're
ready. Thank you so much, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee. It's always a
pleasure to be here with you and
yeah, so the slides I'm looking
at look like this, the executive
priorities and um as the
chairman mentioned, I won't go
through the the last several
slides, those are house bills
that you've already passed
through this committee and
through the House floor, so no
need to talk about those, but um
just as a broad overview, I, I
also want to say secretary
designate Rob Black from the
Economic Development Department
is also
So here is is a support today,
especially in case the committee
wants more details than I can
provide on the quantum tax
bills, we can talk about how
they work from a tax
perspective, but Secretary
designate black is, is much more
involved with the economic
development aspect, so when we
get to that too, just feel free
to pose these questions, but,
um, so on the first slide, you
know, just big picture, the
executive, of course, um,
supports a tax package that's
responsible and sustainable, as
I think we all do.
Um, so, you know, there's a
focus in this package on
providing relief to families as
well as economic development
through the quantum tax credits.
And, um, next, I'll go on
without further delay to the two
quantum bills, so those have
been introduced on the Senate
side, their Senate bills 211 and
212. Those are sponsored by
Senators Padilla and Souls and
on the House side by
representatives Dixon, Joshua
Hernandez, and Representative
Garrett. And so there's
basically two different ways
that we're looking at
incentivizing quantum computing
activity to occur in New Mexico.
So as a as a big picture
reminder in New Mexico and
Colorado were design.
designated federally as a
quantum computing hub this
summer and we were awarded
jointly $41 million in federal
funding to advance the quantum
sector, and so the next step as
we see it is to make sure that
there is a competitive advantage
to developing quantum computing
in the in the associated
businesses in New Mexico versus
elsewhere, including Colorado,
so um.
Uh, the first one is aimed at
offsetting the cost of building
that infrastructure in New
Mexico, and so basically it's a
30% credit on qualified
infrastructure expenditures. Um,
there is a floor so that we
don't have um a lot of small
taxpayers claiming this
basically you need to expand a
minimum of $3 million on quantum
infrastructure to be eligible
for the credit. Once you meet
that eligibility criteria, the
credit is equal to 30% of the
infrastructure expenditures up
to a maximum of $50 million.
dollars per quantum facility,
and there's an aggregate cap of
$70 million that would double if
New Mexico receives a US
National Science Foundation
Award. Um, it's a 10-year sunset
period through 2035. And this is
one of the credits that would be
pre-certified by the Economic
Development Department.
I'll pause there, or I can pause
for questions or go on to the
next quantum.
Any questions for a secretary at
this point?
If not secretary. Let's proceed.
Chairman, members is offsetting
the infrastructure cost to build
these facilities in New Mexico.
Senate Bill 212 then moves on to
once they're operational in New
Mexico and provides the credit,
I should say that this bill has
the same Senate and and House
sponsors is is 211. Um, so now,
um, that we've got these quantum
facilities built in New Mexico.
Their infrastructure is built
out, they're operational. The
second credit is available to
two taxpayers and
Mexico, those are our national
labs, and the national labs
would be basically providing
testing and evaluation services
to um private or lab uh
activities, basically evaluating
new developments in quantum
technology analyzing and and
testing them.
And so the idea is that the labs
would enter agreements with
quantum agencies at the federal
level and this bill provides a
GRT credit equal to their
federal match. So the idea here
is through GRT state only, not
local, GRT relief were allowing
the labs to make available their
federal match to bring that
federal funding into New Mexico
to advance the industry in its
testing and evaluation of
quantum technology.
Um, this one has a cap of $15
million per calendar year in an
aggregate cap of $60 million
over all 10 years that it's in
place. Again, it has a 10 year
sunset, again, um, it's
certified by the Economic
Development Department and last,
um, just to reemphasize this is
a credit against the state GRT
only, not the local GRT.
OK. And then last, um,
We have really switching gears
here. We're we're back to New
Mexico families and as the
governor mentioned in her State
of the State address, um, we've
we've proposed Senate Bill 335,
which provides a credit against
personal income tax for foster
parents and guardians of, of
children. Um, this is sponsored
by Senator Padilla and
Representative Doo.
And the credit is equal to $500
per month for these foster and
guardian families to be eligible
for the credit each month, the
family had to have um custody of
the child for more than 50% of
the days, and that's really just
to prevent um multiple claims of
the credit for the same child in
the same month, if it, if the
child is moving around, um, and
I don't think I need to explain,
uh, you know, the, the goal of
the tax relief, we know that
foster children and children
that are, um, in the
guardianship of, of another.
family member are uh very
vulnerable, and this is
something we can do to put an
extra um refundable up to $6000
per year into the pockets of
those families to help assist in
raising those children and help
them achieve the best outcomes
possible.
So as far as the fiscals and the
impacts we expected about 1030
foster families that are
currently licensed by CYFD will
be eligible, as well as about
1900 guardian households and um.
CYFD will certify this credit,
and it is refundable.
With that, um, the rest of the,
oh, I'm sorry, I have one more.
I forgot, um, House Bill 421 is
house bill, but it hasn't come
through this committee yet. Um,
I believe it's with House
commerce first.
Um, and so this has two parts,
um, most of the pages of the
bill are a new act relating to
an RLD rebate, um, for retail
security costs. I won't talk too
much about the security rebate,
just that the bill appropriates
$100 million seed money that RLD
will then use to make rebates to
qualified vendors who sell
security equipment and services
at a discount. The rebate is
equal to the discount offered.
Really, we're, we're trying here
to offset the costs that
businesses are bearing of.
retail and restaurant and
industry crime, um, which of
course affects their bottom
line, makes it more difficult to
decide to open more locations,
hire more employees, things like
that.
Um, for, for our focus, though,
the bill also creates a GRT
deduction, also on the receipts
from the sale of those um
security equipment related sales
and services.
Um
The GRT deduction is expected to
reduce state GRT by about 1 to
$3 million per year in local GRT
by between 5000 and 2 million
per year.
And with that, I would stand for
any questions.
Thank you, Madam Secretary, for
your presentation. Questions or
comments for the secretary?
Not, I want to just thank you
for the large font that you
provided for us this morning.
Also for the presentation, as I
made mention before, is
oftentimes we don't even know
this is coming over until we see
it in in their.
of referred bills that they want
to be in that they want to have
in the tax package and so this
is helpful. Uh, can you, can
you, I don't know if you made
mention of this, but at least
for the two Senate bills, you
have a cost on those?
Mr. Chair.
That's an interesting question
and, and as the, the committee
all knows, we don't do dynamic
scoring on on our bills, we do
direct impact scoring and so
from a direct impact scoring,
um, we score these bills at
their cap. So, um, we would
expect an aggregate 75 million
claimed over the next several
years, um, on the, on the
infrastructure one and on the
one for testing and evaluation
again because it's the cap in
the bill we would expect 60
million to be credited over
about the first.
4 years. However, I should say
that.
Not, not that I'm advocating for
this dynamic scoring in the FIRs
themselves, but I think we do
need to take into account that
we're scoring against revenues
that we don't currently have. We
don't currently have a quantum
sector in New Mexico. We aren't
building quantum infrastructure
or doing a lot of testing or
evaluation in New Mexico
currently. So the goal of these
is to bring that activity to New
Mexico, and then, of course,
once it's here, we score the
negative fiscal impact, but I do
think that this one should be
looked at a little bit uniquely
in terms of fiscal scoring,
because we're not, um,
contemplating.
No longer taxing revenue that's
currently part of the tax base.
We're, we're looking at drawing
a new industry here, growing the
pie, and then in doing so, um,
offsetting its new revenue.
I hope that answers your
question.
Yes, it does, Madam Chair. Thank
you. I mean, Madam Secretary,
thank you. Anyone else questions
or comments?
Hernandez
um.
OK, so I'm, as everybody knows,
I'm the tacky geek, um.
So this, you know, we presented
in front of uh HAFC.
In the year
Uh, about quantum and.
You know, the question that we
got was, isn't quantum?
Um
So Microsoft this week, um, put
out Maharana, um, which now
means that quantum is a couple
years away, rather than a couple
decades away.
Um
The, I love your plan.
Um, and I'm hoping that we can
bring a whole lot of quantum
here. It is gonna be the, the
future of computing and let's
make that future.
Secretary.
Anyone else question or
comments?
Yes, ma'am. Representative.
Uh, thank you, chair, and thank
you secretary for the
presentation, um, thank you for
explaining the scoring and the
cost because that'll help me pay
attention to that in the future
and then we'll.
He and Rev and DFA be working
together and LFC to be then
scoring that and and monitoring
that development. Thank you.
Yes, Mr. Chair and
Representative Silva, thank you
for that question. So all the
proposed credits um that I've
just talked about credits and
deductions will be scored in the
annual tax expenditure budget,
so basically that means we'll,
uh, total up the amount claimed
and reported annually to rest up
each fall.
Excellent. Thank you. Thank you,
chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Anyone else? Questions or
comments?
Seeing none, thank you again for
your presentation this morning,
secretary.
Thank you, Mr. Black, for being
here as well.
All right, let's go to our next,
uh, and only bill for today. We
have House Bill 417 liquor tax
changes and programs.
Presenting today, we have
Representative Kadena.
Representative Parajon, I
believe will join her as well as
their co-sponsor representative
Ferrari.
And ladies, the floor is yours
whenever you're ready.
Good morning, Mr. Chair.
I am grateful to be here with
you on a Monday, figuring out
how we do right by New Mexicans.
I'm Representative Lara Cadena.
We're presenting HP 417. We have
Chair Ferrari joining us
shortly, and of course here we.
So to start with Mister Chair,
for those of you that have been
on this committee, you know that
over several years, we've been
in debate and conversation about
how to modernize New Mexico's,
um, mechanics for taxing
alcohol.
So currently and in place today
since the 90s, we taxed alcohol
at the wholesale based on volume
and alcohol type.
Uh, in previous legislative
sessions, we've considered
proposals from ourselves and
others that would.
Either increase the wholesale
tax or eliminate the wholesale
tax and go to a retail tax. Um,
what we have in front of you
today with HB 417, um, is a bill
that came out of collaboration,
uh, with several of us members
of the legislature, myself,
representative Parajon, Chair
Ferrari, Chair Thompson,
Representative Cates, and
Representative Chavez as well as
Senator Serio Lopez, what this
bill does is.
Um, on the tax side, it does two
things, so one, we freeze and
place the um excise tax, the
liquor excise tax that's been in
place for decades, put any, uh,
measures to keep up with
inflation on those rates. We
basically freeze them in time
where they've been since the
90s. What that does, Mister Cha
and Committee, is continue that,
that pretty stable um revenue
stream for New Mexico that comes
in at about 50 million a year.
So first part of our proposal is
to keep
And freeze the liquor excise
tax. What we are changing is the
distribution of where that tax
has gone since the 90s. So right
now, about half of that goes to
the general fund, 24 million and
some, and the other half has
been, um.
Pointed towards mitigating the
harms of alcohol use in New
Mexico. And today, as the law
stands, first, the municipality
of Farmington gets about 20,000
a month, pointed to their their
city budget, then there are 6
additional counties the way the
law reads is that they were
supposed to get additional
dollars for detox services in
their communities, and then
finally, um, the large remainder
of that money of that fund gets
distributed to our 33 counties
based on a formula that
considered GRT an alcohol
related injury. What our bill
considers and proposes is that
none of those dollars go to the
general fund. Um, we do
discontinue, uh, the feed to
Farmington and and the 1st 6
counties, and instead we have an
updated in what we consider very
fair um formula to get that
money out to counties where it's
needed most, so.
The new formula is based on
population instead of GRT with a
strong weight towards
alcohol-related death. So when
you have questions and later
represented Parajon will be
ready to explain, um, where,
where we're.
Pointing that money and and in
our opinion, where it's needed
most. That's the first part of
the bill.
The second part of the bill, um,
Mr. Chair and committee, uh,
brings forward the imposition of
a new liquor excise surtax. So
what we've called more
informally, um, a liquor or
alcohol retail tax. This would
be a tax at the point of sale,
so if there were any New Mexican
um buying alcohol, whether that
be at a grocer, gas station,
pharmacy, bar, brewery,
restaurant, they would be, um,
facing a 6% tax on.
alcohol at the price of
purchase. So we believe that
makes it a better tax because
now the tax is proportioned to
the value of the product, um,
and not the product just because
we, we considered it to be a
sin, so on this new side, on the
6% side, our proposal considers
that instead of putting any
money to the general fund, we
instead put those dollars where
they're needed most, so.
Um, after setting aside 3
million for 10 years to do
research and evaluation on
alcohol and substances and the
harms they've caused in our
state after that 3 million, uh,
the net receipts a tributable
attributable to this new tax
would be pointed to the Indian
Affairs Department, where they
would be charged with setting
something that something up that
looks like um the tribal
infrastructure Fund, so they
would be responsible for
creating a council that had
representation from the tribes,
nations, and pueblos.
Within the New Mexico state
boundaries as well as
representation from
organizations serving urban
Indian populations that council
would then be responsible for
figuring out the mechanisms or
distributing that money and
making that money available both
to tribes, nations, and pueblos,
local government serving tribes,
nations, and polos and other
entities serving indigenous
people and urban urban Indian
populations. So at its top, um,
that is what this proposal does,
uh, I do want to also say, Mr.
Chair, as you've been
to wear some time last week, I
believe it was Wednesday or
Thursday, uh, we did send the
committee, um.
An amendment doesn't change the
substance of the bill, but just
clarifies how the implementation
dates will roll out. We can
answer some questions about the
TRD question, uh.
Concerns on that, but this part
in particular in the amendment
we brought forward is just
clarifying what we need on some
of the implementation dates.
Um, Mr. Chair, if we can move
briefly to my co-sponsors.
Um, uh, Mr. Chair and, uh,
committee, thank you so much for
having us here today. A lot of
the work that um I've been able
to do and contributing to this
bill is really examining how
that formula um is distributed
for me, um, in the way that it
was written in the previous
statue, the, as I've said
before, the uh counties that
experienced the most harm were
not receiving their proportional
share of the dollars in order to
treat their, their members in
their counties, and so I'm
really proud of the work.
that we've done, um, in that
aspect and really ensuring that
um you know the counties that
suffer the most will have the
most resources to address the
harm in their communities. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee members.
Um, increasing the alcohol
excise tax is a proven evidence
based public health strategy,
um, designed to reduce alcohol
consumption and increased
funding for for prevention and
treatment efforts, and the
proposed liquor excise tax
combined with the existing
excise tax will not be changed
from the current rate.
Um, but it is expected to
generate approximately 110
million all dedicated to
reducing health disparities
caused by alcohol related harms
and the reason we need this for
New Mexico, is that we're almost
3 times the national average of
deaths related to alcohol in our
state. We've been ranked 1st,
2nd, or 3rd since 1981 and 1 in
5 deaths among working age
adults ages 20 to 64.
In New Mexico is attributable to
alcohol, increased risks of
severe physical and mental
health conditions as well as
higher rates of violence and
injury associated with alcohol
consumption are key contributors
to these deaths. An additional
harms to come to our state in
the form of increased economic
burden over $2.2 billion was
spent in New Mexico in 2010 on
health care, criminal.
Justice, expenses, etc. related
to excessive alcohol use in that
current estimate now is close to
$4 billion half of our state
doesn't even drink and are
having to carry this burden.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee.
Thank you, presenters. Any other
questions or comments?
Before we move forward.
OK, very good. Let's now then
move to public comments. Let's
go to the uh internet first.
Are there any folks in support
of House Bill 417. We have 8.
In support of House Bill 417.
Good morning. Uh, please keep in
mind that uh I like to keep uh
on target with the schedule this
morning, so please keep your
comments brief. I won't cut you
off, but please keep in mind you
have others that are here in the
room as well that wish to make
comment.
was first.
We have 14 now. Again, for the
same reason.
Your comments brief.
Dorothy, Dorothy, good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, uh,
sponsors the bill. I'm Dorothy
Seaton. I represent the 560
members of the Veterans and
Military Families Caucus. Um,
we're in support of this bill
because
There are 122,000 plus veterans
living in New Mexico, not all
veterans get their care at the
VA and when you have a
behavioral health crisis and
addiction or a mental health
issue going on, uh, driving to
Albuquerque and getting on a
wait list, it's not a good
option. So we think this bill
will keep people out of uh
emergency rooms and jails and
put them into treatment, uh,
where they can be restored to
society,
we particularly
like to travel alcohol harm
alleviation counsel to provide
um culturally appropriate
services to that group, and we
appreciate the work, uh,
Before
Before it got to this point and
the collaboration to get the tax
part ironed out and to remedy
the inequity.
Of sending tax dollars to the
general fund instead of
treatment and prevention.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Alyssa.
Melissa, good morning.
Hi, uh, I'm Alyssa Kinniguer,
and when I served in the Oregon
legislature, I worked a lot on
behavioral health, so when I
moved to Santa Fe, I joined the
alcohol, uh, harms alleviation
group a couple years ago and
have worked on this bill for 2
years. This, uh, alcohol harms
alleviation consortium is now 30
different groups. I encourage
you to go to the website. It's
fabulous, and I really, really,
really want to thank all of the
collaborators who brought their
different ideas both around.
Uh, tax, the tax structure and
the allocations together. I
think this is fantastic, the
sales tax will naturally go up
over time as the price of
alcohol goes up, so that takes
care of some of the cola. I
think the allocations are great.
I won't go into that. I'll just
point to an email I sent on
February 21st, in response to
some of the questions that came
up uh in a previous hearing
about how could we have such
high consumption when our
average consumption is not the
highest. That is true. It just
shows that there are a lot of
people who are not drinking or
moderately drinking while they
are a smaller group of people
who are heavily drinking, and so
the burden on people who hardly
drink at all is not gonna be
high. The burden on people who
drink heavily will be high, and
that will reduce as data has
shown, their consumption, and
then the dollars going into the
treatment is the ethical way to
deal with this, um, so I hope
that I have a lot of different
links in that email, so I won't
go into it. I respect the time
of other people. I do hope if
you have any questions about
what the data shows, you will go
to my email, Alyssa Kennyguyer
on Feb uh Friday, February 21st,
and see all of the links there.
Thank you so much for your time
and again, thank you so much to
all of the legislators and the
Speaker's office who got
together and ironed this out.
Thank you, thank you, chair.
Thank you for your time. Next.
Cindy, Cindy, Cindy.
Hello.
Good morning chair and members
of the committee. I'm Cindy
Sockerman and I'm the director
of the Tribal Behavioral Health
Providers Association. I've been
working to address alcohol harms
for over 20 years, and I'm in
support of this proposed bill.
Since the last legislative
session over 2200 people have
lost their lives due to alcohol,
and it's time for action. People
with an alcohol use disorder
need comprehensive services that
are empathetic, like managed
alcohol programs and our state
needs a multifaceted approach.
This
was needed to make a dent in
alcohol related deaths. We can't
have 20 year olds dying from
liver cirrhosis or people dying
on the streets due to exposure
or drowning in a puddle of
water, and let's not forget that
alcohol is associated with 7
types of cancer. It's been over
30 years since alcohol taxes
have been changed. We believe
that this bill will provide much
needed prevention, harm
reduction and treatment services
to every corner and every tribe
pueblo and nation, and will help
address disparities while
enhancing our much
needed behavioral health
services. We at the behavioral
Health Providers Association,
the tribal association, um, are
in full support of this bill as
is. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Next,
Kristen. Kristen, good morning.
Good morning. Thank you so much.
My name is Kristen Hartman. I
represent myself as a survivor
of alcohol-driven domestic
violence and sexual assault from
Gallup, um, almost 50 years ago.
Homeless at 15 and 16 with an IQ
of 144 to escape the
alcohol-driven domestic violence
at home and sexual assault by
those in positions of trust. And
I'm asking you to vote yes on HB
417. It's taken me 50 years to
get here. Like many survivors,
I've been living with them.
paying for alcohol privilege my
entire life. As a teen, the
constant exposure to
alcohol-driven violence in our
home locked my body in a
constant state of fight or
flight that has taken its toll
on my physical and mental health
in the decades since.
Alcohol took my childhood and
poisons the very diversity,
beauty, and dynamic richness
that is also the Gallup that is
part of my tapestry, my very
being. You can take the girl at
a gallop, but you can't take the
gallop out of the girl. I
survived but barely.
I ask you to vote yes because I
deserved better.
Gallup deserves better.
New Mexicans deserve better, and
there's no better opportunity
than now for confronting alcohol
policies and their legacy
barriers to health equity. After
50 years, I'm now a graduate
student in public policy at the
University of Colorado, uh, a
state where that has a public
health impact of $5 billion a
year from alcohol. I can't
imagine what New Mexico's must
be. This is a health equity
issue. It's not about
prohibition. This is about
health equity. And I thank you
so much. It has taken me 50
years to get here.
And I really, like I said, I
deserved better. Gallup deserves
better and the Mexicans deserve
better, and I really urge your
support on this bill so we can
get closer to health equity.
Thank you so much for your time.
Kelly Livingston.
Kelly, good morning.
Can you hear me? We can hear
you. OK. Good morning, Chairman
and commissioner, I'm sorry,
Chairman and committee members.
My name is Kelly Livingston. I'm
the assistant county manager for
Justice and Human Services in
Lee County, and also the chair
of the LDWI grant Council, which
oversees the current funding
provided to the counties for
their DWI programs. I stand in
support of the proposed changes
to the local DWI program fund. I
feel the changes will benefit
all counties by expanding our
scope of wellness services and
enhancing current services which
will preview.
Proved to have a greater impact
on gaps and needs and overall
well-being of our communities.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Katie
Katie, good morning.
Good morning, Chaente and
committee members. I want to
also thank the sponsors of this
bill and thank the committee for
hearing from those in support of
it. My name is Katie Wickowitz
and I'm the director of the
University of New Mexico Center
on Alcohol Substance Use and
Addictions.
As outlined in the UNM fiscal
impact report funding funding
from this bill will help our
center by allowing us to devote
more resources to studying,
preventing and treating alcohol
problems in the state.
I want to note for this
committee that funding research,
prevention and treatment for
alcohol use has a very large
return on investment, and this
funding will ultimately help
reduce the human and state costs
related to the burdens of
chronic disease, particularly in
our native and rural
communities.
It's been pointed out that New
Mexicans don't drink the most
nationwide, but we do die the
most. We're number one in the
nation for alcohol-related
death.
We know that promoting
reductions in drinking reduces
deaths due to alcohol-related
causes, but it also improves
quality of life and well-being
for those most impacted by the
deleterious effects of harmful
alcohol use.
Including the children,
families, and people of New
Mexico.
Ultimately, this bill will save
the state money and also save
consumers money.
These appropriations would allow
us to have a much larger impact
in the state at our center. We
would be able to provide the
resources for us to create more
programs to help New Mexicans to
create jobs, and to address the
societal issues and harms
related to alcohol use.
With these resources, it will
allow our center to improve the
quality of life in New Mexico
and save lives of New Mexicans
across the state, including in
rural and frontier communities
where we already work. I'm happy
to serve as a resource to this
committee for this bill, and
thank you for your time today.
Thank you for your comments.
Next. Jenny.
Jenny, hi. You're with us.
Hi, Mr. Chair and committee
members. My name is Jenny Way.
I'm an addiction medicine
physician working in Gallup, New
Mexico since 2012, and TR
McKinley County alcohols Task
Force, and I support House Bill
417.
There really is no way to
exaggerate the extent of alcohol
related harms in our emergency
departments, intensive care
units, clinics, they are far
more prevalent and far more
severe than any of us have seen
in any other setting, and we
have providers that have
practiced all over the country
from Atlanta to Seattle, from LA
to New York City. We're facing a
public health emergency here in
New Mexico, and I'm not talking
about a new deadly virus. This
is one we've been fighting for
decades. New Mexico has high
rates of alcohol-related deaths.
As a result of acute
intoxication, accidents,
violence, yes, but it also has
the highest rates of cirrhosis
among any state in the country.
The large majority of these
folks are not due to the small
minority of patients with severe
addiction, they're not going to
drink hand sanitizer and
hairspray if these taxes are
raised. This is a long term
complication from chronic use
over decades that do not folks
that do not have severe
addiction. I never get used to
seeing a 28 year old woman who
started drinking at the age of
12. Now in fulminate liver
failure.
Yellow from head to toe because
her liver can't clear her
toxins, bleeding from every
orifice in her body because she
can't make the proteins needed
to clot blood, swollen legs with
10 L of extra fluid in her belly
because of the liver failure,
liver failure has shut down her
kidneys too. I never get used to
telling her family that she died
from a preventable illness. Yes,
a preventable illness, but only
if sound evidence-based public
health practices are enacted
like House Bill 417.
We healthcare providers do our
best to provide compassionate
care with the resources
available, linking them to
medications, counseling, but
that is not nearly enough. Too
long we've been in disaster
mitigation. We need to shift
this alcohol epidemic towards
prevention. We're fighting
formidable forces, but our
communities need us to be
stronger. Our healthcare teams
want us to be stronger and House
Bill 417 shows us that we can
be. Thank you so much for
everyone's time, Mr. Chair and
committee members.
Thanks.
Ali Anderson, good morning.
You're with us?
I am. Good morning here and
members of the committee. Um, my
name is Allie Anderson, and I
work on a prevention program
focused on reducing the harms of
prescription drug use. Um, we
know alcohol plays a huge role
in substance misuse, and my
colleague works on an underage
drinking prevention program
along with many of the other
colleagues in the state. Um, but
New Mexico has the highest
alcohol-related death in the
nation, as Katie mentioned
earlier, and without proper
funding, we can't effectively
address this crisis. House
417 doesn't raise the base
excise tax. It just ensures
those dollars go exactly to
where they're supposed to
towards prevention, recovery,
and treatment. And with a small
surtax, we can finally start
addressing the real harm that
alcohol is causing in our
communities. I appreciate your
time. Thank you. Thank you.
Linda Atkinson.
Linda, good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
committee members. My name is
Linda Atkinson. I'm the
executive director of the DWI
Resource Center and the New
Mexico Victims' Rights Project.
I, uh, in our organization is in
full support of House Bill 417.
I'm one of the old timers that
was, uh, doing this 30 years
ago, but we never indexed it to
the cost of living. So to see
this bill intact and actually uh
really pulling in all the
resources to help address this
crisis in the state is important
and needs to be looked at. I
know that working with the
victims of all violent crime, we
see many are associated with uh
abusive drinker in the family
and the help they want sometimes
is just not there and the funds
aren't there. I think this
addresses that. I know also
liquor industry 30 years ago
said, oh my gosh, we raised the
tax, we're gonna lose jobs and
this will be a disaster. We're
gonna lose money. I think we
need to focus on the, the people
in this state that are already
losing their jobs and their
funds because of alcohol abuse
in the family, death, injury,
all the, you know, the harms
that that
come from this, so we fully
support this and appreciate your
time this morning. Thank you so
much.
Thank you. Next.
Tyson Cortez, good morning.
Greece
Hi, good morning.
Good morning, uh, chair and
members of the committee. I'm at
I hope you and the harsh to
Charlie,
uh, I am a proud member of
Santin Domingo Pablo, and I am
here in support of House Bill
417. You know, I see it here
before you today, filled with
humility and commitment, not
just for my tribal communities,
but for all of my relatives that
reside in the
Be in my homelands of New Mexico
to find solutions to the plague
that we are facing that absorbs,
you know, life away from seeds
planted within us for
well-being, uh, from this
disease, um, alcohol related
deaths and harms. You know,
alcohol addiction, uh, has stunt
the growth for all my
generations, culture and people
never surfaced due to the cycle
and social trauma is contributed
by this generation.
epidemic. You know, my people
have so far so so long been
targeted by the alcoholtries
through uh easy accessibility,
cheap alcohol, and lack of
awareness, um, to the general
population about how the
industry preys on vulnerable
populations, uh, such as my, you
know, binge drinking is high in
communities due to lack of
prevention efforts, um.
And also, you know, my reality,
you know, is looking at my
people walking to uh 5 miles
away to a liquor store
establishment, you know, I am
here today to ask you leaders,
please help my relatives walk
towards home to Brazil
resiliency and hope, so thank
you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Carrie. Next.
Valeria.
Meera, good morning.
Buenos dias, Valeria Alarcon
here, members of uh committee,
uh, we represent the New Mexico
Alliance of Health Councils,
including 33 counties and
currently 10 tribal health
councils, and we are in full
support of this critical bill as
a means to continue the
collective effort around
education, intervention,
prevention in addressing alcohol
harms alleviation, but also the
intersectionality uh of
substance misuse disorders such
as
Alcohol with forms of violence,
gun violence, um, suicide, and,
and many other uh effects on our
population, so we are in full
support of this bill. Thank you,
members of committee and those
who worked um in such a
dedicated, thoughtful manner on
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Bill.
Melanie Joe Melanie Joe.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Melanie Jo Montoya, and
I am a core member of the New
Mexico Tribal Behavioral Health
Association. I am in support of
House Bill 417. Alcohol abuse
has caused major impacts on
families with violence, physical
ailments, and death. And this
goes without speaking with my
own family. This bill will
assist with making the cost less
of a burden to the hardworking
New Mexicans and put some of the
costs back on the, the tax.
s that could go to our tribal
communities within the state of
New Mexico. Thank you for your
time.
Thank you for your time. Let's
move on to the next one.
Honey?
Honey, good morning.
Good morning. Um, I am an OBGYN
that lives in Gallup, New
Mexico. I am here to add another
voice of the medical community
in support of this bill. I
believe that this is the unified
view of the medical community
here in McKinley County, that
alcohol use disorder is a major
public health issue that impacts
many of our patients, and we
hope that Representative
Lunstrom and our other
representatives will vote yes on
House Bill 417 to give our
community the resources we need
and deserve to address this
issue, which impacts
drives the economy and our rural
healthcare systems and
hospitals.
I hope you will look to
addiction experts like Doctor
Jenny Wai, as well as service
providers and advocates with
lived experience who have
testified today to guide you in
this opportunity to develop
sensible alcohol policy. Thank
you. Thank you, Jenny.
Anyone else?
Oh
Deborah.
Deborah, good morning. Good
morning, Mr. Chair and
Committee, Deborah Martinez. I
worked in McKinley County over
20 years. The city of Galt
receives less than $3 million to
address a multi-million dollar
problem.
We are desperately in need of
more resources. We have been
able to collaborate to reduce
alcohol harms, but it's not
enough. If federal funding goes
away, we will not be able to
fully fund our detox center.
Last year our detox center had
as many intakes as our
population in the city of Gallo,
please support our community.
Thank you. Thank you.
Shelley
Shelly, good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Shelly Manev. I'm a longtime
public health advocate, having
worked on this issue for more
than 2 decades. This bill, House
Bill 417, is critically
important to the health of our
community. You've heard from so
many different kinds of people
and communities. I want to
specifically honor the alcohol
harms alleviation Coalition is
aha that has worked diligently
for the past several years, and
also to honor all the
Legislators who have worked hard
together.
To come up with a proposal that
hopefully we can move forward so
that we can both raise the funds
needed to deal with this
incredibly important public
health challenge that is
impacting so many of our
friends, family, community
members throughout New Mexico,
we all, and I could certainly
tell years of stories, but we
need to do this for our
community. We need to do this
for our children, and I thank
you and urge your support for
House Bill 417.
Thank you. Last one.
Robert.
Robert, good morning.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, Robert
up with the lobbyist for the
hike the Apache nation, the uh
leadership fully supports this
bill. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Robert. Let's go to
those in opposition of House
Bill 417 online.
We have 5 on the list.
Yep.
Carol
Carol, good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Carol White. I represent 3600
New Mexico restaurants, and we
strongly oppose House Bill 417.
While we acknowledge the efforts
to discourage drinking and
defend the tribal.
Alcohol harms alleviation fund.
This tax would significantly
burden our industry. First, I'd
like to clarify that this is a
new tax on New Mexicans at a
time when the state has a
billion dollars surplus. Having
said that, the restaurant
industry has experienced a 27%
increase in our costs over the
last few years, and we've had to
pass that increase on to our
customers and increased alcohol
and food prices on our menus,
and because of this we are
seeing fewer customers visiting
our local
restaurants. So the bill
sponsors the right, right,
raising prices deters purchases.
We are experiencing this daily
in addition, an additional tax
will only exacerbate this issue
further, discouraging customers
from enjoying the dining
experiences at our establishment
that our establishments offer.
On top of all of this, the
implementation of the tax would
require restaurant owners to
reprogram the point of sale
machines, even if it's possible,
and they would have a new
regulatory burden to remit this
tax. I would like to remind the
committee that restaurants
Bear the burden of paying gross
receipts tax on food, whereas
grocery and convenience stores
do not face the same GRT
obligations on our
Industry, which is already
grappling with high costs and
higher prices for our customers.
I beg you to please oppose.
House Bill 417. Thank you for
your time.
Thank you, care for joining us
next. Peter.
Peter, good morning.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Peter Compos, the vice president
of the Gallup-McKinley County
Chamber of Commerce, and we
oppose House Bill 417. Our
community has long struggled
with alcohol addiction issues
for decades, Gallop in McKinley
County has had the highest
liquor excise tax in the state.
This tax currently stands at 6%.
We have what we have learned is
that increasing the price of
alcohol is not a deterrent to
those who suffer from addiction,
but it does create and
exacerbate other unintended
consequences.
Just this past week, the
McKinley County sheriff and a
lieutenant from McGa Police
Department spoke with our
leadership McKinley class, and
pointed to the fact that the
increased price has led to more
aggressive panhandling, more
bootlegging, more shoplifting,
theft, and it leads to the abuse
of far worse intoxicants. The
higher price often drives those
who are addicted to a mixture of
hairspray and water often
referred to as ocean water.
The sheriff and lieutenant also
told us that the higher costs
move those with addiction to
cheaper, more available illegal
and illicit drugs like fentanyl.
These are the realities that our
community battles every day. We
also know from speaking with the
large alcohol distributors that
liquor sales across the state
are declining due to
legalization of cannabis and the
increased availability and lower
cost of illegal narcotics.
Increasing the cost of alcohol
is not the answer. Behavioral
health services are key to this
issue, and we applaud both the
House and Senate on the passage
of the behavioral health package
which will fund these services
without increasing taxes. We ask
that you please vote no on House
Bill 417. Thank you.
Thank you, Richard Campos. Next.
Terry Cole.
Very cool. Good morning. You're
with us.
Good morning, Chairman Lin Day
and members of the committee.
I'm Terry Cole, president and
CEO for the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce. I'm here
this morning to oppose HB 417.
Mr. Charon and members, we won't
dispute that our state has a
drinking problem. According to
the Albuquerque Journal, alcohol
was a factor in nearly 25% of
New Mexico's road deaths in
2022, but simply ratcheting up
attacks isn't the answer to
combating alcohol abuse. If
needlessly punishes very
responsible adults, and it would
harm local economies, especially
the hospitality industry,
because
While it's less clear that this
tax proceeds will support
evidence-based programming to
address alcohol-related harms.
This bill will hurt the tourism
industry and New Mexicans, and
make no mistake, these attempts
to make alcohol a cost
prohibitive luxury won't deter
anyone. Casual shoppers will
turn to online retailers and the
truly determined will cross
borders to build their own
personal stores. Last but not
least, given the historic
avenues, our state is in the
midst of collecting. We really
shouldn't even be considering
tax increases. If alcohol harms
are truly a priority, and if we
believe in the programs as
proposed tax would fund, then we
should find the means to support
them. Right here and right now.
Without a bill that would hurt
business and residents. We
strongly encourage the committee
to vote no on this bill this
morning. Mr. Chairman, I
appreciate the opportunity to
share our thoughts. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you for your
time this morning. Next.
Ronald Brown.
Ronald Brown
Morning.
Mr.
Brown, hold on a second.
I don't know if it's your side
or our side.
Say something again, please.
Uh
we.
We
I understand you here in the
room.
Um
And I don't know what the fix is
maybe.
Log out, log back in,
if, if you can, um,
If you can please, uh, just.
That's my cue for everything
night. Turn it off and turn it
back on. But um if you can do
that and then join us, we'll,
we'll gladly hear your comments,
but at this point, we can't
understand you, so let's move on
to the next one.
Larry Sontag.
Very
Good morning, Chairman Linhe and
members of the committee. I, uh,
represent the New Mexico
Business Coalition in opposition
to House Bill 417. But first, I
just, as a matter of order Miss
uh Chairman Linhe, I just want
to commend you on a congenial
way that you run this committee
welcoming uh public comments. It
is not.
The norm, um, not everybody has
your demeanor and it's so
appreciated.
Uh, beyond that, I won't repeat
what has been articulated well
by Terry Cole and Carol White
and others.
New Mexico Business Coalition as
a matter of policy differences,
thinks that
When the state has had
multibillion dollar surpluses
for several years.
We should look as Terry Cole
said, within the budget to
address the serious problems
that the bill sponsors are, have
brought up, so it's not a matter
of um the liquor.
Itself, that is a problem, but
we have problems with fentanyl
and all kinds of other problems
that can be addressed with the
current tax revenue.
We encourage you to vote no on
House Bill 417. Thank you.
Thank you, Larry. Next.
Hall guessing.
Paul, good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, uh,
members of the committee, I'd
first like to echo, uh, Mr.
Sontag's points about your uh
running of these committees, uh,
it is very welcoming and uh I
appreciate that.
Uh, my name is Paul Gassing. I
run the Rio Grande Foundation,
which researches public policy
in New Mexico from a free market
perspective, uh, we opposed the
tax increase, not changed
distribution of
Money, uh, for treatment.
Uh, New Mexico's alcohol taxes
are not low, depending on the
type of alcohol, they are quite
high.
Especially in the area of wine,
taxation, uh, none of our taxes
applied to beer, wine or spirits
would be considered low relative
to the other states, and since
they're taxed on a percentage
basis.
Uh, they're not affected by how
long we've gone without raising
the particular tax.
Uh, as prices rise,
They're charged uh at a higher
rate.
This is a regressive tax though
that will negatively impact the
casual drinker, not the
alcoholic, and heavy user of
whatever substances they can
come across.
They will find those intoxicants
and harm themselves regardless.
Uh, we should not be raising
regressive taxes at a time of
massive budget surpluses. Thank
you very much for the
opportunity to speak today.
Thank you. Last one online.
No more online. Very good. Let's
come back to the room then.
Let's uh
Don't fall over each other, but
let's go to those in opposition
of House Bill 417, please do
form a line, and we will have um
Or attended all the mic for you.
And for the same reasons, please
be respectful of our time this
morning. Please don't be
redundant.
And
Whoever wants to go first.
Man.
I.
Yes, yeah, yeah, go ahead.
00, I'm sorry. Good morning. My
name is Bridget Dixon. I'm the
president of the Santa Fe
Chamber of Commerce, and we
represent over 600 member
businesses in Santa Fe. We are
deeply concerned about the
impact of House Bill 417 on New
Mexico business community. A 6%
alcohol tax will place an undue
burden on restaurants already
struggling with rising costs and
labor shortages. Our hospitality
sector, which provides a
significant amount of jobs here
in Santa Fe, and this tax will
drive customers away hurting
businesses and employees alike.
We urge you to reconsider this
proposal and seek alternatives
that won't jeopardize our local
economy. We vote no to HB 417.
Thank you for your comments.
Next.
Good morning, Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Henry Sandoval, and I am the
executive director of the New
Mexico Grocers Association.
We oppose House Bill 417.
For a few things. Number one,
New Mexico is already the
highest.
Alcohol tax within our region.
With this potential passing of
this bill and the other 8 to 10
bills that will affect our
grocery stores. All that is
going to go straight to the
consumers. An interesting fact
is that New Mexico ranks 6th.
Highest basket ring in the
nation, uh, at $286.15 dollars
higher than our neighboring
states.
Um, this really puts our.
Independent grocery store
owners, um, store owners, liquor
store owners that are in rural
communities, small towns,
cities.
Um, in a potential loss of
revenue by going to other states
like Colorado, Texas, and
Arizona.
So please vote no on HB 417.
Thank you. Next.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, my name is
Leland Gould and I represent the
New Mexico petroleum marketers.
We have 800 small business
owners in every city in New
Mexico. In many cases where
family owned and rural areas and
and we're the only grocery store
convenience store or gas station
within 100 miles.
We've been dealing with business
struggles these past few years
like inflation, many are still
recovering from the pandemic.
Now it looks like we're
potentially going to have
minimum wage in family leave put
on strapped on the backs of
these small businesses.
Our main issue with House Bill
417 is how it will completely
change how we collect taxes on
alcohol.
Most of our members will have to
acquire either new software or
hardware or both.
On top of this, we'll have the
cost of training employees.
All this is a greater cost to
New Mexicans. If we continue to
strap these small businesses in
New Mexico I see in the future,
many of them closing their
doors. We oppose House Bill 417.
Thank you. Thank you, sir. Next.
Um, German members of the
committee, my name's Billy
Baldwin. I have 3 liquor
establishments in Albuquerque.
I've also been a member of the
Bernardo County EWI task force
for 19 years.
We've done a lot of great things
with reducing um.
Issues with alcohol based on
alcohol, um, lot of really good
things.
I just don't see where this bill
is going to help anything
considering the fact that we've
already seen McKinley County
have an excise tax and nothing's
really changed there as well.
Uh, I oppose this bill for all
the reasons everything's already
been stated. Thank you. Thank
you, sir.
Next
Good morning, members of the
committee. My name is Alan
Markey. I'm the regional vice
president for Premier
Distributing Hensley Beverage, a
beer wholesaler here in New
Mexico.
Uh, we, as a wholesaler collect
the wholesale or excise tax
currently.
All the wholesalers combined
collect about $50 million in
tax.
That tax has been described as a
regressive tax.
So I think part of the impetus
of this bill is to increase
introduce a progressive tax
based on retail value of
product.
Um
And
At a second and, and
Currently
We have a retail tax and the
gross receipts tax.
So there is already a
value-based tax that is
collected at point of retail on
alcohol at a rate of about 6 to
9%.
That's probably burns in about
$75 to $100 million.
So currently we have.
wholesaler excise tax that
collects $50 million.
The gross receipts tax that
probably in the state portion
collects about $50 to $70
million.
And we have a massive surplus.
Budget surplus.
Uh, we've also allocated funds
in the in the approved um.
Behavioral Health Trust Fund. So
there's a lot of funds
available.
To fund the purposes of this
bill.
And
At this time when there's an
inflationary cost of living
crisis.
Introducing a second retail tax.
On alcohol purposes, um.
It doesn't seem like the right
thing to do by New Mexican
consumers. So we respectfully
ask that you oppose this bill.
Thanks for your time. Thank you
for your time.
Next on the list. Scott Scanlon
registered lobbyist for the city
of Farmington, and we too oppose
this legislation, um.
We oppose it because the
certainty that Farmington has
received over the last 20 years
or so, um, receiving their
funding is gone in this bill.
Um, and that money now goes to
to uh programs in the city of
Farmington like Tota that as an
example are taking people off
the streets that could be
freezing, um, at night in um in
Farmington, so we might get
more, we might get less, but we
don't get certainty, and that's
why we're opposed to this bill.
We think that the distribution
um issue was really a solution.
In search of a problem.
But beyond that, um,
We're increasing taxes.
With uh the surplus and the
reserves that we have.
This legislature very proudly.
Um, past Senate Bill 12, and 3,
just yesterday, a couple of days
ago.
So I would submit that a lot of
the problem is going to be taken
care of in those two bills, um,
I would also point you.
Uh, in your FIR to page 5, the
top of page.
5,
Talking about the assumptions
that this 6% tax would
Uh, would do and the reduction,
and I would suggest that it
ain't much.
Um, finally
I went to the grocery store over
the weekend.
And uh
24 eggs.
Cost $16.
So why are we raising taxes when
we've got $16 eggs. Thank you,
madam, uh, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered
lobbyist, uh, for Anheuser-Busch
and Anheuser-Busch stands in
opposition to House Bill 417.
We'll just note very quickly
that the proposal.
That is contained within House
Bill 417 will result in 180% tax
increase on your average beer.
This is based on retail prices.
It has similar effects across
the different lines of alcohol
that you have contained in the
bill and all of those increases
we believe will negatively
impact responsible consumers of
alcohol. We respectfully stand
in opposition to the bill.
Thank you.
in line. Good morning, Mr.
Chair. Excuse me, my name is
Jessica Diego and I am the um
owner and operator of Bosky
Brewing Company. We have 12
locations across New Mexico, and
I am here today to respectfully
oppose um HB 417 on behalf of
our 393 employees who make their
living in this industry. Thank
you.
You
Next
Good morning, Mister Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Ebby Edmonston. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Brewers Guild. My brewery
members are already facing
rising costs, uh, from
ingredients, uh, imposed tariffs
for aluminum and steel, and
those costs are being passed on
to the consumers. Breweries
already imposed drink limits to
help curb overconsumption for
on-site, uh, sales as well as
taking the responsibility of
that. Uh, due to these issues
and many already stated, we are
in opposition and respectfully
ask you to vote no on HB4.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Yes, ma'am. Next.
Morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Kaylee
Shoemaker. I'm the owner
operator of As above So Below
Distillery here in Santa Fe, as
well as the president of the New
Mexico Distillers Guild, um, and
echoing all of the reasons put
forward on behalf of our
members, we strongly oppose
House Bill 417. Thank you. Thank
you, ma'am.
Yes, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, Jason Weeks,
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Hospitality Association.
We do appreciate the intent of
the legislation, but at present
have to stand in opposition. We
think that this will obviously
have an impact on tourism, it
will increase the cost of uh a
drink at restaurants, a lot of
the, a lot of the hotels that
are members of the Hospitality
Association do have restaurants
there, but bars in the hotels
and so we think that.
Eliminating on-site consumption,
or at least exempting onsite
consumption from this tax would
go a long way towards mitigating
some of the more significant and
direct economic impacts that
this would have on hospitality
on the brewers on restaurants in
general, and that's still
they're still recovering from
COVID, I know that to to
reference COVID still is kind of
uh, uh
A little bit attenuated in terms
of time, but they took on a ton
of debt service during COVID.
And so exempting that on on-site
consumption would be significant
and at best on-site consumption
accounts for about 20% of all
consumption in the state. Most
restaurants, most hotels, most
breweries, most distilleries
also have drink maximums. And so
they're already imposing a gate
on the front to reduce
consumption so that it happens
in a responsible way. So at
present we do uh stand in
opposition to this bill. Thank
you. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Kristen
Thompson with the New Mexico
Restaurant Association. You
heard from our executive
director and actually, uh, the
person in front of me just took
everything I was going to say,
so, um, excellent. I just want
to say thank you, um, to the
chair for, um, running a very
fair committee hearing and
letting us all speak. Thank you
so much. Thank you.
Yes sir, next.
Uh, chairman and members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza, uh,
president and CEO with the New
Mexico Retail Association. They
do stand in opposition to the
legislation, specifically the 6%
tax at the point of sale. Uh, we
do not believe that it's gonna
have the intended impact that
the sponsors hope to when
consumers are looking and they
really base their decisions off
the lab, the sticker label that
they see, not the post-tax uh
costs that they're paying. So we
don't believe it'll uh be
effective in terms of their
their stated intention, uh, and
that's why putting the, the
at the wholesaler, which then
increases the circuit label at
the retail makes more sense. So
we do stand in opposition. Thank
you. Thank you, sir.
Yes or next. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, John Thompson. I
represent for uh beverage
distributors. Uh, madam, Mr.
Chairman, my apologies. I'd like
to point to something that
hasn't been brought up and if it
has, my apologies. In January,
the Department of Health
released a report that showed
that New Mexico had seen some
really remarkable results
relative to a reduction in
alcohol death rates statewide,
Mr. Chairman, there was a 17.3%
reduction in the state, but more
more notably, Mr. Chairman, and
Gallup McKinley County, there
was a 30
8% reduction between 21 and 23.
And that's thanks to community
interventions, prevention,
outreach, access to healthcare,
Mr. Chairman, and that was
accomplished without a tax
increase, Mr. Chairman, and to
echo Mr. Scanlon's comments with
the passage of this
transformational behavioral
healthcare package. That's where
we should be looking, Mr.
Chairman. We're getting
dividends and I would
appreciate, uh, appreciate the
time and thank you.
Thank you.
OK, all those then in support
of House Bill 417.
Again, for the same reasons,
please.
Respect our time. We do have a
floor session at
10:30 that I'm reminded that we
have to be on time for, so.
For those reasons, please do
consider them, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, I'm
Meredith Machin, and I'm
speaking on behalf of the legal
room voters of New Mexico, the
American Association of
University Women and the
National Organization for Women
Local.
And uh we are very strong
support of this legislation and
we want to thank all of the
sponsors and the speaker for
working on this compromise bill.
Um, I think a lot of the
speakers have talked about how
we have the surplus in New
Mexico, and we're gonna have
this behavioral health fund, but
we, frankly, the billions that
we have now in excess, um, will
not be available with all the
federal cuts that are coming
down the pike, and
We need those funds for the
services.
That um are provided now by
federal funds, and we also like
the fact that in this new bill,
um, for 17, the money does not
go into the general fund, it's
dedicated to the programs, and I
ask you to think about in 1995,
you know, 30 years ago, which
was the last time we raised
taxes, alcohol taxes in the
state, um, how much you paid for
a cup of coffee.
OK, think back.
Um, I just Googled it and um a
coffee was about $1.50 to $1.75.
OK, um, people have gotten used
to the increased prices for
coffee, uh, yeah, but, you know,
maybe they think twice before
they'll have um a second cup,
and I, you know, I think really
we have to look at the harms
we're paying for the harms in um
increased uh car insurance costs
because of the the injuries and
deaths that happen, um, we're
paying in human costs, uh, it's
not just.
Hospital costs and medical costs
and so on, but think of the
lives ruined the careers
stopped, um, because of the
alcohol, um.
Impact on them and their
families. Thank you very much
and I urge you to pass. Thank
you for your comments. Yes, sir.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Speaker, members of the
committee, my name is Conroy
Chino.
And I represent the photos of
Taos and Akima, and we are in
support of the legislation
that's before you.
We support HB 417 because the
excuse me, because of the uh
Uh, the revenue that we
generated from the uh
legislation that's under
consideration right now. And
also the creation of the alcohol
harms of fund.
Uh, behavioral health is a major
concern in tribal communities.
It's also an issue, uh,
especially in a segment of our
tribal populations because of
addiction.
Um, and the society ills that
described earlier by the bill's
sponsors are really the result
of uh of what's happening in
tribal communities. Uh, the two
bubbles that I that I represent
aren't very large and so they do
not have the kind of revenue
streams that are available to
the state lands can be taxed,
uh.
We do have gaming, uh, but the
gaming revenue that's generated.
Uh, goes largely to fund tribal
governmental operations
providing programs and services,
everything from law enforcement
to public safety to.
Um, elderly programs to repair
and maintenance of water and
wastewater systems, and we share
the gaming revenue with the
state under our gaming compact,
a percentage does come into the
state's coffers and we also
share uh the collection of gross
receipts tax on tribal lands on
a 7525 cut.
Under a separate tax agreement.
So behavioral health is a
priority among tribal
governments, I.
The uh the fund that we created,
I will go towards building
capacity within tribal
behavioral health programs, uh,
allowing them to.
hire professional staff and to
provide the kind of treatment
and services that are critically
necessary.
So for those reasons, Mr.
Chairman, I, I would urge the
committee's support. Thank you,
Mr. Chino. Next.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Moniko Otero, Health
Research and policy analyst with
New Mexico Voices for Children,
and we stand in support of HB
14. We think the sponsors for
their dedication, collaboration,
and thoughtfulness in developing
and bringing forth this
important legislation.
The severe harms of public
health to public health and
safety caused by alcohol
consumption are wide ranging and
well researched. HB 14 will
provide a much needed resource
to help mitigate and alleviate
those harms, and it will do so
equitably in a way and in a way
that works for New Mexicans. We
urge your support. Thank you.
Thank you, ma'am. Next.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Joyce Sarson. I'm the executive
director of New Mexico counties.
We stand in support of
House Bill 417 for a couple of
very specific reasons, um, we
recognize the concerns that
industry may be speaking about
the tax increase, but it does
not make sense to us that there
would be a diversion of funds
that are designed to deal with
the harms related to alcohol to
the general fund. We have very
important programs that are
designed to support alcoholism
in New Mexico and other types of
substance abuse. Um, what I
don't think is really translated
here is the two years that the
sponsors have worked really hard
to understand our county.
DWI programs. They understand
that these involve alternative
sentencing for individuals. It
helps with the court systems
that are part of the problem
that we can all recognize here.
It also provides for education
for children, so that is the
reason that we stand in support
of this is the need for those
programs and the need for the
funding to go directly into
those programs and with that, we
thank the sponsors and stand in
support of these bills. Thank
you very much. Next.
Good morning, chair and
committee members. My name is
Bernadette Hardy. I'm Hamish
Palin and Dana, I am here as an
individual, as a resident of the
International District. Um,
sorry, don't have my glasses on.
Oh.
We are in full support. I'm also
the secretary of Trumbull
Village Neighborhood and also
part of public health community
in the, in the neighborhood. Um,
these compounded issues with
alcohol abuse, um, among our
native populations and youth
need to be addressed. Alcohol
abuse has caused physical and
emotional tolls on the, not to
mention the unfortunate
stereotypes that further burden
native communities, um working
most of my life with in public
health, um, in the
international.
I see the need every day, just
driving down the streets.
Working with First Nations,
working with representative
Potterhorn with the Gateway
Center.
Trying to get people into these
facilities and knowing there's
no bed for them.
Trying to work with churches to
pay for gas to take our people
to Las Cruces.
These are personal things that I
have to deal with daily.
And also losing my brother.
Alcoholism.
We urge your support.
HB 417. Thank you. Thank you.
Next
Yeah, Bennenko's I hope, uh,
good morning, Chair Lente and
committee members. I'm Osa
Chavez, ED for New Mexico native
vote and a small business owner.
New Mexico native vote is in
deep support of HB 417, with the
creation of the tribal alcohol
harms alleviation Council with
representatives from Indian
Nation tribes and pueblos, urban
natives, and behavior health
regional representatives, we
will all see a paradigm shift in
all of our communities. Why the
burden of this disease has been
borne by.
disadvantaged communities and
families. Currently there are no
treatment facilities in the
state despite the long history
of known devastation of alcohol.
We have all been touched by this
disease. We know we need this
change for our families, for our
youth to address this health
crisis. Current reductions are
due to community efforts who
have had funding to deal with
this disease.
The grants provided to tribes,
nations, and pueblos and local
governments and entities that
serve tribal communities,
indigenous people and urban
urban native populations for the
express prevention or reduction
of harms and risks associated
with substance misuse. This is
powerful policy.
I will gladly pay a little more
to help those in need.
Communities will have the
ability to address one of the
major issues that affect all of
us.
We are to do pass on HB 417.
Thank you.
Next
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, sponsors, and
All in this room today. My name
is James Burrow, I'm the vice
chair of the public tax
administrators Coalition.
We stand in support of HB 417.
Uh, we, uh,
Recognize the 25 75% split
between the tribes in New Mexico
and the split is quite frankly
in the millions of dollars.
And um the uh also the uh the
gaming revenue share what's in
the tens of millions of dollars.
So, you know, we, we do um as
tribes, we.
Put back into the state of New
Mexico in many different ways
beyond the uh.
Uh, regular taxation of our
tribal budgets as well. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. And thank you all
both on.
online and in the room for
making the time to make your
comments. I, I did fail before
we go to committee a question
and and comments, uh, address
the amendment that was sent in
last Thursday, February 20th,
uh, by the sponsors and if we
can hand those out, please, you
should all have them or have
have them sent to your inbox,
but we have paper copies as
well. If you would please read
off the 231 number.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The amendments that we are
asking to be moved is 0231151.1.
The amendment on the right side
of where I'm sitting.
Um
You can just do the, the people
that are here.
Someone please move the
amendment.
Discussion.
By Representative Duncan,
please.
What is the amendment about?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, this
amendment is to clarify how the
effective date and
implementation.
Woodwork
So, um, Mr. Chair, as it stands
and as you've heard from the
counties in the room, um, and
Kelly Livingston that weighed in
on public comment. We do have in
place a program and fund called
the.
grant fund, um, what this
amendment does is clarify that
should this bill pass and become
law, it is set to become
effective July 1 of 2025, but
what we are, um, clarifying here
in this temporary provision is
that as they move through their
process to receive grants today
to authorize funding based on
the current law today to make
sure the counties get that money
that they are eligible for. We
are, um,
Clarifying that any authorized
distributions made before July
1st, shall of of this year of
2025 shall continue through
fiscal year 25 and 26, so, um,
the, the fund should this bill
passed will be renamed, but
we're clarifying that those
payments authorized before July
1, um would continue into the
next fiscal year as then we um
continue with the implementation
of the other parts of this law.
Thank you. Any questions or
comments on the amendment?
See their motion to approve the
amendment.
I'll second that amendment.
Seeing opposition in roll call,
we're good.
OK.
Your amendment your bill has
been amended.
We have a question now.
Oh, never mind.
Yes.
Yes or no?
OK,
all right. Your bill's been
amended. House Bill 417 is now
amended. Let's now move to the
committee for questions,
comments. First on our list is
uh Speaker Martinez. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you
sponsors, um, couple of things I
just wanna, I wanna clarify and
first and foremost, I said this
in house judiciary last week.
To the advocates and the
lobbyists that are in the room.
Thank you for showing up.
Uh, Zoom was designed to give,
um, you know, grandma who might
be homebound in Silver City, the
opportunity to participate in
the democratic process.
Zoom should not be used as a
tool of convenience for people
that are paid to be in the
building. I just want to say
that because I think it happens
over and over and over again,
uh, as I walked through
committees, both the ones I sit
on and also the ones that I
travel to and just kind of go
see for myself.
Um, you know,
It's too bad that folks don't
take the time to show up in
person and put in the hard work.
So thank you for doing that, the
folks in the room.
Um
To the bill, Mr. Chair and
sponsors, um.
I want to appreciate the hard
work of the sponsors over the
last several years, um, this
seems like it's the most
volatile, uh, you know, toughest
issue in the world, and it
really isn't. It's actually
pretty simple proposition.
I think part of the
Um
Problem getting to compromise
has been mostly personalities,
Mr. Chair, and it's been, I
think,
Um, a lack of communication,
right, coming to the table, uh,
and talking about what in fact
is the end goal?
And how we get to that end goal.
And part of the process that I
had the pleasure of helping lead
with so many of you over the
last few months, is in fact
asking the very basic question,
what are we trying to do here?
Versus the Christmas tree of
wishes that I think this started
off as.
Uh, so from that vantage point,
I'm, I'm very proud of the work
that many of you have done to
get us to this point.
Um
In terms of the harms we are
trying to fix.
Um, I'm a believer that our
people drink incessantly
sometimes.
And if we're lucky, that's all
we do drink.
If we're unlucky, we're on the
streets.
On fentanyl and other things.
But a big part of the reason why
we drink, Mr. Chair,
Representatives, is because our
people have been subjugated to a
history of oppression, and I
want to make that very clear, a
history of oppression.
That comes
With
The conquest, colonization of
this place.
That comes with the rape, the
pillage, the genocide.
That our people have endured.
And to one of the uh public
comments that were made earlier.
The fact that we don't have
A facility that treats
alcoholism.
Tells the whole story.
Now, I'm happy to report that
the package of bills we passed
just over the weekend.
Is trying to fix that.
My vision for that, and I don't
get to be on the floor anymore,
but if I did one of the things I
would have said on the floor is
I don't want any New Mexican to
live more than 50 miles from a
treatment facility.
On the Navajo Nation, you
shouldn't have to travel across
the state.
To get the help that you need.
His legislature is moving in
that direction pretty
aggressively in the 1st 30 days.
We've made well over $200
million in investments in a down
payment.
For that purpose. There's a lot
more.
to come
The next half of the session and
also in the years to come.
The impact of alcohol in our
communities.
It's palpable. We see it. My
family lives in the
international district. I see it
every time I visit my parents.
I grew up on Rhode Island and
Chico.
I lived there for a long time,
my uncle and aunt still live on
Chico and Pencil on Rio Grande
and uh on on on Rhode Island in
Chico, apologies.
Uh, we see it, we see it every
single day.
I will also submit to you, Mr.
Chair and sponsors.
That that scourge, that
addiction does not come from
Bosque brewing from tractor
brewing, it doesn't come from
The restaurant
That we go to
It comes from
Packaged liquor
It comes from the fact that
My dad at at a point in time
could buy.
A 4 pack of natural light.
Or
About 5 bucks.
You know what a 4-pack of
tractor beer cost?
At the same store?
Like 15 bucks.
And the fact that
Some of us are blind.
To that very point.
Tells me we're tunnel division.
We're building legislation.
Based on research articles
published on the Johns Hopkins
research repository, yet we have
no idea what is happening on the
ground.
I've said it before and I'll say
it again when it comes to
Are small local microproducers.
You have built
A community space.
In my district, and I know in a
lot of y'all's districts.
Where
Say LGBTQ plus communities can
go and have a little fundraiser.
Try doing that at the Walgreens
package liquor.
Section.
The tractor will let you do it.
Any day of the week.
Hell, they'll let you do it even
during karaoke night.
And mix and match whatever
entertainment they're doing that
night.
Microbreweries, micro
distillers, micro wine girls are
not the problem. Let's be clear,
they're not the problem.
That's why I fought really hard
67 years ago in this committee.
To give them a different excise
tax rate, because we want those
industries to grow organically.
They employ the tractor that I
visit.
In Wells Park?
The same stuff. Some of them
pre-COVID.
Imagine that.
Imagine that.
Now, when it comes to the
process that got us to this
compromise, we shouldn't even be
here. We had a compromise in
2023.
I personally worked to
compromise with the chairman
with one of the sponsors on the
floor of the house.
Prior to the tax package leaving
that.
Leaving the house.
We agreed to a rate that the
advocates agreed to.
And I forget what it was. I
think it was 15 cents a drink or
something like that.
And guess what? The bill wasn't
read right.
Whoever carried the bill didn't
read the bill.
They brought the fix they they
brought the compromise, we
rolled it into the package.
Days later, we were accused of
pulling a fast one. I said,
nope.
We did not pull a fast one, we
had an agreement.
What happened?
The bill
was not
adequately read.
And so an issue that should have
been put to rest in 2023?
Comes back
Again
2 years later
As we work toward the compromis
in front of us.
Keep in mind
That
The folks at the table.
have been diligent in trying to
find
Common space, common ground.
To fully
Um, to fully implement a piece
of legislation that can actually
do what we say we wanted to do.
And that's what's in front of us
today.
I have a little bit of heartburn
on the earmarks.
And that's just me. I've I've
made that very clear. I feel
like we shouldn't be earmarking
money that appropriators should
be earmarking, but I also know
that
I landed on the other side of
that equation over the weekend
and some of those behavioral
health bills.
So heartburn, but also I
understand the process.
Then the last thing I want to
remind, and I'm, I'm sorry we
lost one of the sponsors. Well,
the last thing I want to remind.
Everybody in this room.
Is of.
Decorum.
I don't particularly care how
anybody votes.
I mean, I hope you vote my way,
but
Maybe you won't.
But your vote on this bill or on
any other bill.
Should not be equated.
To
Some sort of ulterior motive.
Now I want to make that very
clear.
Because
Whether it's a bill regulating
oil and gas, whether it's a bill
proposing some better
environmental standards, whether
it's a bill proposing a liquor
tax, whether it's a bill on on
medical malpractice reform.
I fully expect every member of
this house to vote first and
foremost or conscience.
Secondly, vote their district.
Third, vote for good policy.
And I'm never ever.
Going to question how it is that
you vote.
And in any way try to say well.
That particular representative
of God.
$700 from Anheuser Busch must be
in the pocket of the liquor
industry.
I have
Zero patience for that, and I
don't care who does it.
You would get called into my
office and I will make it known.
My displeasure.
People in this building work too
hard.
We sacrifice.
Jobs, we sacrifice time with
family, time with loved ones to
be here.
We will not
We will not be subjugated to.
type of treatment.
from other legislators from
lobbyists or from advocates.
So
I appreciate the time, Mr.
Chair. I appreciate the sponsors
for your hard work.
And I look forward to a lively
debate.
He and hopefully on the floor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let's go
to Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um.
Mr. Speaker, through
Um
But on the, on the heels of him,
I would like to propose a few
amendments he took everything I
wanted to say.
Um, about the local guys,
restaurants, you know.
I've also had alcoholism in my
family, even though I was too
young to know what it was and,
and absolutely right.
Watching
A family member of yours, drink
a six-pack of Bud Light to go 2
or 3 miles down the road, he
walked in.
Early 90s and bought for just a
couple of bucks. Um,
That is the problem.
Not the $15 for a 4 pack from
our local guys.
Not
You know, also for them to
create jobs and attract tourism
and everything else, so, um,
Mr. Chair, I would love to
propose an amendment, um.
To
exempt the
Um
Winee growers, um, the local
small brewers and
ers from
This bill
Thank you, Representative
Hernandez. There's a request to
make an amendment to your bill
to the sponsors.
Is that a friendly amendment is
that amendment something that
was prepared?
It was prepared but not in time.
hand you a copy if you would
like to.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We'd
appreciate seeing that.
So
Mr. Chair, is this the amendment
that was emailed to committee on
Thursday.
Uh, no representative. This was
a uh an amendment that was
ordered to our office by
misrepresentative Hernandez, uh,
yesterday afternoon.
So it didn't make the the 24
hour cutoff.
Uh, I, I know that we're, I'm a
stickler for that. I want to
treat everybody the same way we
did the same thing last week
with, with the amendment that
the, the speaker wanted. I told
him he wasn't in time, so for
the same reason, I want to treat
everybody the same way here on
this committee, and so this is
something that I said if you
want to make the amendment, it
would have to be in the
committee, uh, via voice and so.
OK.
And you still have the floor.
OK, can you explain your
amendment? Yeah, absolutely. So,
um.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
uh, in addition, I also added
wholesaler on the written one
just for the fact that it is a
different license type.
Um,
lo
If you look at.
Page 8, line 23 through 24.
Uh, it has the definition of
retailer, uh, but in the liquor
Control Act and the liquor
Excise Tax Act, um, it does it
based on license types.
Um, so wholesalers and retailers
have very different license
types.
Um, and as well as the brewers,
the distillers, the local wine
growers, um,
Everything in
Believe that was it. So that's,
that's really what the breakdown
is, is so that this definition
of retailer matches what the
definition of retailer.
Is in the other control acts,
um, that already deal with
liquor.
And then by doing that, um, it
will take the small brewers, the
wholesalers, and the local wine
growers um.
Mr. Speaker,
That it would take out
Say that again.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Mr. Speaker,
so, um, what counsel told me was
that by doing that, um, it does
not, it will take the small or
the sorry, the whole
wholesalers, the wine growers,
the small brewers and the
distillers, um, out of the
definition of being a retailer,
uh, later in the bill, the
Term retailer is who the surtax
is then charged on. Got it.
Thank you.
Sponsors? Yes,
I believe that I'm following the
intention of this proposed
amendment. I don't actually know
mechanically if that's where it
would land in the definition of
retailer.
I, well, among other things, Mr.
Chair, we've, um, several times
checked in with our drafter
about whether wholesale falls
under the definition of retailer
that we have on page 8 of the
bill, and they've told us
several times, including over
conversations with tax and rev
department that um wholesaler.
Is not subject to what we're
proposing as the new liquor
excise tax, so I would have a
technical question about the
wholesaler piece and would want
to make sure we're not
compromising or undermining,
undermining the standing liquor
excise tax, which which the
wholesalers are subject to, so
I'd want to clarify the wholesal
language specifically and then
for the other pieces of that.
Um
I would imagine there
potentially is a more polished
way to do this, besides naming
that they are not retailers and
potentially it would be on page
9, section 4, it would be where
we impose the new liquor excise
or tax, um.
But yeah, I would imagine if
this was something the committee
wanted to move forward, there's
probably a cleaner way or more
direct way to do that within the
new section 4 and not a
definition of who's not a
retailer, because in fact in
practice.
These entities are retailers.
Um, Mr. Chair, speaking to the
intention of the amendment as we
presented and debated this bill
in the House Health Committee
earlier this earlier this
session.
And explained in media
interviews, otherwise, um, it is
clear for us as we look back to
a tax policy that needs some
work.
That there were very um specific
intentions other legislatures
held in creating these carve
outs for these industries within
the existing liquor excise tax,
um, so certainly the speaker has
referenced those and we
appreciate those intentions,
that's why when freezing the
excise tax, we did not try to
undermine those commitments made
by those in place.
In terms of moving forward and
being in this collaboration, um,
I'm really grateful and proud
that with your support, Mr.
Chair and the Speaker's support,
we were, um, volun told to start
working together and figuring
out a compromise that was based
on a sound tax policy and had um
a care and attention towards the
historical inequities and
alcohol related harm that has
rolled through so many of our
communities.
All that being said, um, it is
our perspective.
In terms of upholding a sound
tax policy that we keep all of
the taxpayers or retailers in
this bill.
What I would um offer argue, Mr.
Chair, is that a better tax
policy and more fair tax policy
would be to keep all of the
taxpaying entities or retailers
in and lower the tax rate, um,
certainly this is a compromise,
6% is where we came to be so
that we could have um
transparency and get to the
legislature for these kind of
conversations, so of course we
respect the will of the
committee, but at this point,
exemptions, um, in my mind would
undermine that tax.
policy, we should keep that base
big, and I would rather see
something like lowering the tax
rate potentially from 6 to 4%.
For everyone. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I'd like to add hold on
real quick. I
didn't
you stillnandez. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, I would be amenable
to
Uh, taking out the wholesaler
part that was put in by ledge
counsel to try and clean up the
differentiation between what
they thought was retailer.
And what the retailer is said to
be in the other two, the liquor
control and the liquor excise
Act, so that was not my original
intention. Mine was the other
three,
and with it being a voice
amendment rather than something
on a piece of paper if it needs
to go into section 4 on page to
make it cleaner, completely
amenable to that as long as the
end result is the same.
So, so what I'm hearing just to
clarify for for folks here, is
that
Your amendment
Has been made it a little bit
more to simply
Include to exclude in this bill.
Wine growers.
Persons issued
A small brewer's license.
And 3rd
A craft distiller's licensee.
Yeah, persons issued a craft
distiller's license, and then it
has the um NMSA
the sections.
OK. That, that would be.
Um, yeah, completely amenable.
OK, so that's, that's man, we're
we're not,
I'll call you when I'm
ready.
I know, I know, but we're
running this I wanna run, OK.
I'm, I'm gonna go back then to,
there's still some questions on
that Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, um,
Represented with this um takeout
restaurants as well, or would
they be?
No, that would be the next
amendment. I have, I have broken
them up. We can add them
together, Mr. Chair, if you
think that that is a more
streamlined way to do it.
Um
But yes, the intention is to
take out all of them.
Um, depending on who you ask,
it's about 17% of the total
alcohol consumption is done
through
Um, brewery, wine grower, uh.
cra ft distiller and
restaurants, um, is the number
that I've been given. I have not
been able to verify that, but
Um, the intention is to get rid
of the 4th.
Thank you.
from a tax point of view.
That's not good tax policy. We
continue to carve out of the
Swiss cheese, it just.
I'm all in favor of lowering the
base.
1% tax get her done. Thank you.
Yeah. So at this point in time,
There's there there's a request
and we'll take it one by one. I,
I think the way that you see on
the floor, the floor is still
yours.
Uh, there's a request to amend
your bill again, making mention,
and we'll, we'll figure out the
logistics of where they go in
this bill.
at a time when we,
inappropriate, but again, you
exclude at this point in time,
wine growers.
Second, person issued a small
brewer's license.
Pursuant to the statute
appropriate, and then thirdly,
persons issued a craft
distiller's license again.
Pursuant to the statute.
Is this a friendly amendment?
Mr. Terrence's a very unfriendly
amendment exempting restaurants,
breweries, and wineries would be
against the spirit of the bill
and raises serious equity
concerns if these businesses
were exempt, it would put the
burden on the tax on lower
income individuals as they are
less likely to frequent
restaurants, breweries and
wineries, and it did in
addition, the surtax would raise
less revenue, which would mean
less funding for crucial public
health programs for indigenous
communities who have for the
generations.
Experience disproportionately
higher harms from alcohol.
Just to clarify, you, you made
mention of restaurants. We're
not talking about restaurants
now.
But
Did you have something else to
add?
sponsor would just add.
In the breadth of the potential
amendments that are coming.
It's my view as taxi to keep all
of the, the tax, um, but
certainly, Mr. Chair, in all
transparency in house held that.
Um, right now the restaurants
are getting the short end of the
stick, and they are being
treated differently and
distinctly. So whatever the will
of the committee might be, I
don't think it would be fair to
continue treating the
restaurants differently and
continue to um impose new taxes
on the restaurants while only
carving out the brewery, so my
preference would be lower the
rate, keep everybody in. If
that's not the will of the
committee, I would say it's
fairer to treat the breweries
and the restaurants the same
because we can't justify in tax
policy.
or public health reason that
restaurants would be imposed
with this tax and not the
brewery, so again, I see both of
these potential amendments as
unfriendly. I'd rather lower the
rate and keep everybody in, um,
but I, I do want to say out
loud, I, I do feel like the
restaurants are in a compromise
position in this process. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Let's go.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I would
like to
And you want it in my
understanding, Mr. Chair, you
wanted, although she wants it
together.
What
All those 4 together.
You'd rather have them in one
piece at a time and I understand
that right, Mr. I, I'm
respecting the amendment of, of
your, of your representative
here that he brought those 3
amendments and then he has a
potential 4th 1 to add on top of
that, but I want to take them
one at a time. I wanted to
clarify that before I make my
motion. I'd like to make the
motion to adopt this amendment.
As stated, not, not on the
paper, but as stated
are about those three sections,
those 3, microbreweries, I think
it was, excuse me, it was.
My understanding was, um, the
wine growers.
Mul breweries and
Was it the last one was?
Preston, Crafton distilleries.
Thank you.
And there's a second here.
So again, for the committee and
for the public, public that are
that are following along then,
according to the amendment
proposed by Representative
Hernandez on page 8, line 24.
After New Mexico, insert.
Excluding
Wine growers
Persons issued a small brewer's
license pursuant to section
60-68-26.1 NMSA 1978.
And persons issued a craft
distiller's license pursuant to
Section 60-68-6.1 NMSA 1978.
That is the amendment that's
been put on the table by
Representative Hernandez that's
been uh
In motion by
Representative Raza is seconded
by Representative Henry, uh, at
this point in time.
We're gonna go to the to to the
committee for a for a vote on
that amendment.
He's called the.
We're gonna take this
Representative Chandler.
No.
Representative Duncan? No.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Henry
Yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lindstrom.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Parajon.
Representative Silva.
Yes.
Representative Tarasas.
Vice chair Karena.
No.
Mr. Charlante, yes.
7.
for clarification, I'm sorry.
Sylvie, you said yes or no.
Yes. OK. Very good. With a vote
then of 7 to 5. Your amendment
passes.
Mr. Chair, we don't have that
many members. I think it was a
vote of 5 to 4.
Why,
excuse me, OK.
Actually
Either way
Yeah
6 to 4.
Our apologies.
OK.
Representernandez, you still
have the floor, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, so
then with that,
As
Uh, Speaker Martinez, uh,
I sure Kadena and myself, um.
You know, we're also worried
about the restaurants, um.
A lot of them are still reeling
from COVID, um,
A lot of them are having a hard
time finding.
Works there, um.
To impose this tax and then all
of the costs that are associated
with that, um, of potentially
having to pay more in
Accountants and bookkeepers and
staff to do everything plus
potentially new POS system or
having somebody come in to
Active
Uh, retroactively update their
POS systems.
Um, I would also like to
So in the right place either,
but essentially, um.
Exempt anyone who has a um
on-premise consumption and uh
liquor lights and so that would
Mostly restaurants, um.
The reason I didn't just do
restaurant licenses is because
we have Restaurant B the A A A
plus and B, um, but we also have
the on-premise consumption ones
and I didn't want to.
Only do restaurant ones to make
it unfair if you have a row of
restaurants and half of them
are.
On-premise consumption and half
of them are restaurant B.
Um
So that you pit restaurants
against each other and and make
one.
You know, unfairly disadvantaged
versus the other one. So with
that, Mr. Chair, I would like to
move that amendment as well.
Thank you. There's been a,
there's been a 2nd here from
Representative Duncan this
friendly manner,
I am going to say no, but would
like to explain myself one, I'm
not con I'm not sure the
previous amendment was in the
right place, so what I committee
was to in fact exempt res small
distillers and wine growers that
we would have preferred to do
that on the floor to make sure
we've done it in the right part
of the amendment, but um.
Uh, yes, definitely, uh,
appreciate the will of the
committee on this one, the same,
I hear that we need if we were
to move this idea forward, we
would need to.
Work out where this was and make
sure we were catching the right
types of licenses as the um so
generally speaking, yes, I, I
would still say the tax policy
that would be fair is to lower
the rate and keep all parties
in, but otherwise, um, yeah,
would want to make sure that if
this was the will of the
committee, we got it in at the
appropriate place with the
appropriate.
Language
So on the amendment unfriendly,
it's going to represent a Senate
Speaker Martinez, thank you, Mr.
Chair and Representative. Um, I,
I can appreciate the intent of
the amendment. I think part of
the problem I have with it is,
um, you know,
How, how do we differentiate?
Chewy.
The corporate chain from um you
know, um,
Chop is
In Donana County. And, and I
think that that that does create
a lot of heartburn for me. I, I
can't, I won't be able to
support the amendment.
Uh, for that reason, primarily,
uh, you know, to, to the folks
here and watching at home, um.
I think
Every time there is
Pa family medical leave, sick
leave, minimum wage.
You know, all the restaurants
come and tell us this sky's
gonna fall. It hasn't fallen
yet.
Uh, we heard again today that
the sky could fall because of
this, it probably won't fall.
Um, I will say the biggest
threat to restaurants are mass
deportations, and I applaud the
restaurant association for
actually doing trainings and
whatnot on that issue for their
members. I think that's
important work.
Um, but for those reasons, not
being able to to differentiate a
big corporate chain from a small
mom and pop, um.
Which is not the case with the
micros. They're all moms and
pops. Um, I won't be able to
support the amendment. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Other
questions, comments regarding
the amendment.
Representedrasas.
Mrs. uh, chair and listening to.
Speakers, comments, and I
You want to move the amendment,
but I want to.
Understand what would appease.
The speaker who
Get as many restaurants as we
can here.
Um
It is that they're on a, if
they're publicly traded, we're
not gonna put this what are we
doing?
Here, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Chair, Speaker, I, I can,
I can click on that, on that
point. So I, I think, um, to the
sponsors points earlier, it's,
it's not good tax policy and I'm
not proud of, you know,
exempting anyone because it's
not good tax policy.
Um, and
It's almost the, the, the least
of two evil evils, right? I
think when it comes to, to, to
the micros, which I define as
the seller's wine growers, beer
makers, producers.
It's pretty easy on paper to do
that.
Because there's actually a
license that allows you to be
that.
Versus restaurants, it gets
really tricky, right? And so,
uh, you just said it yourself, I
mean, are we gonna not allow for
publicly traded company. I mean,
it just gets really messy from a
tax policy, so I think it would
be cleaner.
Uh, well, at least my vote will
be to not exempt restaurants at
all, um, and keep it as is,
understanding that there might
be other ideas out there.
Representer
Represent. So Mr. Chair,
Speaker, thank you for your, for
expressing that. I, I have a
before I make this motion, I, I
just want people to understand
I'm not.
I'm in disagreement to a lot of
this simply because of my
experience as a funeral
director.
Um
In seeing what we deal with when
people pass away uh due to
alcoholism.
And
I have seen people that it
didn't matter if they couldn't
afford it.
It would take uh uh those jolly
ranchers.
Drop it and rubbing alcohol.
You get a little bit of of
flavor in there and drink it
anyway just because they
couldn't afford it.
I feel that I've seen this is
these are real stories, people
drinking up.
Shaving cream, you name it, any
way they can get any sort of
alcohol consumption.
That being said, Mister, uh,
Cheer, the issue that I have is
I'm, I'm in, in, in a position
that what we're doing.
In
In dealing with substance abuse.
Um
With the behavioral health that
we just passed.
Is a better
position for me, and that's why
I'm really not.
In favor of this.
I'm also not in favor because I
believe that a lot of our
restaurants have such a thin
margin is this is very difficult
for them.
Um
I did just and I'm just gonna
share this and then I'm gonna
move on. I did a quick little
um.
All my staff, I said, I want you
guys to
tell me, because I've done this
for 37 years.
And I can assure you that we are
having more deaths from drugs. I
send a little survey to our
staff to see.
Or are we drugs or alcohol?
6 to 3
Excuse me, 6 to 47 to 3 was the
average of what I've got from my
staff.
And um, but that just, I just
wanted to make that statement. I
I wanted to keep it short
because I know we need to get on
the floor. I would like to make
a motion that um
For us to exempt
Um
Alcohol consumption that is on
premises. I'd like to try to
make that motion. I would want
to make that motion, hopefully
we can pass it. Thank you.
So to clarify, represent Rasa,
you're seconding the.
Amendment by Representative
Hernandez. Let's go to
Representative Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I've
just got a couple of quick
questions if I could on the
amendment, but then I'd like to
back up a little bit, but
It is on the amendment, but I
Like I still want to understand
the intent, the speaker talked
about the intent of the bill.
Because that's going to go to my
question on the amendment. I
guess the question on the
amendment uh that I'm going to
have is, I would.
Disagree if we, if we do not
include restaurants, but we're
gonna allow breweries.
Um, in there, mainly because,
you know, full disclosure of my
family owned uh quite a few bars
and restaurants across the state
of New Mexico, uh, we do not
anymore, so I don't have any
personal interest in.
Wrong way to say that.
Ah
This doesn't directly affect my
family one way or the other, but
I do know that talking to a lot
of folks in the industry that
have a full liquor license, um,
in a restaurant.
They're all already frustrated
because it's so much cheaper now
to do the brewer license and,
and all those other license
they're already added
disadvantage.
Now if all of a sudden we're
going to exempt.
Um breweries and all those types
of things, but leave restaurants
in.
I do think that to your point.
I'm with you. This is bad tax
policy, um, but since we're
already headed in that road, I
would really hate to exempt a
restaurant.
Whether it be Chili's or anyone
else, because if we don't, if we
don't capture some of these mom
and pops that have paid for the
full liquor license.
So that they could have a
restaurant.
Disadvantages are going to be
overwhelming to some of these
folks.
When they can go right down the
street to a brewery, have a
burger and a beer.
Um
I think that that becomes a
dangerous road and so that's
just my two cents, uh.
on it at this moment.
appreciate your sentiments.
Anybody else questions on this
amendment? Comments on this
amendment that has been moved by
Representative Hernandez,
seconded by Representative Razas
is deemed unfriendly by the
sponsors.
I was handed a paper that
clarifies the amendment, but I
don't think it was read out
loud, the actual language that
you would like to amend.
Please do that, Mr. Chair.
And you, I don't have, I give
her the amendment states on page
number 9, line 23.
After resale.
Insert.
And not for on premises
consumption, period.
That's it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Again, on the
amendment deemed unfriendly,
let's go to a roll call vote.
Representative Chandler.
No.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Gallegos,
Representative Henry.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lundstrom.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Parajon.
No
Representative Silva.
No.
Representative Terasas.
Vice Chair Kadena.
Vice chair Mr. Charlete.
Like
No.
Mr. Chalante.
Yes. The tie, the motion fails.
And though it's not amended to
include all those that are
on-premise consumption.
So then, uh, with that being
said, Representative Hernandez,
he did let me know that you have
about 2 hours' worth more of of
questions. Um, I think in a
matter of, of
Being efficient, I want to stay
here. I want to get this done
today. So let's, let's have
this, this conversation today
and please or still yours, OK.
Uh, thank you, miss.
chair
All right.
OK.
Um
Couple of things
OK, page 9 starting on line 22.
Um, the bill imposes a 6% excise
surtax on the quote unquote
price paid by the retailer.
Or alcoholic beverages.
Can you confirm whether this
means the tax is based on the
retailer's wholesale purchase
price rather than the consumer's
purchase price.
Cause that's the way that I read
that.
Mr Chair Representative
Fernandez, if you can direct us
to that language again, but.
Hey, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, page 9, starting
on line 22.
Yes, the intention of this
language is Mister Chair.
for the person.
In the end effect is that the
person buying the alcohol, the
consumer is paying a retail tax
of 6% on the price of the
alcohol they are paying for.
OK, Mr. Chair and
Representative, it reads as the
opposite way. So if
A restaurant pays.
A $1
for a
Or a beer and then sells it for
5, which is this makes it sound,
it says the price paid by the
retailer, which wouldn't that be
the price that say,
Uh, premier cells.
The restaurant, the beer at
rather than what the consumer
then buys the beer at.
No, Mr. Chair, it says on page
10, line 1.
Rate of 6% of the price paid for
alcoholic beverages sold by the
retailer.
So.
Charon. Thank you for that.
Um
I did not
Um, page 23 section 15C.
OK, um, so.
In the, Mr. Chair and
representative in the DFA.
Analysis
Um, they know a technical issue.
In this section
Um
The amount available for the
funding form to be.
Not only by the
the.
But also by the $1 million
allocated.
Section E
For administrative costs.
Um, it in there, it says as
written, the formula does not
account for trade of expenses.
Potentially leading to
miscalculations.
So that if we're going to go
down this road, that that is
correct, that it is.
Correct in here the way you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, as we've
understood it, um, of course,
through conversations with our
drafter and multiple
conversations with DFA, um, yes,
just like in previous and
existing statutes, we are
allowing the agency to exempt up
to $1 million in the
administration of the fund
previously they were capped at a
lower amount, so we've raised
that amount amount to a million
dollars, but yes, as it's been
explained to us that expenditure
language still allows DFA to
cover their administrative costs
in the administration of
What would be called the local
alcohol harms alleviation Fund.
And we hope you have more
questions about um.
Section C, because we have uh a
rock star over here that can
talk with certainty and clarity.
about uh the distribution
increases. Thank you.
Chair and Representative, um,
Yes. Section 2 is very.
Nice to read through, um, I'll
let you.
Um
OK.
OK, so this will be page 23
starting at
You
Um
So
Ask this question. So the
interlock device fund, um,
had a surplus in the past.
Full of years be more, um.
And was even used to balance the
budget in 2016 when we had
Record downfalls
Um
I guess my question is, why, why
would we continue to allocate
Money to that fund, um.
Which is
I mean, it's been used for all
kinds of things for NMDOT for
Um, balancing the budget, you
know, not, not what your bill is
trying to do, um, rather than
directing those funds.
To resources that made them more
urgently.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Fernandez, we
also raised questions this page
23, line 2, section B is an
existing um distribution that
goes to the Interect fund, we
reached out to the agency, I
believe it's the traffic Safety
Bureau of the New Mexico
Department of Transportation as
it's explained to us, um, and is
written in the the existing DWI
Act. They're supposed to be
using these dollars to pay for
interlocked devices for indigent
New Mexicans, so New Mexicans,
um, that have already had
an income test and don't have
the resources to buy that
device. Um, it certainly wasn't
something we were committed to
keeping, but we at least have
email communication saying that
yes, they use this and they use
it to that purpose. So we didn't
want to undermine the agency
that, that, um, that certainly,
Mr. Chair and Representative,
that's not our fight and we
carried it forward.
Mr. Chair and Madam Vice Chair,
I
It's not our fight at the
moment. Um.
Let's go to the next one. You
and I can talk about that one
later and see if there's.
thing that some place better
where it could go, um, I don't,
I understand the benefit of
Of uh
You know, providing for
In the New Mexicans.
In this situation, but um, not
if it's also gonna be a slush.
people.
Uh, so next one is
Page 30 line 23 through page 31
line 3.
So this is the section, so, OK,
so this bill requires a review
of tax rates and distributions
by December 1st of 2032.
Um, why does this review not
included an analysis of the
health outcomes and
effectiveness of the surtax in
reducing alcohol-related harm.
Um, rather than looking
The dollar
Certainly Mr. Chair and
Representative are in tension
with this temporary provision
was to call a future legislature
back to this conversation, um,
many arguments have been.
Pushed over many years, um, with
some assumptions that I always
felt were potentially flawed or
or not certain, so what we've
did, trying to be responsive and
responsible legislators to say
that every 5 years, the
legislature.
Should come back to this and
both review the alcohol tax
rates and the distribution of
those dollars for us implicit in
those conversations is whether
or not those intended effects um
were brought to reality, uh,
part of the other dollars that
we've attempted to point in this
bill, HB 417 is extensive money
towards research and evaluation,
so that evaluation is designed
to be expansive and
comprehensive, um, giving us a
better understanding of New
Mexico driven data, so.
not relying on white papers from
somebody on the East Coast to
tell us how to save ourselves,
but instead building a New
Mexico data set that we can
count on, that we can ask good
questions of, um, so that
certainly in our minds would be
the basis of that review. What
was the impact of this tax on
public health and is this the
appropriate tax rate to continue
moving forward, um, in these
economic and fiscal ways as
well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and Madam Vice Chair,
I, I totally get that, um, and I
would hope that a future
legislature does that, but
Without it being
Specifically in this in this
section that
The distributions and the syrtex
and everything.
Needs to be tied to the health
data, you know, that makes me
super nervous cause we're.
We do that in this legislature.
Unfortunately, quite a bit where
we will
Say that something needs to be
studied and then we never see
the study, yeah, if you and I
ran into this last year when
Talking about alcohol for hours
and hours and days on end.
Um
I, I mean, I don't have an
amendment. I don't, I want to
put one on it at the moment, but
Um, something that I think we
should definitely look at is
making sure that before
distributions and surtaxes are
raised or lower that we make
sure that that somehow ties to
the health data.
If this works.
In the way that we are all
hoping that it does, and, you
know, death and.
Um
Ilme due to drinking goes down
at the drama.
I want to make sure that the sur
and the affects that.
Um, in that way or if population
moves or, you know, any of that
stuff. So many things can happen
in 5 years, as we've seen in the
last 5 years, so.
Just a
of thought
Um
More with health data, so
Um, the Department of Health.
Uh
Just released in January data
that indicates a 17.3% decline
in alcohol-related deaths
between 20 2021 and 2023.
Um, with McKinley County showing
at over 38% drop.
Uh, given that many
alcohol-related deaths stem from
chronic health conditions, um,
Which take years to address it
is this whole thing.
Um, a little premature for the
fact that we're already seeing.
Uh
Health data show that that, you
know, deaths and everything else
are dropping. Um, the other step
that I saw this morning.
Was that um traffic.
But alcohol-related traffic
deaths are also down 40.5% from
100.
in 2023 to 1994 and 2024.
Um
Which is just more good news for
the things that we have been
doing over the last handful.
Looks like it's starting to
work.
Mr. Speaker, and I mean, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair and um
representative Hernandez, um.
We are glad that there are
declines, but there's still.
From 2022 over 2200.
74 people who have died to
alcohol-related deaths that's
come down to just, uh, right
around 2000, so there's still
2000 lives that we need to have
the prevention and the treatment
and recovery and other programs
of outreach.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
thank you for that. Um,
I get that we don't
You know
Someday we would all love that
number to be 0.
Uh, as hard as that is to.
Fathom, um,
But
I mean, it, it's
Unfortunately, in government, it
doesn't work that.
We do things that we can, we put
funding where it is, we create
or help create programs.
Um
And it looks like it's, you
know, starting to.
It's starting to work after
years of that number of climbing
or saying stagnant, so.
Um
Keep going down this list, so.
According to the CPI, um, since
2019.
Prices of alcohol would have
already increased 21% with
inflation.
Um, prior research suggested
that a 10% price increase would
reduce alcohol consumption by 7
point.
yet we have not observed a 15%
decline despite the 21% price
increase.
Uh, does this suggest that we
are approaching that.
Asymptote, I think is what
Harper used to call it. Um,
where further price increases,
uh, increases yield, diminish.
Uh, in reducing alcohol
consumption.
So
Just because it continues to go
up, it
Thank
you Mr. My hand gestures, it's
not as good as Harper's.
Thank you, Representative
Fernandez. Certainly, as we've
come to this table of
compromise, I've never argued
that an increase in alcohol
taxes, excuse me, Mr. Chair.
are going to change people's
consumption.
Um, I've said that if we're
going to look at this issue
issue as we should.
We should be building a fair,
thoughtful, transparent tax
policy that applies a chronic
skill. So, um, my
Argument has not been that if we
increase taxes high enough that
somehow.
Arm will disappear. I think one
of the interesting data points
that we do look at from the rest
of the country is that
typically, um, alcohol-related
death is tied to alcohol related
consumption. So in other places,
the states that drink the most
have the highest deaths, but New
Mexico is distinct from that,
and I would argue because our
families are navigating poverty
differently. Our families have
held in intergenerational trauma
differently, um, so while.
I appreciate that there are
questions about what happened in
harm that for me is really
important to that 5 year
temporary provision like we
should have New Mexico data, we
should ask our own questions,
um, and we should review that
rate and distribution every 5
years.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. um,
Representatives, um
Random question and I
That this will go to
representative Parejon.
Uh, does this bill counts in the
county where the death took
place or the county where the
person who passed away lived.
For instance, let's say that
someone was transported to UNM
as the state's only level one
trauma center.
And they passed away at UNM but
they live in.
Sandoval County or somewhere
even further, more rural, um,
Are they counted as a death in.
Bernalillo County or as a death
where their primary residency.
Or even one more than that,
where, let's say an accident.
There's so many like unknown
variables there.
Oh
Mr. Cha and Representative
Hernandez, thank you so much for
that question. Uh, the, the rate
is calculated by the Department
of Health, um, through their OMI
so uh actually represented the
razos might know the question to
that, um, but essentially what
what we do see is that um.
Currently the balance of how the
tax is distributed that 25
million is not in proportion to
the number of deaths in the
counties, um, and so you'll see
counties uh like Gallup and San
Juan, um, or sorry, not Gallup,
McKinley and San Juan, uh, for
instance, right, have really are
in the top 5 but aren't getting,
um, are in the bottom 20 or so
they're getting the distribution
for for the DWI grant fund.
Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Fernandez, we can
confirm and clarify your
question, um, in my
understanding, working, having
been a member of the state's
maternal mortality Review
Committee and, and seeing how we
um pull data aggregated data,
yes, there is consideration of
where those deaths took place,
for instance.
Albuquerque is the only city
that has a level one trauma
center. So um we are still being
able to place those New Mexicans
that die in these different
review committees and and data
task force where they called
home and where they should have
been able to receive access to
er um my understanding here that
yes, DOH is keeping track of not
where the the death happened,
especially if they needed to be
in a hospital care setting, but
of the community that they, so
they have both pieces of those
information, but for the
purposes of this, the county is
appropriate.
measure. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chair and thank you for that.
Um, I just wanted to make sure
that
Um, it was being counted in the
correct place so that the
distributions would go to the
right place rather than Bernalio
which will already have a lion's
share because of population.
Um
Making sure that they are not
getting resources that should be
in other account.
Share that commitment. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
chair and Madam Vice Chair.
Representatives
Um
Can you tell me if
Um
Native American tribes and lands
are exempted from this surtax,
um.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
uh, the state of New Mexico does
not have the authority to compel
sovereign nations to impose any
tax. So over
Generations there have been tax
sharing agreements, some of
those are referenced by experts
providing public comment, but
no, we do not have the
authority, nor should we, I'd
argue, to ever um tell us
sovereign nation what taxes to
impose. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Presenters so much.
Um, OK, so my, my
My issue with that.
Um
My issue with that, and I know
that there is nothing we can do
about it. It's just one of those
things that I think needs to be
said is that by doing that,
Um
We are now making.
Uh,
Rival lands and businesses, the
cheapest place in the state.
OK.
And I think that that
All in all goes against what
your bill is trying to do, um,
by making it cheaper, cheaper
and easier to get, um, on tribal
lands. It's also making people,
let's say in Albuquerque, drive
the extra 5 minutes um to Sandia
or
One of the many others, um, to
be able to get it for cheaper.
Um
And I, I just feel like that's
gonna be an unintended.
You know, down the road.
Um
But in in
In for time's sake, let me cut
some of.
Um
Um, OK.
Uh, Texan Rev in their analysis,
um, estimated that implementing
this new surtax will require
$3.5 million in initial
administrative costs.
And $725,000 in recurring.
cost annually to manage
compliance reporting and
enforcement.
This includes processing over
430,000 additional tax returns
per year.
And registering more than 3600
new alcohol retailers for tax.
Given the bill's potential.
limited impact on reducing
alcohol consumption.
Uh, do you think
These significant taxpayer
funded administrative costs,
especially
But much of the revenue will go
towards covering compliance
costs rather than actual.
is the way to go is the right
way to go.
Sorry, that was a very long one,
I think we're, we're playing
catch up. I think this was the
3rd analysis provided by Thaksin
Rev previous analysis had their
potential costs much lower, um,
so we were surprised to see that
keep going up, um, the bills
remain the same.
Um, but Mr. Chair
Representative.
I would always imagine that if
it's appropriate that there
would be an actual financial
cost to implementing laws we
passed that the agencies have
room to expend those dollars
towards that cost, um.
So, yeah, as it stands.
Um, as it stands, we are
grateful that we've had room to
build this bill in a spirit of
collaboration and our like this.
and
Presenter's last question.
Um, in the LFC report which
Um
Or which is the FIR, sorry.
Um
LFC knows that while this bill
dramatically increases funding
alcohol-related programs, it
does not require these funds to
be spent on evidence-based
prevention and.
Uh, without clear accountability
measures, there's always that
risk that millions of taxpayer
dollars could be wasted on.
Uh, initiative
Is there any mechanisms that are
in place to ensure funds are
out.
Responsibly and produce
measurable improvements in
reducing out.
Yes, Mister Chair, Mr.
Representative.
As has been in place for
decades, DFA is responsible for
program evaluation on the money
that would go out through the
renamed local alcohol harms
alleviation Fund, and we believe
the council that would be set up
at the Indian Affairs Department
also would be pretty uh
responsible with those resources
and make sure that so that as
dollars went out to greatest
impact, we could learn from
model um.
Follow on the places that we're
doing right by New Mexicans.
But yes, there are measures
built in.
Mr. Chair, um,
That was my last question.
To say, uh
You know, with the
Essentially $1 billion that
we've
That we've, uh,
The fund for mental health.
Addiction that we've passed over
the last handful of days.
Um
You know, with the additional
costs and headaches that this is
going to bring to.
Business across the state, um,
time where a lot of them are
still hurting.
Um
There, there's a lot of things
in this bill that
That still give me heartburn.
Um,
None of us want to see another
life lost in New Mexico to
alcohol.
Um
I would be more supportive of
something like a an excise tax
hike.
Where, you know, you have 10
distributors, uh, which would be
a whole lot easier to get, you
know, uh,
Tax revenue from rather than
Uh
What the number is probably
close to 10,000 additional
businesses.
And restaurants and everybody
else, um.
Also a lot of government waste
with that, so there's, I still
have a lot of heartburn with
that, but with, with that master
chair.
Thank you for your comment this
morning, really appreciate your,
your input and, and all your
amendments that you put forth.
Appreciate the time. Uh, let's
go to Representative Duncan,
ranking member Duncan, pardon
me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Yes, thank you for the
presentation. Um.
You know my feelings about
alcohol. I don't care if you tax
it 100%.
I don't drink it, almost killed
by a guy who, who did drink a
lot of it.
That's my statement.
Now
Having made that statement,
You know, we, uh
I, I don't believe for one
instant.
Raising taxes.
For that socioeconomic group.
The drinking problem.
It's going to impact them more.
So
I believe that tax policies
should be wide, it should be
inclusive and it, and it should
be cheap.
Get everybody in there.
So, Mr. Chair, for that reason,
I would say that this bill lays
an egg.
Now, having said that, it's not
an egg like you think. This is
gonna be a golden egg.
It's going to generate a lot.
In the old days
We used to say a bad idea. I'd
say, man, that, that idea laid
an egg.
Isn't
And this idea is going to lay a
lay a golden egg.
That golden egg, I hope.
goes to those communities that
need.
And I've got a couple of
questions about that, mister, or
if I could.
Um
Representative, can you tell me
what happens to the Gallup tax
that's in place now and, and for
their programs are in place.
Mr. Chair Representative Duncan,
um, Gallup, who's exercised
their local authority to impose
a retail tax would stay in that
same place, of course, their
local governing bodies could.
repeal that or do something
differently, but as we
understand it, there is a 5%
alcohol tax imposed within
McKinley County.
The day.
Um
Our bill does not consider
amend, touch that, that's using
their local authority.
Uh, to speak to your broader
question, Mister Terry
represented if I, if I
understand it, yes, historically
since the 90s, the city of
Farmington, um, and then 6
counties have been getting
payments off the top of the
collection of the DWI grant fund
before the money goes out based
on a formula to all 33 counties.
We are discontinuing the
distribution to the city of
Farmington and those 6 under the
the guise of of doing detox
services but instead replacing
it with an
equitable formula to send money
where it's needed most and Mr.
Cherry like to turn to
Representative Barajun
specifically name what would be.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair, Mr.
Chair, and um representative
Duncan, so previously, uh, San
Juan County, they ranked the 3rd
highest county in our in our
state for alcohol related deaths
and because our um our
calculation focuses on alcohol
related deaths, uh, the current
allocation right now is about
20,030,000.
Plus the uh the amount that
Farmington is receiving, the
250, so that's approximately
about 480,000 that is available.
Uh, but what would happen with
the new formula is that uh San
Juan County would be eligible
for almost dollars um and that
that's give or take depending on
how much comes in, right, um,
that year from the flat excise
tax.
Mr Chair uh representative just
to confirm and clarify because
we would be replacing a tax that
was waited on GRT.
And alcohol related injury with
the attacks weighted on
population and alcohol related
death, San Juan County in total
of over $4 million so we'd be
discontinuing the.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative for that.
Um
With that you said would likely.
So with that,
I would like to propose a
friendly amendment on the fly
here.
If, uh, we go to page 2.
And I would like to put back in
lines 11.
Through 19.
As a floor.
And, and I hope Representative
Per homes, um,
Calculations are exactly right.
I hope there's
You know, 4 million to this, but
In in the
Off
I don't even know how to say
this in the in the chance that
there may not be.
Could that be a floorury?
The pharmain is going to get
their $400,000 that they've been
getting this decade. We've got a
great program and it's stood up
for 30 years now. We feel firmly
feel that that is what has
caused our rates, death rates in
San Juan County to go down.
I mean, I would much much uh
rather have had the 25 million.
that the alcohol tax is raised
that goes to general fund pull
that back.
And then give that whatever
communities, tribes, or entities
that need those funds as opposed
to even raising taxes.
Mr. Chair Representative, um.
Certainly our intention is to
make sure the money is going to
programs like those that we've
heard of incredible things and
accolades coming around the
treatment program that you all
run in your part of New Mexico,
so technically speaking, um,
yes, on page 2 lines 11 through
19. That is important to repeal
because Farmington was the only
municipality in all of New
Mexico receiving a direct
distribution and certainly while
we can have confidence in rep
Barahon's models that she's
built out with.
The staff at DFA and in
coordination, um with the
counties that are responsible
for spending this money as they
have been for decades, we are
doing that, so we're repealing
the or we would be discontinuing
the 25 million to the general
fund and um then expanding the
base of money that the 33
counties are going to be getting
distributions from. So in that
way, um, Mr. Chair and
representative, this is not tied
to the new 6%. This is the
historical ex.
tax. So I can, I can say with a
high degree of confidence and
looking back at revenue reports
over the last.
30 years that that has not
dropped below high 40s, uh, the,
the collection has not dropped
below 40 million, so it would
not be possible for your county
to received an increased
distribution based on this
formula because there's the, it,
it, it's one of the most
reliable revenue sources in New
Mexico, it brings in about 50
million. This bill says 25
million is no longer going to
the general fund, so it won't
drop below, um, but it is real
that it won't be directly going
to the city of Farmington
anymore.
it would be going to San Juan
County, and it would be their
responsibility to work at the
local level to make sure
resources were pointed towards
that programming, but for those
reasons, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Oh, and I would just add one
more piece on the new side of
the new text, um, why we
specifically said that the, the
pot of money going to IED for
the tribal alcohol harms
alleviation fund, that would be
made through the council
available to tribal nations, um.
And Pueblos, it would also be
available to local governments
serving tribal nations, tribal
communities, indigenous people
and urban Indian population, so
our thought also with places
like Farmington that have this
culturally relevant important
native built and run program
would have access to the county
source of money, but also could
go to IED directly, hopefully,
um with this incredible program
that have a much larger share on
the county, but also a
possibility that municipalities,
farmington and others.
could go to the IAD council and
bring forward their um tribally
appropriate programming. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Um
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
Representative.
I'm going to, when, when farming
or San Juan County does not get
their funds. I'm going to give
them rep Ehon's number because
she can outrun me and I'm gonna
say it was all her.
All her uh doing and uh so I
hope.
I hope that that
It's exactly what happened,
because if not,
And, and the other part of that
is if the council chooses not to
give them the funding for that.
And
We're gonna be back in a
situation where I was.
25, 30 years ago as a county
commissioner, have to take that
out of our fund and put it in
there.
stand up to programming.
So
Hope that is exactly.
Hope that's exactly right.
Um, Representative Dan so you're
withdrawing that. Nope, I'm I'm
OK, sir, I would like to have
that.
I can
OK.
Second, let's, let's go then
take up that amendment then.
They it's unfriendly to.
To put back in H2.
Lines 11 through 19.
Yes sir.
Take the roll.
Representative Chandler? No.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Henry.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes
Representative Lundstrom,
Speaker Martinez. No.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Parejon.
Representative Silva, No.
Representative Tarasas.
Jacana.
Mr. Chair,
No
Both uh.
6 nos and 4 yeses, the amendment
fails. So your floor, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
One of the other concerns I have
in my part of the country.
Bootlegging is rampant.
So if I go to my neighboring,
and that's where they go now,
they go to Colorado to.
buy their liquor and bring it
back to the Navajo Nation.
So if when this tax passes.
You think that that's gonna stop
bootlegging, and you think
that's going to stop those
folks.
And
My
Part of the world.
Mr. Chair
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative for that. I
don't either. I don't think it's
gonna stop it one bit.
People who need
These services the most.
I
What they do and
It's true, I'd like to ask, uh,
Victory Clark some questions if
I could.
Um, on the implementation of the
new tax.
Secretary.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
secretary. Can you tell me
One, how this is going to impact
your department, how long it's
going to take and how much money
it's going to take to stand up.
OK. Mr. Chairman, Representative
Duncan, um, representative, the
sponsor is correct, we did
revise our FIR once the the
first FIR had a lower
implementation cost, like our IT
saw that this was a surtax and
thought that we were adding
something on top of the existing
liquor excise tax and and it
would.
Be the same, you know, tax at a
root, but it's not, uh, we
revised once to indicate that
this is a brand new tax, um, we
estimate that this is about a 9
to 12 month long IT project, and
I said a minute ago that yes,
the non-recurring cost is about
$3.5 million to implement the
earliest we could probably
implement if a bill was signed
in April would be January 1st,
but April 1st would would.
And then ongoing, I, I think we
said the recurring costs were
about.
half a million to 3/4 of a
million.
Um, basically, the new tax
program creates a new type of
taxpayer, anyone with a retail
liquor's license that needs to
register as a taxpayer in a new
program, and then they would
file monthly returns. Um, I, I
did some quick math. I think the
number of returns coming in with
the amendment that was approved
goes down from about.
Uh, we, we previously thought
about 44,000 returns per year,
maybe it's more like 40,000
returns now having um
experiences.
So each of those returns gets
processed, distributed, audited,
collected if necessary, of
course.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary. So
As far as your department is
concerned, it's doable, it's uh
you're gonna, it's gonna take
you 9 to 10 months probably to
do it.
The, the folks that will be
paying these taxes.
Um, let's, let's talk about
those with uh
With point of sals, I'm gonna,
I'm gonna take you up to um
to
Some small
town or community and and state.
They've been in business, mom
and dad opened it.
Now the sun's running it and his
son's about ready to take over.
They've had a point of sale
system 40 years old.
How will this impact other than,
you know, if they have to get a
new point of sale system, they
can't program it.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Duncan, um, just, just to
clarify on, on your first
question, it's doable, but not
by the effective date of January
1st or April 1st of 2020.
Something that I'm a little bit
confused by that may be missing,
so the effective date of the
provisions of this Act is July
1, 2025, but the imposition of
the new tax begins on July 1,
the entire time.
So yes, appreciated that
consideration, heard it through
the air.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Duncan as to the point of sale
systems, um, you know, I, I
don't operate those, but I have
uh heard from past testimony and
today with the um restaurant
association, I think Carol White
was on, um, there are questions,
you know, retailer types of
softwares and systems and so
basically, I think what, what
the question is, is can their
systems accommodate.
Charging in an automated
fashion, can they charge the GRT
state and local on all receipts
at a restaurant, for example.
And can they they then be
programmed to know the
difference between food and
alcohol sales to charge an
additional 6% surtax on just the
alcohol portion. I think for
some, the answer will be yes,
that'll be fine, and for some it
might be no.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that.
Um, Ms. Chair, I, I, I think I
just have one more comment.
I'll, I'll be done.
I would, uh
As I mentioned before, um, Mr.
Chair and Representative, I
would have much rather taken
that $25 million that's going to
the general fund and, and take
it back in here and give that.
To the tribal alleviations fund.
We are not, according to even
testimony today, we are not
going to impact those who need
and who have the behavioral
health problems.
With this impact
I believe that very similar to
cannabis.
That
The illegal sales have probably
doubled since we made that a
law.
I think the illegal alcohol
sales are going to double as
well.
From my neighboring county in my
county.
I'll go to Colorado and get it
and uh.
So I hope the taxes end up where
they should be and where they
need to be to help these.
Folks that desperately need
this.
I do not think at this point in
time it can impact them one bit.
As a guy that I don't drink, but
if me and Rep Henry went out to
the dinner.
And
I'm not that margarita cause
It's $30.
I'm probably gonna get the
cheesecake.
Instead.
So that's gonna impact the
restaurant.
For that reason, I can't support
the bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan. Let's go to
Representative Henry.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
I, I'm gonna keep it super
short. I just have a couple
quick clarifying questions. So
with the amendment that we
passed earlier.
What a restaurant with a beer
and wine license.
still have to pay the debt.
Mr. Chair Representative, based
on the First Amendment that did
pass, we were only exempting as
I understood it.
Um
Breweries and local small
distillers, so restaurants as it
stands.
Right now are still uh would
still be part of the new tax and
the imposition of the liquor er
tax.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Representatives. I guess that's
gonna lead to, to my point. I'll
have.
A point and then I've got
another question.
The issue I have is
Let's take Artesia for example.
It's a small town. If there's 2
barbecue restaurants, one sells
beer and wine and one happens to
be a brewery.
Don't we feel that at this point
we have put a competitive
disadvantage on both of those
restaurants.
And I really think that's bad.
Really bad tax policy. I I just,
I can't get over that
Representative, I agree with
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Representative. The next quick
question I have, um, and
sometimes I can get away with
this cause I'm a freshman and so
I'm gonna call it a learning
question, um, hopefully not a
dumb question, but what I've
heard is with the, I believe, I
believe you said Gallup had a
5%, is that correct?
Can you help me.
Thank you, thank you.
Perfect
So with that, Mr. Chairman.
What have they, what did they do
with that? Did they use that to
go help with these programs or,
or what did they, what was the
reasoning for that 5%?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
and to be accurate, we're saying
Gallup, I understand that it's
McKinley County, so the county,
um, but I can't speak to their
reasons, I would imagine it was
to.
Reducing care for the harm
connected to alcohol misuse,
Mister Speaker, Representative.
Representative, have they?
If they're using that for that.
Um, did we see a decrease in, in
I guess drinking of alcohol, is
that, I guess that's the end.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
don't know that we have data
around an overall consumption
decrease, but there is and the
ways that um health statistics
are captured, decrease in the
harm and risks associated with
alcohol use.
Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Chairman Representative,
thank you for that. I'd be
really interested to see what
what they use that 5% for and
how we can maybe attribute that
to possible reductions, um, or,
or exactly where that money is
going. So that would be
something I would be interested
in to see how this whole thing
is I don't play out.
The other
I guess this is more of a
statement, Mr. Chairman, that
I'll make real quick and then
I'm done. Uh, you know, when we
use big chains as restaurants.
As kind of examples of, well,
that's a big chain on the
restaurant side of it, again, my
family has come from
restaurants, not just ones we
owned.
We've owned quite a few
different types.
Sometimes those big chains are
actually owned by a local
franchise owner.
And so I think sometimes we
forget.
Just because it's a fill in the
blank, I mean, any of them.
And we think, oh, that's not
going to affect them because
there's some big chain, um, a
lot of times those are locals.
And the only reason I can speak
to this, we just opened.
The
Artesia, uh, there was a family
that just opened a franchise in
Artesia, and that is a comment I
got a lot from artesians, well,
that's a big chain we shouldn't
support them, all that stuff.
What I had to remind them is,
yeah, that chain that just
opened is a local family that
took the chance to pay the money
to get the franchise to open the
chain. So just because they're a
big chain, I think sometimes we
forget that that is does affect.
Many of our local families that
took the chance to open it.
And I think when we put them at
such a competitive disadvantage.
I really have an issue.
With that. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Henry.
Let's go to Representative
Razas.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Vice Chair and
representatives kind of was
moving really fast earlier cause
I, I thought we were like we
need to get out of there, so,
um, but I first want to say,
Thank you for all your hard
work. I know what you're trying
to do.
And, you know, um, every person
in here has
wants to do something good. I
don't think, I think we just
have different ideas of how to
get there.
Um, so, you know, and there's
some struggles with some of the
things and heartburn, probably
some of the things our
statements and your statements,
but overall, that's the process,
that's what we're supposed to
do. Mr. Chair, um,
You know, I, again, I want to go
back and I think it's a
preventative issue more than a
Then, then, then.
Try to get it in the front end
rather than the back end, right?
People that drink and once
they're addicted like that. I
mean, I have helped many
families and through my business
and seen many families be
destroyed.
I had
I have family members I've had
uh employee I've tried to do as
much as I can for those type of
people, so I understand. Um, I
have seen the trend in 37 years,
go from alcohol to drugs.
Tremendously and, and so, um, I
just wanted to verify those
thoughts that I had, my, my, my,
um, remem you know, remembering
those statistics for myself and
my staff, that's why I called
them and and or I texted him and
asked him that.
Um
So a couple things, um, the
first in I, I.
Real big question, why did,
because I'm gonna ask you this,
and I think I don't know if the
madam secretary can help us with
this.
There's probably from listening
to the discussion, Mister Chair,
uh, Madam Vice Chair
Representatives.
It sounds to me like
The way this is written.
Because it's more of a point of
sale, it's on the retail end.
Why did you decide to because it
looks like it sound like 40,000
returns it's gonna affect.
Whereas maybe if it's on the.
On the front end, right? That's
on the back end, on the front
end, how many um
As wholesalers
would be affected if we would
have done it through a surtax.
Or excuse me, uh, excuse me, an
excise tax.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative. Quickly, I'll
share it with some respect, um,
a bit of our legislative
history. So, um, my co-sponsor,
Representative Chair Ferrari and
incredible champions, advocates
from across New Mexico, did so
much to make sure that we were
having this conversation we're
having today, um, so I certainly
didn't come to Santa Fe to raise
taxes on anybody or get into
alcohol tax at all.
When I landed on this committee,
I did not know how we impose
taxes for alcoholic beverages,
but thanks to um Chair Ferrari
and her colleagues, we realized
that these rates hadn't been
touched since the 90s and that
they were flat rates. Once I
started reading into it, I
realized that taxing at a
wholesale is fundamentally a
regressive tax. So whether
someone was buying the top shelf
bottle of wine for a couple
$2000 or buying the 2 buck chuck
at Trader Joe's or the gas
station.
the same 45 cent tax was
imposed, and for me, that made
it an unfair tax policy. So when
we continue to debate and and
realize how important coming
back to this issue was, um, I
kept turning advocates say.
How we potentially change
behavior. Well, I have some
questions about those
assumptions. If we potentially
change behavior, it has to be a
perjuring tax, and I said a
wholesale tax will never be
that.
Plus it's regressive plus to
catch us up as folks had put in
front of us, um, proposals that
this committee voted on were
increases of 100%.
100%
And for me, that did not sound
like the right kind of tax
policy.
I wanted to vote on, so what I
brought forward was an
alternative proposal to say if
we actually want to talk about
what a perjuring tax looks like
what an alcohol tax that the
consumer themselves is paying
not down through the supply
chain. I said we're actually
talking about a retail tax, so I
introduced a different bill just
so that we could accurately
debate the merits of both of
those proposals. What we've now
have in HB 417.
Is this collaborative bill that
both keeps the excise tax, so
the wholesale tax that is paid
regressive and regressive ways
is in place with that same
revenue stream coming in, but
now we are trying to pilot a new
tax that the consumer themselves
would pay, so we're we're not
relying on what comes through
the supply chain or how that may
or may not change prices, but an
actual tax designed on the value
of the product someone is
buying. So if they're buying a
$1000 bottle of wine.
They'd be paying the $60 in tax
if they're buying a glass of
wine for $10 it would be 60
cents. So yes, it's proportional
to the, the, the, the cash value
like what they are paying for
that, uh, price of alcohol. And,
and Mr. Chair, uh, Vice Chair
representatives, secretary,
maybe I just just just to
clarify this, we're going and,
and make sure I got this right,
from 40,000 tax returns that
you'd have to then figure out.
to go through. And then possibly
all the restaurants and retails
or retailers or whatever and
have this system would have to
now have probably update their
software or their program to
separate that from other um.
From food
Um, and, or whatever else
they're they're selling, um, so
how many, Mr. Chair.
Uh, last year, how many
On the er excuse me, on the
excise tax, how many people are
you collecting from now?
Representative Traz currently we
have about 1200 active um liquor
excise taxpayers, so 1200
taxpayers times 12 monthly
returns is about how many we
collect per year.
And we would be, I, I believe if
my back of the envelope math is
right after your amendment, um
we would be at that would stay
unchanged. We would still
collect.
Those
at the wholesale level, and then
under this bill as amended, we
would add something like 4000
per year. So 3300 new retail
license, liquor licenses times
12 monthly returns. I, I, I
wanna say I, I really appreciate
what the sponsors is the point
you're making about a flat tax,
let alone a flat tax that hasn't
been adjusted for inflation
since 1994, when inflation has
changed, I think 114%. So the
real value of that taxes is less
than half of what it was.
was
But I, I guess I just posed the
question just as the tax
administrator, um, body.
Why we wouldn't make the liquor
excise tax.
To basically address the issue
of regressivity.
That answered your question.
And Mr. Chair,
Madame Weiser, what she just
said right there, I was trying
to.
And simplify it, and I, I'm not
trying to take over your bill
and this is 6 years of work to
get to where you're at. I mean,
this isn't something.
Um, is that something that you
would, I mean, not obviously, I
don't wanna do that now. I think
that's too complicated for me to
like completely.
Change directions on you. Is
there any thoughts that you have
on that exact issue we just
brought up
just add a little bit of
clarity, it's our understanding
that with the new new fiers and
entirety because they are
already in the system as people
who pay GRT. So it's not new
fiers, it's.
Uh, the same fiers who will be
paying an additional tax, but
it's not new returns or new
filers, these entities at the
retail are already responsible
for GRT. So this question, um,
Mr. Chair Representative.
At a different point at the 30
day session, I introduced a bill
to do exactly that.
I wanted to have accurate
debates. I said, if we keep it
at excise, it should move off a
flat rate to a percentage, and I
said, or we eliminate excise and
we go to surtax and we make it a
percentage, but either way, my
commitment was to bring more
fairness to the policy, take it
away from being regressive by
moving to a percentage at the
time, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, this proposal, the surtax
got more momentum and in fact,
it changes the point of
distribution.
So at the time, the distributors
were coming out against it
differently, uh, because they
didn't want to see the increase
in tax, so it seemed like
momentum came in this direction,
potentially cause the
distributors were fine paying
the taxes they did or they
didn't like it, they they.
They'd have some complaints or
amendment or or concerned with
it, but fundamentally they
weren't going to see an increase
and it was actually the people
buying alcohol that would see it
directly. Thank you for sharing
that, Mr. Chair. Um, Vice Chair
represents a lot of it is.
When you know the history, I've
always said that that's the
advantage of being on on the
community for several years
because you know some history
and it helps.
You not ask a question that just
got asked. So, Mr. Chair,
um, last year,
um, so the last thing is I've
been listening to everyone and,
and, and I've been listening to
uh Representative Henry and.
Representative Hernandez and the
speaker and I'm going.
I have similar issues in in my
area. We're close to the border.
Oh, they just go out there and
just pick up whatever they can
legally and come back across.
But, um,
In, in fairness to what you were
expressing and some of these
people were expressing both you
were expressing.
Lowering the, lowering it
because look, the bottom line is
this, Mr. Chair, um,
was chairing representatives.
Restaurants
And these grocers really have a
very thin margin.
Grocers probably employ 20
25,000 people. I'm not sure.
Um, we have restaurants that I
have no idea how many people
they employ.
But it is gonna, it is gonna
ripple through, through that,
those two sectors.
And so I'm wondering, um.
And, and, because I listened to
you earlier of lowering that
from a 6%.
Down.
Would, would
And I'd like to make an
amendment on the fly also in in
trying to balance what
Representative Henry was saying.
Represent Duncan, Speaker, and,
and, and, and representative
Hernandez and even the statement
that you made.
Would you consider, uh,
Lowering that to kind of level
the disparity that we've
created.
Um
Mr. Chair Representative.
Um, to lowering that.
In, in balancing, trying to get
a little closer balance for
those who are exempt now and
those that are, that are not
exempt, would you consider, um,
3.5% um
an amendment on page 10 from 6%
to 3.5%.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Tarassas, we would find out.
Thank you.
Chairs representative, as I
explained earlier, if we have a
full base, I think it would be
appropriate to lower that tax
rate.
At the beginning of the
committee, we took out some of
the retailers that so.
I would follow the will of the
committee, but certainly if, if
that base was white and we kept
it wide, I do think that
fundamentally we need to address
the discrepancy that restaurants
are a tax advantage. So for me,
I would think it's better tax
policy.
And respectfully, Mister Chair,
um, I don't vice chair, you
know, um.
I think everyone's concerned
about business and so forth, and
I, I really, um, would like to
see, I'd like to move forward
and hopefully we can find some
middle ground there. um.
With uh 3.5% of
Change.
It would be on page 10, excuse
me, one would strike 6% and
change it to 3.5%, um.
Make that motion.
Thank you for that that motion.
So I'm looking at page number
10, line number 1.
Uh, striking out 6% and putting
2 or 3.5.
3.5%.
Pretty good, and it's been
seconded by Representative
ranking member Duncan.
Comment question on this
amendment.
If not, let's let's take the
boat. Let's call the rope.
Representative Chandler? No.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Henry.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lundstrom.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Parajon.
Representative Silva.
Uh, no.
Representative Tarasas.
Speaker Martinez. No.
Vienna.
No.
Mr. Gerente, no.
fight for that amendment fails
the floor.
Mr. Chair, uh, uh, Madam Vice
Chair and Representatives, thank
you for your work. I, I
I think we've pretty much hashed
this out and thank you so much
for your presentation. Thank
you, Mr.
Thank you. Let's go to
Representative Silva.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
presenters, um.
I'll make this brief, but just
wanted to say that there are
states facing similar challenges
across the country.
And uh when we look at the
comparable tax rates of those
states compared to ours,
Oklahoma, Arkansas, Mississippi,
Alabama, Florida, um, I'll have
similar or higher tax rates for
alcohol. And so, um, I just want
to applaud the hard work that
you've put into, um, to adjust
our tax rate, given our
realities and given that it
hasn't been updated since 94.
Um, I think, um, to, and I also
want to thank Representative
Joshua Her
this for all of his questions.
Um, a lot of my questions got
answered in that, so thank you.
And I think we can direct the
LFC to study some of these data
points, uh, over time. So is
this tax rate impacting all of
the health data points um
without having to write it in,
in the bill directly. I think
that's something that we could
direct LFC to do. Um, and then I
also just wanna make mention
about uh the concern of not
having the
to um
To impose taxes on sovereign
nations and think the uh our
committee staff for uh finding
this information, but the
prohibition of liquor on
reservations was lifted in 1953,
and uh the only liquor sales,
um,
On, uh, on sovereign nations in
New Mexico are tied to casinos,
uh, which are part of the state
and tribal revenue sharing
agreements or um it also include
golf courses, and if those
become part of the GRT shared
agreement. So I think we can
capture some of that, um, that
additional revenue there too. So
I don't think they're completely
left out. Um, so, thank you
again for the hard work and uh
the conversation here. Thank
you, Chair.
Representative Representative
Chandler,
your woman Chandler,
Chair, I make a motion for do
pass on House Bill 417 as
amended
passage of House Bill 417 as
amended. Is there a second,
seconded by by Speaker Martinez.
And if I may take a prerogative
of the chair real quick to make
a couple of comments and simply
stated, thank you presenters for
your tireless work on this
initiative. I know it hasn't
been easy. This has been a long
time coming in regards to at
least getting to present in
front of this committee again.
And, and I say that again
because we had a first shot a
couple of years ago that didn't
go the way we planned it to, but
um nothing's ever perfect the
first time.
When I say that
I want to thank especially
Representative Cadena, Vice
Chairman Cadena for her
thoughtful and compassionate
focus on on equity.
In tax policy. I know we make
mention about, about, uh,
exclusions now and and how it's
not good tax policy. I get it.
Every everything regarding tax
isn't fair.
But when I look and I consider
what's fair about this entire
proposal is that you didn't just
take something easy and say, OK,
I want to pass it and make a
couple of amendments. You went
to the drawing board, you
changed the tax structure
completely in regards to how you
thought about it.
We recognize that in New Mexico,
we have a problem here.
We recognize that in tribal
communities that
We come from a history of
alcoholism that my family is, is
a part of that.
And I am so deeply, deeply.
Frustrated and disappointed that
we can't even have the Indian
Affairs department of this state
in the room today to make
comment.
Either way.
Let me state that again. I'm
deeply, deeply disappointed.
At the state of New Mexico
Indian Affairs department cannot
be in the room.
To show face for the people
there are supposedly supposed to
support in battling, especially
in this in this case, alcoholism
that harms their people the most
in this entire state.
But as we look at the entire
picture, recognizing what the
potential could be.
Is this the right vehicle to do
this?
Unlikely because as I made
mention before, is that in the
revenue stabilization
stabilization and tax Policy
Committee.
I recognize the comments of then
ranking member uh Harper.
When you presented in front of
that committee and how he
commented how he felt that it
was.
Different tax policy.
Good tax policy in a way where
that you didn't take the easy.
To try to just make something
work.
You didn't stick, throw, throw
gum at the wall and hopefully it
sticks. You went to the drawing
board and, and changed it and he
felt that, and I, I will quote
them, he felt it was transparent
in the way that you approach
this, and I can appreciate that.
I know he's not here, but I know
that that I learned a lot from
him in terms of how he looks at
tax policy.
And when he and we would look at
those discussions that we had
back in the in in the interim,
and we look at the progress that
was made since then.
I know that that again, it's not
perfect.
That a lot of work still has to
be done, but at the same time,
this is the definitely the the
vehicle and, and I would say
that those that um are texting
me, um, you know, about, what
about this? What about this,
what about this?
that these conversations should
have been had with these
individuals in the front of me.
Months ago and not today.
Because I'm not gonna sit here
as their, as the chairman for
this committee and say, I'm
getting all this feedback, maybe
maybe maybe this, maybe this,
maybe this, that's not my role.
My role is to try to conduct a
fair and objective process in
the in in this bill and in other
bills that come forward in front
of us and in doing so, um, I
hope that we have done that
today. So with that being said,
we have a motion made by
Representative Joan Chandler,
seconded by Speaker Martinez.
He's called the rule.
Representative Chandler. Yes.
Representative Duncan,
and I like my vote.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Henry.
Representative Hernandez, no.
Representative Lundstrom.
Speaker Martinez. Representative
Montoya.
Representative Parajon.
Yes.
Representative Silva.
Yes.
Representative Tarazas.
No one I'd like to explain.
Vice Chair Kadena.
Yes.
Mr. Charlie.
Yes.
By a vote from 6 to 4, House
Bill 417 is amended, uh, passes
this committee.
