Vice chair condemned.
Share it.
Right we have a quorum would mix
things up this morning folks
we'll start with house bill one
twenty one forty four that will
go down and down to the house
joint resolutions five and six
thereafter so that being said.
Representative the floor is
yours for House house bill one
twenty limit capital gains tax
deduction
thank you Mr chair in good to
see you all again
Committee this bill is a bill
that I would say again is part
of a reform process
and I believe Mr chair and to.
First it's also the remnants of
are your governor's Richard
sands tax overhaul that.
Frankly I think did a fair
amount of damage to the state
in I think it was twenty four
twenty oh five time frame.
And what that did it effective
personal income tax but it also
has to do with the capital gains
and.
Prior to that to those changes
we only allowed a thousand
dollars of of capital gains to
be.
Not taxed as ordinary income and
the practice in the large
majority of states is to not
just to tax capital gains as
ordinary income and you can see
that in the FY are aware that
it's a new rated as to what
states is on page two which
states have some kind of.
I don't know adjustment or
difference in to to tax capital
gains income differently from
ordinary income and that's there
about nine of them and their
enumerated on page two in the
middle of our F. I. R. and I
would also note that according
to the F. I. R. approximately
eighty five percent of capital
gains are generated by the
wealthiest five percent of
taxpayers.
And this is again part of trying
to address the regressive nature
of our income tax system and
actually our taxation system in
general Mr chair and members so
this takes us back to pre
Richards and except for the fact
we've adjusted these thousand
dollars to twenty five hundred
dollars.
I did a little I worked with
Clinton a little bit and did
some math on inflation and it
gets us close a little bit more
than what the inflationary
adjustment would have been to
that thousand dollars had it you
know
so that's what I'm doing there
Mr chair not
that's essentially what the bill
does it makes capital gains
income.
Taxable as ordinary income
except for the first twenty five
hundred putting us in line with
the large majority states in the
union Mr chair and members.
Thank you Representative
understood that's go to the
audience for a those in favor
and online those in favor of
house bill one twenty please
raise your hand in the room and
online school starting in my
left hand side you Sir.
What was chairman members of the
committee my name is my aunt's
for we all.
Garcia.
That
is built one of reasons the
positive just laid out there is
no need to encourage these
issues are.
Thank you for listening.
Chairman members of the
committee my name is Dick Mason
culture the action committees
the women voters of New Mexico
illegal voters have to position
I tax system should be
progressive
I mean that capital gains
deduction makes the system more
progressive so we stand in child
support and I just want to
provide very good thank you next
to the state spent.
Mr chair members of the
committee and one of the
executive director New Mexico
voices for children really
strong support we really
appreciate the Sanchez
leadership on this issue you
know as you heard New Mexico is
one of the few states in the
nation the taxes capital gains
lesson that does the hard wages
and incomes of regular workers
we know that eighty eight
percent of the value of the
deduction goes to just the top
thirteen percent.
I'll have to take those less
than one percent at the very top
tax so it's currently structured
this is not a deduction that is
set up to benefit regular New
Mexicans of limiting.
As as proposed would have some
benefits that would still allow
everybody plays a to do so it
would protect the value of it
for the majority of New Mexicans
who Clemente but it also
introduced.
Social workers and importantly
it would generate Q. Revenue.
Used to help offset the cost of
the other taxes if you are
considering which we think is
important help us apologies
we're just for thank you next.
Senator if not anyone online yes
Alex Williams hello good morning
you with this.
good morning
thank you Mr chair members the
committee my name is Alex
Williams and I'm appearing on
behalf of the New Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty we thank the
sponsor for H. B. one twenty we
stand in support of limiting the
capital gains deduction because
we believe that New Mexico
deserves a tax system that is
fair for everyone the current
capital gains tax break
overwhelmingly goes to the
highest income earners however
there's no evidence that
promotes economic growth it's
simply a tax break that is
unnecessary and ineffective and
worst it's it only goes to it
only goes to the richest New
Mexicans rather than ordinary
working ones repealing this tax
break will also help our state
generate sustainable revenue for
the long term so that we can
continue to fund the programs
are most important to New
Mexicans and benefit everyone
our state including things like
schools and health care we ask
that you support eighty one
twenty and make arts tax system
work for all New Mexicans thank
you Mr chairman committee thank
you Alex next.
Good morning girl.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee I'm Carl Kaiser
fifty year resident of New
Mexico and I absolutely support
H. B. one twenty most families
do not receive unearned income
they receive wages and they
should not be penalized in the
tax code most capital gains go
to the wealthiest stuff filers
in New Mexico this means that
high income households receive
special treatment this must stop
Furthermore personal investment
in existing public stock is not
an economic investment buying
and selling of company shares
does not help the state economy.
I know that such income tax
preferences do little to
encourage economic development
item ten in the interim
committee last year August
eleventh
Brings this force the same
presentation demonstrated that
the tax cutting experiment
failed in Kansas Page four
through eight and their policy
implications state that
investing in human capital is
the better choice to address the
competitiveness problem in New
Mexico I urge you to pass and
thank you for your time.
Thank you Carl next.
Rich
rich good morning.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee I
strongly support H. B. one
twenty and both the personal
income tax and capital gains tax
corporate income tax all of
those those cuts severely
reduced Revenue here in New
Mexico and there is just no it
is for is it there is no basis
for the idea that you cut taxes
that automatically will generate
jobs people are non is basically
just to Erin this is to make a
profit not just prior people we
hire people when they need to
people and its fundamental
economics and economic practice
that if.
If an employer gets windfall
they're not going to necessarily
use it to to to hire people
unless there is a demand for
hiring those people we seem way
too often especially the large
corporations use their windfall
tax cuts to buy back stock and
to this is the the civic this is
strongly increase the salaries
of the CEOs and other executives
so we need to undo what what was
no just three done.
Ten and twenty years ago and and
and this bill H. B. one twenty
according to the F. E. R. F. I.
R. as as I recall seeing would
would raise seventy million
dollars of income we lost that
revenue many years ago and it's
time to get it back now so thank
you very much.
Thank you rich next.
Judy good morning.
Good morning thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I'm Judy Messel with
Lutheran advocacy ministry in
New Mexico speaking also on
behalf of New Mexico conference
of churches.
We support house bill one twenty
white house bill one nineteen
which we also support one twenty
moves toward more equity in the
tax system
in our our you large capital
gains deductions benefit is very
small and wealthy segment as
limiting capital gains
deductions will bring the state
more revenue to stand on such
programs as education and
health care expenditures which
can help build a more just
society we are to do pass thank
you thank you Judy.
At the less what I'm not okay
thank you although the
opposition of house bill one
twenty in the room and online
please raise your head anyone in
the room seeing no one on the
line.
Zero eight zero Senator good
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I'm Sarah
fitzgerald senior vice president
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce by cutting
our current capital gains
deduction this legislation
represents a major tax increase
leading economists have called
taxing capital gains quote about
the most inefficient source of
tax revenue in the economy it's
a bad idea of course because it
raises relatively little revenue
over time while distorting
economic decisions today
especially around investing for
growth and innovation anyone who
spent much time around Economic
Development in New Mexico knows
that one of our biggest problems
is a shortage of investment
capital why we want to make it
more costly for individuals to
make investments here and for
businesses to grow the last
thing we need is capital flight
out of New Mexico and yet here
we are considering a proposal
that would do just that and
reduce our business friendliness
we strongly recommend you oppose
this bill thank you thank you
Serra next the list.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr speaker and
members of the committee it's
Leri Sonntag here I'm a member
of better together New Mexico a
group of advocates that are
gathering to help make our voice
heard on decisions that you're
making up it was mentioned that
economists who study good tax
policy.
Would not agree with this bill
there's a publication called
rich states poor states that
ranks New Mexico I think it
number thirty four for economic
outlook at our tax policy is one
of the reasons were not ranked
higher and it was mentioned
earlier that part of the goal of
this bill is to align us with
other states the rich states
poor states.
Points out that the states that
our people are moving to are
doing the opposite of tax
increases you look at California
New York people are fleeing
those states because of the tax
policies.
The elephant in the room as the
then tax surpluses for at least
two years now I think you guys
are looking at a three point
five trillion dollar tax surplus
the last thing you should be
doing is looking at a tax
increase and that's what this
bill does to the amount of over
seventy million dollars
it's incredible no on house bill
one twenty thank you.
Thank you very it would also
let.
Okay right thank you for your
participation does not go to the
committee questions or comments
from the committee members.
Mr Harper.
What a surprise thank you
chairman and madam chair.
good to see you this morning and
I think we'll just again just
have a little conversation is
that's already the
Representative Chandler
Representative corporation.
The morning would.
We are.
Right right right excited to be
here and for the weekends.
So
I guess I just want to share a
few thoughts to get your
thoughts uh.
so.
I don't want to start with the
tax policy right but chair and
madam chair we heard several
folks in the audience talk about
how.
just doesn't create jobs right
and.
I think I I might even agree
with that ladies when Richard
soon did this back in the day
there was an argument that there
be a ton of capital that would
flow to the state.
And we really didn't see that
there are also lots of bills
that were passed to try to make
that
business grow in New Mexico and
I think we could passionate
about half of those items so
this price of reasons why that
didn't happen but all I think I
agree with that argument right
just to say that this was not a
huge.
Generator of jobs an influx of
capital three Mexico.
Yeah but is that the only reason
why we have tax benefits in our
code.
Right.
And the answer is no I mean we
have a huge portion of our code
that a citizen benefit.
and then.
also there's things are just
kind of good tax policy right
like a we have an exemption in
our gross receipts tax for
wages.
Right let's because wages are
taxed with the income tax.
And we don't need a tax wages
with the gross receipts tax to
right.
So I think there are other
reasons why.
We have tax policy set aside
here in San Juan one of them of
of your your your thoughts on it
obviously so capital gains what
what is capital gains right so
this is when you have purchased
something right and we normally
think of like a
you know stocks or bonds or some
investment right purchased
something there's growth in that
value and later you sell at a
higher value.
And in the nineteen is taxable.
Right but it's not just
investments this could be House
houses this could be a small
business that's owned by you
know
I'm on top right
And so.
When we have a capital gains tax
to tax that came and the the
leftovers is part of your income
that also goes to income tax.
And so.
I can.
Make a straight faced argument
that what we're doing here is
there is some element of double
taxation.
And that you have a capital
gains and then also you have an
income tax and depending on the
investment rates if you have.
like a pension or for Lente or
for over three B..
I guess the argument I make is
that when you talk about.
Eighty five percent of capital
gains generated by the
wealthiest five percent
taxpayers.
Sure but the other fifteen
percent is made up by all of the
people in the state who have
see that for their retirement.
And
So one hand were.
We're removing taxation on
social security.
We're trying to.
Encourage people to save for
retirement or something was
wrong here to have all
employers.
Required to offer for one case
or the the state run version of
investment
savings retirement make that
requires all employers offer.
And on the other hand will get
a.
Right at.
Especially double tax there
There was a sort of drawing from
their four K. four three B. or
to get distributions from the
pension so I'll just stop there
love to hear your thoughts on.
On that
first of all I don't understand
the tax argument
Things that are gained in value.
So and let's be clear so for
people in the audience primary
residences are not subject to
capital gains tax so I don't
want people to start getting
nervous out there your primary
residence still okay so let's be
clear about that point that's a
little bit of an exaggeration as
to what's going on second homes
possibly there are issues with
Mr chair and but certainly not
primary residences so second I
don't understand the argument of
the double tax
those people contributing to
qualified plans and iris are
different but I have a four oh
one K. eight Mr chair Mr chair
and other many many people do
from my understanding it
correctly you're not paying tax
on the income until you draw it
out of the plan Mr chair so
that's not double taxation and I
find it interesting Mr chair and
representative that federal
government calls capital gains
under income it's on you're
sitting there and those of us
who are fortunate enough to have
investments that we can just sit
on and happily rider bicycles
around town whileor are four oh
one K.'s and other investments
are growing it's on earned its
on its passive it's not
something that any that many
working people have access to so
I think we need to be clear
about that as well Mr chair and
lastly it I think violates a
principle that we talk a lot
about Mr chair and
representative and that is it's
not good tax policy to treat
income.
Differently and we have these
conversations when actually we
talked about the social security
exemption is we should not be
looking Mr chair to the source
of the income we should be
looking at it's income and how
are we going to treat it and how
are we going to address it in
this case it will be ordinary
income just as it should be Mr
chair and it will be taxed at
the tax payers
tax rate.
So those individuals with lower
tax rates who have maybe the
good fortune of having a second
home
It will be taxed at a lower rate
at a lower rate than perhaps
somebody who's in over the
hundred to five hundred thousand
dollar range which we were
talking about Mr chair at our
last meeting so I think this is
a fair way to be doing it's
under income that many people
don't have access to in terms of
benefits its taxable Mr chair at
the rate that the tax in the tax
bracket is so if you're lower
income person you're not going
to be paying as much especially
of my great progressive tax plan
moves forward Mr chair at at the
same rate so it's not good tax
policy to look at the source of
the income income is income Mr
chair and I think a lot of us
have had very good conversations
about that point over the years.
Chairman and chair thank you for
for that I I I appreciate the
the clarification that primary
residence that's owned for more
than one year I believe it's not
two years.
Two years is not subject to
capital gains.
thank you for clarifying that
I I do think there there may be
some room for for a little more
exploration of the.
We shouldn't care where the
income comes from which I agree
with that and but there's also a
statement well this is under
right
so if we if we don't care it's
covered from head white where we
specifying that it's under
because they were caring rates
coming from.
I I will say.
When it comes to helping people
retire.
Right to make sure that we have
a a good place for folks to
retire right I just I thank you
I think it is strange that we're
removing taxation on social
security.
But increasing taxation on.
On for one case and for what's
ruby's inventions this this will
increase the the taxes that are
paid by those folks.
So I just it's a little strange
we you did mention that chairman
and madam chair.
That to you in the FIR mentions
a few different states that
tax capital gains less than
ordinary income and we're we're
one of those.
There's a nice list here that's
put out
By the Brookings institute.
and urban institute to list all
the students what they do this
it's fascinating to see you know
there are several that like New
Hampshire to completely accept.
many states that the same as
federal like West Virginia.
Or Georgia we're telling.
But there are lots that have
special budget for your
particular state is interesting
like
Maryland capital gains on
Maryland office for tax exempt
directions annectens for sale of
certain we see at this our
businesses are exempt and we see
and right and we can go through
here there's
when we have a surcharge on
certain capital gains related to
medical cannabis right I mean
it's it's kind of all over the
place it's interesting but I
guess the reason this is the
other the other main reason why
I'm concerned about what this
might do to New Mexico is that
there are folks who
have small businesses like our
former chair Jim Trujillo right
had a has a little gas station
right and these folks that have
small businesses that have been
family owned for many years they
often don't have for one K. or
retirement nest egg with they do
is they sell and that is their
retirement fund.
And this would really
significantly increase the taxes
on that cell and so I would just
say.
If the committee decides that
this is something we want to
move forward with.
That we consider doing something
similar to what many other
states do for
that's New Mexico you know for
first businesses in their
particular state we consider
putting some.
exclusion if it's in New Mexico
family owned business.
your comments Mr chair in
Representative I am open to that
in during the interim when this
was being discussed individuals
were raising it as a possibility
but then no one offered up
proposal I'm happy to work with
anybody to talk about some kind
of an accommodation for a New
Mexico owned.
Small business in terms of this
particular item and would be
happy to work with you
Representative especially if it
will gain your support moving
forward but I'm happy to have
that conversation Mr chair I
think that's reasonable
and it's true I will agree Mr
chair whenever you start
comparing states they're never
the same which is why I take
things like the tax foundation's
comparisons with a grain of salt
because you really do Mr chair
have to drill down into every
little specific item in the
totality of the tax system to
really understand it thank you.
Thank you chairman and madam
chair I I very much appreciate
that I think that's I think
that's fair.
And then I just the last comment
to us perhaps you'd consider
You know just looking at the
four one K. four one three B. at
pension you know I I I
appreciate that you raise the
the amount of two twenty five
hundred.
Perhaps if we could.
Make a you don't with some help
from LFC or maybe that tax
part of the calculation for kind
of like your.
Your average you know kind of
like a means test on you know if
you're withdrawing a hundred
thousand a year from your your
whatever.
What would be.
The correct amount you know
maybe it's maybe twenty five
hundred is right maybe it's
three thousand so we're not
impacting those folks and and I
mean to me it sounds like you're
really trying to target.
The affluent here and so maybe
we make this a little means
tested so that your your middle
class don't get hit by this well
I think we need to I'm willing
to end the conversation but if
things start to get complicated
when we're learning and learning
now with means testing spend
within the scene having
conversations Mr chairman chair
when the social security stuff
starts coming back again
willing to look at what you know
increasing possibly the twenty
five hundred to another number
that's reasonable but not
excessive but I would remind
everyone Mr chair and members
that when one is drawing from
the retirement system you know
there for own Kate they do that
knowing they don't have the same
it's a you're at a lower tax
bracket generally and not a
hundred percent but generally
you are in a lower tax bracket
when you stop working in your
now drawing Mr chair on here
four oh one K. and other kinds
of things and Mr chair tensions
are going away so we can talk a
little bit more about that as
well
happy to talk with you about the
small business issue as we move
forward on this package and
maybe that would be something
great you when I Representative
and chair could collaborate on.
Thank you chairman thank you
mentioned Representative Harper
we have next Representative
Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
chair.
I want to raise the.
Our current comment.
Senator night.
And I think we established
yesterday in a previous
conversation that.
That
A few thousand twenty thousand
to sixty thousand depending on.
On this past use of these high
income taxpayers.
Would be subject to the space
legislation.
To which Mr chair which piece
this piece which.
The increased cap.
So.
Many Mr Chairman Madam chair of
these people.
Would be perhaps most of the
small business.
That would be.
The job creators in the state.
And I can also imagine.
The building.
Started a.
All this just forty years ago.
And.
And as a consequence we met this
is sold.
At age.
J..
Representative.
That forty years of life.
And this is just based on our.
Would you.
Mr chair and representative
let's step back a little bit
I'm not sure about your data
first of all and your
assumptions that this would
largely affect small businesses
in the state Antill Mr chair and
representative we actually have
data on that I cannot agree that
that's a fair assumption now
speaking to your personal
situation Mr Chairman
representative I do not doubt
for a minute that you worked
very hard in your business.
Mr chairman and.
And madam chair.
The oil and gas business is
booming and mark.
And.
No more content providers in the
community have a look at this.
If you will just have to catch
up.
So we're business.
Part time many of.
Having been there also.
Two generations.
Mr Chairman madam chair.
The very first thing these folks
to.
When they contemplate disabled
this is.
This is stab which residents say
taxes.
That hasn't happened lunch it
happened twice it happens all
the time.
The reserve bank.
Is to avoid.
New Mexico.
Thank you.
I can't really fault.
Because in some cases in most
cases.
Effort to me till just more than
four.
Reduction in taxes.
So.
We need to be careful.
Tax policy.
That is in many cases in
competition.
What tax policies of our
surrounding states.
Capital gains.
Increases and top of the
proposed increases in the
personal income tax rate well
qualified immunity.
These are our members.
Least consider.
Thank you New Mexico Texas.
I can share in the.
Folks with the capabilities of.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr chair
may make a comment response
please.
Presently New Mexico has an
income tax.
And what I interpreted the
member to be saying is because
we have an income tax those high
earners in his part of the state
which is just very close to
Texas oil moved well this isn't
going to change any of that here
we are not eliminating our
income tax Mr chair and
representative so I appreciate
the argument but I do not see a
trend to eliminating the income
tax so whatever behavior on you
on the east side of the state is
occurring because that we have
an income tax will continue
whether or not we repeal in
order to adjust our capital
gains tax to to as as I am
proposing thank you Mr chair
thank you that sponsor it's one
that to Representative Townsend.
Here
Representative we are last
night.
That eighty eight percent of
Americans are.
I think that Representative of
New Mexico.
Mr chair and Representative I do
not know.
I think it probably.
Chairman
what bothers me is.
Yes.
Policy.
If you make a lot more tax from
those very wealthy at the.
The tax the impact of the.
Small.
It was
What are the.
It's going to be.
The option to.
For that family.
And so I would just the action.
I don't know what Representative
is saying is actuals.
I don't think it's I don't think
it's you need to.
Mexico I think people in
Albuquerque that so businesses
and look at this and I think
that.
terrible trouble Dr save a ton
of money.
I have a residency in Amarillo
are on Representative someplace
else and I don't know that that.
I would just the.
At question meeting the chairman
of Representative we don't know
the impact.
If.
It seems like to.
I needed some of the of the
because that's where the biggest
impacts for the biggest taxes
collected.
The amount of people.
That have smaller investments
but the impact of that activity
is just as important
If if we don't know what we are.
Thank you representatives were
representative Duncan.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative in the committee
of the school we passed angel
investment we do pre stuff.
And I find it interesting that
that we increase that about for
this coming to the state goals
we.
The money and the and investors
part of the state and now we're
fixing to taxed later which.
And that's the reason that that
they would want this was to make
a great return.
Mr chair and representative
maybe my recollection is that
similar to yours did we not
temporary table that bill
because it has a negative fiscal
impact and Mr chair and
representative I believe the
reason we do that as we look at
all these packages all these
items together eventually and
determine how it with the
package is going to look like.
As well as a you are correct so
that is the boss Mr chairman
this was the thank yes ma'am and
I think it will be passed
Representative district
Of the nine states you're
talking about Mr Chairman
representative can you tell me
those states that have a flat
tax working you can you explain
to me our tax rates total tax
rate not justice total tax rate
as compared to their total taxes
Mr chair no I'm working on tax
policy that I think is to the
best advantage of New Mexico I
am certainly that I'm sure could
be research for you Mr chair if
you so desire thank you.
That's my concern as we as we
lay our all of our taxes Mr
Chairman representative
that we have a heavy heavy
burden on the people within the
state of New Mexico
I'm a small businessman.
And and I've got several friends
that are small businessmen as
well and as they work in their
companies for many many years
these companies make sixty
thousand sixty five seventy five
thousand dollars a year don't
make a lot of money and yet at
the point when they get the
opportunity to sell it to retire
they're going to be hit the
hardest at that so I guess
that's what they want to retire
on the the last twenty years of
their life on so that's my
concern is
As we look at the tax situation
I am I'm a flat tax rate that's
fair for everybody.
What we do so in my neck of the
woods Mr Chairman representative
southco is where folks the
staff.
Thank you Mr thank you
Representative up and
Representative or speaker
Martinez thank you Mr chair
thank you.
Chandler for the bill we've seen
this before I think this is a
big part of our tax discussions
now for some time.
It I apologize if you already
address this if you have just
tell me a little while but when
when was
when was the direction first.
dropped to the table for the Mr
chair and we speaker my
understanding it was around two
thousand four two thousand five
at that time governor Richards
and did a number of things
frankly that I think really
disadvantage the state including
limitation of the food tax
lopping off some top brackets
and the income tax and this was
part of that so called.
Important as well.
Yeah and and it's between the
only ones I think it was two
thousand nineteen with house
bill six that we went from I
think it was fifty to forty.
as part of that compromise
but but you're right this this
first game came about two
thousand three I think it was it
was actually up on a Valentine's
day there was a big press
conference we we were all babies
so we work here.
Related to the garden at the
time
But the
there's a big press conference
and and it was stated at the
time that the people in New
Mexico we're about to get a big
Valentine's day gift and that
gift was a series of of tax cuts
which you know from a policy
perspective obviously hides its
twenty twenty but the problem is
was that this would create jobs
bring job creators to the state
it would diversify revenues
would bring more revenues of a
fact fast forward a few years
later hundred different
administration
and it couldn't have been
further from the truth Mr chair
representative as you recall
a fact that previous the the
that that following
administration the previous one
continued on this path of
In taxes in
for the wealthiest for big
corporations with the.
I promise that it would bring
jobs
now I remember us most of us
were here when we have to cut.
The budget
we essentially had two budget
process sees that here at the
goes twenty.
Twenty seventeen.
We had a.
We had a budget process that
went on for about ten days where
we were balancing the budget.
and then there was the regular
budget here.
and thank goodness for oil and
gas industry rebounded and you
know now we are here
experiencing some historic
surpluses and so the idea now is
how do we pull back.
Some of the.
What I would consider you advice
policy.
No silver bullet that's going to
reform the tax code but
certainly is another piece of
the puzzle I think what you have
here is a bill that would do
just that now.
Why are there only nine states.
New Mexico on the that tax
capital gains less than ordinary
income.
So that means the people that
are.
Working with their hands working
hourly wages working out in the
oil fields working out of the
construction sites pay more on
their income tax then.
The earnings on my investments.
that's a that's the fundamental
flaw here with how we treat
capital gains now I it's in
Oklahoma.
gives.
Especially capital gains rate on
investments for in state
businesses right that's
something to consider I think it
was upset Harper couple years
ago a bill that I had with you
raise the issue what happens to
the guy who owns a mechanic
shop.
You know sells it to is the
bills or whatever daughter.
That's fair that's that's a fair
point thirty years of investment
in your business you're selling
it okay what what is the
appropriate number that's a
policy discussion for us.
but I'm not so inclined to give.
Forty percent right.
To somebody who is investing
money in the stock market and
moving it around and this is is
that they might be partners in
in some other country.
Right
the way I live here.
But the jobs are being created
here.
So.
I think in a way madam Mr
speaker Mr Mr chair.
Leader.
Well I called the course.
I think I think the question
here front of us is how do we.
The status screen I don't think
is working I don't think there
is data to prove that that
direction.
Rob jobs from new industries to
New Mexico.
if there is I'd love to see it
up but what we do know is that
currently in New Mexico or taxi.
Ordinary
More than we are taxing what is
essentially passive income and
and I do have a problem with
that I don't think we do need to
look at that I think that this
bill gets us on a path to get
to change how we think about
that
is it very much appreciate the
building appreciate the
discussion it comes up every
year
It's a tough one but I think
it's very much part of
you know we can't talk about tax
reform.
Without talking about capital
gains we can't talk tax reform
without kind of talking about.
And talk about tax reform
without talking about food and
all these other things I mean
it's all part of.
In these limited sessions thirty
days or sixty day session it's
it's hard to take the bait but
at the apple zero percent of
harboring the chair of the bill
this thank.
Get an a for effort on that one.
But I've I've long ago
Resigned myself to the idea that
this is going to be probably
generational work we're part of.
Building that wall forward
understanding that many of us
may not even be here.
Right for the conclusion of.
The tax reform effort whatever
that might be.
so thanks for the bill thanks
for the discussion very much
needed it's been twenty years
since the state of the books
and.
I have not seen the data show
that this has been.
The silver bullet that took New
Mexico from last on the list of
first on the list.
Well in fact places like
Oklahoma.
Seem to be thriving with us and
they treat this kind of income
very differently than ours thank
you Mr chair thank you for
bringing the before.
Thank you Mr speaker well as we
have Representative great.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Chandler
I do agree that there does need
to be some reform
and and by the way tensions are
not dying I just want to make
that comment clear because you
mentioned that earlier and I
just wanted to kind of differ on
and so I just thought I'd say
that but with regard to this
particular bill
I think that you know I'm sort
of an example of a small
business in New Mexico and I'm
just a little tiny business I'm
just but when I started my
business
back in the twenty eleven
and I was very I was very
successful in investing in my
four oh one K. tradition to my
you know my retirement and I did
have to reach into my four oh
one K. to start my business
and I was taxed forty percent
every time I did that it was
tough I mean it was a tough pill
to swallow Mr chair and
Representative Chandler and you
know I think that I very much
take to heart Representative
Harper's comments because I
don't want to see Mr chair and
representative.
Chandler US sort of hurting the
businesses that are trying to
stay above board and reaching
you know reaching into those
places that they never thought
that they would have to do in
order to start a business.
And to keep that business going
and you know I don't know that I
don't know enough about this to
say that this is the right bill
or it's not I think this is
definitely.
A way for us to start the
conversation and talk about what
makes sense because we also
don't want Mr chair and
representative
people to leave our state we're
trying to encourage people to
come to New Mexico and start
their business and continue to
pay taxes
So you know one of the things
that I don't see in here is some
comparisons.
You know four or maybe taking an
example for businesses at
different categories of to see
what they pay and what this bill
would make them pay
or you know not allow them to
pay but Mr chair.
Kind of showing some
differentials against
I personally think it would be
very helpful to me.
but I have to bring that issue
up is you know for the small
businesses that are trying to
reach into their.
Savings to start a business that
we don't hurt those people or
people that have been in
business for years Mr chair and
Representative Chandler I have a
lot of family that have small
businesses they're they're not
making a lot of money but that's
their only source of income.
So I just want to raise those
issues because I think they're
important to.
Mr chair I just briefly I think
the committee and you've heard
me say I'm very happy to work
with Representative Harper on
that particular issue so
appreciate the comments and I'm
mentioning he and I were going
to put our brains together Mr
chair and have something to
suggest to the committee yeah
and what else the questions or
comments from the committee that
is the beauty of this process is
that we can temporary table this
for consideration it gives
Webber wants to work with the
sponsor than what a time to then
collaborate to come to maybe
perhaps a a better bill isn't
kind of compromise and and noted
in regards to your concern
Representative Gallegos at if
you have questions I mean feel
free to ask LFC or whoever else
because they they're they're
staff and they're they're very
capable of working with us and
for us on any questions you
might have deleted to any
questions you might have
regarding anyone bill okay so
that being said similar
questions or comments I'm sorry.
Representative fate.
Thank you Mr chair I'd like to
make a motion to temporary table
motion made their second.
Second by Representative Ortez
any opposition seeing that yeah
your bill's interpretable and
then we will move on to your
next bill house bill one forty
four increase certain child
income tax credit.
thank you Mr chair
this bill
Expands on the child income tax
credit that we enacted I think
about a year ago in our last tax
package it at the last package
was a modest proposal taking
into account are tax expenditure
capacity.
So what we know about the child
income tax credit well.
The data is been actually pretty
strong Mr chair that by
providing a tax credit to
individuals with children.
We are supporting
Low income people and allowing
them to rise up from poverty.
We know it decreases childhood
hunger
and as a result children perform
better in schools in school we
have higher graduation rates
college attendance rates and
like so this is Mr chair and
committee up a program that we
know will help lift up low
income.
Families in the state and most
particularly children and help
reduce child poverty in the
state Mr chair
as I said our proposal last year
was was somewhat modest because
of where we were in terms of our
tax expenditure package the
federal government has not re
renewed part of their child in
income tax program the one where
there was a bump up during the
COVID and this helps rectify
that Mr chair.
And lastly I would like to note
that although I don't know if we
receive the official numbers and
we're we're expecting a fairly
large and substantial tax
expenditure package close to I
think about a billion dollars so
this program is easily
affordable within the context
that I believe we're going to be
operating within when we put our
package together Mr chair thank
you ma'am Sanchez go to the
audience for those and online in
support of house bill one forty
for those in the room please
make your hat I will start my
left hand side you Sir.
Ways.
Lawyers for the.
This bill
on residential or.
Our.
The that.
Thank you is it.
This next.
Okay.
I have the Germans Committee
Munoz that makes and I'm sure
the action committee the windows
New Mexico and that we stand in
front of what we position for
progressive taxation this well
as others are pretty act I tax
system and as I said he noted
that some children whose about
our investment that
seventy students from what thank
thank you Sir anyone else in
this other yes ma'am.
Members of the committee my
sanity is.
Our statewide organization
mostly organized mixed status
immigrant families employees
workers world communities we
strongly support this bill
because we see that the
expansions in the past to really
have a lifeline to families who
often don't have access to
traditional forms of economic
leave and public benefits but
who are absolutely essential to
cater disagrees in New Mexico
like oil and gas many of our
members in southeastern New
Mexico I work for the oil and
gas industry or associate with
the with the gas industry
whether there are busts for when
there are disasters were
pandemic there in Mexico levels
fall dramatic.
Cases they really do rely on
things like tax credits to help
them during those years our
other little.
You all.
Research shows that credits like
the child tax credit will create
and do creating opportunities
for example.
Families the passage of the bill
is structured but also brings
more to work with other states
that have state level check tax
returns and it will also improve
gender and racial equity in the
tax code you know we know that
child tax credits or some of the
best policies out there for kids
and for families the more kids
and families in New Mexico
needed we are trying.
Thank you tell.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Charles good water
standing on behalf of New Mexico
voices for children action I and
I'd like to expand a little bit
on the comments that have been
mentioned about student success
being related to this it's not a
casual talking point four for
minor impact this bill you know
children from low income
households for instance have
less access to books interactive
games and so on it's a very
specific way in which property
tax their development in respect
to the ratio age appropriate
books for travel and
neighborhoods is one for three
hundred twelve middle income
neighborhoods is thirteen just
reached our
and then of course times were
low income families have to work
double jobs or more hours that
means that the children have
less time the property care of
the parents or caregivers just
have to deal with by dresses on
their own in without a lot of
good role models around as much
intercourse that was stressors
Act brain development directly
this this.
Scientific fact
the executive functions
regulation of the motion
attention that have lifelong
consequences so this bill will
not just help students.
Chief greater student success
that also for life experiences
as well so thank you very much
thank you anyone else in the
room.
It's not a live in New Mexico.
And as the opioid with us good
morning.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is that any
separated renewable management
New Mexico Center online poverty
we stand in support of this bill
because it will benefit every
child in New Mexico increasing
the child income tax credit in
making sure that it keeps up
with inflation will not only
help our families but will also
the star Kanemi is increase the
child tax credit will have many
proven benefits including
improving infant and maternal
health reducing childhood hunger
and increasing New Mexican
incomes across the state with
low income families seem the
greatest benefit for these and
for the many reasons given here
today we stand in support of H.
B. one forty four thank you
thank you next.
Judy good morning you're with
us.
Good morning thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I'm Judy mass or again
with Lutheran advocacy ministry
in New Mexico and speaking also
on behalf of the New Mexico
conference of churches and we
like to say we strongly support
house bill one forty four we
believe this child income tax
credit is a vital investment in
our community and the support to
the hard working and low wage
families in our state we are
just passed thanking thank you.
Lawrence are but good morning.
Good morning chairman and
committee members my name is a
leading Martinez and I am
community organizer for the
center I am here today in
support of H. B. one forty four
as a mom of four daughters I
have experienced firsthand the
struggle of keeping my family of
flow as a breadwinner while
navigating their education and
House acts and a community
continues to share stories of
how inflation under pandemic
continues to affect their
purchasing power with the
current wages making it hard to
cover basic survival like food
and shelter which is why we
believe that increasing the
child tax credit TTC for lower
wage essential workers is
necessary policies like CTC
invest proven to lift children
out of poverty while also
boosting our economy have a New
Mexico has taken the step to
move in a direction to make our
tax code fairer and ease the
strain on families budget
increasing CTC thank you to be
one forty four is New Mexico
investing in families and
children's will be.
Thank you Mr tennis.
Support.
You know what this.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Secora nefesh and I'm a
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico thrive and we stand in
strong support of H. B. one one
four four it's good for families
and it's good for our
communities thank you thank you
but what about that's it right
okay this move out to those in
opposition of house bill one
forty four in the room and
online anybody in the room
Beijing had there being none
online anyone.
The.
That being said discovery debate
for the committee anyone wish to
come at questions on house bill
one forty.
Looking to my right you're
looking to my left.
That.
Taking the bait.
Representative Harper Lee
representative in the first one
to talk all the time thank you.
Madam chair I I I would like to
propose an amendment to the
title.
The increased child income tax
credits for Catholics and
Mormons.
No sorry judge.
No I I've shared.
Audience.
No I just you know I have four
kids right love all of my
origins.
So so generally I'm I'm
supportive of that I just have a
couple questions for you so
madam chair so we we passed.
Was it last year or the year
before we pass this credit Mr
chair I think it was last year
but we delay the effective date
yeah that's the right answer Mr
chair yeah chairman Reggie
Harris on tax blur together.
They do.
To
yeah chair and chair I think
that's right last year and then
it's going to affect this
taxable year so next year when
people file their taxes.
Okay that.
The credit and.
So chairman and madam we're
looking at increasing it
The fact.
This this.
It is for taxable year one one
January one twenty twenty four.
It would have one year of the
current law and if this passes
the year after that this is
going to affect you yes it's so
if I may clarified let's look at
page one as for taxable years
beginning January one twenty
twenty three okay and we did
there's a ten year sunset as you
can see
on Mr chair and representative
thank you yeah thank you chair.
so so will go into effect.
This this current year's you
look at the budget next year.
So if I remember right the
current cost is about seventy
six million.
That this would increase it by
another.
Hundred two million stars
something like that so looking
at roughly on the total cost for
this credit will be about a
hundred seventy five issue
million.
Okay Mr chair and representative
I'm not sure about that because
I don't know if this hundred
thousand is cumulative or
takes into account the seventy
million already I guess it's
incremental so Mr chair and
representative of I don't know
what that means what does that
mean in addition okay thank you
yes I agree with you if so then
your original numbers correct Mr
chair so German chair thank you
yeah I think.
I think that's about right so
just a role where you know this.
It is roughly hundred seventy
five million.
And we're indexing the rebate as
well.
Representative that's correct.
Okay so so again generally I'm
supportive of the concept
I I I am just concerned we are
having a lot of indexing going
into our statutes and we don't
have a lot of revenue streams
that grow with inflation and so.
I think it's a great time with
got three point six billion
extra dollars but I think Madam
you've been here for least one
big downturn I've been here for
two.
And I just.
Mr chair representative I agree
with you but LFC has indicated
that they believe there is about
a billion dollars sustainable
tax cuts going forward that's
not a number Mr chair I created
that's a number that's been
vetted Mr chair through LFC and
is the recommendation of the
director and others Mr chair on
LFC so this falls very well
within the boundaries for which
we are speaking Mr chair.
That gentleman madam chair yeah
I completely agree with you and
I think this is an amazing your
to do some great things for our
tax code and.
At I'm hoping that we'll have a
good code
good bills that to like I said
earlier we love seventy five
percent of it and eight twenty
five percent of that depending
on where you sit there's
different parts that you love
and hate.
just make sure that we all
understand the total impact of
this and that it is indexed and
that we're just I just urge.
Caution let's let's be careful.
Mr chair in it is indexed it
also is sunset is on like some
of the other tax expenditures I
think we're gonna be hearing
that are equal to if not greater
than the fiscal impact of this
Mr chair.
That's fair that.
Thank you chairman thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative Harper
and also that joke he told
started live forever.
You and
it is that good so keep that in
mind we have next Representative
Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
chair.
All from.
LFC reporter Christian last year
on income support.
That would be available to.
For.
One minimum wage jobs schools.
Right at a hundred and four
thousand dollars.
It looks like it's going.
And it looks like this.
This legislation would.
Increase that by.
Fourteen thousand four hundred
dollars annually.
Making the total.
Revenue string of that low
income family of four.
hundred.
Eighteen thousand dollars.
Is that.
Your recollection of the report.
Mr chair and representative I
don't have the exact numbers I
Mr Chairman representative I was
very proud of the information
that was provided in terms of
how much support we are how our
tax code is recognizing the
needs of low income and working
families those families Mr chair
spend that money on line others
of us and so it is a great boon
to the economy to have
individuals who are low income
having sufficient monies that
they can start re injecting it
into the county Mr chair.
Mr chair madam chair.
Consider under eighteen thousand
dollars the low income.
Do you Mr chair no I don't but I
think what it is is what's up
first of all I did not
acknowledge that was number.
I don't know what the number is
but I do know yes that we are
supporting we are have been
injecting into our tax code
methodologies Mr chair that
allow low income people to
access funds that they will then
re inject into the economy Mr
chair and representative.
Mr chair madam chair injection
these benefits for installation.
That's in the bill Mr chair and
representative.
Mr madam chair which there are
many working for this.
The.
It would be level.
Middle class families on.
Have.
Thank you Mr thank you.
Thank you representative got
what else questions or comments
from the committee.
Representative Marty speaker
Martinez thank you Mr thank you
Representative.
Kudos to you for bringing this
forward to to chairwoman
Gallegos for starting this
conversation years ago by to go
then as well as being part of
these discussions what I what I
appreciate about this
conversation and this committee
is that what we see in front of
us never really work you don't
have right and that's part of
special having me at the group
subscribes made really good
points.
It's so understanding that we
take our time to learn what's in
front of us to to really dive
deep into the numbers figure out
what makes sense from a
budgetary perspective as well as
I possibly struck in the super
super important.
Mr chair and Representative
We first did this a year ago.
Mr chair representative speaker
correct at.
And.
As I recall.
The part of the reason.
That we were the ship this
check it goes.
Do we thank you I'm trying to
remember I think it was part of
in part a response to the
federal government's failure to
continue what had at the time
in a month we child tax credit.
That was paid monthly
I think you must have been part
of.
Federal government's COVID
package right now unlike the
prior bill.
There's actually I believe
there's actually data that
shows.
that when you put more money
into the pockets of parents they
literally reinvested back into
families kids
I don't I haven't had a target
time to dive into the analysis
here but I'm assuming that's
reflected somewhere.
I think that's something to
think about when it comes to.
Addressing.
Child poverty in the state.
In ways that I believe are
innovative and meaningful Mr
chair.
I'm not a big fan.
Of the way we've thought of the
safety net.
Generationally.
As nothing more than just a seat
to and I think Harper tells
story when he was in college it
is why we are safety net right
this be very public about that
that story.
That's what it should be.
Right so little safety net for
you to get back on your feet.
I don't know that as a country
we figured out how to do it
right.
So.
In recent years we've seen these
innovative concepts.
Up that I think have a lot of
problems that includes policies
like the working families tax
credit which this legislature.
Eight nationally on in terms of
how gender is that credit is and
how inclusivity is up up the
working people.
This child tax credit is a
continuation of that now.
Where the cut off should be
that's a so darn good to be
tapped I mean this is a bit hi
I've got two kids hi I would
give up my child tax credit so
that folks who are
low wage workers can get a
higher credit I'll be the first
one to say that.
the rebate discussion right we
all really need to repay
probably not right I think we've
taken the position that it's too
expensive and cumbersome for the
administration to run.
The eighth inning come these
rebate so the last session or
two we just giving everybody the
same rebate.
I think that's a fair discussion
to have with this child tax
credit is that those are going
to be a cut off right in
compliance to address some of
the points or meter here.
Furthermore I think that Mr
chair and and Representative up
this is another area where New
Mexico can lead the way we're
one of just a handful of states
currently with the child a
statewide child tax credit.
It is state that still reels
from poverty that's to deals
with up the impacts of
that poverty generational in
some cases.
This is a promising program it I
think it is another way for the
legislature to tell working
people that we stand with so not
withstanding the political
fights that we have later on
over.
General tax policy for the
budget or whatever else I think
this is one that we can all come
together on.
Given what it's intended to
build up and given that it's
really designed to support.
People who are working for a
living right
we're working with their hands
again in the construction tools
in the oil fields out of the
ranches and farms.
Understanding that hopefully
hopefully hopefully.
This is the beginning of the end
of how we think of the safety
net in this country right
and I'm not talking about things
like guaranteed basic income yet
you know that's I'm still not
let my brain is not quite there
yet
but there's a lot of innovation
happening in this space and I
think this is a very good way to
rethink how we do safety net and
how we invest in families so
that the safety net truly
becomes the safety net that it's
meant to be and not.
It's not a way of life at the
end of the day.
I'll stop there I know this is
going to get people that I know
the conversation will continue
but thanks for bringing the bill
forward optics again three worth
of this over the years out into
the last year who who who also
with a lot of just having it
over the last few years thank
you Mr thank you Mr speaker and
what else question.
Following up that sponsor on the
discussion points in and those
specially with this speaker
saying less that you know in
regards to where it started with
with the showing the it goes and
then also with the help of slide
show maker that up you know in
the evolution of taxation and
trying to help of children in
our state responding to
shortfalls federally in terms
the programs also responding to
if we have a tax capacity of of
a billion dollars.
How do we make sure that.
Expected in the right way we and
then the discussion point was
made in regards to a refund and
that the reason we know what's
coming this way in terms of us
being able to hear this
committee I mean is it
worthwhile to to to spend that
tax capacity of a billion
dollars of one on one time
refund for everybody or do we
begin to make these these
headways and and begin to make
discussion points and progress
into these types of initiatives
for a long term return on
investment so that being said we
will we will table this attempt
to all this at this point in
time it will return to this as
that tax package is then
developed again with the
cooperation consideration of
everybody on this committee as
we move forward so if I can have
someone make the motion please.
Is going to make that.
temporary table very well the
state.
The table by Representative but
it goes to second by
Representative for.
See no opposition your bill with
every table thank you very much
very good conversation thank you
thank you.
Representative all gone.
Thank you for your
consideration an option
appreciate you going back to
join us this morning thank you
Mr chair the more you lost my.
Down here yes and I want to be
called first did not.
Then you go to current law the
money family up to four
reckless.
Eight million.
The floor is yours Sir on house
joint resolution number five
thank you Mr chair moved to the
building on this committee have
not heard this resolution over
and over again this is about my
eight year a caring this the
resolution I will not give up on
it.
house resolution basically
are proposes an amendment of
article eight to extend the
property tax property exception
for a hundred percent disabled
veterans and their families what
would orders what the.
Just to the north shall Mr chair
members of the committee is
committed to our own very
hundred percent disabled
veterans like myself you don't
need any property taxes under
house.
But if you're fifty percent
disabled you get no disco.
No no.
Yes the double hit I'm gonna let
appreciate disabled veteran
receives a pension or disability
thirty six thousand dollars a
year.
So if you can live on thirty six
grand a year is my big question
you know but so this is the
reason that I'm bringing this
bill forward I think in all
fairness F. here Radina
increases so does your amount of
a discount on your home taxes.
So with that Mr chair I will
stand for questions thank you
Representative thank you for
your service and your co
sponsors Representative yeah the
service well we'll go now to the
audience and those online all
those in support of house joint
resolution number five please
raise your hand in the roof yeah
what yes Sir.
Mr Chairman.
Representative.
Hi speed up just half of the
assessors ability of my name's
client were.
And we we stand and support no
not so much do we stand in
opposition estimates either our
concern is that the act of these
these tax we do have concerns as
we've done surveys are also.
We do have concerns about the
administration of something new
and you know we would look for
staff.
this user as well as with the is
that would save is this gonna
come from the New Mexico
department of Veterans Services
becomes less and Veterans
Services it would be as simple
as the one hundred percent
better as the assessors ability
it takes send that information
as the certificate that actual
certificate is provided by the
department of Veterans Services
awaiting clarity on that and it
does pose an issue with our
camera systems that allow state
but that into the computer and
as always yeah we look at the is
that it says is that shifting
tax burdens.
If we watch carefully we're
getting close and in Torrance
County it is maxed out its mill
rate.
The state is doing it she can't
see it there is actually a hard
dollar did in that county and
this year is getting very close
as well so there are some
flexibility in other counties
but some counties do not have
that flexibility thank you for
your at I'm sorry Mrs are you in
support or opposition and we're
in we're new to.
To top it in the back of.
Okay.
Able to from myself and I coming
from a family that yeah my dad
is the role of their thank you.
Okay we're we're still in
support of house joint
resolution number five anyone
else in the room anyone else
online.
Sen.
Joe.
What do you what is in support
of house to mourn.
Good morning Mr chair members
the committee my name is John
Dickerson on with the veterans
military families caucus and we
strongly support this measure
thank you and thank the sponsor
for his persistence.
Thank you Joe.
Mr guy goes good morning.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee.
Representative I'll call on and
to the sponsors of this measure
I am not retired master sergeant
of the New Mexico National Guard
of thirty years thirty seven
years of service I am the
legislative chair for the
military veterans leadership
consul consul I am here to
testify on behalf of all of the
following military and veterans
service organizations.
The enlisted association of the
New Mexico National Guard.
The military officers
association of America the
association of the United States
Army the marine corps league the
navy league The New Mexico
chapter order of the Purple
Heart.
The veterans of foreign wars
disabled American veterans the
American Legion.
And the Air Force association.
The military veterans leadership
council.
Is in support of this measure by
Representative Alcon.
This measure was brought forward
last year and it was tabled we
feel that since it's a joint
house resolution it is only fair
to get it put before the public
and let them make the decision
of this measure should go
forward.
Again the military veterans
leadership council supports this
measure thank you.
Thank you.
Hey what else okay anyone out
opposition in the room.
They cannot anyone online in
opposition of this.
This resolution.
Yeah Representative Harper.
If you want to go out to this
fair awesome chairman thank.
Yes just a.
Google comments in the industry
short.
Yes I yeah.
Yes.
A short lesson on you'll control
up.
So yes we we love our veterans
one of my very best friends I
want to percent disabled that
yeah longstanding airforce you
know my my grandfather was a POW
in Germany during World War two.
so yeah
That.
It just kind of makes sense
right so that we we give up
whatever cent break to for
veterans were won or percent
disabled but if you're ninety
five percent is able to ten
percent disabled you there's
nothing right so so this makes
sense to me.
so I just want to take a moment
though and talk about what how
this change affects locals in
the state
In our first day
at the state level we really
don't get much property tax we
use most of it for the general
obligation bond the past every
couple years so
when we were away at the
property tax base what that
means is there's less bonding
capacity for.
Cation for senior centers for
libraries those kinds of things
but most of property tax goes to
the county your municipalities
and your school districts.
Now
just the ones you want to share
because I I don't even know
their state had this until my
first year here but we have
something in statute we actually
have that was the only equation
in our statute that it's yield
control.
And this is put in place I think
in the early fifties or sixties
and it's kind of brilliant it is
very easy to explain
You know property values often
will go like this.
Hello oscillate up and down and
you really would not like your
school district's budget also
oscillate up and down with
housing values property values
and so what yieldcontrolled us.
It says when property values are
going up.
It pushes the tax rate down
you're paying about the same
amount of tax.
On the other hand when property
values go down it pushes the tax
rate up you're paying about the
same amount of tax so it's
really kind of elegant cool
solution to stabilizing revenues
to these folks that rely on
property tax.
No was mentioned earlier by Act
Clyde is that sometimes if
you're maxed out on your mill
rates.
I can be a problem right
because.
If you're maxed out you can't go
up.
Right so so there are some
issues but if you look at page
three in the FIR.
You should now understand the
last column in this table.
Because what's gonna happen is.
To make sure that we're getting
about the same amount of tax
with this change.
That tax burden is actually to
shift on to everyone else.
And so if you look at your
particular County.
It's not that big of a number of
press one people understand how
this is happening what is right
so if I look at my County
Sandoval County.
To make this change their
dissipating everyone else's tax
is gonna go up by nineteen
dollars right so so that's where
this is coming from.
is is the effective yield
control.
So.
That said
That that chairman because this
does have an impact on.
The state general obligation
bond fund and it has an impact
on counties Miss Vigil this.
Even though it's a house joint
resolution I would still
recommend that we take for the
table otherwise I think we get a
lot of bills that are not built
coming to the you don't have to
temper table because restaurant
resolution
that would be my recommendation
and that we consider this as
part of the the tax package but
I I very much appreciate the
thoughtfulness and the.
And the judge slash chairman's
persistence and bringing this
forward.
Thank you Representative we got
these on on that part.
Your December it table this what
are you going to do that's going
to do anything for the better
and that are in this that's I
mean that's to temporary table.
Three zero that.
The hot it was where
we were going to what your
suggesting is we temporary table
this so we don't do anything
again we don't do anything at
all is that what your thought is
chairman and chairman of the LFC
lacked clearly because I out of
the fighting this bill for eight
years now and all the way to the
Senate floor.
One year it didn't get through
because last time and they're
telling me it's like last year
and this year that that would be
temporary table if we don't do
anything again.
So so chairman and chairman.
You and I share that common
frustration.
I have been trying for eight
years nine years to pass tax
reform measures I'm hoping one
of them gets passed this year
And the policy of this committee
is that anything with the fiscal
impact we hold this year we have
a lot of capacity
many years we had none or very
little like twenty million
dollars.
And then this committee works
together and we developed the
package.
I've.
I I very much share.
frustration I've been working on
anti turning provisions for
eight or nine years.
I am not really tabling this
saying that we're not doing
anything.
This is what we do you and
having to meet the year before
that the year before the year
before that this.
Years we also it would dominate
okay I'm sorry Mr chair that's a
simple last year yep that that
that that the stop the the that
back and forth for.
I appreciate I'm sorry Mr
chairman and a member of this
committee for taking the
question Division of immediate
to that question but but for you
to play any of thank you but to
the point of that you're asking
your frustration I understand
where you're at and and.
Related to the point that
Representative Harper mentioned
is that the practice of this
committee is to look at the
fiscal impact of what might have
now into the future is one that
I think everybody in this
committee takes.
Seriously we have to that and
that's our obligation to this
committee and then to obviously
the the larger body of the house
and to the Senate and then to
the taxpayers of New Mexico and
so to that point it's not a
matter of that we don't.
They don't respect what we
coming from our understand we
coming from appreciate that the
people it may affect but is the
fact that we have to take this
into consideration and treat
every single built the same way
and that's been my commitment to
this committee and to the
process and so with that being
said it's not that we don't
appreciate it and that that's
where it's at but as a matter of
how the process works and so
when we come to a point later on
in this session where we begin
to create that tax package that
will bring back of every single
bill that we talked about here
collectively talk about where
they may fade away meet the may
not fit in the packages of that
being said I hope that better.
Helps you to understand where
we're at and the process that we
will do so that you don't feel
like you're being.
Believe it or anyway
disrespected in your proposals.
The chairman and and I apologize
for not even for disrespecting
the chair I I do she was the
other one of the ones who rules
with an iron hand and I and then
I can do a committee in this way
I can and I do apologize.
That that Mr chair I I am
frustrated because this is a
this is a resolution we we we
can do this is that we take it
to the voters I mean there's no
way.
We can do this without the
voters the state of New Mexico
agree to do that one of the
owners agreed to this then it
goes back to us and then we
decide how we're going to go
forward with it.
That's where the frustration
comes included get stable here
because.
It I can't get it to the voters
is you're not going to let me
get it to the voters.
Understood completely noted
The cat we got these please.
Representative dot com.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative I I may not be
seeing it in here the FIR but.
You had any discussed the
association counties counties
are the treasures affiliate and
and if so can you tell us
committee with the.
The
gentleman representative Duncan
throughout the years that I've
taken this they have taken a
neutral stand on this none of
the assessors or the pressures
have.
posted they know that it's going
to be some work for them but
they do not oppose.
And this year to be honest with
you I haven't heard from them
but the like I said this is my
eighth year.
thank you Mr chair question is I
mentioned a couple of counties
are getting one that's there and
to the second one is just really
close what we gonna do to
protect those counties.
Mr chairman and Representative
Duncan's like I said when we
come back after we get the
voters say yes my hope that
we're going to have to put
together legislation that we can
figure out how we would of
picked and how we're going to go
forward with the process this is
the only allow you need to take
this allowing us
we are allowing this to take
this forward to the voters of
the state of New Mexico to give
us permission to do it and then
we'll come back and then we'll
work on how we're going to solve
the issue we should and
everybody else this problem with
anybody else thank you Mr
chairman Representative and
that's my concern I would prefer
to have that answer.
Before we get to that point.
So thank you Mr Representative
Duckett Representative Chandler.
Thank you Mr chair I just a
couple points.
For the maybe relatively new
members who have participated
and rest up we hear a lot about
three legged stool and where we
fall into the whole tax system
across the country it's cetera
and you know just for everyone's
information our property taxes
Mr chair are the lowest if not
the second lowest in the whole
whole country all countries so
in terms of tax burden property
taxes are the least effective
way Mr chair I would suggest to
you in terms of helping low
income people low income
veterans low income moms and
working moms low income families
and the the actual way to help
all those folks is to look at a
progressive tax system and some
of these other programs that we
have on our our plate just
talking right now Mr chair and
I'm happy to talk more with the
sponsor about that but we are
out there helping low income
people we have for the last
several sessions and that came
up in our conversation today Mr
chair some might suggest or
helping them too much but I
would suggest you perhaps we are
not in and so that I'll leave it
but we do have a very low
property tax in the state very
very well very well thank you to
Representative Representative
bagels thank you Mr chair and
thank you
Mr chair for bringing this and
for for your results for being
such as a champion for for
veterans and thank you for your
service
So I know that.
I just want to bring up a couple
points for discussion you know
you talk about the hundred
percent and then nothing I think
that that needs to continue to
be a discussion because
We can never do it we can never
get on the ballot this would
that would be something that I
think people would want to know
about and so I would I would
encourage you to do that I also
see that
It where there's there's
conversations about.
They're being maybe a greater
amount of benefit.
It budget was shifted to
veterans that rented as well
because it the population seems
to be higher.
Excuse me of a better is who are
not homeowners have you have you
thought about that at all.
The Mr chair and the
Representative Gallegos are just
being on my mind a lot there's a
lot of veterans who they read
and they're not getting a break
and that I I just can't find a
way to extend to that that we
are I'm just working on what I
can but she that my concern is
we have so many homeless
veterans and and just to get
them into housing seems to be
at a point of contention for me
I mean I I feel like that's
where we need to start as well
so I would encourage you to it
to continue
looking at that and pushing
pushing that envelope I also
notice so could you tell me how
would those would benefit what
does for veterans would benefit
from this tax credit.
Well Mr Chairman representative
that goes up and basically even
gonna break on your on your own
taxes you know just give you an
example I I live in a mobile
home okay my taxes into the look
at me are like would be a little
over four hundred Bucks the by
zero out that saves me four
hundred dollars a year.
I mean the other member people
have a nice year olds they but
they did they get a big break
and I want.
But
the thing is that if you look at
that one of the things that you
look at when you're looking at
what people are looking at
coming to New Mexico the first
thing they look at is our tax
base if you got a disabled
veteran it's getting disability
and they want to move somewhere
else they can also think New
Mexico would be the place to go
because we want to help.
Usually we buy a whole.
Okay so that's the thing that
you can think of also how this
will attract people to New
Mexico.
That that's might think you and
I'd love to have a lot more
veterans in New Mexico we do
honestly I think we are probably
one of the highest rated one of
the states with the highest
veteran population in the
nation.
Thank you thank you Mr chair if
you have a also questioned
constantly Committee.
They're being done
Mr chairman I I recognize your
frustration I understand where
you're coming from there are
several other initiatives that
I've worked on that need to be
tabled whether for one reason
other centers that we here at
but I will make this commitment
to use that if we can better
understand it maybe better
worked some of the concerns that
were identified from this
committee I will commit to doing
rested during the interim that I
can work with you one on one or
with whatever else you might
want to bring on I you know
other solutions or other ways
for so that you don't come here
and and.
But the rapid investigation on
this committee.
I get it then and I I I'm not
I'm not saying that to do to
make a much more frustrated but
the point is that I expect
enough to say I want to work
with you to a point where we can
get to where we can say okay we
understand that maybe.
We can work something else
that's different so that being
said is there a is there a
motion a temporary table from
the committee.
Well there's like a second by
Representative Harper any
opposition that motion saying
that the.
I thank you hi I am both.
Okay so then we'll call the roll
that that's there's been a
motion and a second this call
the roll.
Representative Garratt go no.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Duncan yes.
Representative guy it goes yes.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative speaker Martinez.
Representative Ortez.
Representative Scott.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Townsend.
Vice chair Dennis.
Chair limited yes.
Temporary table we will continue
on with house joint resolution
number six.
Thank you Mr chair I.
I guess in the state but
this bill is how good mission
mission six others windows
proposed a veterans property tax
exemption for on a honorably
discharged veterans of the armed
forces and their with orders to
take it from four thousand to
ten thousand dollars you read
that four thousand dollar a
extension for property for that
this property tax since two
thousand four hundred meters.
And the.
What it was what it was but it
at four thousand dollars it was.
Probably that is about a hundred
twenty thousand dollars today's
world that four thousand dollar
extension this and want to try
to figure out what is also the
to the office I said to the cost
of the the.
So with that Mr chair I will
stand for questions thank you
Representative let's go to the
audience and online all those in
favor of house joint resolution
number six please raise your
head yes Sir.
Like what yes billion
we're gonna be neutral on this
one as well for the same reason
stated earlier but there's the
one that actually change the two
thousand three.
So I have to agree with the
sponsors are through this has.
Coming into.
That amounted to the three it
changed from two thousand to
four thousand so once again well
there's a caution for that there
is a recognized you know we
recognized that that has not
changed for twenty years so and
as all the other kids before on
our bill we have the C. one.
Thank you for your thank you and
what else support in the room
anyone alive.
Mr guy eagles your with this.
Mr chair Madam.
Madam vice chair representatives
committee members I am a retired
first sergeant of the New Mexico
National Guard thirty seven
years I am the chairperson for
the military veterans C. ship
Council I've testified on behalf
of the following military
veterans service organization.
The illicit association of the
New Mexico National Guard.
Terry officers association of
America.
The association of the United
States Army the marine corps
league the navy league The New
Mexico chapter order of the
Purple Heart.
The VFW the TV the American
Legion.
The Air Force association.
The military veterans leadership
council supports joint house
resolution six and we are
satisfied with the language and
we appreciate this opportunity
to testify before the committee
thank you thank you Mr guy goes
next.
Joe good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Joan
Dickerson I am with the veterans
and military families caucus and
we fully support this measure we
appreciate the sponsor for
including the indexed to
inflation so that we don't have
to go back to the voters every
time all values change that does
it would be indexed to inflation
of we fully support this measure
and we think the sponsor for his
persistence thank you very much
thank you Joe anyone in
opposition is that all for
support.
John.
Okay very good it would
opposition of of house joint
resolution number six in the
room anyone online saying that
discussion by committee members
questions comments from anyone
of the committee.
What yes Representative
separate.
Mr chair I just want to speak
and in favor of our veterans and
I know I don't know if this is
the correct bill or not but I
know representative I spoke had
conversations with
Representative Alcon and Mr
chair representative alkaline
you know I truly believe that
our children and our veterans
are the people that we need to
be trying to help especially in
this economy
this bill
takes it to the voters and I
know it's been a long time on on
in the I guess in the I don't
know if this committee or
exactly what committees but it's
been coming here a long time I
think at some point in time we
seriously need to take a look at
Mr chair and and Representative
Alcon serious we need to take a
look at how we affect our
veterans and
so I just and I also want to
mention to you that hi
I'm a co sponsor of this bill Mr
chair I also have a substitute
bill coming to I'm not sure if
it's coming to this committee
but later on so just want to
stand up for our veterans thank
you Mr chairman Representative
Alcon.
Thank you representative
pros pass committees thank you
Mr chair Representative Alcon
You know I I I.
probably in a different place
than.
Others on this.
Solutions and I don't want to
speak about the other one
because we're on this one now
but I feel it's going the same
way these are joint resolutions
these are questions for the
voters to decide
I feel for the the assessors and
and local governments and some
of the points that were made up.
We need to be careful not to.
Continue the practice of Gooding
tax codes for different things.
But.
You know I.
This is the.
Population that.
I think deserves.
US.
Taking a very very hard to look.
Supported.
All of us want to do this I know
all because we've all school
came in support and understand
the sacrifices that these folks
week for.
Quite frankly for the existence
of our country.
What makes me comfortable.
Regardless of the LFC tax policy
shakes out is that these are
questions for the people.
Up and I've been on the other
end of the creation when this
legislature for ten years said
no we shouldn't send your
question to the voters when it
came to the land grant permanent
fund.
The voters decide that this is a
wise use of their tax dollars
whether it's state or local
that's the will of the people
and if they decide that it's not
that it's not up but we got is
what happens you today I I you
know these are these are
constitutional amendment
proposals at the end of the day.
and we're not voting to.
Create another new polar another
hole in the tax code we're
voting to move something to the
borders for the consideration
of any of the local governments
one amount to campaign telling
the orders this is a bad idea
for these reasons they've got
every right to do that
I just want to say that for the
record and I appreciate the.
The the thought.
And really the the.
Intellectual honesty of this
committee looking through the
different angles here because
it's not a black and white
issue.
According to table this
temporarily doesn't mean we're
morning gets veterans make that
very clear.
It's a tax policy committee so
we're looking at the policy
implications.
But I would submit to this
committee that.
This.
So much so.
I would submit to this committee
that by moving this along
whether it's today or tomorrow
we're not.
We're not willing Tax Policy
were moving a question to the
voters
And all that thank you Mr chair
thank you representative.
Thank you to assure that they
the the songs to that end is
discuss.
Wrap it up Representative okay
goes thank you Mr chair and I
echo the sentiments most of us
are speakers comments
you know I think what we need to
remember for this piece of
legislation is is adjusting
At the inflation and we have not
brought that back up in and so
we need to address that and and
make sure that veterans are
getting their fair share and so
that's that's important and also
this piece of legislation for
taxpayers would be minimal
that's what what are the FIR is
indicating and our noses and so
I think that that's something
also for sure just to push
forward and to have those
discussions and once again if
we're going to push I I guess I
want to at the Representative Mr
chair to to realize that what
I'm hearing from from this
committee is that this is going
to be serious conversation when
we do have and put together our
tax package I know that I will
be pushing this I suspect my
neighbor to the left will be
pushing this and and so I don't
want you to Toulouse based faith
in this committee process
because I do believe that it's
going to get have strong
considerations of thank you Mr
chair representative you also
commitments and that thank you
Mr Representative is the
veterans department in favor of
this yes Mr Chairman
representative Duncan yes very
much so the fact is that our
last the veterans check with
Terry was the one who suggested
that I start moving again.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you I get
Representative Alcon is that the
reflection of every table in
this bill does not mean in any
way shape or form that we don't
expect budget here and this
committee or or recognize the
sacrifices you made up for our
country so that being said we do
have a process to follow we will
continue to follow that in all
fairness to everybody on this
committee and in those that we
have to create that package for
the end so that being said is a
motion to temporarily table.
Representative Harper is our
second.
Second by Representative Duncan
very well I will not assume
there is a unanimous vote here
so let's go to take we'll take a
roll call.
Representative but no.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Duncan yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Harper this
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative asked speaker
Martinez sorry Representative
Ortez yes.
Representative that.
Is.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Townsend.
Vice chair katana.
Chair yes.
I get see if your bills but
there for the table thank you
for joining us this morning for
those members here today thank
you Mr I'll be back next year.
for those members as we do want
to create this package that made
no to table Representative
Harper added to those with tax
interest of of what the session
that would be my interested what
to see we can hear all those
bills I at least the end of this
month so that we're not waiting
until the last day to pass this
this tax package of that so that
being said hopefully if you have
something in mind or you have
friends that have something in
mind let's get them to us
quickly they will schedule that
viciously so that we can make
sure we hear everybody and that
also includes if you're viewing
online the governor's office I
don't intend to just put your
stuff in the packet but I expect
that you would find a sponsor
and bring it to us so we can
have a fair hearing on it as
well so that being said we are
