Check your.
Morning everybody sitting we're
going to start with the there's
been communicated and yes have
members of the committee in New
Mexico I'm here.
I will start with the consent
calendar to name our I don't
want to allow we have Senate
bill two fifty one is amended
that's not much changes we have
the committee seven percent bill
one fifty seven at G. R. T.
distribution to Hobbes Senate
bill three ninety six as amended
motorcycle registration funds
Senate bill two forty tax exempt
organization tax.
The committee.
Madam.
moves I do pass on Senate bill
two fifty one is amended
committee substitute for Senate.
One fifty seven as amended
Senate bill three ninety six as
amended and so it wasn't working
was not amended wasn't I'm sorry
seven one fifty seven yes thank
you so the one sixty percent or
fifty seven Senate bill three
ninety eight as amended in
Senate bill two three ninety
six.
Thank you to.
But a lot.
The last another set of bills to
Ford and Terrel section.
I.
Do we have any opposition to
that motion.
I seconded to keep County.
Thank.
Okay the thing up in the.
Forget
that.
Thank.
Takeovers that.
Yeah.
The nature of the members so
good morning all.
Mexico Representative
Representative yes wanted to be
included on this one so maybe
it's two seventy five and then
come back to.
We would like to start with two
back to the okay I wasn't sure
if you look at the very.
So members of the committee with
a tool I don't.
This is a half cent.
Gross receipts the tax that's
been enacted in the house for
the house area.
For thirty years.
The the the first ten years was
used to actual construction of
the hospital Intel's.
And then the following you know.
Re authorization for the next
two cycles of ten years of peas.
We're dedicated to education of
those to the entire the nasco
Questlove Thompson U. N. M.
Thomas at charter schools that
expired in December of twenty.
Well twenty twenty two.
And so no all we're asking for
we authorization and this would
be to go back to the hospital.
And without twenty five percent
of part of the gross receipts
tax that would be able to assist
you and Jim tells for the
nursing program.
And they have a starter the
nursing program inTaos it's been
a few years of extremely a very
successful especially this time
with the COVID and what has been
happening you know has been
working very well the the
funding that comes from the
gross receipts taxes strictly
for capital outlay it's not for
salaries or for budget so this
is what it would be used for on
both both parts.
And with that madam chair
members I pretty much would
stand for any questions.
I'm very.
And
on the the station fifty eight
we are.
Even my microphone.
Those with the.
And listening and participating
resume please take your hand if
you like to speak in support of
Senate Bill to all I.
As You can support expert this
Madam is a.
A little late to the the.
This is a back to the future
bills can you please introduce
yourself.
The association this is it this
is kind of a back to the future.
Losses in nineteen ninety one.
Excuse me I think.
The.
It's been in place since
nineteen ninety one
and I think it's really
important because the hospital
was built back in nineteen
ninety one with this agreement
and brought the segment and it's
about thirty years ago so the
hospitals in dire need of some
upgrading your equipment and I
think the beauty of this is it
is a gross receipts tax
agreement that are subject to a
referendum and the good part
about it is gross receipts
Intel's is a lot of it is
exported because they have such
high tourism so we stand in
strong support of this I think
the part that since some
needed revenues to the nursing
programs also very good thank.
Anyone else I would like to
speak in support of Senate.
Going to zero.
First please introduce yourself.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee
appreciate the opportunity to
testify before you today I'm
vice president of public affairs
for tusky valley also a member
of the local hospital board I've
served on that board for over
fifteen years and as was
testified earlier in the
hospital.
By central services for the
community but it's in dire
financial straits
we have about thirty seven
million dollars worth capital
needs including buildings a new
medical equipment and as you
might suspect that electronic
medical records which were
behind on in is really critical
to our ability to build and to
share their medical information
so this tax would be a big help
to the hospital and as was
mentioned earlier it is a local
referendum so I think there's an
opportunity for the community to
vote yes or no on whether they
want to impose this tax on the
visitors and members of our
community again thank you very
much for allowing me to speak
this morning I appreciate your
consideration.
Thank you.
Anyone else.
Can you repeat that let your
****.
An RSS Medicean next.
Soon please raise your hands.
Thank you go back to the
sponsors would like to make any
additional comments before we go
to.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee our hospital is
the life of our community we
need major improvements in this
is the way we can do it it's
this is fully supported by the
hospital but members of the
community town and county.
We need to move forward thank
you madam.
Thank you going to committee.
A no debate we have a motion.
We have any opposition to the
motion.
You have a two passed and just
be to I.
I will go now to the committee
substitute FOR SB two seventy
five.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair on the
wall.
With
Senate bill two seventy five
the motor vehicle registration
the.
Hello.
I do have our cabinet.
Risks are not.
The the to assist you with time
wise you know just to be a
about a way to you know our
expert witness.
Senator thank you madam chair
members the committee
thing Senator Gonzales for for
really initiating this piece of
legislation which kind of
prepares a slow increase in the
cost registry registering
vehicles in the state of New
Mexico
what we essentially have
proposed in the original bill
was a twenty five percent
increase on the cost to register
a vehicle.
recurrently in the state of New
Mexico that cost is contingent
on a couple of things the first
is the equal weight and the
second is whether or not the
vehicle is five years or older.
And so by applying that percent
increase across we would
essentially generating crease
revenue to the state road fund
which would support you know the
on going maintenance
constructions of roads we felt
like the twenty five percent
increase was reasonable was
responsible but also helping us
get to a place where the cost
escalations associated with will
construction has been twice that
much up anymore so what occurred
during the amendment process and
Senate finance committee was a
split up that twenty five
percent increase over a few
years so that the first what
occurred in July of twenty three
at twelve and a half percent and
the second would occur in July
of twenty five twelve and a half
percent.
That would yield about nine
million dollars a year for those
increases what was also added in
the Senate finance committee
amendment was a surcharge on for
registering vehicles are either
fully electric or hybrid so what
we essentially did at the end of
the bill was at an additional
section that added a surcharge
on top of the registration fees
for fully electric in the amount
of one hundred twenty dollars
and for a hybrid vehicle the
amount of sixty dollars and so
this is devilish is a surcharge
fee that I would essentially
help replace some of the fuel
tax lost with hybrid or electric
vehicles because as you know
that fuel taxes one of the
majority of tax revenues for the
department in supporting trade
state transportation
infrastructure needs so that's
is not International Center for
any question.
Check.
I have an amendment the proposed
amendment.
Sanchez I like to discuss this
ammendment before we go to.
So the public can also we need
to madam.
Okay.
Madam chair would you like to
read that the December.
We have to have.
She.
Check.
It is that number is two two six
two four seven point five.
We have the.
The state seated chair yes.
Representative you please
discuss your amendment thank you
madam chair and sponsor of what
this ammendment does is it
reduces the cost for the easy
and like in high hybrid two more
what was in that Senate bill
twenty two and hospital for
twelve.
Under twenty dollars is is what
many consider punitive off for a
registration fee for
for an electric vehicle that
reduces that easy registration
fee to eighty dollars and the
plug in hybrid to forty dollars
and their losses there's lots of
research that shows that those
numbers could be even lower but
this these numbers were were
agreed upon in lots of
negotiations as we are working
through HB four four twelve and
SB twenty two.
Funds raised funds would you
consider this to be a friendly
amendment madam chair yes and we
have had a good discussion so
okay what we take action that we
are going to go to public.
Back to the committee to
discuss.
will first go to those that
would like to speak in support
Hey we've got lots of
communications over email
otherwise would you keep your
comments concise
Committee.
I would like to support.
That are less please either line
or start to raise your hands on.
Madam chair members of the
committee sponsors and
representatives I would like to
stand in support of the proposed
amendment we work closely with
the Senate and house sponsors of
SB twenty two and H. B. for
twelve to identify the eighty
dollar annual fee for electric
vehicles Consumer Reports flags
fifty four dollars or more as
close to punitive for electric
vehicle fees you'll have seen a
memo that shows math that
justifies the eighty dollars fee
as a fairly negotiated fee and
we ask for your support thank
you.
Madam chair members the
committee David economy on the
lobby ritual this for the in our
DC and we want to thank
Representative Ortez for
bringing this ammendment we want
to thank Senator Gonzalez and
secretary Schardin four taking
it as a friendly amendment we do
believe that it addresses the
concerns of the department and
others that EV's pay their fair
share all of up essentially the
fuel tax that helps of support
our roads throughout the state
the eighty dollars as the
previous speakers that more than
covers the estimated fifty four
dollars that the rest of
everyone that everyone else pays
so this doesn't cover all just
some of the burden it covers at
all the burden plus a little bit
more so it just shows that you
the owners are paying their fair
share thank you.
Madam chair representative thank
you.
Representative Ortez for this
proposal we agree with this my
name is on the border and with
prosperity works and I I
represent low income people all
over the state one of the things
that we have been doing is
intervening before the PRC on
behalf of low income people with
electric vehicles and one of the
ways that we can support this is
looking at the total cost of
ownership which is low
comparatively that to gas
powered cars this would be a
punitive measure if we
maintained what was proposed so
we appreciate the amendment
thank you Representative Ortez.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee Charles good
markers be in behalf of the NNPC
action fund want to thank the
sponsor at the main bill as well
as a sponsor the amendment both
are important components to pass
at I would just quickly noticed
that transportation sectors are
not noted this is a surcharge
they were talking about in the
amendment so it's on top of the
registration fee so it's an
additional fee for the the
applicant's thank you thank you
we appreciate it just also maybe
a.
Alright appreciate basically we
have a long agenda and helping
us along this morning oversee.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Daniel Pritchard and I live in
Taos I'm on the executive board
of renewable talus representing
two hundred individuals families
and businesses promoting
renewable energy and economic
development in northern New
Mexico I stand in support of the
proposed amendment in accordance
with previously agreed upon
surcharges.
This this really goes a long way
towards
helping our low income community
who would benefit most from
electrifying transportation.
Please make this ammendment.
thank you very much.
Any help.
Hello.
Thank you madam chairman
committee my name estimates how
I requirement energy advocate
with conservation voters Mexico
we also want to thank
Representative okay
Representative Ortez for
bringing the amendment forward
it would make the bill something
that we were able to be
supportive and the after that a
document services you heard that
right thank you very much.
Tammy.
I.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Tammy people
corner southwest energy
efficiency project and for all
the reasons you've heard before
we support this amendment and
with this amendment we support
the bill thank you.
Excellent going to those rural
is there anyone in opposition to
Senate bill two seventy five.
resume anyone like to speak in
opposition to two seventy five
service Gerald.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee and Sarah
fitzgerald senior vice president
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce we are in a
opposition to the increases up
proposed here we believe in
making prudent investments in
our state's infrastructure but
this is a you are considering
much more substantial and
impactful appropriations and
revenue streams to fund road
improvements the registration
fee increase here is at odds
with that reality the increasing
fees even a delayed one proposed
here is burdensome to our
state's drivers just because New
Mexico's registration fees are
lower than the national average
doesn't mean we should be in a
hurry to increase them we are
committed to table this bill
thank you.
Anyone else.
Okay we're going to go
on the amendment to.
Representative got the.
Sure
that would be Representative.
Sure sure.
At all.
The average.
Which.
For oil change.
Researchers have.
The rules.
Representative Scott this is an
additional surcharge so the
vehicles are already electric
vehicles are already paying
registration fees which I
believe would cover the
remainder of that.
Taxes in addition to the
registration.
So the surcharge is attempting
to.
The revenue lost from gasoline
taxes that would not seem to be
a.
Representative as I understand
the the
This additional surcharge you
know it just it goes to the road
fund it it supports to support
the road fund
Yes okay Madam chair
representative has to work as we
talked to so if we're trying to
make an apples to apples
comparison yes in taxes.
Being.
The select which would take
those two.
A hundred forty to a hundred and
sixty dollars a year as the
surcharge that will provide sure
equity based on what the folks
driving gasoline powered
vehicles.
The.
So it would seem madam chair.
Representative I'm pretty twenty
dollars sure charge would be a
much more accurate
representation of what we're.
Yes taxes that's all thank.
I think madam chair
Thank you for the yeah on the on
the amendment thank you average
or yes so I I want to first say
I'm I'm glad we're finally doing
this we've talked about doing
this for several years it's
actually been several bills and
just never quite got across the
finish line but the concept is.
You know as we move more towards
electric vehicles.
so gasoline tax which is a great
tax credit so it's a user fee
beginning loss of it right
and the reason why the gasoline
tax to great taxes user fees
because.
you only pay the tax if you're
using the roads.
Right you don't pay gasoline tax
reduction roads.
And depending on the weight of
your vehicle you will pay more
in tax right so if you have a
light weight vehicle you have
more miles per gallon you'll pay
less that tax if you have a have
your vehicle you're generally
not as efficient miles per
gallon and you'll be paying more
that taxes you're buying more
fuel so it's a it's a great tax.
And we've thought about over
these years how do we replace
that we talked about.
Doing that in some states have
adopted a message work the
report how many miles they've
driven an insect Tax base how
many miles you driven
at this present cons to that
right I mean yes it actually
reflects what's going on but
that's a big brother saying
right and then
So that's one approach and
others to kind of just do a flat
fee like we're doing here I
actually think this private best
approach I'm so I'm glad that
we're doing it.
And so just to be clear
madam chair and roads of Ortez
what was discussed earlier
appropriations Scott is this
correct.
everyone pays a registration
fee.
And and that is really kind of.
At a separate issue right we
want to increase registration
fees what we're doing here
that's fine.
but the the second issue here
it's kind of a different issue
is how much electric vehicles
rate to make up for that loss of
gasoline tax.
And then speaker and gentle lady
when I do the simple mass right
the average mileage for New
Mexico drivers is nineteen
hundred more nineteen thousand
miles a year.
And then.
This this next part is kind of
like the question right in
addition ation right so we've
got nineteen thousand what you
divide that by how many miles
per gallon.
Right and you can argue that
electric vehicles get way better
miles per gallon stand regular
cars right so that would be a
big number.
But then you can also argue that
in general they are happier.
Then your your light weight
vehicles because batteries are
free or have the right and so
what I've viewed as fair is
well what's to roughly thirty
miles per gallon.
And and we can argue about that
is that fair or not fair right
we divide thirty nineteen
thousand by thirty.
You get to a six hundred thirty
three that's how many.
Gallons they would have bought
the most when I by nineteen
cents that's our current New
Mexico gas tax that's exactly a
hundred twenty Bucks.
So that's I believe that's why
the Senate finance committee
order that was a good number.
So I don't think it's punitive
just to be at this right I I
don't think I actually don't
think fifty three dollars is is
really close.
What I've kind of looked at what
is the range of that certi you
know could be twenty five to go
up to forty five you know eighty
to a hundred twenty is kind of
the right number I really sick
for twenty is the right number
so I let your thoughts on that
and madam chair Representative
Harper so what I understand is
that the average miles trouble
by New Mexicans not nineteen
thousand it's more like fifteen
thousand that is what the
national household travel survey
shows the actually the show of
the and even number a lower
number of that which is about
ten thousand dollars so I think
our numbers are are a little bit
skewed here
So first off I think that's.
It is if you're you're looking
at ninety thousand miles receipt
it's really even lower than that
so we're if we're if we see
fifty thousand dollars it's it's
much it's fifteen thousand miles
it's much less so.
We also have to think about to.
If they are more efficient
vehicles that are being driven
right now and and that is what
some of the registration
surcharge fees are are also
based on
I think we have our numbers.
That wrong.
Come to agreement on that in
terms of the number of miles yes
chair representative or yes I
appreciate use descend that I
just did a quick Google search
and it's at nineteen thousand
for New Mexico miles here in
there is always a chair right
that my kids laugh my time I'm
older than Google.
The.
better chair
But anyway I'll just.
The state even if we used
fifteen thousand miles I just
the master should be ninety five
dollars so I I do think one
eighty is probably a little
while.
At.
This is on this point or in the
middle at the reuse of Florida
okay I'm able okay have that
thank you madam chair and
senator
I you know I'm just kind of
somewhere in the middle on this
I I get the point that we are
the more electric vehicles we
have on the road we've got to
start making up for that funding
source that comes from tax I I
get that
but I'm also not sure that this
is a problem right now we we've
got one of roughly four thousand
technical restrictions right now
in the state of New Mexico which
is.
Not that many in or percentage
that in support of the
restrictions but.
relatively low number of and I
think that.
While we might get to the point
where we do have to increase
these registration costs because
we've got to capture money to
improve and maintain roads.
I don't know that we've got to
do it all in one.
Full.
This
If we are trying to get if we
are trying to send device.
Folks to think differently when
they make their purchases
of vehicles
you know in this league still a
choice because Dr aghast because
something is very if you want to
or you can get yourself an
electric car.
And as the policies that we've
set in this legislature.
It's been a policy this list of
the Legislature to incentivize
it's been a positive out it's a
national policy for that matter.
I support your amendment because
thinking.
Creates this step.
Perhaps we'll be here in a
couple years talking about
increasing those fees because.
The incentives are working and
more people are purchasing
and that could be because guided
me to.
I don't think we've got a right
now this whole parties for your
amendment that think it's a good
idea to keep those cost
affordable particularly for
working people who want to have
we've heard over and over again.
You know that.
We've got to make these.
Electric vehicle incentives work
for double for working people
apple forty three want to
retreat to forget yes.
But I do want to give incentives
to working families to by
election result.
You know a Nissan leaf right
something affordable the two
should participate.
In this.
You know in this for local
transportation so I I appreciate
the the amendment I'm glad that
the sponsor finds a friendly I
think that's really helpful and
I will be supporting thank you
mentioned.
anybody else on the committee
that time.
Yes
I'm with the document.
Is.
Representative right yes.
Representative Castellano.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Duncan.
Representative die and go.
Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez.
State.
Yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Serrato yes.
Representative Townsend.
Thanks to.
Share linkedin.
We have a six yes's fine.
Bill.
Eddie let's go that fund to
develop.
Madam chair members will stand
for questions.
So
Do we have any comments from the
committee regarding.
Representative.
Representative
I question is.
dollars.
Yes.
At.
Here is that.
That we have.
I.
But.
That.
Raul.
We have.
Well Dr.
The.
Of.
Representative it's a great
question and you can add to the
list of reasons right the
revenues that we're dealing with
right now the legislature why
some of those can come and I
think what the what we're aiming
to do really is what do we need
to do to leverage the revenues
the state has now to address
major infrastructure priorities
across the state which we're
doing and you all are generously
supporting tunes of hundreds of
millions of dollars but we also
know that that's not always
going to be the case and so we
look at where are four major
revenue sources are and how we
can create responsible mechanism
for increasing them not just
because but doing so responsibly
to address the inflated cost of
doing business in in this
industry and so we can look at
other options including you know
raising that seventeen cents to
something higher rate so that
it's based on usage as opposed
to just registration so our our
logic behind this is how do we
do this responsibly going back
to the speaker's comments as we
don't want any of this to be a
bait and switch right especially
protected vehicles you come by
and then all of a sudden you get
hit with a hundred forty dollar
registration surcharge so we're
anticipating that there's going
to need to be new fees for you
the vehicles we know that the
needs of addressing
infrastructure gaps in roads is
costing more than it ever has
it will continue to rise as we
start to implement federal
provisions like by America right
so Representative we're we're
we're trying to keep up with the
cost going back twenty years I
believe it is that we have an
increase these we we know it's
it's got to be done responsibly.
Thank.
So.
Rural
America to thrive.
Seventy five.
Just for you.
Product out.
In order to plans.
That we.
So the answer.
Senator.
Are the taxes the same for the
job as we are for this one.
Madam chair representative the
the the national litmus test if
you will will be what is the way
to right and so that it'll be
the same debate the subcommittee
on the way and that the vehicle
is older than there's a reduced
cost five years old.
The tax is based on the number
of gallons that they put into
the vehicle so if you have a
smaller vehicle or a vehicle
with better gas mileage and then
you're going to pay less because
usage we can use fewer gallons.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Representative Townsend.
You madam chair.
The.
Yes.
I realize.
The cost of.
Representative.
Building anything of.
Point that.
Almost all.
Okay.
Hi.
Part of the deal he went
it was yeah.
Representative an issue that
there.
On
the use of.
To.
All right.
We.
At the end of that gap issue
the committee instituted right
there.
Chair.
But I don't I believe that we
are going to have your order
looking at.
Office.
At the White with gas.
Of what made the the now.
on on those.
I definitely.
And the.
I was looking for.
That out of seven right.
And you think about.
What we.
Let me be able
The products that are items that
I that.
Hi
there we are the HSD.
incentivizes at track people
that is really cheap for Michael
L..
That they do have.
Yes we are to be able to call
will eventually there will
Mexico.
Your.
For
the full.
About what you really.
Of.
What we do
Through the process.
Hi.
And.
Representative Allison knows
because he's worked with me in
the past
And you know I having served yes
on the Mr Clarke transportation
board.
I know how important it is to
Yeah I have the funding to build
the roads that we need enough to
New Mexico and chair and
representative Gonzales
And also Representative Ortez.
and I know how important it is
to get that funding to make sure
that those roads are safe.
We have some roads in
Albuquerque Unser Boulevard and
Paseo which are not safe.
and we are actually trying to
build those roads because of
safety issues
finding the funding.
And and understanding that now
that we're transitioning from
you know oil and gas two more
electric I really think that
this is a time of transition
madam chair and and
representatives
and this type this transition is
going to take time it's not
something what we're gonna do
overnight.
and I I see it is.
All probably a long span before.
New Mexicans think are thinking
in terms madam chair and
representatives of.
Kind of New Mexico the wild
west.
And being able to drive for
miles and miles
and transitioning into those
electric vehicles
And I am at the bank with you
know the comments that were made
over on.
Some of the representatives from
down south.
But the fact is that our
population is increasing and we
need to have our state and
alternative forms of
vehicles and not just for cars
Mr chairman representatives but
for hopefully in time electric
buses and other types of
transportation I think that
we're having to take incremental
steps and in time Madam chair
representative we're gonna also
have to be thinking about
How do we provide incentives for
for these families that can't
afford an electric vehicle right
off the bat
just I see this is one of the
steps moving forward to that
direction but I think that in
time we're going to need to
really sit down and talk about
Madam chair representative is
how do we.
Incentivize people to to move in
this direction.
I still drive in oil and gas car
I haven't.
Made that transition yet in my
mind and I'm on this committee
and I've heard a lot of stuff
this year
about and and sitting on Mr
caught and even some of those
people who are policy makers not
in their minds making those
transitions so how do we
incentivize people to do this I
think that we need to look at
this really really seriously in
the next few years and and
figure out how do we meet the
needs of people that are
struggling.
And start making those
transitions
I think this is probably the
first step.
And I think the speaker said
earlier
We need to start thinking about
how we incentivize those and and
and if we take this step today
which I think are you know some
of us are convinced
we also need to think about how
do we.
You know meet those gaps because
building roads is very
expensive.
And
you know maybe we supplement
some of our our costs with some
things that the federal
government Lofgren the future
and maybe even some of our local
taxes
we need to start talking about
that I know when I was in city
council madam chair and
representatives we weren't
talking about electric cars
so these are some things that we
as policy makers really need to
sit down and maybe in the in
terms of representatives we can
sit down and talk about some of
those things and how we get.
Local governments involved.
And start looking at really the
numbers adding up.
So thank you madam chair
appreciate the time and thank
you Representative so I will be
supporting this.
Thank you representative
Representative Ortez thank you
madam chair thank you senator
for to bring this forward I want
to.
I want to be clear in a couple
of things I believe that you
should pay their fair share and
at a hundred and twenty they
would be paying way more than
their fair share at eighty they
are still paying way more than
their fair share compared to an
efficient gasoline vehicles
that's where the number.
Members aren't lying at least on
my shift.
Madam chair and representatives
so I think this we have an
opportunity here to have to
continue to the road fund to put
PED's in a position where
they're paying more than
efficient gasoline vehicles to
contribute to this route Fund
and at the same time we're not
putting a punitive cost on easy
owners with our tax credit we
have the opportunity to bring
more low income Evey owners on
into the market and paying their
fair share as well and to the
speakers point madam chair I
believe that there will be a
twenty five thousand dollar
Tesla apparently I don't know
what it looks like or how it's
gonna run but that is that this
Mr anyone must as it's going to
be on the market at some point
so you know the these will go
the cost of the TV's will reduce
all of the manufacturers are
going in that direction and this
is the way we can start
capturing some of those costs
and putting it.
And thank you madam chair.
Right
less speakers.
Desire the committee chair may
make a do pass on the.
Senate Bill.
Three ninety six as amended I'm
sorry to have that we have to
your two seven.
Senate bills to certify.
Are already got a motion to have
the second.
Somebody's got it does.
Please.
Representative for New Mexico
yes.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Duncan.
Representative di it goes.
Representative hybrid.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Up to the bar for back to.
Representative.
Contest.
Representative Duncan.
Yes.
Speaker mightiness yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Serrato yes.
Representative Townsend.
Chair katana.
Chair of them to yes
we can have Representative
properties I can never.
Representative Harper.
I have nine yes this and agree
to.
Thank you thank you that having
the gap back to archer thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you senator for.
The.
Are just.
So late but it's going out to
the committee substitute for
Senate bill three oh nine.
Senator Rodriguez.
Just.
This topic.
That.
We're right in the center.
Good morning.
Chairman morning from.
Finance committee to another tax
thank you for hearing test
today.
I have Kelly here from the LFC
for help us answer any technical
questions I may not be able to
answer Mr
chairman members of the
committee this is our annual re
authorization bill to be
authorized capital outlay
projects either for reasons like
extending the date change in the
purpose or perhaps both exchange
within the purpose to refrain
from having to let these good
project six fire if they are
under way and we have
approximately two hundred ninety
nine projects in here in before
we go on you have a minor
amendment Mr chairman members of
the committee goodness I was
running real fast.
And so
The amendment is this simple it
happens quite commonly in that
during there were three projects
that were intended to have gone
initially into this re
authorization bill to for
extension of time and one for
extension of time into broadened
the language and for some
technical error upstairs is
during drafting and the
transition of the of the up
projects and so on page so much
the staff has here they didn't
get into the bill so what we do
is we we put those three
projects through an amendment
here and I would just ask for a
motion to move the amendment for
discussion if I may Mister
chairman that is a motion to
move the equipment moved out and
you for reference but identify
the two to six number yes thank
you two two six two four eight
point one that we have thank you
Mr chairman in these three
projects that I'm asking to be
put into this re authorization
bill as I said they were
intended to be there one of them
more lease to extend the
deadline of the expiration date
and it's in Dona ana county and
it's has to do with that jump on
Paul Taylor former
representative who just recently
passed away and this has to do
with that the museum that Missy
Act Tabor but and I ran Misia
historic site improvement and
all we're doing is extending the
date for two years so it doesn't
expire now before I go on Mr
chairman members of the
committee briefly because I know
you have a long agenda of the
the rationale behind having to
do a few more projects this year
is because the pandemic killed
everything back for two years
the transportation of projects
the materials escalating costs
and so much held it up so we're
happy to bring a few more of
these things in the other one is
in eastern New Mexico university
Ross well the branch campus
that's also to extend the time
you should have been in there a
third one is a yeah but what the
fire station in the public
about.
Way to construct to construction
yeah it was it's to change the
date and also to expand the
purpose is still saying it wrong
show or
Act Kate let's see what it says
yeah the area of popcorn on the
run show it's going to say
walking in general let's see
yeah change to improve fire
station in the book Waukee fire
district that's all it does Mr
chairman so if we can improve
the amendment that way I can go
on with the best with any
question of the amendment.
Just not as a most of the
revenue your question.
The question first but I don't.
No I'm just making a okay I'm
sorry senator motion made second
by Representative a I think this
is that which is not back in the
bill thank you Mr chairman and I
will be quick here as I said if
we of this bill re authorizes
two hundred ninety nine projects
that with this amendment if
approved on the floor it would
be three hundred and two
projects the three more were
added and basically you have a
chart we prepared a chart for
you by county so that you can
see all that the individual
counties of re authorization
project I'm sure a lot of your
starting here two thirds of
these projects in this bill are
actually member projects that
were authorized and approved
between two thousand nineteen
and twenty two so you've got the
the sheets which looks like this
pretty thick by county in your
in your hands hopefully and that
that's really what this bill
does Mr chairman thank you it's
that are schoolyards in
questions of anybody here in
support of Senate bill three oh
nine.
It all right.
What opposition in the field
right in the room for online see
note that the wait list ****.
I just got.
To be sure to.
Question.
We.
At.
Use the.
Which.
How do we know that okay Mr
Chairman representative of Scott
in I'll defer to County she in
the Legislative Council work on
this on a daily basis and so I
do have to say one thing that
I'm gonna be sponsoring
legislation in the near future
hopefully to be able to improve
our system the system that we
have lacks so much ability to be
able to track every single
detail of things like these and
then we work together with DFA
and state board of finance on
the bonds and all these things
are system show needs to be
renovated or improved but I'm
gonna defer to Kelly as she
works on this all the time thank
you Mr chair representative
Scott Senator Rodriguez said we
don't know the exact number in
this bill that have banned re
authorized more than once and
the reason for that is that
issue in particular is very
difficult to track in our
current reporting system LFC is
working with Leslie and DFA
current lead to revamp the
reporting system and re
authorizations in particular we
hope will be easier to track so
that we can get you better
information on a systematic
basis on that kind of question
in the future
it there are projects that have
multi room full re
authorizations over many years
they are a minority of the
outstanding projects out there
currently
and I think as you as you all
know
on the projects that are in here
had to be approved by the
Sanchez so hopefully those ones
that aren't moving and all are
things you're aware of we try to
keep you aware of them through
quarterly reports and you could
consider that when you decide to
I sponsor the re authorization
or not the statewide and higher
education projects that were
included in the statewide
framework in previous bills do
you go through the.
Fe for approval
before the end of this bill and
they do require justification
and consider those kind of
issues.
Mr Walter.
She plans to.
We.
Raul.
Encourage.
Sure that anyone else question
the comments not it was please.
Yes Representative dug into
second by Representative bagels
and opposition that do pass
motion.
I think that have you ever to
pass.
Please up to percent of bills
the O. line thank you senator
thank you so much Mr chairman
members of the committee well it
all together in the last council
is working reverses.
For more accuracy thank you.
Yes.
Well folks before we leave and
and and I think this might be
our last meeting that I think
that there will be does as a
committee I wanted to just give
up something that the staff
because of the
worked out for us that shows all
of the bills that we passed out
of this of this chamber on this
committee for this past session
I think for for is that we can
all reference maybe your letter
or maybe just you work as we
move forward will be helpful for
you also I and this is for your
I just got out of a Senate tax
that looked at our at our tax on
this bill and I realize that
there were some members of this
committee that is supported
Sunday did respectively but it
will be in the Senate finance
there were a slew of amendments
made to the tax package of that
that increases the the cost for
FY twenty twenty for another
ninety one million dollars that
will be passed out of our house
also did general fund costs four
years twenty five FY twenty five
and their after increase of
One point two billion dollars
which is seventy five more than
we passed out of the house and
so there's a number of things
that that I will share this list
that I've developed real quick
what I know that this is our I
will come in and speak with all
of you individually in regards
to the public before on on the
house floor when it comes back
to is that if there's and things
that that I know I question and
we that question of public in
the committee but there's a big
related to
Hello.
Things up for the increases in
liquor and tobacco
reduces capital gains from forty
percent to twenty percent
The the the include failed
tax bill which has a huge impact
values of about seventy million
dollars so I I just have some
questions in regards to House
bill for instance ended up in
the tax act would get past that
legislative process and and you
don't process here we know that
and so if this didn't didn't.
