Representative and in order to
hear.
Representative W..
Representative is here
Representative what that.
Here Representative lunch.
Representative Martinez.
Representative basically we're.
In the back
madam chair.
All right thank you hello
Representative Lujan signoff.
Because the first time numbers
across the for us to bring down
there that's right that's right
welcome thank you very much of
Madam chairman of the committee
thank you for your this bill
today joining me today is my
expert witness Mary Barbour from
the New Mexico our breeders
association she is the executive
director.
Madam chair today we are
presenting house bill four fifty
nine it has to do with the
