That could Stansbury.
President thank you.
Representative Strickler.
Representative Strickler.
Speaker Egolf.
And the land I. C.
Representative Strickler on the
on the screen there so he's here
with us okay you.
Of Meister Chandler.
Here.
Chair.
Here.
We have we do have a quorum.
Chair we've got three members
that I still don't see on the
screen so maybe they'll drop in
shortly.
Excellent thank you I know
representative on texted that
she couldn't open the link in
her in her email so maybe you
can resend that to her email
forwarded to her
Thank you thank you members we
have a quorum get started today
we have a patients from our
taxation and revenue department
secretary.
Sierra Club as well as our
secretary of DFA Debbie Romero
and maintenance done Iglesias
who's the chief economist at the
LFC.
and without further ado I'll
pass it on to our presenters and
and you know you all the Senate
wants to go first.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee it's a
pleasure to be here with you
remotely and to see your
committee I can this year and
some of the new members I'll be
sharing my screen Mr kinds of
make one point okay I'm sorry
and Representative is it more of
a point of order out we adopt on
the floor will change.
We're all of our committee
meetings are going to be in
speaker view of so that the
person speaking is I think the
rule says prominently displayed
we all agreed it was the speaker
view and zoom so I'm not sure
who on staff is operating this
today but we had to go through
yesterday is each of the
committees were starting to
remind folks that we need to to
comply with that rule so.
Whoever is the zoom authority up
in the cloud please switches
over to to speak you in that Mr
chair thank you and start
building option.
Thank you Mr speaker thanks for
the reminder.
Go ahead Secretary charting.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
speaker for that so I will be
walking you through the first
part of the executive slides and
then I'll be talking about the
macro economy both globally and
in New Mexico and in the United
States and it a few highlights
on the economic data and then
some specific information about
the oil and gas markets before
turning it over to acting
secretary Romero who will take
you through the General Fund
status report and then mystic
less yes will be presenting her
side after that.
Preview of where we're going and
I know many of the members have
received this forecast before
and so we'll keep our remarks
pretty brief and make sure
there's time for questions.
So it's just a reminder and for
those that are new on the
committee the forecast is a
product of the work of the
economists from four agencies.
Then a finance and
administration the taxation and
revenue department the
department of transportation and
the legislative finance
committee and these career
economist get together several
times per year to run models and
compare their results and and do
peer review on each other's work
and come up with the consensus
forecast.
On the first flight in gonna
share with you is a snapshot of
what's going on with US GDP
which is sort of a barometer for
the entire economy can see that
in the second quarter of twenty
twenty US GDP contracted very
significantly before rebounding
also very significantly in the
third quarter of twenty twenty
so with the onset of the
pandemic things contracted there
was a partial recovery the
following quarter you can see on
the right hand chart put another
way you know you have historic
GDP in blue and then compare the
forecasts that came out of the
May baseline and red is was the
lowest and then things
stabilized quite a bit in
September and November and there
wasn't a whole lot of change
between September and November
again just sort of reflecting
that the markets and the economy
had stabilized somewhat from the
onset of the.
Recession.
US jobs here or what we're
looking at in this next chart at
the beginning of the pandemic
the US economy lost nearly
twenty one million jobs that was
the most since nineteen forty
five
in in one month
And to date about half of those
jobs have been regained but the
US economy is still down over
ten million jobs from where it
was pre pandemic
Let's see I can I can get most
of the information on this chart
I just kind of want to point out
that one of the issues with the
forecast one of the risks that
secretary Romero will be talking
about is the impact of the no
impact of federal stimulus we
don't know yet to and at the
time this December forecast was
made the new even last how much
federal stimulus will will come
out and when and in what form it
will be so high on the on the
downside we have that no that as
risks to the forecast but on a
positive note we look at
different forecasting services
and one of them moody's assumed
that there would be a large one
point five trillion dollar
federal stimulus in this first
quarter that we're in right now
well the other IHS a student no
stimulus so we sort of had to
diversify our expectations for
that throughout the forecast by
the one of the forecast
including and one of the not.
similar to the first chart I
showed you of US GDP this is a
similar chart for New Mexico and
you can see that similar to the
U. S. economy New Mexico
contracted sharply in the second
quarter of twenty twenty at the
onset of the pandemic before
again recovering pretty
significantly in the third
quarter you can also see that
the recovery in the third
quarter in New Mexico exceeded
what was expected in may in the
November baseline it's kind of
confusing but the red was the
forecast that we used in may for
the June estimate that you went
into the first special session
with and you can see that the
the rebound in the third quarter
and black was significantly
higher by the by the time we we
did this December estimate
and again similar to the U. S.
you can see on the right hand
side the forecasted stabilized
quite a bit you know the most
pessimistic was in may when we
really didn't know you know the
expletive stand of this was
going to be we didn't know as
much about accion progression or
anything like that.
all right on to the next chart
I'm gonna start now a couple of
charts that will walk you
through what's going on with
employment and jobs in New
Mexico so the chart here
basically shows the black line
is initial claims weekly for
unemployment in New Mexico and
you can see those spiked heavily
at the onset of the pandemic and
spiked again towards the end of
November when we had another you
know it's cases were rising we
had another partial shutdown
the bars in the background blue
bars are sort of more like the
stock of continued claims of
unemployment and you can see
they are they're coming down
gradually but still way above no
historic transfer unemployment
in New Mexico the difference
between the grey and blue the
the blue bars are the
traditional unemployment
insurance program.
And so people and basically can
be on that traditional
unemployment program for a
certain amount of time before
they sort of time out of it
because of the pandemic in the
associated downturn the federal
shares Act created what's called
the federal pandemic
unemployment as emergency
unemployment assistance program
and so that is sort of like an
extension of a temporary
extension of unemployment
benefits and you can see over
time that is best New Mexicans
are aging out of traditional
unemployment their move they
remain unemployed and they're
moving on to that PED receive
program and blue the thing that
this chart does not include is
the P. you a program the
pandemic unemployment assistance
program and that is basically a
special program for gig workers
and the self employed people who
aren't typically eligible for
unemployment assistance and at
the peak there were about eighty
four thousand people receiving
that full or partial assistance
in New Mexico.
go through this trip very
quickly we just want to
basically show you that after a
the longest economic expansion
in U. S. history from from the
end of the Great Recession on
word unemployment both
nationally and in New Mexico
spiked during the pandemic and
is now expected to just
gradually continue to come back
down towards more normal levels
over the forecast period.
Here are the next two charts
that we we give you a little bit
of information about employment
and jobs by sector in New Mexico
so you can see that here we're
comparing year over year jobs in
New Mexico and at the time of
the forecast the most recent
data we had was October twenty
nineteen verses October twenty
twenty and so from year over
year New Mexico is down almost
fifty five thousand jobs and you
can see that those job losses
were have really felt in the
mining sector leisure and
hospitality local governments
education and health services
was down pretty significantly
one of the bright spots was in
federal government that was up
four point four percent but keep
in mind that at the time of the
federal census was still going
on and I think that was part of
why federal unemployment or
employment was propped up year
over year.
The next slide I I won't go
through with you in full detail
but basically it's it's here for
your reference and you can look
at in each sector of New Mexico
what the pre pandemic employment
was how far it fell from between
February and April and in total
New Mexico lost one hundred and
four thousand jobs from February
to April of twenty twenty but
then also how many of those jobs
had been recovered in each
sector by October and so in
total forty percent of the job
losses had been regained by
October and that number I
believe would be slightly higher
in the if we were to update this
chart which will be doing in the
next couple weeks for the mid
session estimate.
Put another way here's the
forecast for the employment
recovery in New Mexico and you
can see that.
New Mexico is not expected to
reach its pre pandemic number of
jobs until around December
twenty twenty five so Senator
the it's it's expected to take
New Mexico several years to
regain the number of jobs we had
just before the pandemic it's
also expected to take the US
economy several years but New
Mexico is expected to take
longer.
next to move on to some charts
about the oil and natural gas
markets which of course our very
important to general fund
revenue.
first well we want to talk to a
little bit about recount to take
a step back you know of course
rig activity is a leading
indicator of production you know
in order for wells to be
produced it to produce in the
future you need to have a race
today and so we've we've shown
here
for each of the last oil down
turns this chart is indexed at a
hundred but if from the the peak
number of rigs how long did we
fall and how deeply did we fall
in each downturn you can see in
black that the current downturn
we've just experienced was the
steepest sharpest downturn and
also one of the longest if we
provided two days data for you
this is improve pretty
considerably New Mexico stands
today at about seventy rigs so
we've we've added about maybe
fifteen cents this chart was
produced which is good for
revenue
And of this of course right
activity is subject to the gross
receipts tax by and large so the
more rigs we have the more G. R.
T. we have especially in the
Permian basin but then lagging
right activity comes the
production activity that subject
to the severance tax.
Skip over this chart but it's
here for your reference is just
comparing the right downturn in
New Mexico versus Texas in the
US.
again
if we were to chart this for you
today the recount has come up to
about seventy where is and in
late November was down at fifty
eight so that's a good sign for
recovery in the gross receipts
tax
but you know the main
relationship we want to stress
is that oil price is really out
of the control of New Mexico
that something that is that
globally and and to talk if
you're interested in the factors
that affect that but the oil
price is determined every count
the recount follows oil price
and production follows right
count so they're all very
intertwined.
Here you can have a side by side
view of what assumptions went
into the forecast for oil and
gas prices and volumes starting
at the bottom you can see what
was assumed to just before the
pandemic in the December twenty
nineteen forecast we're looking
at oil prices that were expected
to stay above fifty dollars a
barrel for the forecast period
and then the sharpest downturn
was reflected in the June twenty
twenty the most pessimistic
forecast where we took nineteen
dollars out of the the price of
oil in FY twenty one and as a
rule of thumb I'm each dollar
over the fiscal year that comes
out of the oil price forecast
costs the general fund about
twenty two million dollars so
nineteen dollars times twenty
two million it would be they had
per year have that decreased.
and then you can see the that
thing stabilize quite a bit by
the December twenty twenty
forecast that we're presenting
to you today now that the price
of oil you know is expected to
average thirty eight dollars per
barrel in this fiscal year
rebounding more over the
forecast period and as of today
I haven't looked at it at today
or yesterday but I think the
price of oil per barrel is
hovering around fifty two or
fifty three dollars at the
moment.
just to share with you a little
bit on personal income tax which
is that I believe the second
largest revenue into the general
fund behind gross receipts tax
one of the things I I kind of
want to leave you with and
stress you know economists since
this all started have been
talking about and and
hypothesizing what shape of
recovery we would experience you
know we've we've had but it
could be an L. shaped recovery
and Nike swoosh shape recovery
of the shape all these different
shapes and what I'm comfortable
describing it as right now is a
case a PED recovery you have
that downturn and then you have
one thing wages rising pretty
quickly and one thing continuing
to be down which is odd total
number of jobs and I want to
talk for a minute about why that
is and what it means.
what we're finding is that wages
are recovering much more quickly
than the number of jobs and
that's because please and higher
wage positions to begin with our
recovery much faster so
positions and jobs that require
advanced education and we're
higher earning to begin with for
example financial services
health care
The things like that that the
jobs are coming back in those
workers were probably more
resilient to this downturn to
begin with they were higher wage
earners so they probably had
more savings where is lower
earning workers like and food
services leisure and hospitality
and to some extent retail are
experiencing much more prolonged
job losses and they were lower
wage to begin with and probably
were less resilient to this so
with that leaves us with this
case shape recovery is is to
emphasize the need for continued
federal and or state support of
those workers for the future you
know there there's at two to
three year forecast before those
jobs are expected to all be
regained and we need to make
sure that the safety net is
supporting that and aware of
that.
On to the gross receipts tax on
the sides more for your
reference this is a year over
year chart showing the change in
the gross receipts tax base year
over year and so I would just
caution you not to read too much
into the big swings and some of
the smaller counties
like a seventy one percent
increase in Torrance County
probably was caused by a
nonrecurring construction
project more so than actual
changing the economy there but
these staff figures are there
for your reference.
And then the second chart is
similar except you know where
the the former chart was year
over year this is quarter over
quarter so it again it's just
there for your reference if you
want to look at what's happening
in your district.
Again I I talked before about
how oil price that's in blue
here is it really a determinant
of recount and then there for
the gross receipts tax and so
here oil prices been lags by two
months to line up perfectly with
recount so what we're saying is
that about two months after the
oil price declines the rigs
decline and then production and
and therefore at and and in this
this chart the taxable gross
receipts in the Permian basin
are are
are to follow.
Just a couple more chart for me
before I turn it over to
secretary Romero
here we're showing you for each
fiscal year you can see the
amounts of you know traditional
energy taxes that come into the
general fund rents and royalties
in blue and then the severance
tax in green and gray the main
point I want to make here is
that several years ago the
legislature I think it was
through the leadership of
representatives are in Jaga put
in place this mechanism we
currently have where we look at
the five year average of
severance tax revenue and if the
if this year's revenue exceeds
the five year average of the
past five years then that excess
amount automatically gets
transferred into the tax
stabilization reserve and so
it's a way that we have figured
to smooth out our recurring
revenue and make sure that in
times of windfall we're building
reserves for for a rainy day and
the main point I want to say is
that this mechanism is working
exactly how it should be and
it's and by adding to reserves
it's given us a lot of
maneuverability through this
this crisis as you know we
targeted a twenty five percent
reserved for the last fiscal
year and ended up significantly
above that reserves and
secretary Romero will talk about
that but this this mechanism of
transfer in the windfall to the
TSR is is to thank for that and
with everything we know about
the oil markets and I just want
to emphasize that even though
oil is down we're still
estimated to transfer about
fifty million dollars into the
tax stabilization reserve in
each of the next years.
And with that I would love to
turn it over to secretary Romero
thank you.
Thank you US secretary sure
Clark and Mr chairman and
members the committee thank you
for on buying this to you
present before this committee so
on slide twenty eight I think
what is important to note here
is for FY twenty and twenty one
the revenue was projected to
decline for FY twenty five one
point nine percent but it left
preserves that two point five
million or thirty five point
four percent of recurring
appropriation for FY twenty one
if there's a lot that was a
bigger decline of about ten
point nine percent and reserves
that that that three thirty
three point four percent and so
why twenty two we actually are
going to see a grow up there's
projected growth of five point
four percent resulting in about
a hundred and sixty nine
millions of new dollars.
Strike twenty nine this one
actually shows a breakdown of of
of revenue by source so the
bottom line the total recurring
revenue you can see that there's
the time ten point nine percent
reduction due to the COVID you
know the COVID has affected our
employment it's affected wages
and salaries the actors affected
consumer and business confidence
and it definitely has affected
the oil demand and and so
there's a direct impact on our
recovery due to to the oil
demand people are traveling
There's not as many flights
going on so that's the result of
of that part of the decline for
oil.
Next please.
This is the consensus general
fund revenue forecast
You can see December forecast
just hired in June by about one
point eight six million for FY
twenty one and about one point
one five eight million for FY
twenty two do FY twenty two
revenue is estimated at seven
point three seven nine billion
that estimates are still lower
than the December
twenty nineteen projections
that's that high number that you
see up there the Green Line is
actually where we are now with
the some point three seven nine
as you can some of you may have
known or been that that we would
presented in the past in the
earlier in the year we provide
that crack provided a range
because there were so many
unknowns are so many variables
we didn't know what the risk
there is going to be additional
federal stimulus coming to the
states we didn't know what the
recovery was going to be looking
like and so they actually
provided a range and that's what
that information is used to to
kind to build a budget well that
that for LFC and and for the
executive
this where we ended up actually
was just slightly above the
midpoint of that range and so
this.
That that was the good news is
is that even though we had
arrangement because we weren't
so sure about what was going to
be happening we actually ended
up a little bit higher than we
thought we were going to be in
September.
Slide thirty one actually shows
our general fund reserve levels
this contracts reserve levels
for the last fourteen years and
as you can see FY twenty
reserves are estimated at thirty
five point four percent and then
FY twenty one it's thirty three
point four that that's going
into the legislative session so
that's before in the budgets are
approved and so that we're okay
estimates are about thirty three
point four percent it's really
important to note that these
health researchers have come in
handy that helped us and and we
want to maintain those health
reserves especially now we still
have so many unknowns I mean the
vaccines are are are are
positive thing but we're still
not sure what kind of impacts
are going to be sent seen from
us some of the executive order
specifically about the potential
moratoriums that are being
discussed we're in the process
right now trying to analyze what
those impacts could be if they
do put a ban or if there is
moratorium on of their leases
and so it and and the other
thing that the reserve levels do
is they they help us.
Position the state so that we
don't have to make cuts that we
don't have to do for low or not
reducing services to to our
citizens and and and this isn't
something that's just short term
we should be considering these
reserve levels and and looking
at our budget three years out
you know we want to make sure
that that that we can sustain
any kind of downturn not just
the immediate future but in in
the future years as well.
Thank you
I don't read the secretary Sean
Clark talk a little bit about
the tax stabilization reserve
the creek is estimating that
there will be a transfer in FY
twenty of about a hundred and
sixty six million dollars to the
TSR and the December estimate
forecast of the transfers will
continue to twenty twenty five
they're not as
as robust as as we're we're
projecting in FY twenty but you
can see that for the next few
years that they're they're
expecting to be at least around
fifty million every year and
these these risk these transfers
health to reserve levels as
well.
It's like thirty three is the
general fund financial summary
this chart shows in summary the
beginning balances it shows
total recurring revenue and
recurring appropriations and
reserve transfers
Again we're we're expecting that
there's going to be about a
hundred and sixty nine million
new money available in FY twenty
two and again together thirty
three point four percent of
reserve levels is before any
action taken by the legislature.
So it's like thirty four I'm not
going to go into a lot of detail
but it just gives us we
identified some of the things
that are still
that with that that we're not
sure about you know economic
although there's a vaccine
coming out I think there's still
some questions about how quickly
I can the dachshunds can be
administered you know there's
there's a lot of of hope that
they can be done sooner rather
than later so by mid year there
hoping that everybody that wants
to vaccinate will be vaccinated
but a lot of this is is going
to.
The house and we can get people
vaccinated will potentially
impact how many how quickly we
can get back in to recover I
would quickly begin to recovery
mode so the other thing that say
we're still not sure about and
actually I'm working on putting
together some talking points is
how much more stimulus money we
can expect from the federal
government there's been some
discussions that they don't
think smaller states need
additional money because they
have and what they have I can
tell you that's not the case for
New Mexico we've done a pretty
good job of spending all the
cares Act money that has come to
the state New Mexico and so you
know and and more you know the
one the one thing that we need
to keep our eye on is the fact
that it's really important for
the state you too can you
continue get the stimulus money
because we have a lot of the
unemployment compensation is a
big need Medicaid this is is
another big need and so we're in
the process of developing some
bullets that we can share with
DC to let him know that we yeah
we still need money don't cut us
out yet.
Next please.
So I actually is a stress test
that is really an important
factor in developing the revenue
estimates this provides an
optimistic view in a pessimistic
view and as and as you can see
It takes into consideration the
sensitivity to the oil market
and the national economic
recession and it's going to take
multiple multiple years for us
to recover secretary Sharon
Clark talked little bit about
that the pessimistic forecast
illustrated long economic
downturn for two to three years
with revenues lower by seven
hundred thirty six two hundred
seven three six million to about
and milk.
One hundred and eighty eight
million
Bottom line is to Mexico
substituted Energy downturn is a
national recession hi thanks the
need to maintain our healthy
reserves and so you can see
where we you know we did really
well but but but that it was a
really steep decline and because
of the health research we were
able to of whether that decline.
Thirty six is the ten year
Revenue Trent the dark line is
is
Yes this is the high above and
below the revenue trends and so
what I can say here is that you
can see where we had to have
some weekend and we're we've had
peaks so the years that we had
the gaps is it's been really
important that we have those we
serve levels to help us through
those steps I think we learned
from the Great Recession that
you know the stress that that
these downturns can cost of the
state New Mexico and so the fact
that we've been able to put
our money into different that
the tax implication reserve fund
has made a big difference and
moody's is just for the future
but trust states that in times
that we have these peaks that
that's a good opportunity for
the state to use that funding
for a one time non recurring
expenses and and we definitely
have needs for those
nonrecurring funds but.
You can see that the peaks don't
last very long and so we can't
count on them we've got I've
always have the reserve levels
and.
The twenty five percent rate
reserve levels is what we we
recommend in order to maintain
the the fund balances that we
need in order to to have to do
whether the downturns that that
we stopped just this year alone.
Thanks.
Mr chair the last night that I
want to bring to your attention
is the sources and uses table
this is the table that that
tells us what's available for in
severance tax bonds and which
typically we use for capital
outlay projects as you can see
The setasides are getting a
little bit more than we had
projected earlier in the year
these so water trust gets nine
percent and they're going to get
about
Forty I can't read this is so
small forty eight million and
then the other two colonia
Centro and tribal to be about
twenty four million but that
leaves about four hundred and
thirty three million of
severance tax bonds for capital
projects in as the governor
mentioned yesterday
Directive executive
recommendation is that we use
half of that for broadband
initiatives throughout the
state.
So Mr chair that's all I have
right now thank you very much.
Thank you Secretary charting
Clark and thank you secretary
Romero
missing less yes we'll go to
six.
Thank you Mr chair sorry about
that I needed to and you
Mr chair members of the
committee it's a pleasure to be
here with you all today I'm
gonna walk you through the LFC
revenue brief that was just
presented during the December
revenue estimate this brief is
available on our website you can
be made available to all of you
I'm gonna just talk through some
of the key highlights on this
and would be happy to answer any
additional questions on that you
might have about information
contained here anything else
that has been presented one of
the things that I'll start by
pointing out I'm as the
secretaries mentioned so
recurring revenues for FY twenty
one are estimated at seven
billion and that's a decline of
eight hundred and fifty seven
million dollars or ten point
nine percent from FY twenty so
if we look here in the
comparisons between the where we
thought we could be going into
the June special session verses
where we are now it is notably
not as low as it was but it is
still a very significant decline
if we ignored June twenty twenty
is revenue estimate and we're
looking at December alone an
eight hundred fifty seven
million dollar decline in a
single year is a substantial
impact on even though it's not
quite the impact we were
estimating in June.
And if we look at the combined
revenue of fact for FY twenty
one through FY twenty three the
total adjustments combined for
those fiscal year is our one
point nine billion dollars below
the prior year
prior forecast for December
twenty nineteen pre pandemic.
Another notable piece of this is
that most of that decline for FY
twenty one is primarily due to
the pandemic severe effects on
the oil market with low prices
I'm causing that sharp drop in
gross receipts tax collections
I'm drilling activity and
production related revenues so
while we are seeing a revenue
impact in in areas like G. R. T.
for consumer spending and
employment impacts most of the
revenue declines are actually
coming from oil production and
price declines more so than the
other economic activity that is
taking a hit during this
pandemic.
Other important thing we want to
mention is that if federal funds
had not been available to offset
this year's general fund
expenditures the state would
have needed to pull in nearly
one point one billion dollars
from its reserves to cover the
current budget also we're
thinking about those reserve
levels and how much is in those
reserves is a good thing to keep
in mind that it if this were an
oil price crash that we're
completely separate from an
economic downturn in which we
received federal funding for
example the the twenty fifteen
to twenty sixteen downturn with
oil price crash alone and we did
not receive federal funds that
we experienced a very severe
revenue hit at the time if those
federal funds were not available
we would have had to pull
significantly from those
reserves just to cover this year
state budget so that's important
to keep in mind we're producing
those reserves that even though
they didn't need to necessarily
be drawn on this year that was
because of that federal fund
offset.
And speaking of reserves I'll
just point out briefly that in
this document we do discuss that
thirty five point four percent
reserves that some of you may be
questioning why with a twenty
five percent reserve target for
FY twenty how we ended up with
thirty five point four percent
reserves and we have some
information in here that really
explains each of the pieces that
contributes to that reserve
level and I'm happy to go over
that if you have any questions
but for now for the sake of time
I'm going to skip past that.
And move forward to page five of
our documents.
Just to reiterate some of the
great points that the
secretaries made
about our stress testing.
And we're looking at our general
fund stress test for this
December analysis will note a
couple of things one is that you
may notice that the variation
and the stress test for this
particular
analysis is not as severe as the
variation that was and is the
December twenty nineteen stress
test and there's a significant
reason for that in the December
twenty nineteen estimate we were
looking at high prices and high
production and a significant
amount of revenue that was
entirely a was largely dependent
on that price and production
levels we had a very high
revenue estimate based on those
prices and production so when we
were then looking at low prices
and the potential for production
to fall there was a much was
further to fall then there is
now we're already in a low price
and reduced production
environment and one thing that
we will point out is that in the
December twenty nineteen
estimate we provided a scenario
to you that said what if oil
goes to thirty five dollars a
barrel for two years and we
projected that about nine
hundred and forty million would
be lost in the in the first year
once you include distributions
to the tax stabilization reserve
and in this current revenue
estimate with an average oil
price in FY twenty one expected
at thirty eight dollars a barrel
the forecast is nine hundred and
eighty eight million dollars
below that twenty nineteen
forecast and so the point that I
want to make here is the stress
testing was a very effective
tool and a very good job at
projecting where state revenues
would be in it in the event of a
severe price downturn and so
this is something that I
encourage you all to pay
attention to both for this
forecast and if there is a mid
session update any stress tests
that come out with that it is a
good tool to let you know where
the state could be should we
experience another significant
price shock.
Thanks another point on the
revenue volatility analysis the
secretary Romero did a fantastic
job of discussing this trend
analysis one thing that will
mention is that in our prior
Revenue trend analysis including
that for December twenty
nineteen pre pandemic we were
riding an oil production boom
and we cautioned during that
those presentations that
revenues at the time were
significantly above trend in
that above trend revenues tend
to not be sustainable over time
and unfortunately we felt the
very severe impact of that with
COVID nineteen and the oil price
crash we're now looking at a
period of significantly below
trend revenues as a just as a
secretaries mentioned when you
are
significantly above trend that
is a time to be saving or
utilizing revenues for
nonrecurring expenditures in
case you fall back below trend
and then similarly on the flip
side when you are experiencing
below trend
revenues that could be a a call
for utilization of those
reserves in order to support
your spending levels and that's
part of the reason why LFC
budget recommendation targeted a
twenty two percent reserve as a
twenty five percent reserve
realizing the need to utilize
some of those reserves to help
deal with this below trend
position that we find ourselves
in.
Thanks for to a brief discussion
on gross receipts taxes the
primary point that I want to
make year.
Is that declines in Eddy and Lea
counties and drilling related on
out of state receipts account
for over ninety percent of all
of the projected decline in
gross receipts taxes for FY
twenty one and again that's that
important point to make that
even though we are experiencing
a significant economic downturn
gross receipts taxes for
anything that is not in any Lee
County you're out of state
showing related receipts are
only accounting for about ten
percent of that decline and
ninety percent of the rest of it
has to do with the effect on the
oil markets.
And it's not just affecting the
mining sector even though the
mining sector impact is large
mining is down
over forty five percent in the
first quarter of this fiscal
year but it's also affecting
many other sectors with in Eddy
and Lea counties including
construction manufacturing real
estate warehousing wholesale
trade we see it show up in many
many industries as each of these
provide different ways of
supporting the oil and gas
industry with in Eddy and Lea
counties.
And of course it we can't go
without saying that the gross
receipts taxes and leisure and
hospitality is severely hard hit
it's down twenty three percent
in the first quarter of FY
twenty one I'm as these
industries have been severely
affected by the pandemic.
I also want to point out that
small business revenue in the
state was down twenty five
percent in September actually
worsened in the following months
down forty percent in November
and was down forty five percent
in December so small businesses
are really taking a very hard
hit I'm during this pandemic as
you all now.
Next I'll just want to reiterate
the point that a secretary
starting Clark made it very well
on this transfer to the tax
stabilization reserve from
access oil and gas school tax
revenue and the point that I
want to make here.
Is that even though we're in a
year in which this severance tax
revenue source is expected to
decline ninety four million
dollars based on the current
estimate the general fund amount
of this distribution will
actually be increasing by
nineteen million dollars because
that general fund amount is
based on that five year average
so this is another way in which
this mechanism is doing exactly
what it was intended to do that
we could be in a downturn or oil
market year and still see
general fund revenue from this
severance tax source increase
during that year and the brunt
of the impact of that decline is
really felt by the reserves
rather than by the general fund
itself and therefore agency
budgets we implemented a similar
mechanism for this for federal
mineral leasing payments which
is the royalties for oil and gas
production
and bonus payments on federal
lands this provision will come
into effect in fiscal year
twenty two so unfortunately we
were not able to to feel the the
benefits of this provision just
yet for this particular downturn
but because the legislature had
the foresight to implement
this provision it will be
something that will help
mitigate impacts to the general
fund in the future just like the
mechanism that we have for the
severance taxes doing.
And of course we can't talk
about revenue stability without
mentioning the permanent funds
the point that will make here is
that even though every general
fund major revenue source is
expected to decline in FY twenty
one the permanent fund
distributions will actually grow
by fifty five million or about
six percent I'm and that's
because that distribution is
based on a percentage of the
five year average it mitigates
market swings both in terms of
investment earnings as well as
changes in contributions to
royalties to that permanent fund
so even if they experience a
downturn in the contribution of
the royalty even if the provide
experiences a downturn in the
the market that I have that five
year average helps to smooth out
that distribution and eve and
allows it to grow even in
periods of decline.
Just briefly talk about some
forecast risks and the primary
point that I want to make here
is regarding oil prices in the
oil market because we now of
the majority of the decline for
FY twenty one is based on the
impact of the oil and gas market
this similarly means that if
prices were recover sooner or
production levels offer resumes
growth faster than expected the
general fund could see very
sizeable revenue increases but
even without an estate economic
recovery and so for example we
have an average expected oil
price within this forecast of
thirty eight dollars per barrel
that was the the outlook at the
time for December since then
prices have increased pretty
significantly current W. D. at
TI prices about fifty one
dollars and we operated about a
three to four dollar
differential to WTI so that
price change could end up
affecting general fund revenues
but that doesn't necessarily
mean that the underlying economy
has markedly improved even if
that general fund revenue
estimate comes up because of
that price change.
Lastly I'll skip ahead in
to one of the attachments in
this document
To discuss the general fund
dependence on the oil and gas
industry
And one of the points that I
make here is that in twenty
nineteen dependence on oil and
gas revenues jumped pretty
significantly because of the oil
production them we were seeing
so much more general fund
revenue through these various
sources there which we get
general fund revenue from oil
and gas production that it
really spiked in twenty nineteen
now that production and prices
have declined that that that
percentage share of the General
Fund is respectively declining
although I will note that at its
current level anticipated level
for for FY twenty one which is
just below thirty percent it is
still above some of that that
ten year prior average of where
general fund dependence is and
that's because even though
production and prices have
declined our state's production
is still markedly above on what
it has been in prior years and
so that's really still propping
up the amount of revenue the
general fund receipts from that.
The next thing that I'll mention
before ending is there's
Lines on page twenty five of
this document from track the
recovery dot org I'm actually in
a pull up some more recent data
for you that's the same sides
that are in there but more
recent than that and the point
that I want to make with this is
this really illustrates the
point that Secretary Chardon
Clark was mentioning about that
case shaped recovery and we can
see what we're looking at
changes in employment based on
wage level that high wage
employment as of the middle of
October was down about three
percent but low wage employment
was still down about nineteen
percent so there is a very
significant difference in both
the decline in high and low wage
employment and the recovery and
high and low wage employment.
Additionally when we look at
things like consumer spending on
as of the first week of January
total consumer spending was down
about nine percent but you'll
notice here on this chart that
retail spending was actually up
about fifteen to twenty percent
from January and from the end of
December to the beginning of
January and a lot of that has to
do specifically with federal
fiscal stimulus on in terms of
individual stimulus tax that
went out the beginning of the
year at in the middle of the
year and more recently as well
as additional unemployment
benefits that provide a weekly
supplement these things that are
putting more funds into the the
pockets of New Mexicans result
The New Mexicans resulting in
additional retail spending even
though other types of spending
is down pretty significantly I'm
particularly restaurants and
hotels
are still seen declines in about
forty five percent as of the low
where they were and in January
twenty twenty as of January the
beginning of of this month.
Lastly thank you Mr.
Mr chair if I may what was it up
yes when asked a question on
what we have this chart up and.
You've shown me my favorite
website I spend hours getting
sucked into the data on track to
recovery dot org I'm curious if
we are able to see yet
in terms of retail spending
other.
Consumer spending.
Or in employment data any effect
from the roughly billion dollars
or so that we did between the
June and November special
sessions specifically maybe you
into the November special
session we did the two hundred
dollar payments to those with
unemployment and the
in the payments that we made to
those who didn't receive federal
we have any any day of the show
what effect that.
Mr speaker Mr chair that's a
fantastic question one of the
limitations of the type of data
that we have access to is that
it's things like overall retail
spending or over all types of
spending and unfortunately it's
nearly impossible to parse out
how much of that would have been
due to the state specific
initiatives versus the ongoing
continuing federal initiatives
on that were occurring during
those time periods so
unfortunately we're not able to
parse out any increases or
changes that we see as being
specifically related to those
state initiatives.
Speaker meeting.
It does seem gonna there's a bit
of an uptick in consumer
spending.
In retail starting you know
around the mid point of December
which is when those this twelve
hundred dollar payments were
being deposited into folks
accounts and I.
And there was no federal
stimulus at that point you
directly to consumers so the
optimist in me was wanting to
get attribute that to what we
have done in the session it is
that about the right time we're
looking at the very top it is
five percent bump in retail
spending is that sort of in in
in in the timeline of when that
the special session.
Thanks we've been noticed I'm.
Mr chair that would be around a
similar time line one small
caveat that I would just make it
that's also around the time of
Christmas so there there would
be presumably some additional
retail spending right at the the
end of this was right before the
twenty fifth and the twenty
fourth when some of this
occurred but it is entirely
possible that any additional
funding to the state legislative
did allow for some of that
holiday spending don't know
rescue for one handed economist
please.
I unfortunately I can't I can't
give that to you but I I will
not negate your optimism.
Thanks in in the.
Credit to have president
Eisenhower for the
for the one and it comes to
thank you thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr speaker go ahead Mr
glasses of store thank you Mr
chair that the last point that
I'll make is that even though we
saw these increases in retail
spending we don't want to negate
the severe impact on small
business retailers a lot of this
retail spending is open big box
stores as well as online and
small business revenue for
retail it was still down twenty
one percent in December despite
overall retail spending in the
state building up thirteen
percent so again this just
reiterates here when we're
looking at small business
revenue the severe impacts to
our small business economy and
you can also see here that as of
the end of December leisure and
hospitality was still down
nearly eighty percent for small
business revenue and with that
I'll conclude my presentation
but I'm happy to answer any
questions the committee may
have.
Thank you very much Mr bliss yes
and and secretary sharding Clark
and and secretary the mail for
your presentation is very
informative by the way members
hopefully you are all able to
access your share file link
You know once we go over post
comment when we go back in
person I hope we keep the
technology I for me it's way
better than shuffling through
tons of paper
it's pretty easy to use.
I don't know if we have any
questions I don't see any hands
up
from committee members but
please feel free to raise your
hand at this point I've got a
couple at this point.
I'm gonna start with the first
one I see on my screen and that
would be Representative Harper.
Thank you chairman and
Thank you secretary Sharon Clark
Romero and mystically seus I.
Enjoy very much these
presentations and I just have to
commend you all they get better
every time.
I'm very pleased especially with
the the stress testing work that
you do that I was a huge.
improvement as may just recently
and I think maybe a year and a
half ago you all started doing
that and
that's just incredibly helpful.
also very much appreciate the
effort to break out the impact
of
kind of oil and gas revenue on
the budget and.
Second as a better picture I
think of what's happening in the
general economy instead of just
looking at what taxes were bring
in.
I think that is a problem with
our.
Our tax code.
And that we are.
What we bring in doesn't often
reflect what's going on in the
in the economy as a whole so I
appreciate that you helped to
break that down for us.
My my my first question
The you know again ignoring that
you know the consensus consensus
revenue estimate group does a
great job and it's a hard job
and you're you're about ninety
nine percent sure to always get
it wrong but try to get as close
as possible.
This last estimate was based in
that the meeting occurred in
December you might recall in
that correctly.
Mr chairman and and
Representative Harper that's
correct it was first released in
December based on whatever data
was most available at that time
so some of the data had been
released in November for
example.
Products thank you chairman and
secretary so in light of the
I guess two two big factors that
seem to be
At impacting us this month the
first is the the the federal
change in
The oil and gas activity on
federal lands.
and then also the likelihood of
perhaps a surge stimulus check.
Have you all.
Look at those impacts yet or do
we expect to have a mid session
update that would include those
impacts and can you give us
maybe a a teaser on what to
expect.
Mr chair and representative her
bright be happy to start with
that and then and I think don R.
or secretary Romero might want
to add to it on the first short
answer is yes there will be a
mid session update and and
correct me if I'm wrong it's
been moving around a little bit
but I think we're delivering
that to the house appropriations
and finance committee on the
seventeenth that currently okay
that's currently correct.
and so yes the consensus revenue
estimating group is looking into
the impact of the Biden
administration's announcement
that they'll have a sixty day
pause on entering new leases on
federal land
the the couple things to
mitigate that at would be that
there is a large amount of
backlog permits that have
previously been approved that
have not yet been drilled so we
don't expect a sixty day pause
to have a dramatic immediate
impact on revenue
but I think miss it less
yesterday secretary Romero would
probably have more details on
that for you.
And thank you Mr chair
representative Harper and thank
you madam secretary in
anticipation of this question I
have a couple of charts that out
I will share your.
One of which is to the
secretary's point on those
approved but not yet drilled on
federal comment so this is
specifically information from
Rystad energy on Federal
comments that were backlog in
terms of approvals were sought
and given and a lot of these
were done in anticipation of a
change of administration so
there was actually a pretty big
uptick in the applications for
permitting for drilling permits
in the last quarter of twenty
twenty in in anticipation of a
potential change so there is a
big inventory of federal permits
that operators already have and
you'll notice that biggest on
the lists are our biggest
producers EOG Devin Occidental
they have massive backlogs of
drilling permits and the current
sixty day suspension does not
affect the ability for drillers
to utilize permits that have
already been authorized or to
complete wells that have already
been drilled I have not yet been
completed and to that point I
will straight here that the the
backlog of drilled but
uncompleted wells in the Permian
basin is still very significant
and very high all of these are
resources that can be tapped and
utilized during this sixty day
pods and there for these reasons
as the secretary mentioned it it
is unlikely for a sixty day
pause to have a very significant
impact on on appropriations and
therefore our revenues of course
there has been talk about the
potential for the extension of
that and the impact of that to
our state's budget or to our
revenues would really depend on
the longevity of it so for
example at the the amounts of
drilled but uncompleted wells
that are existing as well as
those existing permits we've
heard from a variety of energy
information sources that.
Those could last for a year or
two enough to sustain operations
for that long so it is entirely
possible and we are in the
process of researching this
particularly at the request of
the chairwoman Lundstrom for HFC
who specifically asked for us to
address this issue in our mid
session update I'm so we're
looking at this but it is
entirely possible that if it
were extended for say one year
only that the these factors
would significantly mitigate the
Revenue impacts of that with
that being said the longer such
a a pas continues the more of an
impact it would have to New
Mexico over half of our
production is on on federal
lands about fifty two percent or
so about oil production as well
as about nearly sixty percent of
our natural gas production
occurs on federal lands and as
we all know
fracking shale resources
required continued fracking or
continued creek drilling in
order to maintain production
because of the natural decline
rate of wells so once these
backlogs of permits and drilled
but uncompleted wells are
utilized then we would start
entering a period into which if
no new drilling permits were
issued then we would start to
see declines from that natural
decline right it takes about
twelve to twenty four months for
the full decline rate of a well
to take place but it can decline
as much as sixty or seventy
percent so if we're looking at
at twenty twenty one and twenty
twenty one only
that impact would could be
mitigated by this but if it were
extended longer the impact would
be more significant and we are
in the process of sort of
exploring what the possibilities
are for that in terms of the
state budget.
Mr chair if I can add on to that
I think one of the things don't
so I I mentioned earlier on that
that I know that the LFC mystic
less yes is working on I'm
trying to figure out what the
impacts are and and the
executive is actually put
together a team of economists
from different agencies to also
try to figure out what long term
impact is going to be I think
one of the things that when we
maybe missing is that this may
affect the smaller companies a
little bit more because they may
not have stocked up on some of
those permits and so I I
anticipate that we may see some
of them some of the results for
those businesses.
Thank you.
The Mr chairman and secretaries
misplace yes I.
That that was a very surly
answer and I think touched all
the questions that I had one of
my favorite charts that you put
together don is the one that
shows how quickly.
a shell resource.
Well that output drop seven the
like sixty percent of their I'll
put the first couple months
Senators tails off quickly so if
we stop.
Really activities we could see
an impact the general fund and
and just a few months.
thank you very I love the truck
you showed with all the other
permits throughout their
their forty been authorized so
it looks like.
even with a pause in receiving
permits for sixty days we should
be fine
as they execute the existing
permits that they have.
I have heard that there's gonna
be another federal announcement
here in about fifteen minutes so
I'll be curious to hear
What they say they're because.
sixty day pause I think it's
fine if we had a one year pause
then I think we we need to.
I'm glad we will have all of you
looking at that to help us out.
And then.
I guess the the only other
question I have for.
For for the group here.
Is
when we look at the non oil and
gas side of our economy.
obviously we've got a big hit to
the
Hospitality sector to the retail
are to the restaurant.
and and will hopefully you know
in the next few months as a
vaccine roll out C. recovery
there but do we have.
Do we have any data I mean I I
I've been just trying to keep
track in the paper and
anecdotally from people that I
know that we have any data that
shows how many.
Businesses especially small
businesses actually shattered
over the last year and kind of
where where are we at as we
start looking at tracking
recovery.
And Mr chair representative
Harper
unfortunately it is it is
difficult to get information
particularly on small businesses
that have completely closed
their operations a lot of small
businesses don't necessarily
need to file bankruptcy so all
we we had a a relatively let you
know limited number of
bankruptcy filings that while
there were you know that Senator
it's not quite the amount that
you would necessarily think
respective to how many small
businesses may have had to close
because they don't necessarily
need to file bankruptcy they
could just decide to to stop
operations I'm in so it's really
difficult to get at and number
the the track the recovery dot
org that I had pulled up before
does have information on small
businesses open however the way
that it defines a small business
opened as a small business it's
been an open an operation for
the last three days so it's
intended to pick up temporary
closures due to I think you are
orders that might be in place
but it's a lot harder to parse
that information out and
translate it to a permanent
closure so just because a
business hasn't opened a store
in three days doesn't mean that
it doesn't plan to you in a week
or a month or two
so it's it's a little harder to
track that but it it's a great
question that I wish we had more
specific data for.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
mystically CS is.
I mean we like track renewal of
business licenses or anything
like that.
Before for
I'm sorry before you continue Mr
glasses we I just want to remind
the zoom gods that we need to be
on speaker view.
to you know to be in compliance
with with our roles so Elaine
I'm not sure if that's on your
end or if that's upstairs but
whoever is managing his own
previous put us on speaker be.
Senate speaker here chair.
Okay thank you elect.
And thank you Mr chair
representative Harper I I will
defer to secretary Chardon park
on this one but as TRD might
have some better information on
that that type of data.
Mr chair and representative
Harper this is something I can
take back to the staff of the
audit and compliance division
and and see what data we have
and and whether we think it's
timely and accurate we might
have something like for example
when when a business closes
there's certain paperwork that
submitted to let us know that
they won't be filing anymore so
that we don't think they're not
filing.
The problem
the secretary of state's office
might have you know have some
information
regulation and licensing and
environment also regulate for
example restaurants and bars say
they might have something and I
can put out some feelers to see
what exists.
Yeah that would be much
appreciated thank you.
The chair and and I could add on
to that I think you bring up a
really interesting point and I
think that if we really need to
know the impact and so I know a
lot of businesses actually
register with the local
governments they have business
licenses and so I think I'll
reach out to our local
government division to see what
they can find out working with
miss league or association
counties and maybe we do a
survey of some sort to try to
identify the number of
businesses that close that I'll
I'll look at it from that
perspective as well.
Awesome thank you and and and
thank you all again.
Secretaries and and this latest
excellent presentation and and
thank you chairman for the time.
Thank you Representative Harper
I'm gonna go next to
Representative role metal.
Representative Matthew next.
Mr chair sorry are you are you
calling me I'm sorry my internet
just cut out right is a minute
yes you're not you're you're
next on the list but.
Okay great thank you Mr chair
apologies my internet is a bit
sketchy thank you all for the
presentation this morning super
informative and I'm new here so
please forgive me if these are
not obvious questions I am
pleased to see that I think in
regards to what the revenue
forecasts is that when we look
at the boom and bust of our
reliance on oil and gas
you know we're we are seeing
consistency with the boom and
bust cycles even in this
pandemic so that's one thing in
addition to that I'm really
curious about what Secretary
starting Clark discussed
pertaining to the case shaped
recovery that's been projected
as far as what is expected I
didn't see any actual chart or
graphic that looks like that
so I'm really curious as to when
we talk about the recovery from
a job perspective and what
you're talking about with the
decline can you just touch on
that again I may have missed
where where that declining part
of the cave is meant to be and
what what we can expect as far
as projections go and where that
that comes from when we're
focused on the upswing that
we're hoping for.
Okay.
A little bit more and and
perhaps I can once once I'm I've
answered your question I can
navigate to some slides that
I'll be able to share with you
but basically what we're what
we're finding is that total
wages are recovering much more
quickly than job losses and so
mathematically what that means
is that wages for higher earning
a wage earners are recovering
more quickly than
wages for low income earners and
so you know that the total
number of wages is recovering
quickly because those who earn a
lot are getting their jobs back
in getting back to work more
quickly where is lower income
workers like and food services
to some extent retail and
mystically CS cover that there
are actually up spots in in
retail as well but leisure and
hospitality definitely and you
know and and to add to the
remarks I made about this
earlier what that means is that
filled the duration of this
downturn are going to be
unfortunately felt
disproportionately by not just
like lower income workers but
workers of color more women than
men and especially women of
color and and it there's an
association with educational
attainment the lower your at
level of educational attainment
the longer this impact is going
to affect you so that's all
wrapped up together in this
case shape recovery that I'm
talking about.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Secretary for that response I
get I guess as a follow on to
one of the things that I'm
interested in is when we look at
the employment recovery with
that sort of downside of the
case shape and fifty percent
recovery and
just about fifty percent and
leisure and hospitality
and and thinking about the
future of of how this how we do
recover I'm curious if are you
tracking gig economy work in
that percentage are we seeing an
increase in that as well and
then coupled with that too now
that we're getting revenues from
e-commerce is that calculated
separately and does that affect
the retail aspect of what we're
doing as well and have we seen
any sort of shifts and in those
two spaces if you can respond to
that.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative from Mero we are
seeing impacts on gig economy
workers although I don't have
that data at my fingertips we
could put something together
that the person are slides where
we touched upon it is as we
mentioned in that unemployment
chart you know that showed the
the stock of continued
unemployment claims we noted
that there's a different P. U. a
federal program that was created
to provide assistance like
unemployment assistance workers
and the self employed and they
are typically not eligible to
receive unemployment assistance
but at the peak about eighty two
thousand New Mexicans were
receiving some sort of relief
through that
and I I might have missed a a
piece of your question was their
second part that I didn't just
answer.
Just on the e-commerce frontals
you are we seeing an uptick and
and any of that revenue is it
separate is there a way for us
to parse that out absolutely we
Mr chair and representative we
do
have the ability to parse out
internet sales that of course
the state has been collecting
the state share of G. R. T. and
internet sales since July first
twenty nineteen the local option
tax will go into effect on
internet sales on July first
twenty twenty one and and it is
one of the few bright spots in
the G. R. T. and in general fund
revenue in general you know part
of it I I think what Mr Garcia's
mentioned about the uptick in
retail sales was on point I I
think it varies by household but
you've got the stimulus payments
coming in you have people
staying at home and noticing
things about their house that
they don't like and want to fix
them you have people who
couldn't spend money on travel
if they wanted to and and so
that's freeing up potentially
money that shifted to retail and
child care you have a certain
number of households that aren't
paying for child care that they
usually do and restaurants
spending you know typically it's
it's cheaper to buy groceries
and so for all these different
reasons I think that's part of
why we're seeing consumption
shift into retail.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
madam secretary that's very
helpful and I guess finally I'm
just trying to understand with
the new revenue at a hundred
sixty nine million and the
decline of the eight hundred and
fifty seven million of I'm
trying to understand those two
numbers that were presented and
and how we sort of reconcile
when we think about the budget
we think about revenue coming in
how do we how do we sort of what
we do with those two numbers
from our perspective as
lawmakers if you could help me
understand those two
discrepancies.
Mr chair representative Romero
and I'm happy to take the first
stab at this then of course if
if secretary Romero starting
Clark would like to add anything
they're more than welcome to do
so
one when we think about new
money it is recurring revenues
for this fiscal year compared to
the recurring budget of last
fiscal year.
And in twenty nineteen and and
at this clear twenty twenty but
primarily in twenty nineteen the
Legislature exercised
significant restraint in taking
the upsurge of revenue that we
saw from the oil and gas boom
and plugging it into recurring
budgets so revenue was spiking
but recurring budget weren't
keeping pace with that because
revenue was spiking fifteen
percent and because it was you
know what was seen as a.
Risky bond by basing it all on
oil and gas we didn't increase
FY nineteen budget by fifteen
percent and similarly in FY
twenty one we saw revenues grow
in double digits again
excuse me in FY twenty and
It's revenue was projected to
slightly decline based on a
first is a one time bomb but our
other recurring revenue sources
that wasn't specifically federal
mineral leasing
were expected to grow again but
we there was still sort of a
catch up that the budget was
playing to where the revenues
were so in the twenty twenty
regular session in playing that
catch up the legislature passed
some budget increases that would
have brought the recurring
budget to about seven point six
billion more in line with where
that revenue estimate would have
been however in the June twenty
twenty special session with the
data that we had available at
the time well prices are just
limited to fifteen dollars
production looks like it was
plummeting as well productive is
shutting and etcetera it was a
very bleak outlook in that going
into that session and therefore
the legislature very smartly
paired back a significant chunk
of those increases so we didn't
actually end up with a year over
year budget declined but they
did pare back the increases that
were planned for FY twenty one
and then also used some federal
funds that were available to
offset another hundred forty
five million or sell us some of
that spending so that the
recurring budget level than for
FY twenty one was at about seven
billion so now when we're going
into this new revenue estimate
and we're looking at revenue is
potentially coming in at about
seven point one to near seven
point two billion then we're
looking at a possibility of a
hundred and sixty nine million
dollars available in that
revenue estimate above the
current seven billion dollar
budget
said some of that would need to
be utilized in terms of federal
funds offsets so actually we're
looking at the seven point and
so a little over seven point two
billion there's about three
hundred so million in new
revenue.
But both the LESC and the
executive recommendation to
replace those federal funds
slots so once you back out the
replacement of that there's only
about a hundred and sixty nine
million in new money that's left
for increasing budgets about
that that seven point two
billion dollar level so that
that's how we end up reconciling
that in terms of a drop from the
previous fiscal year versus
where the budget is now and the
restraint that the legislature
executed in both prior sessions
and in the special session when
looking at the revenue picture.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
madam secretary and the quest
yes that's been very informative
I'll first I'll stop here on my
novice questions I appreciate
your time everybody and look
forward to following up and and
seeing uh you know what we can
do to fix this economy thank
you.
Thank you Mr Romero and this
sort of under the there are no
obvious questions that's why we
do our our meetings this way you
know from from the beginning we
we get these very very smart and
and prepared folks at TRD DFA
and LESC to give us a full
briefing because without this
base knowledge you know it's
very hard for us to do the rest
of our work the rest of the
session so please ask away there
are no obvious questions here
let's go next to Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman and and I
want to ask a quick question to
to don on the only gas side
those of us who live in only gas
country us the San Juan basin in
the Permian basin the sixty day
moratorium on on the on federal
lands is really concerning and
and and I appreciate your
charge.
On the backlog of permits and
also the inventory of drilled
wells but I completed that
that's really helpful and that's
really positive for the state of
Mexico because we the industry
will have an inventory to to to
go ahead and but our industry
because of the the state decline
of the cell horizontal wells.
seventy percent decline ability
mentioned in a flat flat off we
have to have that pipeline it
permits you know on going.
In the regulatory departments of
these other major companies even
small companies they've got to
keep that ball rolling and sixty
days is a.
it's not too bad but this year
we're we're in trouble because
it takes a year that eighteen
months sometimes longer to get
these permits so you got a bill
that in.
The time log I mean we've been
working on permits to you know I
I.
Representative was some small
cap the only gas operators
and on Federal lance's force
lance and it's taken me we I
just talked to one of my
colleagues it is taken as three
years.
to it to get for drilling
permits.
And the and the and the forced
in Rio Arriba county and that
we've got some other permit and
settlement you know that we that
were present and so I don't know
how you gonna forecast that
that's going to be really tricky
do you have any thoughts on that
I mean it in a I forgot to
mention to you don and and Mr
chairman and the panel
right away sure so critical
pipeline right of ways are so
critical because these prolific.
Shale wells are usually at you
know two thousand excuse me at
two mile lateral amounted to my
lateral you know thirty forty
stage fright jobs
you know they come in like gang
busters and they they drop off
but you have to have that
pipeline right of way to hook up
your well because these wells or
or oily you know like sixty
seventy percent of the volume is
oil but thirty forty percent
natural gas so without those
pipeline right away your you
know you're kind of trouble
because you don't want to you
know want to flare the gas so
maybe it's just a waste and so
we want to hook up that well you
know simultaneously and and we
start paying taxes I mean you
you I thank you listed about
ten.
Different taxes at the only gas
industry placed with Donna thank
you you want your charts I had
the percentage of our budget
they come from all the guests
from the very sources and I
think the for fifteen year
average has to be thirty percent
of the last ten year is it about
thirty three percent do you
recall.
Mr chair before before you
respond there I know speaker go
hand at a and on that point that
he wanted to chime in before you
answer so let me speaker thank
you Mr chairman we we did get
some very good information
yesterday and today from the
White House about.
President Biden's actions in I I
just want to make clear that
this is the sixty day moratorium
any announcement today is only
dealing with leases there's
nothing being done with regard
to permitting so there's no
action at all from the federal
government as we understand it
that would affect any federal
permitting is only on leases on
new leases or acreage for future
development so any any acreage
this least.
All the ongoing permitting will
continue and will be unaffected
is our understanding and and I
believe that the current with
the actually the just one up at
the White House website as well
so we're so what I yeah I I
agree you know that there's
issues of concern I just want to
make clear that yeah the issues
that are registered mentioned
about.
Representative permitting I
don't think that there's any any
executive action on that front.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
the speaker that is great news
because there's a lot of there's
a lot of confusion out there on
that point and and and and
that's really good news because
most of the lancer lead based
I'm in San Juan basin and Mossos
lands have been laced over the
last sixty seventy years and
in in the land office for
example I mean thank they're
least sales are pretty are
pretty small because most of the
L. at least everything and and
the industry has done a good job
so that's excellent base because
New Mexico as well best with a
lot of federal lands
and I believe don you mentioned
fifty two percent of our
production come from federal
lands the San Juan basin may I
say eighty percent up here you
know I I know as far as the
ownership.
In the southeast
Or the state Permian basin one
thirds private one source
Federal once thirds say that a
lot of time to have to combine
all three ownership sits in a
six hundred forty acre spacing
unit so was keeping now Mant
excellent I mean I really
appreciate your your only gas
expertise is getting better and
better and it's so it's so
important our state's budget I
mean we we can't replace it and
and we need to take care of it
and we're having a heavily
regulated
yes we should pay and and we we
just need to keep on drill and
and keep keep that production
profile flat and not declining
it it's just been a real great
fantastic revenue source for our
state so thank you Mr chairman
and thank you again Mr speaker
all that clarification on that
distant plies to new lacing so
that's really good manners and I
did and I in in Mr chairman
Representative Strickler I'm
looking right now.
At the White House dot
government backed the and it's
it's with it's clear that
they're going to have a review
of the permitting process that's
really a sort of the an
examination of how the process
works it's not not going to you
know get in the way of any
current city that are needed for
at least increase the.
And just remember panel it takes
Year to to say too much to get
to get Department estates a long
time and you got it through all
yeah go through all the
environmental impacts and it's
it's it's it's a slow process so
that's good news.
Just one quick thing on the
restaurant industry I know
Representative Harper had a
question on on how many
businesses have gone out in the
trunk the restaurant trade
association has gotten out
information that there's two
thousand restaurants in our
state five hundred have
currently shut down and and also
five thousand jobs have been
lost permanently so it really is
hurting our our state on I can't
wait for restaurants open up
again
hopefully the governor will will
do that we need to open up these
businesses I'm I'm pleased that
retail issue is my they can come
back as it should you know late
their their customer flow is is
a very manageable you know
people come in and out I go to
staples all the time and and
others there's fewer than ten
people in there at one time is
very safe and yet it's soap so
again there I know what I want
to get mainly.
The grant that's expensive and I
get in there get out about ten
minutes so
excellent excellent presentation
thank you and.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator Strickler
that's good Representative
Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam secretary is missing less
us really appreciate your work
and your your powerful
presentations.
I just have a maybe a couple
questions and a couple comments
But but the up spas looking
online that the document that
meticulous is used as a December
eight document you can get it
from the LFC.
the page of the December eighth
LESC meeting it's in the hand
out so it's a great great
document to have.
The but just so I get the
numbers straight because I take
the millions and I just kind of
move the decimal point so my
brain can grasp it but.
You know we're we're January two
thousand twenty one we're in the
middle of the twenty one fiscal
budget
July first starts the twenty two
twenty two fiscal budget so in
the in the in fiscal year twenty
we are budget was roughly
seventy million I'm sorry.
And on line of like up was
roughly
Seven billion dollars.
And then in in twenty was seven
point three billion is do I have
those numbers correct.
Madam subdisciplines.
Mr chair representative my SS
yes so the the total recurring
amount spent from the general
fund FY twenty one was seven
billion I will point out that
part of that included about a
hundred forty five of federal
funds what city which didn't
change the actual recurring
budget so agencies recurring
budgets for about seven point
two billion but what was spent
from the general fund was about
seven billion for FY twenty one.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr places
no that's a great point because
we focus so much on the on the
general fund because we got to
make sure that that solvent that
sometimes we forget.
That our budget is way beyond
the the the general fund
expenditures when you include
roads of both the road budget
and and and federal monies that
come in and so the current the
current budget is seven point
three billion Mr chairman Mr
lettuce.
How much is it from general fund
spending sure
Mr chair Representative Maestas
so for FY twenty one the current
recurring agency budgets are
seven point two oh nine billion
now for FY twenty two it would
depend on whether you're looking
at the LFC recommendation or the
executive recommendation which I
can pull bill we will what are
those roughly Mr chair Mister
president for this up for this
budget discussion of the session
what are the two
recommendations.
Mr chair if you give me just one
moment
So the the executive
recommendation for for total
recurring appropriations is
seven point two nine eight
billion and the LESC
recommendation for recurring
probation and seven point three
six one so about seven point
three to seven point four.
Thank you Mr chairman the
services so we are so we went
from seven.
Of.
You know seven billion.
To seven point three or I'm
sorry seven point two and then
this year we're gonna go to
seven point three or seven point
three five.
Something like that I just want
to make the point that and then
of course there's two point four
billion in reserves correct Mr
chairman of the glass that's
like right now there's if we
were to take a snapshot in time
there's roughly two point four
billion at the bottom of the
bank account that we're not
spending.
Mr chair Representative my
assess it as a snapshot in time
there's about two point four
billion there now both the LESC
and the executive recommendation
proposed spending some of that I
understand thank you and I just
want to make the point Mr
chairman the you know the
banking crisis of October of
vote wait led to a budget crisis
tremendous budget crisis in two
thousand nine right into a
special session I think it was
in September October or August
double nine we.
You know cut tremendously the
the oil price crisis of of up to
fifteen sixty eight to a budget
crisis in two thousand sixteen
we had up come back I think late
September early October and and
cut the current fiscal year that
then current fiscal year by five
percent so then we have a
pandemic slash economic crisis
in twenty twenty but we do not
have a budget crisis the state
of Mexico does not have a budget
crisis and that's frankly the
leadership of.
Of a kind of a sick less us that
you know.
A chair Lundstrom former chair
Smith
the governor's office and and
the folks on this soon so I just
I'm just proud to be amongst you
that we we did a fantastic job
in terms of maneuvering to this
current crisis because of the
because of the up you know
conservative measures we took in
terms of keeping that reserve at
a at a very high amount.
I know it's tough times we we
don't know.
It's not morning yet not morning
yet you know I think when
everybody gets vaccinated and
and and all those restaurants
that Representative stricter
spoke of get get back in action
hopefully with the with brand
new permission slips from the
state to to sell spirits along
with beer and wine it's it's not
morning yet but I think it's
always darkest before the dawn
and I think there's really no
place to go but up economically
from this point forward so I
just hope that we keep that in
mind as we craft the budget and
and and Tax Policy.
Future but just a couple quick
one last question the
Mr chair the.
The dollar amount you know ten
years ago we used to say a
dollar in the in a barrel of oil
would cost the state roughly
nine million dollars now that
number because a production has
exploded.
Twenty one million dollars we're
doing about three hundred forty.
Million barrels a year
If we're doing three hundred
forty roughly three to forty
million barrels a year and and
oil fluctuates one dollar.
How does it only a suspect the
state twenty one billion dollars
a year wouldn't that.
Wouldn't that put us at seven
cents on the dollar.
If if the oil companies are
being affected three hundred
forty million a dollar per
barrel it only affects the state
twenty one billion because I
know I've been trying to put a
exact dollar amount on.
On state government revenue per.
Her of hundred dollars of of
crude oil could you tell me of
this chair Mister less us up how
you derived at that twenty one
million dollars.
Yes absolutely Mr chair
representative my SS and and you
actually bring up a good point
that is a cabbie ought to be
made with that with that rule of
thumb if you will and it is
that only takes into
consideration direct production
taxes including our severance
taxes and federal mineral
leasing payments specifically
for what goes to the general
fund so it wouldn't capture all
state revenue it does not
capture gross receipts taxes
from drilling activity that
might change when prices change
it does not capture personal
income taxes from changes in
jobs or corporate income taxes
from changes in profitability it
is solely the severance the
specific severance taxes that
come to the general fund and
specifically federal will rate
will do payments that come to
the general fund such that eight
singular one dollar change all
else equal would be about a
twenty two million dollar change
however it's also important to
keep in mind that that rule of
thumb starts to break down once
you have large price changes
because large price changes can
significantly affect production
and therefore you would have an
amplified effect of a change in
price and a change in
production.
Thank you for that no that's
fantastic I love a.
Hearing economic analysis and
you give light you give light
and hope to the.
This will Science I appreciate
that tremendously I I just want
to make the point that we're
we're we're in business the
state of Mexico and the people
of New Mexico are in the oil
business.
And our friends from the south
east and and north west of have
taught us that over the years
what we're all in this together
doesn't matter.
Whether you sleep closer to the
truth or not we're all a we're
all equal partners and I think
up before getting you know six
seven cents on the dollar it
might be time to to renegotiate
with our with our business
partners at and the crude oil
industry but lastly we made up a
good point Mr chairman of the
suggestions madam secretary's
the
The G. R. T. took a big hit in
the Eddy County but it didn't
necessarily take a hit statewide
which is.
We are given up in pandemic and
the loss of jobs and and tell me
if I'm on the ball park it was
due to of tremendous
construction of particularly on
the west side of Albuquerque the
huge Amazon building one of the
largest buildings in the country
of its type is currently being
built and then also internet.
Sales one of the smartest things
we did was was tax the internet
to put local businesses on a
pole footing with
With mail delivery up.
Why why has outside of any
league because of the oil why
has your to remain relatively
the same in the midst of a
pandemic.
Mr chair representative my eyes
as you pointed out some of the
several major reasons so we saw
declines in industries that we
would expect to see declines in
like leisure and hospitality
arts and entertainment those
declines were very significant
however our two largest sources
of individual dollars from gross
receipts taxes are retail sales
and construction in terms of the
actual dollar amounts generated
they outpace say the mining
sector individually although
granted the mining sector
affects not just mining itself
but also construction and other
things so with that caveat
construction retail are the two
largest sources and so because
you're right the the bump in
internet sales even though we
saw in state retail sales
decline so that reflects would
in person consumer activity to
some degree out of state retail
sales which reflects that the E.
commerce that increased
substantially and it more than
offset all of the declines in in
the in state retail spending and
then you're right with
construction projects there were
a variety of construction
projects and in addition to the
one that you mentioned some of
the more notable notable ones
are on wind energy construction
projects that were ongoing in
Torrance County and Roosevelt
County that generated
significant bumps in those areas
if you look at some of the G. R.
T. charts every growth of two
hundred percent and in those
counties and that's because of
very significant wind projects
that were ongoing there was also
significant border wall
construction occurring in Luna
County there was significant
Papen and gross receipts taxes
and Luna County that were
experienced so massive amounts
of construction and retail
spending for the first dead
either mostly offset or more
than offset many of the declines
in G. R. T..
that we initially saw from the
pandemic before we started to
see the effects of a falling
rate counts
thank you Mr chairman Mr guy
says no it's great great news
and I think R. G. R. T. is only
gonna go up as workers go back
to work businesses get back
online I believe constructions
you know particularly if we
fully fully built a sellable con
and west Albuquerque adults what
the land will will be will be
massive construction it if if we
maintain good public policy
thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam secretary's missing less.
Thank you Rep semi Spence next
on the list as Representative
Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you presenters for.
Current treatment.
The.
Revenue and budget projections a
question for Mr glacis.
Despite being down fifty five
thousand people.
In the on the employment rules
and some significant headwinds
for leisure restaurants
hospitality there is a
projection for I believe I heard
five point four percent increase
in recurring revenues could you
tell me specifically from what
sectors of the economy is
projected to come.
Mr chair representative Scott I
just want to make sure I'm
clarifying your question when
you're talking about at a five
point four percent increase and
recurring revenues I'm trying to
to clarify that since FY twenty
one is projected to be down from
FY twenty are you referring to
it to FY twenty two and the
increase from twenty to twenty
from twenty one to twenty two
yes that is correct.
Great so Mr chair representative
Scott I don't have a.
Specific number to reference you
too but I I can say that a big
portion of that has to do with
bringing up the oil price and
presumption of production
and that is eight and associated
G. R. T. is a big factor as well
as some employment gains and
other items that are expected to
boost income taxes and and G. R.
T. on related to drilling.
Mexico go ahead place.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative Scott I'd like to
share with you quickly
I hope you can see the screen.
And make a little larger this
appendix a one is is the
detailed revenue estimate I
realize it's probably pretty
small for you but you can see on
on fiscal year twenty two areas
that have a large percentage
change in a large dollar change
from the prior year and it's
it's pretty broad based and so
that that five percent five
point four percent growth is
probably as much a factor of
growth happening in FY twenty
two as it is the FY twenty one
is depressed but you can see
there's there's broad based
growth in the gross receipts tax
you have the hold harmless
payments to local governments
gradually phasing out pretty
significant growth of six point
three percent in personal income
tax that has to do with growth
over twenty one it as well as
the new five point nine percent
top marginal tax rate going into
fact you can see oil like how
Mister glass yes mentioned
rebounding and then the last
thing I'll highlight is the
increase in distributions from
those permanent funds because of
the five year averaging so
there's a lot of detail there if
you like it.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
secretary I'm gonna have to get
a larger computer screen.
one more question and I suppose.
These are not.
Current and you expenditure
questions what we've got some
very large holes to fill.
Specifically with respect to.
The unemployment insurance fund
is a this taken into
consideration with the numbers
that you've given us today.
Mr chair representative Scott so
what we presented today is
specifically a general fund
revenue estimate so it is is
relegated only to the general
fund however you're absolutely
correct that the unemployment
trust fund is facing some
significant issues to dates are
as of the early January we had
already borrowed about two
hundred and five million dollars
from the federal government
there's projections from
workforce solutions we could
borrow us up to the four hundred
and fifty million dollars there
was some replenishment of the
balance of the fund
from cares Act funding at the
end of the year that put another
fifty million or so into that
but it will likely be tacked
through relatively quickly as
there remain large numbers of
individuals on those rules
the LFC budget recommendation
includes a three hundred million
dollar transfer to the
unemployment trust fund to try
to
help with this issue in order to
restore the balance of the fund
and to prevent additional
Tax increases due to the low
balance of the fund that could
potentially occur at the end of
this fiscal year.
Mr chairman.
Mr glacis.
At least for the next couple of
years it sounds like that might
be a recurring publication.
Is that your assessment.
Mr chair representative Scott
absolutely the a new from our
preliminary analysis the the one
time recommendation LFC has
included does not look like in
and of itself it would shore up
and fix all the issues with the
unemployment trust fund and this
will likely be a multi year
issue at the legislature will
have to deal with in order to
keep that bond at a sufficient
balance and to pay attention to
the tax rates that will be
imposed on businesses.
So
I make.
So I'd like to just add on that
we're not just looking at the
state to try to help with this
problem we're also looking to
looking and trying to negotiate
with Washington on additional
funding we're not Mr I don't
know for sure what their plan is
but one of things that we did
here is that there is a
potential to get a block grants
and that that block grant can be
used to pay back some of these
unemployment trust funds New
Mexico is not unique this is not
new unique problem and so I
would hope that this will be
brought to their attention you
Mr since tension and that more
states will be asking for more
support for their on
unemployment compensation funds.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Jen Leasure use for your
answers that's all I.
Thank you representative next on
the list as Representative
stands.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you M. two ari madam secretary
and director at a meadow and
chief economist I wanted to ask
you guys some questions about
both the sort of short term how
do we weather the storm for New
Mexicans and then the long term
economic recovery
a couple of years ago when I
first came into the legislature
we were briefed on the last ten
years of economic recovery after
the last recession and it was
clear that New Mexico was slow
to recover with respect to the
country overall and that just as
you're talking about today our
lowest paid workers and people
who are most vulnerable to
economic downturn did not
recover and as a result of that
our entire you know social
fabric was impacted by it we
have the highest rates of
homelessness in the City of
Albuquerque we have a housing
crisis where our food banks are
overwhelmed and so you know kind
of in the short term as we're
focused on the sixty day
session.
My question is for the short
term what do you feel like we
can do is the state what should
we be focusing our budget on to
help more people survive this
short term economic impacts of
the pandemic and over the long
term what can we be doing with
our tax code and with our budget
to ensure that the workers and
people who are most vulnerable
don't end up on the long tail of
recovery and end up in economic
dire straits for the next
several years.
Madam chair Mr chair
Representative Stansbury I think
I'll take the first step and I
think that that has secretary
Shankar can kind of fill in the
gaps so one of the things that
the executive is done is in
their recommendation they said
five four hundred seven five
million for what we call
pandemic relief and and and
that's that's exactly what
you're talking about it's it's
talking about meeting immediate
needs and then some longer term
needs you know to to to kind of
our recovery what you know what
what what can we do to boost the
appropriation of that there's
almost half a billion dollars
that aside for that and and this
is something issues identified
something that that that
administration is is where our
real very interested in working
with legislators to find out to
to to identify what can be
earmarked for what purposes so
short term long term the other
thing is in the executive
recommendation there's a twenty
five million dollar request for
tourism industry we know that
that at the leisure and
hospitality industry has been
hit really hard and you'll hear
more during well I don't know
you well you're one of the other
committees tourism department
has a plan for helping the
industry and and and with what
they're saying is that they can
shorten recovery two three years
versus seven years as well you
know with currently anticipated
now and actually helped bring in
more state and local taxes and
and put twenty seven thousand
people back to work so I think
those major investments well
they may be short term they're
going to have long term impacts
and so those are the two things
that I want to highlight that
we're not looking at any type of
chairs or federal money that we
can get that will be I would say
could be used short term to help
with the major issues essential
workers you know we're we we
have just lots of but at the
expenses that we have an address
that we still need to address so
we're hopeful.
Getting more of their money but
we also need to set aside large
parts of the budget to help with
long term recovery.
And Mr chair and representative
Stansbury I fully echo the
comments of secretary Romero I
guess I would just only added a
couple comments to to that
response you know one example of
that injection of pandemic
relief that the legislature is
considering that that the tax
and Representative department
has worked together with
leadership on is Senate bill one
I believe that bill yesterday
went through its first committee
and that's a bill that provides
six hundred dollar rebate to
basically to to people of a low
low income who are eligible for
the working families tax credit
so that would inject a
considerable amount of relief
immediately into the New Mexico
economy the second one I want to
highlight is house bill one
twelve which is Representative
Armstrong is bill creating a
health care affordability fund
and and basically it works with
the existing health insurance
sorry the insurance premium
surtax it replaces of federal
fee that was phased out by the
trump administration with the
state insurance premium surtax
and that money would partially
benefit the general fund but at
big share of the additional
revenue would go into a new
health care affordability fund
where we can expand health
coverage to thousands I believe
it's about twenty three thousand
New Mexicans who are currently
uninsured and addition to
expanding that coverage would
bring down the cost of premiums
to many many more New Mexicans
so that is a significant thing
we could do to improve the
safety net and and make sure
that New Mexicans are are
protected in this difficult
recovery time aside from that
you know just making sure that
our tax system is adequate so
that in in a in a decent year
and over the long term trend we
have the ability to fund
critical services and then I'll
just add job training and school
support you know without a
workforce that is ready for the
jobs of tomorrow we have a
harder time recruiting them here
and and growing the companies
that we already have.
I'll stop there.
You Mr chairman I'm if I could
just follow on quickly you know
I think one of the things that
I'm most concerned about I I do
think that the federal
government will come through
with additional support because
they have to and I know that our
state and our governor and our
legislature deeply committed to
helping families and communities
get through this really
difficult time the darkest hour
is Representative my SS was just
saying but what I worry about is
one year from now to your firm
two two years from now when
people who are currently or you
know unemployed can't find a job
again when those jobs don't come
back when our small businesses
are mom and pop businesses who
had to shutter during the
pandemic don't have the capital
to reopen like you know how do
we ensure that we're not just
providing a safety net to get
through this emergency time but
that in that time we were
transitioning from the emergency
back into rebuilding our economy
that the entire part of our
economy that's wonderful right
now doesn't end up you know in
absolute poverty because of this
economic downturn like what is
what do you think are some
specific things that we can do
to sort of stop gap that
happening as we're transitioning
into recovery.
I'm not sure Mr chair and
representative Stansbury I think
it was directed towards any or
all of us I'll just say you know
it's it's a difficult time
And to prioritize because the
needs of of government services
greatly outweigh what we can
provide and so making sure that
we deliver government services
and the most effective and
efficient way possible and then
prioritize those things that
will help us emerge stronger
than we went into this and and I
guess.
The I'm thinking about public
schools.
Making sure that
The impacts of this downturn
don't have generational impacts
on our on our public schools and
their ability.
Graduate students are prepared.
Thank you madam secretary and
thank you Mr chairman I didn't
mean to put you on the spot with
probably the most difficult
question that our society faces
right now but I I just I really
think that it's incumbent on us
right now to be thinking about
not just the short term but how
do we ensure that those who are
most vulnerable in our economy
and our communities don't end up
like I said in and in dire
straits in New Mexico a couple
of years and really I think it's
incumbent on us as lawmakers to
figure out how to put into place
not just the safeguards but the
opportunities so that that
doesn't happen so thank you
thank you representative
Stansbury to I I know the
Economic Development Department
isn't here today but you know I
I'm thinking about the the
target industries that they
adopted as as sort of their
prioritization where they're you
know they're handful of
industries where they identified
that we have a strategic
advantage and we can leverage
our existing strings and the
ones that come to mind are
outdoor recreation aviation spin
off businesses related to the
technology that's developed at
our national labs and and there
are several more on film
industry is another you know but
I think keeping the eye on the
prize and continuing to support
those the the growth and
development of those industries
is also important right now.
Mr chair I might just add on to
one thing you know I think the
other thing you talk about
investment in people and I think
that that reflected in the
executive recommendation for
where we're wanting to do more
as far as opportunity
scholarships are concerned that
you know we see the the major
impact you know it's building
that workforce that we can get
businesses here so they can
provide jobs and so I think
those are the long term
investments that we need to
continue to make us it's it's an
education workforce development
and so just.
Touch on that.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
that's all.
Sheikh you Representative
Stansbury and and thank you for
those answers secretary Romero
and senator Jordan Clarke
anybody else on the list so go
head are you know I've I've seen
this I've seen these
presentations a number of times
now and I've seen the evolution
of them since you know since
last you know may June when when
things looked very dire and and
you know obviously thinks are
not as bad in terms of revenues
for the state
but we're not out of the woods
yet and I think that that's you
know part of the work that we're
gonna be doing this this
legislative session is is making
sure that we have an economy
that not only can get people
back to work but any condoms Sir
kids.
But but economy worldwide okay
was good.
Sorry two hours income one to
one.
You know in any Kanemi that
works for all of us and that
gets it's all back to work I'm I
will say you know what one of
things that this committee is
really good at is looking at
things whether it's credits
incentives whether it's you know
revenue enhancers whatever it
might be going through it with a
fine tooth comb and and making
sure that we're very surgical in
in our approach no one things
are very proud of is you know to
to hear that the work that was
done in twenty nineteen the work
that was led by former chairman
Jim Trujillo you know really put
us in a in a much better spot
than we would be otherwise and
you know clearly that work is
going to continue and that work
will will be
critical over the next fifty
days or so.
With regard to how we.
in short that the state has the
adequate revenue to fund the
critical programs that we fund
you know there's also a surgical
approach that I believe we need
to take on the on the spending
side and so you know I'm I'm
glad I'm on things like the
option scholarship and I know
that I I I it rips apart
actually.
You know in the past have the
have been critical of a one size
fits all approach and and you
know my understanding of what's
being proposed now is that it's
it's much more targeted you know
to folks who who truly can use
the support I can use to help
so.
you know we'll we'll keep
working all these different
angles
clearly New Mexico so far I
think has
You know avoided the worst props
to to appropriators on both
sides of the aisle and and you
know from both chambers for
doing the right thing or the
last few years to set us up to
be able to withstand this and
then now the work continues you
know the diversification of the
economy I think is key you know
we many of us talk about all
time you know I think we we need
to start making happen I'm I'm
glad to hear the workaround
aviation the aviation industry
for example outdoor recreation
center the big one.
as as was mentioned and there
are others out there as well you
know will will be will be
looking at some of those in this
committee over the next few
weeks so I'll stop there we're
we're at eleven o'clock thank
you all for for your
For your thoughtful questions
committee members and and thank
you presenters for for such a
good in robust discussion for
planning purposes we will
compete again Friday at nine we
have a couple of presentations
from the office of the state
auditor and the office of the
state treasurer we have a bill
in our committee house bill
ninety eight which is one of two
fairly large tax cleanup bill
that the department of taxation
revenue is is pursuing both have
been endorsed by our inner
committee
we if time permitting we will
handle HB ninety eight on Friday
