Here, Representative Terasa,
vice chair, madam.
Representative Lente, thank you.
I think.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I'd like
me to explain the bill first or
we'll move it for discussion and
then we'll go. Thank you so
much, Madam Chair, I always
like, so I appreciate that, um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, this is, um, House
Bill 325, New Mexico taxes
construction and a very unique
and ultimately a burdensome
manner with among if not the
highest sales tax burden in the
nation.
The Mexico GRT can amount to
nearly 30,000 on a $400,000 home
in some high tax jurisdictions,
which is a single.
Which is the single biggest
budget cost line item after um
the lot.
The biggest challenge to
overcoming New Mexico's
estimated 40,000 housing units
shortage is needed for private
investment alongside public
investment from various levels.
Quite simply, government can't
solve this crisis alone, and the
market rate builders developers
have a lion's share of their
role to play and ultimately.
Bolstering our housing supply.
This bill mitigates New Mexico's
number one financial hurdle to
private capital investments for
the construction, um, this uh
bill serves to reduce overall
tax burden on new residential
construction, which is a
hindrance of new project
feasibility and ultimately to
capital, um, competitiveness
with neighboring neighboring
states.
Madam Chair and
Ultimately, what we're trying to
do is help build more homes and
help get more people in homes in
the state of New Mexico.
Um, would like to say anything,
uh, I.
If you have time for that, and
then I'd like to introduce
MacKenzie Bishop from Brazo
Holmes to let him out as well.
Madam,
um, I'm here today because as in
homeless shelters for many
years, um, homelessness is like
a game of musical chairs, and
this is how experts explain it,
where the chairs, and you can
imagine that some individuals
may be in metaphorical
wheelchairs and can't get to the
chairs. Um, what that means is
that.
Our housing supply, it matters
that there are all kinds of
housing and what I see in our,
in my community in Albuquerque
is that folks apartment are
inhabiting the more affordable
and so, Madam Chair and I'm
representative as we are facing
a crisis of over 40,000. We
don't just need affordable
housing. We need all housing so
that um so Madam Chair and
representative, this uh GRT is
one of the biggest construction,
and I believe that with a bill
like this, we can.
really stimulate housing
construction has done is that.
This, it's really meant to for
us to understand uh that as
we're making an investment, I
think I said in in commerce when
we heard this bill of $100
million of this kind of tax
credit, um, we want to
understand how many gateway
center where I used to work,
which is a very large shelter
was $100 million. That was an
investment that we decided and
there's still more to build out
of it, what can we get? How many
units can we get for 100 million
through this tax.
Good morning, Madam Chair, or
Madam Vice Chair and members of
the committee. Uh my name is
Mackenzie Bishop. I'm co-owner
and founder of, of Abrazo Homes
in Albuquerque, New Mexico.
build everywhere from Los Lunas
to Santa Fe, um, in addition, we
build all of Homewise's houses
in Santa Fe, and we also do some
build for rent developments, so.
Check all the boxes and do land
development as well. Um, we're a
privately owned home builder. We
don't have any outside investors
for New Mexico born and raised
and reinvest everything we, we
can um back into our business
and into growing the housing
supply. Um, this, this bill is
near and dear to my heart.
Um
Fundamentally in the state of
New Mexico, you know, the, the
biggest difference in in
distinction and how we tax
housing and construction as
opposed to our neighboring
states and quite frankly, most
of the states in America is that
we tax labor and material, um,
most states just tax materials,
um, so it results in a, you
know, roughly a double um of the
tax burden, even though our GRT
rates can be a little bit lower
than sales tax rates, um, and
ultimately in our business,
everything is compounded by.
commissions and things that are
based as a percentage of costs
and a percentage of sales price,
so this gets compounded pretty
dramatically, um, you know,
we're talking about potentially
a $100 to $15,000 tax.
Credit, if you will, um, to the
builders, but in many cases that
can turn into $30,000 or more
when you start adding in
borrowing costs and interest
rates for the end consumer. So,
thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, the amendment
number is 231504.
We have the amendment
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
basically what this amendment is
doing is putting a sunset on it
and a cap.
So, madam, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, the, the
cap as it's drafted is tied to
the FHA loan limit, um, which
for reference in most counties
in the state of New Mexico is
just under 525,000. It's a
little bit higher in Santa Fe
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Miles Conway and the
executive officer for the Santa
Fe Are northern New Mexico
Builders Association, we stand
in strong support of this bill.
Uh, we know some things to be
true from the from the housing
action report from MFA. We know
that filtering is a huge issue.
That is where folks, uh, with a
higher income or a more
reasonable income are occupying
homes that would be more
appropriate for folks of much
more modest income levels, and
so we need to boost production.
to kind of elevate people into
the homes that would be
appropriate for their income
levels, we know to be true for
the last 4 years building
materials are up by outrageous
amounts, 50% increase in gypsum,
73% increase in power and
transformers, 50% increase in
steel mill project uh products
that goes on and on 35% increase
in in uh concrete. We are
seeking the uh the assistance of
our legislature to close this
gap, this affordability gap.
And this pill, uh, like no other
bill does a great work to close
that gap and boost production on
housing to meet our housing
challenge. Thank you, uh, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
um,
Good morning, Madam Chair, and
we can to add housing supply.
That's solve, uh, the last of
the cost of that same in the
last 5 years. So we are now
getting more per unit GRT saying
it will mean our subsidy dollars
go further.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Kent
Cravens. I'm a registered
lobbyist for New Mexico
Association of Realtors.
And we're very happy if you look
at the session, you see one's
$20 million for uh fire
preparedness one's a half a
billion dollars for affordable
housing. There's 500,000 in
Albuquerque, another 500 here,
500 there. So there's a lot of,
a lot of projects being floated
around. The one bill that will
really make a difference.
Uh, immediately in this in this
uh whole scenario is House Bill
325, uh, based on the fact that
you're putting it in the hands
of the people that are actually
building the, the housing and
supplying and it's all a supply
and demand scenario here. We've
got to increase supply. I would
really encourage you to take a
hard look at the FIR because I'm
not sure how the price tag that
the FIR puts forward, um, so
with that that they're running
off to print and we should have
it.
Madam Chair members of the
committee for bringing this
legislation forward.
GRT on construction is a higher
than other states, thus pushing
investment and jobs out of New
Mexico. HB 325 will help lower
the cost of construction
is absolutely a billing
housing for all New Mex it will
make New Mexico stronger, that
will increase the tax base of
our communities.
of committee, uh, my name is
Ran. It's very simple. Uh, I
would suggest to you with all
the housing bills that, uh, this
is the bill that is would have
an immediate impact. It would
have statewide coverage, a
difference. I, I really believe
this is the most important
housing, uh, issue
housing estate communities that
provide affordable housing are
better positioned to attract and
strong support.
number again.
already been moved for
discussion. Thank you, Madam
Chair. It's 231.
How, how
Is it the promise of I need to
understand that it doesn't make
sense.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
um, great question. Um, it, it
helps to describe how we pay
taxes. Um, so in the process of
construction, we issue what are
called non-taxable transaction
certificates to our
subcontractors and which, which
eliminates the tax we pay
throughout the construction.
We actually pay construction
when the contract is completed,
um, for the guidance of the IRS.
So that's when we recognize our
revenue, um, on the, on the for
sale side. So we would at that
point, know what the sales price
is, and I believe um I won't
speak on behalf of tax taxation
revenue, um, that we would
probably have to provide some
kind of evidence, like a
settlement statement that would
Madam Chair Representative,
that's correct. Um, as drafted,
it's not the 1st 525,000. It's
only if the house is $525,000 or
less from a sales price.
OK. Does that make sense? But I
think it, I think it addresses
your
I
Europe.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and to
the need and it doesn't matter
whether you're on.
Beat him waiting.
I'm looking forward to it. I've
been in all the.
You know, I, I like this and
there's massive demand for up to
2 years to build a home.
You know, with
This
For our nursing.
Staff or entire state, but
At hand we look
At the possibility of.
But in other possibly even more
to move here.
And then earn thank you Madam
Chair.
Uh, under FHA and HUD.
Chair. Thank you.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
at present, the FHA loan limits
uh for all but two counties in
the state of New Mexico is
$524,255 in Santa Fe, it's
around 50 in Los Alamos, it goes
up to 690,000. Um, that's
evaluated on an annual basis by
the Federal Housing
Administration and adjusted
based on cost of living.
Madam Chair Representative, the
lowest max rate is 524,000, and
that's in effect, I think
there's 28 counties that that
cap is in effect for.
Causing builders to just build
along.
The I-25 corridor T benefit um
to make sure that that goes out
into other parts and thank you
for the question. Um, it's hard
to control that because it's
it's needs based.
Um, you know, they're not gonna
build, so it will be needs
space, so it probably will be in
the larger cities, but that's
where the problem is uh mostly
generated and so um I don't know
that we can control that, so it
really is needs based, and I
would, I would assume that um
Madam Chair, uh, representative
that they will evaluate every
city will evaluate will do the
same and.
Madam Chair and Representative
um in my experience with some of
the biggest parts of the
construction cost is uh putting
in the infrastructure and well,
yes, I do recognize that this
will certainly benefit a lot of
in homeless shelters in in
Albuquerque, I think it it also
will uh help in the rural areas
to have this kind of deduction
that normally you either
representative for that I
appreciate I don't know if this
is.
A thing, but it might be, and so
I just wanted to raise it, um.
The fire says that one of the
significant issues receipts tax.
Under, um, our statute because
the law excludes improvements,
um.
So, such as the house itself.
Um,
I don't know if you have that in
front of you, but can you just
Madam representative, um, yes,
it's a, it's a great question
and it is an important
distinction. The current section
related to GRT deductibility
7-9-53 addresses the sale of
real property. So if you own
your home that's already built
and you sell to a subsequent
home buyer, you aren't subject
to GRT on that. When we take a
raw piece of land construct
improvement, all of those
improvements are, are subject to
the
Um, I think the distinction
that's trying to thank you for
clarifying that. That's what I
thought, but I wasn't quite sure
so I appreciate the answers I,
um, please.
Um, and, um,
Thank you, uh, Madam, uh, as a
real, we have the downward
pressure of.
Which uh has very much like uh
because of that, there's a lot
of workers.
And what that's done is it's the
cost of homes in San Juan County
because of
The has decreased uh
dramatically.
And so I believe that's probably
the case in others who work here
in Santa Fe most.
Those who could potentially.
Uh, be in the market to buy a
home.
years.
Unfortunately, I, I, we've seen.
Uh, just.
couple of days we've seen rates
drop, um, Madam Chair.
This will help is
The taxes
Uh, you, you end up having to
Finance, taxes.
That is how this, that's how
this will help.
With the housing market.
What it'll do is it's going to
make a home, it could make a
home as much as 30,000 and that
combined with will spur.
That type of development.
When that happens
All housing prices will go down
because now somebody is leaving
a home to go to the secondary
market.
That's, that's the natural way.
To create
So I,
I like, I, I might want to see
us and purchase of a home
because that tax is um is still
added on top of the cost of a
home. I think this is a great
first step.
I think naturally
to
become more affordable.
And that allows people.
Is the basis for being able to,
and I think that's something
that.
I don't really have a um
Kind of will allow.
Which would without a hold
harmless is the state to pay
back, uh, it was Madam Chair, uh
representative, it wasn't added,
it was in the original bill.
OK.
Um, Madam Chair, I mean this
bill, I mean, it's in it echoes,
um.
um
Are we not expecting housing
prices to go up, um, given the
sign to all sorts of stuff,
we're gonna be shipping in like.
We rely heavily on lumber, um,
steal from our country, um, so
this may be very interesting,
but I'm predicting that this
$525,000 cap is going to be
reached pretty quickly so that
we're going to be seeing across
the boards is that we're gonna
us consumers are gonna be here
and that's not a question, Madam
Chair. Madam Chair, thank you.
I don't know if they're gonna be
statements or comments, um, but
wearing a lot of different hats
that I wear. I really.
appreciate this bill.
Um, as the mayor of a community
who housing his blessed years.
Um
For 20 plus more all of the FHA
we get hung up on oh houses need
to be dily.
Inaccurate when you
And the word that we start using
in Artesia quite often is
workforce for us is very
different than workforce housing
in Los Alamos. So allowing very
helpful for us so that we're not
boxed into a, a house that uh we
might not be able, depending,
and it's not just the, the
tariffs that we should worry
about. We went through this
during COVID. Um, I, I happen to
be a developer as well, uh, and
I remember what my lumber
packages were costing uh during
COVID, um, and that was a lot of
fun move on from that. So I, I
think fluctuations.
in the housing, but because
you've allowed such a range, I
think thank you all so much for
the way y'all wrote that because
the other problem that we really
see, especially in my community,
uh, is, is we've got some, some
so those folks that bought a
starter home that would like to
buy their next level can if that
next level doesn't exist, that
starter home never comes for
sale in that first time home
buyer has a hard time buying.
All of this is a um this is why
one of the major regions backed
the major developers to the way
this was structured, the way
I hope it goes through so that
we can
take action on this bill.
I also tax dollars, the tax
revenues they did not like to to
representative lunchtime, I
think the big last.
the weight of that decision,
housing may in fact be something
that, but none nonetheless, I
appreciate that you all have
that consideration.
Um, I also housing in the
conversations I've had with one
of the Republican analysts, you
all know that for me when I I
heard represented Montoya say
something about trickle down.
We've debated that a lot. I, I
don't often believe in that
economics that that's not what
they're proposing and they're
not, they're not saying the
actual cost of the tax credit.
is lowly appreciate that. Um, I
have won the amendment we we
tied the the cap of this credit,
um, do you happen to know what
the pro how often what the are
they updated annually, um,
clearly where weather rates.
Madam, madam chair, that's a
great question. Um, it's the
reason we put it and tied it to
an index instead of just having
a price because the price could
become very antiquated very
quickly. Um, the FHA loan limit,
um, historically has been very
stable. Um,
While housing costs were stable,
um, in the last 5 years, it's
been updated every year.
Um, Matt, I'm sure that, that's
a great question. I'm not, I
don't really understand exactly
um members of the committee, I
think that's a really great
question what I um that at least
for.
Um, that we create a new
probably part of the process
that uh.
And Madam Chair, I'd just like
to add that um off office of
housing is willing to track the
data, the outcomes of this
proposal, so uh we also
appreciate that um the one thing
that I like when we're talking
about that 5 year sunset.
And track the progress, see if
we've made any just a forever.
There's a time for when I'm
today.
HB on the committee for HB3 um
thank you very much. We're here
to option.
Um, like it's perfect, I thought
it was the committee house tax.
Uh, our apologies, Madam Chair,
I think, yes, it was.
Um, Madam Chair um sets out to
do what could be a um.
Very large change and tax
policy.
Have made the choice to.
Tax
New Mexico is one of um I know
that Madam Chair, members of the
committee, many of the critical
shortage of health throughout
the state.
Um, and many
Various reports that have been
studying the issue over the
years, um, this exact issue
that.
is one of the reasons and, um,
so it started, um, simply in
that we already have it or um
co-payments and uh deductions,
so.
Um, and that seems to be working
well for us, why don't we just
open that and match 48 of the
other states in the nation that
have choice not to tax
healthcare, um, another thing
that I wanna mention, Madam
Chair, um, is because such a
large.
contingent of New Mexicans rely
upon Medicaid and Medicaid
services because um grocery
seats taxed by federal law
cannot be um.
Cannot not be withheld.
Reimbursement for Medicaid is
actually lower to our
healthcare, uh, providers in New
Mexico because they still have
to withhold the GRT on the state
side, so that's another thing
that is um.
Making this issue for our
healthcare, uh, practitioners
throughout the state. Last thing
that, um, if we were to adopt an
exemption wholesale for
healthcare, we recognize that
this would have an impact on our
municipalities, um, less revenue
through and Senator Steinborn
and I are 100%, uh, dedicated to
working to a solution that works
for an exact the, uh, benefits
of joining these 4 other states
and.
Taking, taking with your
providers choose not to come to
New Mexico while also making
questions.
And I'm sure everybody knows my
expert Senator Jeff Steinborg,
but he wants to say anything
too. Go ahead, senator.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
you know this issue to to the
doctors that we represent in in
Las Cruces and the Donana
Medical Society, but truly
statewide.
Um, I think we all have come to
believe that we have a, a bad
competitive environment in
Mexico.
And it's not one thing to take
on this bill is just one of
those pieces that we should take
on and we should take it on now
while we're.
You know, have the resources to
be able to make an investment in
this area, but as the
representative said, New Mexico
is one of only 2 states,
doctors. They don't pay them on
everything, but they pay him on
enough things that at a cost
them a lot of money and creates
an absolute accounting nightmare
for an independent doctor to
have to track.
They have to collect copays on
Medicaid payments and they have
to collect sorry
so it's another drag on doing
business here.
I know you will also hear
colleagues that New Mexico is
one of the only states in the
country that has actually lost
positions over the last 5 years.
And I think that's a that's a
day.
Um
So with that, you know, this is
this, we spent a lot of time
figuring this out, figuring out
all these little pieces where
they're still having to pay GRT.
This bill includes them all,
with the exception of Medicaid.
The reason it doesn't include
Medicaid is, is providers on top
of their provider rates.
And we get a federal match on
that and so we got rid of the
the JRT so
that.
I like that.
That's that's this, this, this,
this, this, this, this,
madam, college days.
Uh, with that, we stand for
questions.
Thank you and
Uh, with that, we stand for
questions. Thank you,
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Tom Scrisma. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Dental Association and
the dentist in Albuquerque, um,
last fall, I presented a map to
the interim Health and Human
Services Committee that showed
New Mexico as a red state, uh,
not in terms of politics, but
but because we're losing Dennis
at an alarming rate in are
surrounded by states that are
gaining.
Only Massachusetts lost at a
higher rate than we did. I also
showed a graphic from the ADA
Health Policy Institute that
showed that New Mexico dentists
on average generate 2.5 million
in revenue for their
communities.
Um, as you've considered this
tax cut, I want you to focus on
revenue loss, but not the
revenue from the tax, but the
recurring revenue our state
loses with every doctor and
dentist that leaves the state.
Uh, the cuts in HB 344 are an
investment in our state. The
investment that will pay an
immediate dividend and lower
health care costs for our
citizens, especially those that
do not have insurance, but also
a long-term investment that pays
off in reversing the flow and
attracting new practitioners to
New Mexico. These practitioners
are dynamos of ongoing revenue
generation.
The question should not be can
we afford this cut? It should
be, can we afford not to make
it. Thank you, Madam Chairman
and members of the committee.
Carrie.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
and members of the committee,
Carrie Robin Bruder with the
Medical Society. I appreciate
the ability to testify on Zoom
as I had kind of a medical
appointment for my own daughter
this morning in Albuquerque. Um,
if our physicians were not in
clinic right now actively
treating patients, you would
probably see well over 100 of
them on the Zoom to support this
legislation, uh, as has been
said, this is an investment in
the physician and healthcare
providers.
have chosen to stay in New
Mexico, even facing
extraordinary challenge.
The business model of medicine
work here. Uh, we do think that
this again would put us on a
more even playing field with
other states in the country when
it comes to tax policy on
healthcare services, which is
extraordinarily important when
physicians are making decisions
about where they want to move.
We don't need any more red marks
against New Mexico. We only need
marks that are going to say, we
want you here, we welcome you to
be here, and we think that this
is one more step in the right
direction as we're.
riding the ship, uh, for our
providers and our patients
across the state. So we urge to
do pass and thank you very much
for your time.
You.
Hi there, good morning. Uh, my
name is Julia Ritten. I'm the
senior director of government
affairs with the New Mexico
Hospital Association, and I
stand in support of Senate Bill
344. Um, although the GRT that
hospitals pay is not impacted by
this bill. The bill proposes
important and comprehensive
changes to the healthcare GRT
structure that will benefit and
help retain providers in the
state by making New Mexico more
attractive and competitive, and
will help address our access to
care crisis. We ask for your
support of this bill and thank
you to the.
sponsors.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Dana Gray, executive
director of Desert State
Physical Therapy Network,
representing 30 independent
private practices throughout the
state. Network clinics are
appreciative of all efforts made
to increase growth receipts, tax
deductions.
To assist with rising costs of
providing quality care to New
Mexico communities.
We would like to thank the
sponsors for introducing this
bill and for the clarifying
language and the definition of
copay. We stand in full support
of House Bill 344 and urge a due
pass. Thank you.
back
Good morning. Uh, Madam Chair
and committee members. This is
Rebecca Bergson in Las Cruces,
and I'm calling on behalf of the
Donia Anna County Medical
Society since uh those doctors
are with patients. And I've also
managed my husband's clinic for
15 years, and his parents owned
it since 1981.
Here in Las Cruces, we pay a
little over 8% tax. The other
state that taxes healthcare is
Hawaii, and their rate is only
4%. Um, and we don't have the
attraction of Hawaii, our
education system is ranked 50th
in the country, our malpractice
system is very pro-attorney, so
it's very difficult to recruit
doctors, dentists, and mental
health providers. Every doctor
here will tell you that we're
consistently sending patients
out of state to a specialist,
but not every patient can afford
that, or they're too elderly or
too ill to travel to Houston or
Phoenix, and we used to be able
to send these patients to a
local specialist.
We don't even have enough
pediatricians to see the number
of children here.
We have one allergist who
mentioned at one of our town
halls that he has opened 5
clinics in Texas since he opened
his one practice in New Mexico
because Texas is a more business
friendly state, including he
does not have to pay GRT there.
That's 5 clinics generating
revenue in Texas, and his
weight, if a patient calls there
for an appointment is 2 weeks,
whereas it is multiple months
here in Las Cruces. So, uh, we
stand in support of, of this
passing this bill. Thank you.
Good morning, good morning.
Hopefully you can hear me. Um,
this is Mac. Are you still on
the uh city manager of Rio
Rancho.
And on behalf of the City of Rio
Rancho, other and you you the
New Mexico Municipal League
would like to express our
concerns about this bill for the
impact we'll have on our fiscal
revenues for our local
communities, appreciate the
sponsor, acknowledging that.
Obviously, as a community that
has built two hospitals.
In the last 15 years between uh
a medical center.
MSRMC we value the importance of
doctors in the overall medical
profession, and we realized that
uh those independent docs are
also part of that ecosystem. So
appreciate the intent of helping
recruit more doctors and have
doctors work in New Mexico, uh,
but at the same time, really
want to take into consideration
the impact it will have on local
revenues.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak.
to high quality, affordable
care.
Pointed out, there are.
Um, in, in the last 5 years.
The country
There are 3 reasons for this.
One is medical malpractice or
surrounding states and raising
those, they're still quite funny
and this bill addressed.
Oh
Yeah
Good morning, Madam Jr. very
qualified or the intent of this
bill or stating that they're
committed agreement and
arrangement where very hard.
This bill in its current form
represents a $10 million money,
so that's why we're giving a
qualified opposition today, but
we do want to thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
I'm Alex, um, I'm on behalf of
our members' tax revenue and a
few other options to raise
revenue. So, when that revenue
is eroded, services suffer,
including medical providers.
If they see that there's a good
public safety environment
structure and cities need
sufficient revenues to do that.
Like others have said, we
understand the intent of this
bill, and we, well, let's focus
on the real issues here, as
others have flagged the medical
malpractice laws, um, and the
fact per capita.
We'll also note that we've tried
this before, tax cuts to
targeted areas such as food and
medical deductions 20 years ago.
Those were very costly to the
state and local governments and
the whole have largely been
phased out. So.
Um.
So my concern lies largely with
land.
Um
I
We're talking now about how we
can work with um.
It
concerns me greatly that that
has not been addressed. I will
offer a cautionary note,
however, I believe I'm saying
this for a while south on the
statewide then to the local
governments to take the hits
that we did so if if if our
address way to eliminating a
what a sunset, so let's not get
too excited about sunsets with
sunsets, um, at the next
opportunity or as the sunset
starts we ever do the other bill
that we just talked, you know,
this.
All looks good when we're
talking about it theoretically,
but in practice, um, whole time
kinds of things, uh, sunsets are
not a long term solution.
So I have, I have concerns about
the direction we are going in.
The state had to me is a better
approach than for every kind of
subs and lastly, I, uh, that's
right, because we're the only
state with a broad gross
receipts tax. So every time
someone comes in and identifies
a particular sector. Yep, you're
right, because that's our tax
code and that's the underlying
foundation, so to suggest every
time we talk about these things
that we've somehow target
particular service.
Or lawyers paid gross receipts
tax on their services. Shall we
have them come and say we are
the only state that that taxes a
lot legal services, well, we
probably are, or probably one of
the few because that is how our
tax system works, so I just want
to make sure everyone
understands it because it, when
it when it's brought in it it
leaves people the impressed
sector, well, we haven't. The
beauty of our tax code has
always been that we have a broad
base we tax all.
all sorts of things and as a
result, we try to keep the rate
down with this, it is gonna
cause local government, the
state, they have to raise the GR
tape, right, which will, will
cause everyone else to have to
pay for these things, just some
cautionary notes, madam.
I, um,
I, it really is.
Um
One
I think it's true, like we have
a very unique tax rate in New
Mexico. And I think other states
are looking at our tax. Hey,
what's going on over there? So
and I will say I'm, I'm a
co-sponsor of this bill, um.
My community, this was one of
the first issues I heard when.
I chose to run for office and um
The
The desperation.
That
Las Cruces in particular feels
there.
Um, and then, and that was one
of the reasons they moved to,
um, their access to care.
And so I would love to be and I
know like we're I think we're.
I'm feeling I'm gonna self
focused. I'm feeling desperate
solution to this.
Um, and so thinking like, is it
GR just wanna invite us to think
about um.
Um, get to your question. I just
wanna, um, acknowledge Cha
Chandler's comments and that,
yeah, there are, there is a
very.
Long and stod reason why how and
and why New Mexico has come to
be and and the structure led us
to to be where we are, and I
agree that, you know, we can't
continue to um chip away at
something that has worked for
the state, um, but at the same
time, I mean that there is a
desperation, I know that I've
heard it from many of my
constituents, um, in coffing at
this point of people, um, you
know, I love the idea of
possibly a trust fund the the
the state does have funds
available.
and so that's definitely, I
mean, we're here at the
committee, um, more as a
statement that we are dedicates
this.
We have to
We're at that point, um, so this
is just one way of many we've
discussed, um, you know,
possibilities of doing, you
know, a a structured GRT
exclusion for a certain amount
of time, maybe it moves into
something else like a trust,
there's any, and you know, the
only limited by your, um, in
answer to your question, um.
Madam Chair Representative
hospitals and and larger, um,
providers are not, um, for very
specific read to encourage our
smaller independent providers um
who have had a hard time of it
for a while now and we wanna
grow and include an environment
in the state to be able to make
it, especially with the Medicaid
reimbursement issues, so no,
those two,
I appreciate that so that for
Las Cruces have that revenue
from Mountain.
you, uh, from, uh, Memorial
Medical Center from Three
Crosses.
structure in which nonprofits
pay partials in the 30 day,
right, so there there's more to
that um conversations we can
provide, um, it's it's.
Well, accurate, um, to say what
you're saying, it's also there's
there's a well developed.
Tax which we have fair
threshold on hold harmless.
could be corrected. OK.
Thank you, ma'am. And just on
that Madam Chair representative,
I've heard the stories of the
food, uh, and medicine taxies
that were experienced by the by
the municipalities, um, we
understand and completely
acknowledge um their story as it
would relate to another mistakes
of the past, I'm sure.
No, madam chair, I was just
reviewing what I was sent by my
city manager.
All right, thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair, and you
know, so many barriers, um.
Keeping doctors. I'm glad that
we finally have started having
those at the tax code.
I mean, we, we all know that,
but we're having to find other
solutions to figure out how to
to make sure that we can keep
doctors here, and I think that's
exactly what this bill is doing.
Um, you know, we have us medal
reform.
The way it needs to be done. And
so I think this is a result of
that. Continue to realize that
this is not just a bill for
doctors.
if you were in here wearing my
mayor's hat and the more we chip
at local ge.
Safety, so police and fire.
Who were more we're having to
make decisions on the local
level.
Uh, one of the things I did
somewhat helpful and I wish we
would have, um, you know,
throughout the year we would be
giving raises or we would be
adding wage structures.
And so, Right? We've been here
for 60 days. I'm very curious
what we've donealities with
everything that's kind of moving
them with X amount of tax
reductions through these types
of
Based on bills like this or, um.
Car tax increase we've seen that
could infect these local areas.
Whatever happens, so we had a
better plan us, because as we
look, build a in.
But I think until we unities.
I have a hard time
Getting excited about it and we
want the committee to know is we
have personally the mayor of
Albuquerque, the mayor of Santa
Fe, which is great, um, but I've
spoken to the county
governments, so we are very much
looking to do this in
partnership, knowing that this
is a policy that the
legislature, it's about helping
communities and so we all have
positions in our community, um,
so there needs, we need to do
this together, but we need to
this GRT and it has to make the
notion of even.
Co-investment on a local level
is not, that's not wrong
conversation to have either, you
know, the state of New Mexico
has typically with cannabis
taxes percent service fee from
this tax and revenue department
um last year in a bill that will
phase in over several years it's
going to raise $67 million in
total local governments over the
next few years. So there's that
side of the ledger as the
representative said, I'm getting
a solution so that we're
managing local impacts managing
issue that we have here.
The other thing I, I mean, I
know what you say. The one thing
I do, you're right, a lot of
them have like that they have to
come back to make sure I've seen
quite a few that I'm like I'm
not sure why we're, but I think
you got extended, so I fully me,
I just, I would really like to,
but put a package together that
really makes sense on how do we
really impact.
This industry because we have
heard a lot of the other reasons
that probably play a major
factor and so rather than
piecemeal, how do we put a real
package together to say this is
how we.
Um, so I appreciate the work
I
I'm concerned with what has been
brought.
To to be able to do something
like this, some somebody in this
is.
The benefit, but at the same
time,
The the expense.
Potentially at the at the look
described, so.
Um
I, I, I just want to follow up
more, more with the statement,
um, the reality is we're
This is not something
necessarily that asking for
except for the fact.
Dramatically harmed litigious.
circumstances beyond.
Their medical practice and their
malpractice, they're in a
position where they can they can
be sued civilly as well.
And I, I think that's something,
uh.
us.
That's the real issue for Don, I
like this because it does help.
The reality is this is, this is
a band-aid for being wounded
that we're gonna have to
address. So I don't really want
to belabor the point, and I know
it's not on this bill.
Um
The patchwork that we're doing.
Particularly with doctors, we
need to do something to make it
better. I think this, this goes
to to the heart of doctors can
be sued out of existence there.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So
They
It's really
making the feedback which
they've given me their feedback
that issue. I mean, they know
what butters the bread of the
local governments.
I know they have somewhat of a
strident position.
process, but it's a process as
we discussed in the closing days
of this session about some
potential move.
it.
We have to or or.
Probably
I mean
Just,
just philosophical big thinker,
let's just put it that way.
I, I probably wouldn't want to
get in, but not, not saying yes
to this, well, you should just
do away with all tax on locals
like, OK, man.
I hear you.
Let's look at some specifics. So
no, he, he, uh he's a, so I
wouldn't say it's gone to
specifics. It was really more
kind of at the initial and
educating them about what we're.
I can only imagine.
Um, we know that's a huge issue
because we've said we think we
need to do all the above.
That, that is in fact the
solution to improving
malpractice. It's um that's a
part of it as well. Also we'll
see solutions. There's other
great bills. This is one big
piece we can do.
issues.
Makes, but if we can start
chipping away successful.
Represent
Madam Chair.
Senator Steinborn, who was one,
specifically tasked with that
portion of the bill just. Um, so
if you don't mind, um, I can
connect back with him and give
you that answer was literally
one of the things he was in
As well
Those are organized by six digit
tried to figure out how much of
15% and that's from, um, I think
that is also reported they
pulled him and so.
Stein born.
Um
And he's walked out,
uh, but certainly,
yeah, madam chair, so um he has
the this bill, I'm the house
sponsor of the members of the
committee they were.
Um, but I'm sure, yeah, some
additional um after we had had
some of those conversations,
some of the reflections of those
and uh especially how it um.
Does it mean there's a different
kind of cost sharedway today
fundraisers, right, to actually
have a more complex
understanding of what this high
level misinformation can with
out of state or profit
corporations.
That was and families in our
constituents need.
Are not contributing to that and
have not act or speak in those
ways over the last couple of
years go in depth or in source
one of our local journalism
spots that actually the Dark
Money exists across our partisan
left, um, and certainly when I'm
like,
Are you not listening about
what's happening on that issue
specifically.
Some fixes that would actually
fallen into this false narrative
of to protect, but I'm proud
that those providers, I've said,
OK, when you have a few minutes
after a visit and I've been
blown away to um ask more
hospitals or patients, they're
starting to act, so I'm grateful
to all the providers. Uh, so
certainly you all have a lot of
work in front of you. I've also
heard from and been in
conversation with
because I still stand by it. So
without harming the budget you
can fix me well, but certainly.
Sure I move a temporary.
He.
Representative on this already
on HP.
To ensure fair and predictable
access to the incentivizing,
it's.
Um
we have two types of and we have
a threshold job.
Uh, last year.
For the year before they changed
the high wage job to beer and
the threshold job is still on a
calendar year, so if you don't.
Uh, if someone is not hired 4
weeks in the same.
Do you have any amendments or
no hands raised online, we'll go
you for those, uh, watching
online, we have moved in fact to
HB 3 sins are comments from the
committee.
Is there any opposition to that
motion? I'm not opposing. I just
have a quick, I just wanted to
confirm that there's thank you
the FIR doesn't show that, and
we also have our economists over
here giving us a thumbs up,
there is no.
