Representative readiness.
Thank you.
Representative.
I'm sorry.
Representative Romero.
Representative Scott.
Great.
Thanks everybody for being on
time I really appreciate it we
have a couple members who are
missing but they're presenting
and other committees and I hope
that those of you who cannot
from Albuquerque didn't have to
treacherous to drive I don't
imagine the roads are starting
to get a little dicey assistant
keeps falling but lovely day in
Santa Fe.
So we are now
We the meeting is called to
order and are the first order of
business is house bill eighty
two Representative Lara Cadena
Dana.
Good morning madam chair thank
you and if possible I appreciate
having Wendi Strack and Scott
Nichols and pulled into our
committee is my experts for the
day.
Certainly also like to share
madam chair that I have sent an
amendment to the committee in
advance of the twenty four hour
rule and if appropriate we can
move that and as we get started
I just let the committee know
that that is part of our plan
for the day H. B. eighty two
generally is about extending a
sunset on a gross receipts tax
deductions for dialysis
facilities so in the bill as
introduced we were looking to
make that deduction deduction
permanent in great part because
in this section of law seven
dash nine dash seventy seven
point one and further there are
no other
Provider groups are facility
groups that have a sunset on
these deductions so we're hoping
to look for some fairness and
equity in making this deduction
permanent as well but in light
of the spirit of our tax policy
these days and the incredible
consideration and wait and where
the overview we get to sunsets
we've instead it will be
bringing this ammendment that
extends this ten years but
generally speaking before I
transfer this came to be in two
thousand fourteen and as many of
you all know dialysis is truly
life saving care for folks that
need it and I'm really impressed
and proud that those that work
to get this deduction the first
place maybe pretty significant
commitments about how they would
work to expand care especially
in rural New Mexico so that
folks that need dialysis it was
new to me but if you need
dialysis you go in at least at a
minimum three times a week so
getting more facilities out to
where our New Mexicans exist and
are working to to stay healthy
and thrive to me is very much in
line with our values us so I
will turn to my experts so they
can talk and help explain and
extrapolate on the
justifications for extending the
sunset madam chair so today I'll
go to Wendy's check and then
we'll keep Scott on the line
as a tax expert that's been
working on this issue with that
should we have any more detailed
questions but Wendy it does
government relations with
percent just one of the couple
of organizations that does state
office in our state when we.
Morning chairman January
committee members New Mexico has
four thousand people receiving
dialysis at fifty nine clinics
and seventy six percent of them
have Medicare as their primary
insurance this is the start of
the deduction in twenty fourteen
seventeen new facilities seven
added across the state and this
is fresh jobs to communities and
easier access for patients which
is very important as
Representative stated they have
to come three times a week.
We are very grateful for this
deduction and continuing at
allows dialysis providers to
plan now to keep pace with the
twenty percent growth that we've
seen in the past ten years in
ESRD or kidney failure in New
Mexico and providing those
facilities especially in rural
areas where access to care is
needed most is vitally important
so again we thank you for this
deduction and
are the ability to hopefully
continue right thank you.
Thank you Mr Mikkelsen did you
want to add anything.
Great.
File your muted but we can read
their lips on that one so we're
good.
Better by that yes I'm glad
you're here happy to have you
here thank you.
So let's see
is anyone.
Representative Cadena would you
like to explain your amendment
maybe we could all the amendment
issue and then go to the
audience that's okay thank you
madam chair for starting with
the number it's point two two
two three four four point one.
the amendment for discussion
please.
Thank you leader Martinez the
men and women has been moved for
discussion do we need a second
for that.
No okay great.
Precede Representative Cadena
starting with point one on page
one line eleven.
so here in in the title
basically we are still we are
striking the word making and
inserting in lieu of there for
extending then on line twelve
striking permanent so we're
starting at the title changing
it from permanent to an
extension and then on page three
which is where we had previously
struck the sense that in its
entirety with that date we are
now replacing the date ten years
out from the original sense that
so it now so read page three
line five strike receives an
answer in lieu there of prior to
July one twenty thirty four
receipts.
With some comments excuse me
madam chair and there.
Thank you very much of
Representative any question
we're on the amendment now any
questions or comments on the
amendment.
Okay Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Dana thank you
for and it's it's good to see
you always in this committee to.
so just.
A couple questions so first I
really appreciate you bringing
this forward I think
none of us were excited about
the idea of making this
evergreen.
I do understand your your
argument that other
other areas that statute are are
not and so you want to do that
so so I get the argument.
but the the reason we have on on
this was because the industry
came and said you know we need
help right and so for those
kinds of things we we put
sunsets on so that industry can
come and we can.
Are you a whether the tax
credits actually doing anything
or whether it's done its job
entry to go away or whether we
still need it.
And and generally in this
committee we do somewhere
between seven and ten year
sunset so can you you tell me
why
I mean right now we're
essentially doing a twelve year
sunset especially kids like me
why you
that different.
Thank you madam chair and
representative
frankly to be real.
There's some unpredictability
and provided seasons and pop and
politics generally and this test
is set to expire in about
eighteen months at the beginning
of July and and twenty twenty
four also there is some anxiety
and concern over the expiration
and these provider groups who
are continuing to make decisions
about where to expand care about
the the sometimes
unpredictability of Medicaid and
in this case Medicare
reimbursement rates like they're
looking for some certainty to
make sure that they can
consistently keep that level of
care and why tension I expand
that level of care in rural New
Mexico so when I think about it
it's not about just in economic
development says decision here
it's about like people's lives
and I was convinced to make sure
we had this room to get this
done and guarantee that we're
going to continue this tax
policy because this tax policy
has enabled more New Mexicans
who unfortunately are include
are growing in numbers that need
this lifesaving care to access
that care closer to home so for
me because the specifically this
was connected to a lifesaving
treatment I didn't think it was
appropriate to roll the dice and
hope that we got this done with
six months on the time line
we've all been in those
situations where we're told we
have to do this if we don't act
everything's going to the fall
this this guy is folly and I
wanted to be in partnership with
them so we can have a calm
conversation with eighteen
months in front of us to make
sure we were doing right to
maintain this consistency in
care.
Thank you Representative are.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Cadena I by
I do think
The time is interesting and I'll
see these comes for later on the
bill
but I do think a twelve year
extension is is not something
that this committee is done in
the past it's usually between
seven and and ten
I'm gonna I'm gonna vote for
your amendment so we can in the
bill but I think
you know as we consider that the
tax package what goes forward in
those kinds of things we might
ask you to to bring it back to
ten or or or something like that
but I'll talk more about the
process for renewing a sense
that we typically do during the.
The regular order thank you
madam chair thank
representative.
Representative on that we just
for the listening public that
may not have this bill in front
of us I do want to clarify that
its ten day it's ten years out
from the original sunset so yes
in practice because we're any
we're eighteen months in advance
of that date it adds up to this
additional time but just to be
clear the amendment is it a
twelve year from from the
current expiration is ten years
out as in practice of the tax me
but I appreciate your point just
want to make sure the audience
had that distinction madam
chair.
Thank you Representative any
other questions or comments on
the amendment.
I see none happy to hear a
motion.
Madam chair.
Can anyone.
This was the second.
Representative my aunt Martinez
and seconded by Representative
turned in is that right very
good thank you
any opposition to the amendment.
I see no opposition
Representative Cadena you have
an amended bill.
Further comments before I go to
the audience Representative
sorry.
You madam chair I'm ready for
that thank you.
All those M. wishing to speak in
favor of the bill please raise
your hand if you're in the
attendees list.
Okay I see Jeremy van Selin.
For me.
Following I was on the double
mute.
Everyone chairman and hassle in
representing defeated dialysis.
And just want to very briefly
numbers many bills to get to
voice our support we pay we have
a pay eight facilities
throughout the state taking care
of just under a hundred
individuals in the state with a
kidney failure so appreciate
consideration of the bill
appreciate Representative of
content of leadership on this
issue thank you very much.
Thank you.
I don't see any other hands up
in favor anyone wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill.
See anyone so we're back to the
committee.
ET discussion.
Representative Harper is your
hand up now on the main bill all
right shoot.
Thank you madam chair appreciate
it throes of today that so I
just want to.
Just briefly go over kind of the
process.
That this committee and the
legislature has done for
renewing sunsets
I know it's.
Their sorrows their in on the
committee and and and and that
maybe they haven't been through
this process before.
So what typically happens is and
and you're in the right time
Madam chair representative
Cadena you know you're roughly
the session before or maybe two
sessions before sunset expires.
What we first to.
Is we go through the revenue
stabilisation Tax Policy
Committee.
Which is run by.
you know is is chaired one year
by the chair of tax in the house
and the following year by the
chair of tax in the Senate.
And Pam Stokes as a staffer that
works on that and what she'll do
is you know which you reach out
to Herschel set up a water to
our block.
Where we can come was the the
advocates and provide the data
from the analysis and talk
through.
The credit.
and and make a.
my case for why it should be
extended and and I remember when
this is the first time I talked
about dialysis facilities we
talked about them.
I can't remember if it was first
put in place right six or seven
or eight nine years ago or if we
were to their son sat back and I
can't recall off the top of my
head do you remember.
But into place madam chair and
representative in twenty
fourteen.
Yeah thank you so that that
makes sense I remember having
this conversation with you know
folks on the committee and and
the great arguments made that
you know how can we be
competitive with the both are.
With a Medicaid reimbursement
rates in the G. R. T. coming out
of that you know how do we how
do we you know keep our our
folks employed to make enough
money to do this lifesaving work
can.
And so we thought okay let's
let's give this a shot but let's
put a sunset on there and see.
You know just do industry
eventually get to a place where
they don't need the creditor do
we still need it.
And so right now
you know eight years or years
later I don't feel like I have
that data in front of me that we
were expecting to see.
And so that's why I'm I'm
encouraging and and sharing here
what we do is you know one or
two sessions before during the
interim we provide a.
You know a good briefing to the
folks in the house and the
Senate on the sunset and then
you can even get at an indoor
spill through rest up to to
extend the sunset.
or early so folks will be aware
when it comes forward and so and
I and I and I agree with you
wholeheartedly.
Madam chair representative I
don't want to be like the.
You know the the session before
you know and with an urgent case
trying to get this through.
I'm but I think priming the pump
in this way it will.
What is your much faster
and and and you saw you know we
had another bill earlier this
session I was renewal the sunset
and and we didn't you know we
don't hold it up because we we
all knew that that was you know
we have the data from from that
group that should we need to
extend.
So
also beat Mike my thoughts chair
I think we.
could really dive into the data
during the intro and then
get this thing through.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative
Representative Martinez.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative got enough for
the time this morning I've got
I've got a few questions this
this is very similar to a bill
that I carried a couple years
ago a subset extension on
durable medical equipment and
Representative Harper is right
in terms of of the intro process
now health would be.
A couple of things give me
possible and as we visited now.
you indicated that
in many cases dialysis is
provided by sometimes a single
entity right in other words are
not there's not a
there's not a vast number of
providers that you can just go
to and seek out for dialysis is
that correct.
Madam chair representative yes
there's a handful of
organizations that do this very
specialized treatment in New
Mexico and if you'll note I
appreciate that the questions
here including in our FIR it
seems that TRD it was in fact
required to do data sharing on
this but they have been unable
to do this and have not publicly
reported this utilization data
to date and part of how it's
been explained to me Madam chair
representative is that because
there's such a small handful of
entities that actually moved to
to seek this deduction they
would be breaking like the
confidentiality of those filers
report so madam chair
representative it puts us in a
tricky situation in that in that
TRD has not publicly reported
this data so that's why we've
taken the opportunity in a
transparent way to be ready to
speak to some of of this
information and justify where
and how the services have been
able to consistently expand your
community since the first and at
first implementation of the
sunset I would also add just to
so that piece about timing Madam
chair representative of course
that these organizations don't
make capital decisions on a six
month time frame right between
like financing and strategic
planning and figuring out where
the health care needs our New
Mexico that's why they're
looking to make sure that they
can carry the positive impact
they've had so far into this
next chunk of time with
significantly increasing rate of
folks meeting dialysis madam
chair and representative of.
Thank you for that madam chair
representative I think that's
important to note and I I think
that.
For.
For those competition ality
issues to.
For us to understand those I
think is is critical now I'm
assuming either you or your
experts probably can provided
the committee with some insight
as to the number of patients
that are seen for those patients
are seen you look at I've got a
former coworker friend of mine
who was analysis
and you're right it is at least
three times a week and it is a
very very difficult procedure it
is not easy at all it's very
hard on its body and it is
expensive to boot
Now lucky for him he lives in
Albuquerque so he actually has
some.
Choices.
Insurance companies assuming
insurance companies again
choices but there are some
choices I'm concerned about
folks in in Mexico or in you
know better you know or in
church or in Espanola we only
have the one.
and if.
you know.
You wait till the last minute
and that's a scary proposition I
mean this isn't like solar
panels on the can be unlike
anybody get solar panels is here
because time ran out.
Maybe I can wait a year.
This stuff to me is is is
critical and you know to echo
Representative Harper's.
points I think every meeting of
this committee you know this tax
code is broken and and here's
why we need to do these
piecemeal approaches right but I
am terribly concerned that if we
wait
who knows what happens next
session who knows what the
politics will be the political
dynamics will be and I sure as
heck would you want to be in a
position where we are rushing
something through because we
need to do it otherwise people
literally not have access to the
services so.
In a letter that madam chair you
know this is an existing credit
we are not creating a brand new
credit looking at the F. I. R.
you know the the impact is
relatively minimal.
I would I would highly suggest
that we don't put ourselves as a
committee in the position where
next year we are under the gun
because assuming we can get data
and so we we can get TRD to
provide
any type of data to the interim
committee up I kind of feel
we're gonna be in the same place
I don't think any of us are
going to oppose this because
it's something that.
These providers.
We need in order to be able to
make their business model work.
So I I would highly encourage us
madam chair to look at this
through the lens of this
building this existing credit
providing some predictability to
these to these providers.
And you know sure I mean let's
bring all the data we can
provide to rest and.
You know if for whatever reason
it's not favorable I can't
imagine what would be the data
that would make this not
favorable.
You know we can always
We can always pull back but I
just I I feel strongly that as
critical as the services are
life and death
for me what's the fiscal impact
on this
A little over million S. S. U.
hello in the out years now yeah
I just I I think
I I just think we need to to
To listen to get it out that
that's my personal take on it
thank you madam chair and thank
you for bringing this forward I
know that these are
these are not easy are built to
carry they're they're they're
they're heart wrenching in many
cases and you probably feel
pressure.
I I know I did a couple years
ago with under medical equipment
you know you don't want an elder
in our community to be out of
oxygen tanks or to be out of
Alice's so thank you madam chair
thank you Representative and
thank you members.
Thank you Representative
Martinez Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Cadena
I.
I appreciate the urgency thank
you all right all dealt with
issues at that are.
That have urgency that people.
I just if this is the.
Yes this is the direction that
this committee starts to go I
don't even know what the purpose
of having the.
right any point of putting a
sunset with the purpose of the
review.
That.
That is something that that I
think we need to continue to
have if we need to start setting
the review.
After the eighth year.
I'm maybe we need to start doing
that.
but if if if.
We're going to preempt the
review process.
to see if it's doing what it's
supposed to be doing to find out
if the.
The people who are responsible
for for.
You know.
Receiving line properly.
the funds because what we don't
want is.
It just be expected the moment
that that dollars are expected.
it's it ends up having the
opposite effect ends up having
the effect of okay well we don't
really have to have read you all
just get somebody and we'll go
in there and.
Talk about the issue such as.
every business every business
needs needs to have some sort of
sense of.
Consistency and that's going to
be there important.
I I'm I'm my suggests that what
we do instead of pushing it out.
You know ten years from when it
would be the natural.
So you know sunset in twenty
twenty four maybe we put a
shorter period of time so we can
have the review
either if the review doesn't
mean anything after the money's
been distributed so I I
understand the pressure but I I
just if this is the direction we
start going with things that
have a sense that I I don't even
know why we would even.
Talk about a review so that
that's my concern and I I I look
at this and I think that.
I don't see on dialysis or
things that are life and death.
I don't see us having trouble.
Re issuing.
I don't see I don't see that
this would face any problem
regardless of what the political
circumstances are next year.
because we all when it comes to
to medical care especially life
saving medical care we I think
we understand that too there's a
different priority there so I
don't see that that.
Politics could change to the
point that
That we would.
Somehow not think this is
important next year so
if my choice today is to to pass
it out and put a ten year to ten
more years on top of
of the current deadline I I
don't I wouldn't even.
I would have a hard time doing
that just because we work very
hard those of us have been on
this committee for a while we
work very hard about trying to
find a way to determine since
since you know where we all
agree our our tax code is not
what it should be and so when we
put these holes in the Swiss
cheese as.
as Representative Harper likes
to talk about.
Has to be a way for us to
determine whether it's the right
hole in Swiss cheese so
I I really just don't see that
that.
Things could change politically
enough.
That this would not be a
priority next year I would
really like to see us yet so if
you were to.
Maybe extend it extend your the
the sunset for a couple of years
so we can get our review in
place and and and madam chair I
would suggest that we will start
looking at all of the sunsets
that are in place now we start
reviewing.
You know the eighth year after
twelve extension have been put
in place.
if this is gonna sunset I think
a lot of people gonna be in a
situation that representative of
chart and is in now which is
trying to find some sort of
sense of the sure the for
Openings that rely on this.
Knowing that there's that that
they have a customer at the end
of that which is in in in our.
In a position where their life
is depending upon I would like
to see just maybe start
reviewing and in the interim
between the.
North here.
if because I think this is gonna
be a problem that that that pops
up every single time so with
that has nothing to do
Representative card and with
the how important this.
Our.
It is it's has more to do with.
We've had.
We used to be that sounds that
would come up.
I remember when I got here and
and Representative Harper was
was going off on this we show
here it was just a sunset and we
would just roll all since that's
an advantage and years what that
did in the medical for for
osteopaths that had happened
four times and there are rules
didn't get change for fifty
years no wonder L..
College reached out to to me
through some folks want to
things was how do we get these
updated because the what what
happening as we come up on that
sunset and we just re issue a
new sunset ten years down the
road without ever doing a
review.
And and that is the situation
that we don't want to go back to
that's the worst thing that we
can do so I I don't know
Representative alright enough
there's any any other
suggestions you might have as
far as a and.
Maybe a shorter sunset so you
guys can have some confidence in
it but I really am reluctant to
to take away the review process.
Madam chair and representative I
appreciate that helpful
consideration and certainly
appreciate folks the commitment
we have to continuity health
care I just want to name again
the particular circumstances
that we're in these folks I'm
working with these dialysis
providers Kristin yes to be to
and a couple of others are
incredibly committed and ready
to be in conversation with the
legislature but if you'll see on
page three of this bill section
eight TRD was already requests
to compile these reports and
hasn't been able to do that when
it comes to these facilities
because of the confidentiality
around filer status so I'm aware
if there's like a waiver folks
can sign or if there is a
different way we can come hell
TRD to include this kind of data
in the reports we get otherwise
but that's part of the impetus
for having this conversation a
what I offer back to all in the
spirit of review is that we are
are rested and we're coming here
to state we don't have the
capacity to provide the the
information in a way that we
might typically expect it
because of the filing status of
this unique specialty specialty
providers but we're here in
order to to begin not review
process with you all as part of
caring this comp conversation
forward and in particularly like
I need to speak why why I
thought that ten year point was
there because there is no other
group in this section of law
that has any sense that at all
so I was looking to just think
about what would be equitable
equitable in terms of our our
tax policy on that front so
that's just the big pieces is my
worry is like there that we have
nothing else to review whether
we make this decision now or we
go to rest up at a different
moment based on that filing
company the the confidentiality.
Wrapped up into the the filing
status of these facilities madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
I'm wondering we still have time
in this session.
if TRD is worried about
confidentiality issues.
maybe the industry could come in
present.
Something to us and maybe we
could the table just and have.
Industry come and talk to us I
mean I I I am very uncomfortable
doing this without any sort of
review whatsoever so if if TRD
is having trouble getting us
this data may be industry would
be willing to come and talk to
us I mean this is the one
committee where that type of
report is is.
Something that's desired
you know it goes to the floor.
That's not where that gets
reviewed obviously we can't you
can have one person sitting
there that are that that is an
expert and we can ask questions
that one person that I I I would
feel more comfortable Madam
chair representative if I can
get and ask questions directly
of industry experts so thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative
I know that I believe
representative Lente is now with
us I want my it's one note that.
Madam chair representative I
just wanted to offer that I do
have folks from a couple of
these organizations on the line
and ready to present different
data and information if if you
all would like it it was on me
that I said they have a long
agenda where first let's start
out tight and then be ready to
be responsive to questions but
we definitely have people ready
to speak to what some of where
the expenses that have happened
but also some of the base
numbers and what it looks like
for them to come in and utilize
this deduction New Mexico if
that's of interest madam chair.
First let me I'd like to do this
make a few comments you know I'm
a little confused in this way we
talked about the NMAA you
exemption just a couple of days
ago and I am a member of rest
have and I do not recall any
presentation and rest have that
address the NMSU issue and if
there's anyone here who can
correct me on that I would be
happy to be corrected it sounds
like we do not have our
procedures terror well
established in terms of how we
are reviewing these
You know the sun sets on the
various deductions and credits
and so on and so forth and you
know that's on us.
That's on us that's something I
think we're gonna need to take
up in the upcoming session.
Certainly there were people who
spoke to the wonderful
advantages in all the marvelous
things that were happening at
NMSU that wasn't data.
I need let's be real you know
and and we passed out of
committee this is a lessons
learned it certainly for me and
maybe the rest of us and you
know I would just like to extend
the courtesy to representative
Cadena push this out of
committee and we can talk about
try to type procedures since you
know frankly I was uncomfortable
with the Cadena animus you peace
and that was a big fiscal impact
if I remember that was what
fifteen to twenty million
dollars with some significant
now what was I'm happy to be
corrected Representative.
Madam chair was at twelve fifty
thousand dollars and to the
general fund is yes so all right
my dad my apologies I didn't
mean to misrepresent anything
this is also a very small in the
out here kind of impact and you
know with that so perhaps
Representative Harper and I can
sit down and talk to a little
bit at going forward in terms of
how to address these things were
still you know finding our
bearings on how we're going to
address credits and so on and
hopefully next year we're gonna
be looking at these things in a
more global fashion and will be
able to you know take it on
again so
I I I would like to just move
the move the bill forward and
I'm I'm willing to take a motion
and I'll circle back with my
colleague Representative Harper
about how to improve our process
sees it's.
I want to comment I'm happy to
have you yield the floor here
Representative for a minute or
two.
Thank.
Representative harbormaster
okay.
Thank you for all.
yeah I know you madam chair I I
I appreciate that and you may be
correct I I I recall having had
NMAA you come and present to
rest up but I don't recall if
that was last.
Round or around before so you
you may be exactly correct and I
think we need to.
Talk I appreciate the offer and
I think you know we'll we'll
figure this out
I just say if we're going to.
Go ahead and and and and and I
move this bill forward.
I would I would feel more
comfortable if it was a ten year
extension from today.
I don't know if we could change
that amendment to from what it
was you know just here and act
in the committee you know we can
do a.
you know have our our
you know it is a simple striking
a a year or placing another year
I'm.
so I'm
Thank you for that suggestion
Representative Cadena are you
able to that.
Yes madam chair I would very
much appreciate that
consideration and to
Representative Harper is point I
believe it would just be
changing the for in twenty
thirty four to it too to re
twenty thirty two.
With the rest of the amendment
expanding so I'm not sure the
procedure for amending the
amendment or the amended bill
but I would appreciate add an
amendment from the committee.
All right I'm happy to entertain
a motion to that effect
Representative Harper and I'm
really helping Representative
Montoya is going to second.
I will I will make that motion
madam chair okay so for clarity
for our record keeper we are
changing twenty
thirty four to twenty thirty two
is that correct and what line is
that I don't have the amendment
from me madam chair that is look
at excuse me page three.
Line it will be if then if then
if the letter states they may be
line I we have an in with the
amendment we inserted back in
prior to July one comma twenty
thirty four that should now we
prior to July one comment twenty
thirty two comma receipts okay.
People have that.
And folks not a that are paying
attention thank you madam chair
are you done and we have a
second.
I'll second that.
Thank you kind second from
Representative Montoya thank you
very much okay discussion on the
motion to amend the amended
bill.
I see no discussion on are you
putting your hand down or your
hand still up Representative
monthly.
Yes madam chair might mice has
still up but we can take we can
take a vote and then I just okay
follow up question okay any
opposition to the motion to
amend the amended L. as stated.
I think I see Representative
Montoya is handout is that an
opposition.
Muted Representative.
No madam chair trying to lower
my hand but he must have lowered
my hand for me and then it went
back.
Yeah so just to be clear it
appears I'm going down the.
And down the panelists list here
are in there is no one in
opposition to amending the bill
as stated by Representative
Harper which just changes it
changes the number twenty thirty
two
okay any further discussion of
the bill as twice and.
Yes madam chair just further
tests will.
So
At the it was brought up that
these several other of the other
Credits or exemptions that we
have been in the medical and to
medical providers don't have
sunsets I think does that need
to be remedy we need to have we
we if we're gonna be having
holes in the budget we we need
to have some sort of way to to
go back and review so secondly I
I would really hope that we
start looking at all of those
that do not have sunset so we go
back and start looking at
putting sunsets on those at
least have a review and then
maybe put a sunset
but.
Secondly
I think you know doing it on the
eighth year between eighth ninth
here I think if we can capture
that would I think that's going
to be necessary one last thing I
am am concerned we're looking
just for data from TRD I don't
see how there is any information
that can be shared from data
that that cannot be shared we're
not asking for on a specific
company or specific what we're
trying to get is just report
generated and so to have
TRD say you know we might have
some confidentiality issues.
I'm not just depends how they
prepare the report they don't
have to prepare so I I don't
think that is a legitimate.
concern of TRD that was that we
would be passed information
we're not asking about in an
individual filing of an
individual company or an
individual I ended who has
received medical care so I I
just think we as a group who are
supports online house oversight
I think regardless of what the
and who the it is it is in the
administration.
I think we have to demand that
so we can do our job properly so
I would like to work towards
that and Representative Harper
going forward is going to want
to work towards that and I would
love to be part of that process
Jr.
Thank you Representative and
actually I don't disagree with
you and we've had conversations
that on the whole about looking
at all of our medical exemptions
and so on and and trying to get
our arms around that I have a
question for the committee and I
I look for your guidance are you
comfortable with the way we have
amended the amended bill do it
you just can't do it.
No.
So so Madam if I can ask.
So yes.
And we're in person we do
amendments on the fly often yes
that does it all the time.
We've done this in the past and
and I don't know if.
There's something strange now
because we're we're virtual that
makes that a challenge but I I
don't see why we cannot all
right so I we're gonna be moving
forward with the bill and as
amended and so everyone
understands what we're we're
voting on we amended the bill
and then we change the date on
the amended bill that's what
we're talking about here so
Really would you please call the
roll.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Okay.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lente yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative mess.
Yes.
Representative met.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Regrettably no.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler.
Chairman.
Yes.
If you're building because I was
muted but my answer was yes.
thank you Senator Kernan we have
a ten to one about yes our
rural.
Thank you Representative Cadena
you have a do pass thank you for
time and thank you for your
expert witnesses and there
attendance
we are now on.
House Bill unleavened and that
is representative Sarinana and
representative Sarinana do you
have any experts you'd like to
have elevated to the panel you
madam chair yes Representative
Representative a best Abbas
Akhil.
Okay.
It is.
Mr elim yes yes very good.
I I believe you have an
amendment Representative Syriana
if you want to first speak to
your bill and and if you want to
address the we we can then move
to for discussion purposes the
amendment that first talk a
little bit about the bill and
then we'll move on for
discussion purposes the
amendment right thank you madam
chair good morning madam chair
and members of the committee I
am representative Debbie
Sariñana in here to present
House Bill Levin as amended
energy source system income tax
credit madam chair
this bill aims to put energy
storage behind the meter on the
customer side our definition of
energy storage system means the
battery used to store electrical
energy for use or to depart this
place energy at a later time the
bill itself allows for forty
percent of the total cost to
purchase and install an energy
storage system with a maximum
credit of five thousand dollars
per system whichever is lower.
the bill last for million
dollars an energy storage income
tax credits per fiscal year over
two year period by the end of
the two years hopefully there
will be about a four hundred
homes that have an energy
storage along with the distorts
system as the technology
industry grows this bill is to
introduce people to energy
storage and as a tool to help
combat climate change madam
chair I defer to my experts
Abbas Akhil.
Well it's good to see you again
good morning madam chair and
good morning members of the
committee you know this
Representative has become an
expert on energy storage and
she's describing pretty well so
I just stand for questions I
think we can go straight to that
I'm only acted as you would see
the audience this pretty broad
support for this bill both from
homeowners and industry and with
that madam chair of we stand for
questions.
Thank you very much
I understand you have an
amendment made we could move the
for discussion and then we'll go
to the audience.
Okay do you want to to to
venture or yes please the
numbers two two two three two
four point two.
Perhaps Representative trained
in it are you willing to move
that for discussion purposes yes
I move that.
For discussion purposes the
amendment please thank you.
Representative Sirianni what
would you like to share with
Comment about the need for the
amendment or do you want me
specifically just comments Madam
chair.
It just a general explanation of
of the amendment I think would
be fine people can ask Miss
ethically they have in front of
the state needs.
Okay so we one thing we did was
change the number of credit you
can get from one the the
original built into one but we
after much discussion we change
to to work.
Of course in stored tax credits
and we do that because this is a
pilot we really want hello many
people to try energy storage and
the second item was we changed
the zip code from nine digits to
four to five digits and that was
because some people in last
committee believe we were going
to specific.
And that is it Madam.
Thank you Representative
Sariñana okay so let's go to the
attendees.
Those in favor of this bill
please raise your hand.
Using the timer okay when the
Burke fell.
Well.
For giving me the opportunity to
speak.
I urge you to vote yes on each
be allowed in the energy and
storage system tax credit this
pilot program will make the
great resilience let's help make
our economy more diverse there
were thirty five thousand
individually owned solar
installations in New Mexico and
very few of them have energy
storage having storage means
that the energy produced by
these installations can be used
by the order in the future
when the greatest down storage
systems decentralize the grit
making it more reliable for the
customers in addition to helping
the owner and the grid this tax
credit encourages economic
diversity as owners pay for
supplies and labor to install
storage of those merging
technology helps New Mexico
become a leader in the solar
storage industry for job growth
has a strong.
Thank you.
Two small.
Thanks.
Thank you for this opportunity
madam chair and committee
members I'm in favor of this
bill and I urge you to support
it because this the bill will
help move the storage technology
forward as well as help
homeowners and other people
trying to lower their utility
bills and also it will help all
of us move towards our climate
goals by decreasing the use of
fossil fuels that currently
supplies are electricity so I
see it urged everyone on the
committee to support this bill
thank you very much.
Thank you Mr all Steffi Weiss
bird.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members I'm steep why
Baird representing the three
fifty New Mexico rural advocacy
and also they do PNM rural
caucus both of which support
this bill because of the jobs it
would support in rural areas on
a personal note my husband and I
have a solar system on a roof
and we have wanted to purchase a
solar system storage system as
well but have balked at the
price just be eleven would
definitely be a game changer for
us living in a rural area
storage would offer a level of
security during power outages
and we'd also be very happy to
contribute to the grid stability
over all thank you very much.
Thank you Margaret bell.
Yes good morning thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Margaret bell I live
in Albuquerque and I'm speaking
in favor of Bill Evans most of
the studies indicate that both
solar and storage will be the
largest job creators in the
energy industry in the near
future in addition as others
have commented energy storage
will contribute to a more
balanced decentralized and
reliable electric grid thank you
for reading for structure
upgrades that are ultimately
paid for by utility customers
and that one's done by private
investment in energy storage
systems and related technologies
allowing Mexico to become a
leader in this rapidly
developing technology therefore
I ask you to support House Bill
Evans thank you.
Jim Jay Darden.
Dejar Dan.
Good morning madam chairman
members the committee my name is
Jim day Schardin and I'm
speaking on behalf of the
renewable energy industry
association of New Mexico we're
known as ria we have forty five
diverse members been around
since two thousand and four the
ability to store information
like ability to store is like
the inside the building to store
energy is like the ability to
store information it's very
powerful and for information for
energy storage were in the early
stages of understanding the
value which would be dispatched
ability and advanced resiliency
and resiliency is very important
as was notice in Texas we
believe that the future also
we're will be restored and
there's a lot of opportunity
here but we are behind so for
example in California eighty
percent of the solar systems
have stored only about one
percent right now are selling
with stored so we hope that this
bill will help to stimulate that
and we urge the committee to
provided to pass thank you very
much thank you Vince Martinez.
Good morning madam chairman
Vince Martinez
with the tri state generation
and transmission association tri
state is committed to providing
reliable affordable responsible
energy to our member owners by
twenty twenty for more than
fifty percent of our energy will
be from renewable sources and by
twenty thirty over seventy
percent of our energy will be
from reliable sources we will at
over eighteen hundred megawatts
of wind and solar in this decade
we urge you to support House
Bill eleven along with other
bills that encourage new
technologies that help provide
reliable affordable and
responsible energy not only to
the large cities in New Mexico
but to the rural New Mexico and
the call ups thank you.
Thank you.
Andrew stone.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee.
I am answers stone.
Piece by New Mexico and.
The
so another amendment.
Thank
The plane could you please make
yourself sorry.
Thank you Andrew stone and I
want to tell you guys that five
years ago I bought ten K. W. of
storage for my.
This.
And I just want you to know that
I was able to run my home
completely twenty four seven on
the batteries and the solar.
And these batteries are not
cheap.
But because I invest in solar
energy I need to know whether or
not our entire grid could be as
simple as batteries and solar
and if you don't believe me take
a trip up to mesa del sole we're
PNM has a facility now a hundred
fifty homes wired with batteries
and solar and they themselves
know that this is the future
created so please let's make it
affordable for everyone.
Do it to pass an H. B. eleven
and thank you for your time.
Thank thank you Mr stone June
Parsons.
Good morning chairman honorable
representatives can you hear me.
Yes my name is Jim Parsons from
Rio Rancho.
Thank you for providing me the
opportunity to speak to you this
morning on H. B. eleven in order
to make real progress towards
significantly reducing the
extreme environmental drought
caused by human emissions of
greenhouse gases like methane
from fracking and other fossil
fuel extraction and processing
actions operations we must act
locally here in New Mexico
energy storage by homeowners in
our homes is critical to our
clean energy transition HB
eleven is a small yet
significant step towards
incentivizing the clean energy
market while serving underserved
communities therefore I stand in
strong support of HB eleven and
request your yes vote thank you.
Thank you Dan inTaos.
Good morning madam chair and and
commission pardon me committee
members my name is Dan Pritchard
I'm with renewable tell us and I
stand in support of this bill
with the reservation that are
actually request the bill to be
amended.
To remove the requirement to be
tied to a solar photovoltaic
generation system residences
this makes it happen this would
make it happen with all to
everyone in New Mexico not just
those that can afford PED's
solar panels on the roof so
please consider an amendment
make this more applicable and
available to all residents of
New Mexico thank you.
Thank you ascena Christodoulou.
Madam chair committee members my
name is Athena Christodoulou and
I'm I'm good morning Chris how
you doing this morning.
How are you today Sir.
It does can we stop for a second
Representative strictly would
you mute yourself please.
Okay I'm sorry ascena we're
going to give you and your
equipment back thank you very
much sorry about that
interruption no problem madam
chair committee members my name
to the increased to do and I'm
not former president of the New
Mexico solar energy association
and a proud owner of four
kilowatts of solar my first two
kilowatts I got back in two
thousand nine when there were
wrecks offered in a seller's tax
credit to offset the the huge
cost that I was putting into it
but it was well worth it and
what I noticed is that it wasn't
until two thousand eleven when
PNM finally had as much solar in
their portfolio than the
citizens of New Mexico we're
coming to a place where solar
and storage is becoming
necessary in order for us to
expand that market there are
places that cannot have that
solar because they need storage
so let's.
Tear down all the barriers we
can to happen very fast clean
transition to clean energy.
Do past for H. B. eleven please.
Thank you.
Hi to Miller.
You madam chair members of the
committee my name section Miller
the inter governmental
coordinator for Santa Fe County.
And I just wanted to express the
Santa Fe county commissions
support for this bill and it's
goes towards the environmental
sustainability so the county
commission is in support of this
bill thank you thank you
Charles good marker.
Yes madam chair members the
committee Charles good marker
with and our DC we're sure
support for this bill a yes vote
this is a smart targeted short
term investment with the sunset
on it it's going to stimulate
jobs and small business growth
in every quarter New Mexico and
yes it also helps the state
moved towards the climate goals
thank you for your yes vote on
this bill.
Thank you Charles Carlos Lucero.
Yes good morning madam chair
Chandler members of the
committee Carlos was there with
the Public Service Company New
Mexico HB eleven gives
households especially those of
rooftop sources systems an
option during emergency
situations and the ability to
charge their energy storage is
systems during normal conditions
also the energy storage system
could be utilizes a shared
resource particularly tricky
deliveries in the case of an
emergency this could help one
electric outages do happen
happen which PNM works hard
every day to prevent.
Of and for these reasons PNM
supports house bill level thank
you.
You're welcome rocky back us.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I appreciate this
opportunity to speak of what
most people don't know is that
in a thirty year lotion
resources.
Projection by utilities
typically only twenty five
percent of solar is considered
because it does not align
exactly with utilities peak
which means that you still need
seventy five percent duplicate
without some kind of a storage
equipment and so another factor
is that at the peak time is when
the most numbers of non
renewable or you can use and
therefore the highest pollution
times for the system as a whole
so this bill helps to address
storage getting kicked off is
very positive more to do past
for H. B. eleven thank you very
much madam chairman and
committee members thank you I'm.
Kevin group grand waltz please.
You madam chair members of the
committee on Kevin grow wall CEO
The New Mexico electric coop
association.
we support this bill house bill
eleven we think it's a very
modest first step.
but two or three hundred units
out in the
there any great great we think
we can get some good operational
knowledge and data by getting
the start.
as miss Martinez testified
earlier we'll try state and
western farmers will be over
fifty percent
Carbon resources by twenty
twenty four twenty twenty five
we think this will integrate
nicely with our system of them
we support this bill thank you
very much thank you very much
Kevin Brian Condit.
Good morning madam chair it's
not brain it's meet ever.
Well we love those of you.
Welcome Deborah Morning madam
chair and thank you for allowing
me time to speak never content
with Representative western
resource advocates we support
this bill it should this bill
pass it does allow for work
communities and trains are
workforce in new technology that
we know is going to grow and it
also supports that the
governor's energy transition act
so we ask for your vote on this
voted yes on this bill thank you
madam chair thank you Luis
Carrero collateral and I'm
sorry.
Go for.
It's okay madam chair.
Good good morning I madam chair
members of the committee of we
just got read a with the Sierra
Club Rio Grande chapter are
representing thirty five
thousand members and supporters
I'm as previously mentioned
energy storage would enable the
capture that energy so it can be
used in more beneficial time and
I can't think of a more perfect
example that last year with our
neighbors next door in Texas
struggled with a functioning of
Tricity when gas infrastructure
froze.
Mexico can and I believe will be
a leader in solar energy and
storage additionally just like
Debra messing right before me
she stole my words this will
support job growth and training
and workforce new technology and
also supports the goals of the
Energy transitioned Act as well
we strongly support this bill
with the amendment and to you
vote yes on this bill thank you
very much for your time thank
you Sam echo.
The morning thank you madam
chair members of this committee
my name is Sankalp I am the
crime energy advocate with
conservation voters Mexico City
and we support this bill because
we believe in New Mexico is just
and equitable transition away
from the oil and gas industry
what this bill more New Mexicans
are able to play an active role
in improving the reliability and
resiliency of our energy grid
diversifying our energy
portfolio and reducing negative
environmental impacts energy
star systems can help integrate
non possibile energy into our
great which will result in
reduced greenhouse gas emissions
you've heard comments of support
from both the environmental
community as well as utility
companies administer palette use
and collectively we are just
part of the staff thank you
thank you Tom Solomon.
Hello madam chair
Can you hear me.
Yes I can okay thank you
yes my name is Tom Solomon with
the three fifty New Mexico in on
behalf of the nearly eighty
thousand supporters that we have
a statewide we strongly support
HB eleven the final phase of the
clean energy transition.
which is in fact the primary
solution of the climate crisis
is going to require some amount
of read storage on the electric
grid to balance and smooth
out the intermittent renewable
sources of solar and wind we
know that and this bill gets New
Mexico started on building out
that grid battery storage system
as part of that solution and it
just makes sense we know we're
going to need it many many
purchasers of solar systems are
now buying.
You know battery storage is part
of what they installed and this
will help more people purchase
those systems to get it on the
grid in a distributed passion so
we stand in strong support of
this bill thank you very much
thank you Tom now I'll go to you
opposition are there anyone in
it is there anyone in attendance
in opposition to this bill.
I see no opposition we'll go
back the committee now
any concluding words
Representative Sarinana before
we go to Committee discussion
thank you madam chair I just
want to in one of the comments
they said it could be a
standalone but it can with the
first amendment in section one
C. five it does state be
installed as a standalone energy
storage system so that is there
thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much committee
members questions comments.
I'm sure there must be some.
Madam chair.
Yes sorry.
Peter Martinez Representative
Martinez.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Sarinana for
bringing sporting good see you
former representative Abbas
Akhil who's a member of this
committee for a little while
thank you.
In court took in all the fun
that is House tax revenue
madam chair and representative
Syriana did we see this bill
last year or two years ago.
Madam chair representative we
did see it last year and it did
get passed along moved out of
the committee out of the of the
house.
Unanimously.
It was it what happened on this
madam chair.
Did you run out of time madam
chair I didn't eat it yes
Representative at times.
And madam chair up and
Representative the credit is
limited to how much.
Mr chair could you repeat that
Representative yeah yeah the the
actual credit is limited to a
specific dollar amount correct.
I'm specifically Madam chair
representative
Mr leader five thousand are you
talking about one or overall the
whole four year which was
talking I'm talking both but the
first question is on on you know
on my system what what what is
that cap that Madam chair
representative of five thousand
dollars or forty percent of the
cost got it and and and roughly
what is the what is the average
cost for for these things.
I'm Mr madam chair and and and
Representative I'm gonna defer
that to Representative
Representative about us thank
you madam chair leader I think
that tells.
About ten thousand you.
Got it.
Madam chair representative are
the systems that
Business and and homeowners can
install on their property.
Madam chair Mr leader yet yes
these are systems that can be
styled at home or on a property
got it so just just for my own
To my understanding so so I I I
can purchase a system and and
energy storage system that would
be stored state solar energy
produced by solar panels it
would be stored in the in I'm
assuming cycle battery pack is
out that we're with this is.
And on a day like this cloudy
days no we day I would tap into
that stored energy.
madam madam chair and
Representative Mr leader I
minute let a bus talking the
specifics because I think we
changes a little bit the bill so
normally if it's attached to the
grid it it it can't directly I
believe but a past on to
Representative the kids thank
you yeah because that's where I
was going actions how does is
incorrect degree.
So and fully to the system will
interact with the grid or leave
such abilities there right now
some of the utilities we have
don't have the ability to allow
the system to track but in a
nutshell yes on a cloudy day it
was support you all for as much
as it can.
Got it.
I I appreciate these kinds of
bills and and I I can't think of
a better sponsored and you
representative Sarinana madam
chair.
You've been given how technical
these things could be and and
being able to understand the the
technical aspects.
I think that as we as we
transition into this new space
of energy production.
It's it's got to be an all hands
on deck approach and for the
first couple years when I was in
the legislature it was it was
solar solar panels rooftop solar
and I've seen.
Our own understanding of the
legislature and then getting
good people like you all elected
you know brainiacs that that
understands that better than
most up you're bringing things
to us that are up I think
cutting edge I mean maybe that's
the knowledge he is is not I I'm
not sure but for me it's it's
pretty incredible that I can
have a storage system attached
to a house through which I'm
storing energy I mean that's
that's fascinating to me.
I do think it highlights how
complex and nuanced the
transition it's
and you know this session
particularly to session we've
seen
in this committee we've seen
bills on your thermal.
Solar energy storage there will
be other things you know last
week another committee heard
hydrogen right all of these
things are sort of you know all
of the above approach.
To the state medical which is
energy independence
clean energy and really.
All of this work.
Through the lens of climate
justice.
And.
Fills me with pride to to to to
put it bluntly that this
legislature particularly the
house of representatives is
leading on all of these issues
that we may not all agree on all
of them I think that one of our
colleagues made some some some
very.
Intelligent and and and smart
comments the other day about you
know.
Up for for the longest time
solar credits I mean to this day
they're they're nonrefundable so
like you're all sort of creating
this class system within that
space right.
And then there's legislation to
make a refundable rate which I
think goes to that new ones up.
Not all of us will agree with
all of the policy proposals in
front of us and that's the way
it is.
But I think that our chamber.
In bipartisan fashion many times
is moving toward that transition
you know each of us sort of
providing our levels of
expertise
in each of us providing our own
ideas in I think that that is a
fascinating time for us to be
living in when we get to debate
seeing slight shorter more
things like energy storage
things like hydrogen and
whatever else comes out of the
next two weeks and I can tell
you as a as a non scientist
myself this is fascinating stuff
I mean I I feel.
Thank goodness I I would
sometimes with with the
listening to some of the
presentations you are breaking
so anyway.
Someone to getting but thank you
for bringing this bill forward I
look forward to supporting it I
know that fiscal impact and then
we have the process here
temporary tabling
you know I knew new credit some
deductions exemptions that sort
of thing so I expect that would
be the case today but you can
rest assured that for me this is
definitely something that I am
very interested in helping move
forward thank you Representative
Sarinana thank you madam chair
good to see you.
Mr kill.
Thank you for thank you for
comments.
Step back a little bit we jump
the gun we have a we have an
amendment and I would suggest
that we move the amendment vice
chair hunting to do one of the
amendment it is point two two
two three two four point two and
then we'll go to further
discussion I hope that's okay
with the two representatives who
are waiting.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair I move the amendment to
this bill.
I think we have it for the
record point to two to three to
four point two is that not right
Representative Sarinana.
Let me see
Two two two three two four point
two that correct yes this is our
second.
Second.
I'll second.
It.
Any opposition to the amendment
and and Mr Scott and Mr strictly
if you oppose the amendment
would you let me know what your
hands are up and estimates for
discussion purposes.
That is correct no opposition
here is imminent no opposition
from a either okay right thank
you you have an amended bill
Representative the
Representative Scott.
The floor is yours.
Thank you madam chair
representative for the Mr Kiel
good to see you again.
Can you tell me.
How many of these battery
storage systems are currently
installed.
And in operation.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I will defer to
my expert witness.
Madam chair and representative
caught up since we don't really
track very closely the rough
count available from industry
less than one percent in New
Mexico for those homes that
would solar.
And madam chair Mr kids do you
have that in thousands
yes madam chair Representative
Scott if it's one less than one
percent out to that list in the
two thousand three thousand
homes.
Okay and.
Believe I heard Madam chair
representative that this was
going to provide.
K. five thousand dollar or forty
percent.
tax credit.
For.
Systems that would generally run
about ten thousand dollars is
that.
What did I hear correctly.
Madam chair representative yes
you did thank.
You madam chair.
Representative these battery
storage systems don't mean much
unless or.
Install.
All.
With.
Panels installed on the roof
which.
So with this storage system
credit.
The in addition to the credits
that would accrue to the
installation of those panels.
again madam chair I'd like to
defer to my experts in this.
Madam chair and Representative
Scott yes these are two separate
credit so the credit that did
take a credit for the solar
installations to doing it and
update that data need stores
that to be a separate credit and
to be accounted for separately
but admitted with a certified.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr kill for that answer so.
The total installation costs for
the panel.
The battery storage would be.
Somewhere around thirty thousand
dollars is that is that accurate
number.
Again I'm childhood for to my
expert witness.
Madam chair representative Scott
yes that's really we can go with
that number.
Okay it can.
Madam chair representative
this our districts to the heart
of my issue with the system.
Is this subsidy.
For very well Walsh individuals
by and large.
The cost.
Very few middle income
households are going to be
affording these very hard dollar
systems.
Because.
There is so.
Marginal returns on those
investments.
Have some significant increases
in the cost commercial power so
let me let me ask a couple of.
Of technical questions we'll see
systems.
Madam chair.
Representative indestructible
will lease systems cycle every
night.
Madam chair representative
caught yes the expected would
cycle every night but just
depends on the user's profile of
the whole order who is
installing the system but yes
it's very possible that
encyclopedia.
Madam chair representative and
Mister keel.
What is the expected life time
number of cycle which.
There are available from the
SEC's system.
Madam chair and a press caught.
The lifetimes of the systems is
ready then documented in fact
what I would do is I draw your
attention to the batteries that
I installed an electric vehicles
with the duty cycle is much much
more strenuous than just
stationary system as soon you
know as you realize that.
Those batteries are not being.
What it did for about ten years
and you've seen good expedients
with real life experience shows
that these batteries about
outlasted the Danube here so
stationary system.
Which would see less cycling.
Last the staff much more.
Okay so about about ten years
normally ten or more.
Madam chair Representative
Scott.
Okay.
The.
I heard representations that
they were these were going to.
Contribute to the resilience of
the grant with.
Reference of the situation in
Texas so last year B. and one of
the examples but in truth.
These are designed to power an
individual home.
For about two hours is that
accurate.
Madam chair and representative
Scott generated for two hours
but depending if there is an
outage the homeowner certainly
has the ability to reduce the
usage in other circuits of the
whole reduce the usage and only
part of this century is like
maybe a refrigerator or of just
a laptop cell maybe life saving
devices if they have one.
So the can segregate the usage
so that back to our storage my
last much longer than that to
our state the Bactris rated for
because as an engineer you
realized that if I draw less
energy Oxford I can extend the
time that it supports that lord.
Madam chair Mister keel are
completely agree with you I
guess my concern would be.
Looking at the Wyndham on office
on a cloudy day that is very
cool.
And it would seem to think.
Most folks would be the.
What do you.
Have Turner heaters loss to run
just our laptops today finally
one what was the last question
there would be no
representation this.
A piece of legislation would
have any material impact on.
On climate change or climate
justice
what appear to me to to masts
would not support such a climb
and I'd just like to make.
Make it clear to everyone
listening.
That is in fact.
Comments on that
Representative if it if it's a
standalone system we don't have
the PED's we use it for you know
maybe what maybe we live in a
place where there's brownouts or
blackouts that this could keep
keep it running keep your house
running for a little while so
I do think it's useful not
everybody has to be rich to use
it if we can find if it's a
standalone system you know it is
there for like I said Bronson
blackouts it's usable it's it's
if we're looking at peak times
there's once we get our houses
metered and we can we can figure
out the peak times it can be
used for that and we could it
could be used to save energy
during those times so
just a quick comment there thank
you.
Chairman representative I
completely appreciate that.
Nonetheless the storage
capabilities the systems to run
more.
And is a major systems in the
house for long periods of time
is very.
Very limited Madam chair
representative Mr kill thank you
very much for your answers
that's all.
Thank you Representative Scott
Representative Strickler.
Thank you madam chair sorry I'm
late I have been another bill to
present and it went and what
little long so sorry Mr got into
the light.
Madam chair and and
Representative Sariñana we we
heard this bill and energy we
heard it last year and and I'm a
I'm a business major and took a
marketing class.
And.
Thank you.
They presented to us in in that
class that you need to market
leaders you need.
consumers are willing to.
The pioneers and and
and this is a good example of a
the energy stored judge it's yet
you're gonna need some wealthy
taxpayers to take advantage of
this.
Our folks are going to be able
for this.
And that but what it does.
It to expand the market.
is that is that to is that your
thoughts uh representative.
Thank you madam chair and
representative yes exactly.
It is so.
It and I know this is a limited
program and
you know it's kind of a pilot
program and so forth and I I we
just need to figure out if we
have the capacity to to do this
but by no mistake at
those who have a a elaborate
solar panel system and and how
many how many those folks no no
New Mexico madam chair and
representative of New Mexico had
is blessed with solar with sunny
days and of of heard either were
first or second in the nation.
In that regard.
And so the capacity of solar
would probably exceed the
national average of twenty seven
percent of the time.
Because we just were blessed
with the I know here in
Farmington we we we just it's
just gorgeous up here with three
hundred and.
Ten or twenty days of of sunny
weather so we probably have a
little more capacity there
the average.
solar system is about is it
four four kilowatts are eight
kilowatts and and maybe just
maybe you can help me on that.
Can I.
Give me a ballpark I believe
miss madam chair representative
I believe it's for kids eight or
eight kilowatt hours so we're
looking at.
Well I'm curious the average
solar system in our state I
think you would be anymore what
four kilowatt hours
and may be maybe up to eight
kilowatt hours I don't know what
the average is
I know.
Representative Akeel probably
has a pretty good number.
Representative cut the stricter
actually the size of the solar
system just going up so you're
right the the floor can be about
four kilowatts but yes he
systems as high as thirty
kilowatts of some of the
logical.
So the solar system except is
going up.
But the battery storage we are
proposing the bottom of this for
can awards with to ours of
storage and they can pick it up
to whatever size the field is
necessary to support their
largest sources.
Thank you
thank you.
Mr Vasan and I missed the kids
Representative a kill.
I'm just trying to.
Use the one percent figure
earlier.
The current storage in and in
action today's about one percent
and
and so we do we have a hundred
thousand solar panels and and
New Mexico rooftop solar panels
it is that is that the number of
and hearing.
Are set little bit high.
But madam chair and
Representative Strickler yes the
numbers are I'm not really sure
about that because I have good
numbers projects less than one
percent okay so it was only a
doctors in fact one of the
public comment as mentioned how
the installer the storage system
long before you know dese more
commercialized systems available
and do do benefit from it so the
numbers that you see up existing
homes that happened so storage
is a truly that early adopters
and they did it.
Start of a necessity being in a
rural area audited more data.
It up law those those customers
to do that because madam chair
and representative Sarinana I
mean they're they're what we
call market leaders you know
they're willing to take the risk
of the rolling spend extra
dollars the.
To put in the storage systems
and and so forth and and that
gives us a.
kind of a they're kind of a
Guinea pig if you well and the
and that helps the whole.
broad spectrum the more of the
systems account they go when we
get more information state their
economic or not but this is a
you have to be wealthy to do it
so that's that's my main point
we just have to figure out if
it's good public policy to fund
something like this and you know
I know we're gonna have to hold
it for a while safe we have
capacity so that's all my
questions thank you madam chair
and into always good to say yes
thank you thank you CBS
Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Saniona and
And.
Representative Representative
mosque to see you again thank
you Sir so
So we have this discussion in in
energy but
I thought about it since then I
I'm I'm wondering the sides.
If you're if you're gonna have
battery storage that that would
presuppose that you have a solar
system.
To to gather electricity or some
sort of system.
would people be able to stack
these.
This credit on top of.
The credit for solar system as
well.
Is there anything that would
preclude you from applying for
both.
Madam chair representative I
elected for two Representative
Q..
Madam chair representative.
Want to absolutely destroy
programs are independent of each
other so the deadline for us
with a credit thanks to students
total storage they would apply
separately for both those
credits.
Thank you.
Madam chairman and other.
Representative and Mr kill I'm.
I guess that's really kind of my
concern and I know a little bit
more about the Tesla Rep system
and the battery packs system
talked about that last committee
But that's.
I know is expensive as that
system is that is a very
expensive system because you're
not just buying solar panels if
you by the yes the system you're
buying full roof system.
does not affect you if you look
at the roof you almost cannot
tell which roof panel is a.
Is the solar gathering panel or
just a.
A panel that doesn't have the
ability to collect solar because
it takes really just.
Four five panels on the roof us
southern facing not to be able
to do the job and so the rest of
the panels are is a roof system.
and I I know just.
As we talked about I know more
about that system.
and they yes I'm particular only
sell the roof system with a
garage battery pack.
so I I'm looking at this and as
expensive as that is.
There's a there's a waiting line
for that people are lined up.
And the the the time to.
Sure folks who are interested in
let in that one system I know
there's other systems but in
that one system people are
backed up eighteen months to two
years depending geographically
in the country where they're at.
And part of it is materials
availability is not there and
part of it is.
that the number of folks
actually qualified to install
those reserves systems.
Don't exist that they've they've
al sold their capacity at this
point either for materials or
for installers and that's where
I come in that's where the
company I work for has become a
qualified
Installers panels so I I look at
this and I say.
Where is the need.
You know if we're if we have
folks that have the capacity to
do this and they are already
doing this.
Without incentives and without
subsidies why would we ask every
other New Mexican.
Especially the poor.
Hi would we ask.
People who cannot afford I I
know very well.
The average person cannot afford
the Tesla resistant that is a
very expensive system and then
the battery pack on top of that
is not a cheap battery pack.
And if there.
Backed up.
What is the need for a pilot
program it just seems like if we
put this in place the people
that are going to.
Cash in on the system are people
who are already doing it without
the incentive.
That's usually if you're trying
to incentivize incentivize
behavior it's because there's
not enough behavior doing it.
Why.
Would we incentivize something
that people are already doing.
And I and whoever wants to
answer that question is is fine
thank you Madam.
Madam chair defer to
Representative Q..
So madam chair Representative
Andrea indeed you appoint
somebody good and first of all I
want to welcome you thank you
join the dark side.
but.
But aside from that you know
that Tesla has already lied
following so date that this lot
community with by whatever Tesla
so.
What you're trying to do is that
at least four other commercial
systems on the market that said
package energy storage that is
US certified meets all the core
requirements so this opens up to
the other manufacturers as well
who do not have to seeing kind
of exposure and loyalty that yes
not comments basically.
And then to the point of course
that you know this is upgraded
for the rich.
Indeed it is because most of
that a year doctors as you've
seen in any technology they're
always the morbidity people who
have a tax liability that can be
written off against however we
are making this available the
tax liability can be ruled for
five years so a person in a
lower income tax bracket if you
cannot claim all the credit in
the first year has the ability
to roll it forward for four more
years so it makes it somewhat
available to people who are less
with the and may not have such a
large tax liability so I hope
that answers your question.
I thank you madam chair and and
representative Akhil I the
question madam chair I guess
would be are we then.
Limiting why would we not limit
from this legislation why would
we not limit people who are
buying Tesla because.
From my standpoint.
If this is available out there
the folks who who are wealthy
those are the folks who are
going to have CPA's who are
going to be letting me know
about this tax credit.
There's not anything that's
going to keep people who are
buying the Tesla roof systems
and test the battery packs from
applying is it then I think it I
think what happens is they'll
know about it no why would they
not.
It just it doesn't seem like
we're limiting this in the way
that you would be incentivizing
people.
Towards another system right and
I know we can't do that and that
that's the problem the people
there's already enough people
there or doing this.
On their own and and when we got
involved in this the company
that I work for we weren't doing
yes we just started looking into
that when we found out that they
were looking for installers
as we anna of the company that I
work for owns a roofing company
so when we started looking into
this it was other solar systems
that that our customers have we
we didn't have the ability to
install Tesla but it was obvious
that they're getting market
share.
It seems to me because they have
that market share
There are they will find out
about this tax credit if they
have a decent CPA and they will
be applying for so I don't think
it'll hit the target that that
is intended because it is from
what I'm hearing the target is
not necessarily.
Customers who are lined up
already.
In the test line so is there any
way
Madam chair representative the
Saniona that this could be
tailored towards.
first off.
Taylor away from the wealthy
first off and secondly waited
Taylor this legislation
to.
Folks who make it other
companies that may not have the
following the test last is there
any way to do that in this
legislation.
Representative Madam chair
representative the goal of this
bill is to issues energy storage
to whoever would like to try it
there are invent environmental
people who would like to try
this they may not be wealthy
they may be wealthy but it is a
pilot program to get this out
there energy storage is is a big
is a booming industry right now
it is coming along all over the
world
small and very large systems so
again this is a pilot program to
get people to try it
I was speaking to and a company
with installer said when the
install Peavey systems they were
installing energy storage
systems also so however we get
out there we need to work on on
every way we can to combat
climate change and I do believe
this will help
I do believe this will help so
that's what we're doing as best
we can.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair I I just
it seems like we're just.
Instead of trying to incentivize
I think what this is doing is
more of the opposite which is
going to be rewarding people for
for decisions they've already
made for investments they're
already planning on making.
I think this is the opposite of
what a subsidy is supposed to do
thanks such disposed to.
Encourage people to try
something people have already
tried it Tesla has a massive
following and I think if the
other companies are not able to
compete with Tesla.
Maybe at a speech towards the
inferiority of their product or
maybe just not just not the
marketing or whatever but this
to me this is like a.
Offering an incentive for people
to eat Cheerios people are
already eating Cheerios and at
some point.
Giving other people's tax
dollars for for.
Incentivize behavior that people
are already instead of rice for
just seems like a waste of money
and normally somebody who is is
in the legislature and house the
vested interest.
In a business that or that would
be voting on a subject would be
C. will recuse themselves I'm
not gonna recuse myself because
I'm voting against this because
quite frankly the business that
I see lined up ahead of us.
And the company I work for.
We have that business lined up
at right now and we don't need a
subsidy to help.
Help people to go ahead and
purchase the the yes
Representative systems and yes
battery packs so thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative
Montoya.
Let's see.
All right I don't see any other
comments prepared to hear a
motion.
Temporary table.
I'm sure all of the gentle
temporary table House Bill
Evans.
Thank you.
Here's a motion to temporary
table and a second I it any
opposition temporary table madam
chair with the committee report
it's right on the floor you've
got a sage and till.
Well can I and loving as well
gentle and loving.
I see no opposition to the
temporary table thank you very
much Representative Sereni on I
think you know what that means
that will be looking at this
bill and and pulling it up
shortly for a full committee
review again but we do this with
just about every kind of tax
credit deduction and other kind
of tax expenditure and since
this is a new one will be that's
another reason for us to take a
second look at it so very much
appreciate your presentation and
very much appreciate seeing you
Abbas and thank you for your
time and energy on this very
important issue thank.
I would suggest that we go to
House Bill Representative
maclean's bills house bill.
Forgetting the number.
One seventy one.
I see him present.
Madam chair are you looking for
me.
I am.
In rare occurrence but yes I am.
The my office and I came back to
this this awkward silence at
home the whole.
Make sure you're ready for House
Bill seventy one yes.
Members of the committee house
bill seventy one is a new
version of a bill that has been
through this committee before in
a number of different forms
in the committee you will
remember that
you about twenty years ago the
legislature passed the three
percent cap on residential
properties three so it.
That means that residential
property taxes can't go up by
more than three percent in a
given year.
And the reason behind this was
the people had you lived in
their homes for a long time.
We're seeing uh rapidly
appreciating property values.
The taxes fall the property
values and it was getting too
expensive for people to stay in
their own homes and so this was
the the solution was we're gonna
limit the property tax increases
the three percent a year
unfortunately when the
legislature that all they said
was residential property tax and
they didn't distinguish between
different types of residents and
so what we tried to do a couple
times was limit the three
percent protection and three
percent cap is a protection for
homeowners limit that to owner
occupied primary residence so
it's got to be your house and
it's got to be the place you
live it's not an investment
property US second home with
some of the commercial property
and that the version that was
included in tact Tax fast hi
it's last year taken out of the
Senate there's some resistance
to the idea that rentals.
The rental units.
There was an apartment building
or in individual houses being
rented you know could the
landlord pass on that tax to the
the renters and maybe the
renters are long term and we and
we were harming the long range
and so in order to address that
Madam chair representative
committee we change we may is it
doesn't have to be owner
occupied primary residence has
to be someone's primary
residence so as long as someone
is living there as as a whole
then the residential unit would
still be subject to the three
percent cap if it's not
someone's primary residence for
example.
It's an unoccupied second homes
or in Airbnb kind of property
where it's very short term
rentals.
Then it would be under a ten
percent cap and ten percent cap
the purpose of the ten percent
cap is not to create like a
different year it's actually
just to create a soft landing
that the a property that has
been under the three percent cap
wouldn't go the current and
correct immediately we could
gradually as it is increase
increased over a number years
until got to current and correct
and then the ten percent cap
would probably keep it at
current and correct want to go
back to that level so that's
that's the reason for the bill
to me it's it's a fairness issue
I understand the the the the
policy decision to protect
homeowners and I support that
that we don't need to protect
people who are investing in
short term rentals for people
that can afford.
No.
and with that manager I would
love to have my co sponsor
urgent partnerships you words.
Yes and let's remember you also
an amendment so why don't we go
to Representative Harper to
speak to the general bill and
then will we'll talk a little
bit about the amendment and then
go to the audience thank you.
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair and I'll
keep this brief maybe for five
minutes but I wanted to just
talk about two things to really
just give background and history
German McQueen talked about this
move that the legislature made
She was.
Early two thousands really to
address challenges in Santa Fe.
But.
the one thing I wanted to talk
to the committee about your and
and and in a way that the eyes
don't glaze over.
As we have something in our
statutes called yield control.
And and I think this is a good
time to talk about it is it'll
also affect the next couple
items that have an agenda.
But you'll controls put in place
in the seventies it's the only
place in our statutes where we
actually have an equation.
Which is amazing rate I do go
out on this kind of stuff
but it's really it's really
simple to understand and if you
can I wash my hands I'm gonna
explain it to with my hands will
be really easy so what you'll
control does.
Is one property we don't
property values costly right
from you guys do this.
but there are
government entities that rely on
that revenue schools counties
right these folks requirement
revenue and they don't want
their budgets to also do this
when when property values
postulate.
And so what you'll control does.
Is it's it's goal is to keep the
amount of tax revenue coming to
those entities are essentially
constant plus an inflation
factor.
How does that is one revenues
are housing values go up
everybody's go up it pushes the
tax rate down to and it was
about the same attacks.
That's pretty pretty simple
right and when the opposite is
true when taxpayers are probably
guys go down it pushes the tax
rate up to get about the same
amount of tax.
So that's been that's been
really working well in New
Mexico for for the decades that
was in place.
but when we put this three
percent cap on the valuation of
property.
That doesn't really play well
with this you'll control.
and in some ways I think it was
the wrong solution to the
problem.
And we've talked about this
problem it creates the tax
lightning issue right we have
properties right next to each
other they're paying two or
three times more property tax
than than the ones next to them
that's that's a fairness issue.
and and other issues total
because I'm going to all the
detail but it causes issues with
bonding to a correct capacity
amount we could be but our our
our our valuations in New Mexico
are artificially lower because
of this and so that keeps our
bonding capacity down and
actually can affect our bonding
rates so there's all kinds of
ripple effects unforeseen
consequences of that.
So so the.
That.
Want to mention that the last
thing I want to mention.
and and why you know I've had
people call me you're such an
evil Republican try to raise
taxes on on property owners
while you.
You know you're evil Republican.
and and really and we spent a
lot of time during rest of a few
years ago looking at property
tax income tax and all these
things.
And the solution we came to this
cap needs to go away that's
really more support solutions
need at you'll control do its
thing.
but in this case here we're just
we're gonna try to take the
first couple years off of this
onion the first steps here and
in the right direction.
And and this bill as drafted
makes it clear that it is it
doesn't apply to
Like multi family doesn't apply
to rentals identified your
primary residence this amendment
will make that crystal clear.
But what this really will do
because of yield control this
will really be a slight tax cut
on every.
Primary
owned
Property tax the property tax
was to be a slight taxi from
those who who own it and the
reason is yield control right so
so if we have.
BMPs and second homes paying a
little bit more in tax.
What that means is to keep the
tax is about the same going in
it's gonna push the right down
on everybody else so this
actually will be a slight tax
decrease on everyone's regular
home and so that's why I'm I'm
I'm I don't consider myself to
be an evil Republicans actually
slide tax decrease to a.
Well everyone so with that madam
chair I have an answer more
questions but I'll stop there.
I'm sure we recognized on that
points from the committee if we
want to discuss whether or not
Representative Harper is in fact
evil Republican or not or do you
want to have just wait until you
call us for the rest well I I'll
I'll wait to speaker I think we
should wait on that but and
maybe it also turned up is the
slippery logic so.
Madam chair maybe we can take a
vote.
All right so amendment
Representative chairman the
claim.
The manager that there is an
amendment this.
What I actually missed the last
Committee Representative
Representative currently there's
a lot of discussion on what the
fact is a principal place of
residence it is a term used
throughout our statutes in our
our drafter originally felt that
we didn't need a definition it
continue to be a source of some
concern so the amendment
provides the definition of the
amendment to to to number is two
two two three eight nine point
one.
And it simply adds a definition
for principal place restaurants.
Thank you.
When we go to the audience and
what what do we do this why
don't we move the amendment vice
chair emerging would you move
the amendment we can adopt the
amendment and then
go to the audience if that's
okay yes madam chair I move the
amendment to this bill amendment
number two two two three eight
nine point one.
Move adoption of the amendment
is there a second.
I'll second that.
Okay I'm is there any opposition
to the amendment and I'm
assuming speaker Egolf and
Representative Lujan are not at
opposing the amendment.
That's correct all right very
good thank you you have an
amended bill representatives
let's go to the audience and
we'll go back.
Yes Sir Representative Lujan is
a co sponsor of the bill and yet
I don't know if you want to say
anything
Representative we wanted to do
like to speak the bill as a as a
sponsor.
She might have stepped away for
a moment why don't we go to the
audience and then we'll back all
right those in favor of the bill
please raise your hands.
All right
Randy trainer.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members a Randy
trainer representing the
apartment association of New
Mexico
first I'd like to thank
Representative McQueen and
harbor for working with us on
this I know we've been we've had
these conversations for several
years now.
we have seen the language for
the amendment to we agree with
that and as a result we support
this bill of thank you very much
thank you Hutch Miller.
Mr Miller.
Thank you I just saw the and you
show up.
members of the committee R.
madam chair.
I'm Judy Miller and the
intergovernmental coordinator
for Santa Fe county and the
Santa Fe county commission has
in place a resolution in support
of this particular piece of
legislation and we would just
like to thank the sponsors of
this bill for bringing for over
the years to
fix this issue regarding
property taxes will go a long
way to help of the revenues for
a counties throughout the state
thank you.
Thank you.
Parsons.
June.
June Parsons.
On good morning chair and
honorable members of the
committee so can you hear me now
yes.
I just want to speak in support
of HB seventy one and thank you
very much that the legislature
brings forth bills that are
meaningful for each of us is tax
payers as they represent us
thank you.
Thank you June Brian Miller.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee of Brian Moore
with New Mexico counties
counties all over New Mexico
were very sympathetic with the
desire to protect people who
live in their own homes nobody
wants to think about forcing
their grandmother sell their
house because our property taxes
are too high the same time going
to struggle with having enough
money to pay for things like
roads jails and hospitals so any
attempt to kind of balance the
needs of our lower income or
races regular property owners
with the ever increasing
challenges in county budgets is
is welcome Mexicans really
appreciate to Sanchez bring this
bill and this discussion to this
committee will Arkansas are
assessors are rightly concerned
about how the administrative
process will work in hell really
work in the real world who
reports out of the report what
technical big grades maybe
required New Mexico County
support legislation that
eventually could lead to a
system that is current and
correct thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr Moore.
Laura Montoya.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee this bill has
had a lot of work done to it in
a lot of people working on this
I think the Sanchez for doing
that I think this gets just a
little bit closer to with the
full intent was of the three
percent cap on residential
property for primary home so
that people can be safe and make
sure that they can stay in their
homes but helps get us back to
current and correct this will
help counties municipalities get
their funding source I'm
definitely glad I'm not in the
faster but this definitely gets
in the right direction for
public policy and the five
principles thank you.
Thank thank you ms Montoya Randy
trainer you still have your hand
up but I suspect that's just an
error so
It see anyone in attendance who
wishes to speak in opposition is
raise your hand.
Okay Leri Sonntag.
Good morning.
Because of the committee
representing the New Mexico
business coalition we appreciate
the the sponsors of the bill and
what they're attempting to
accomplish here have concerns
what is not addressed in this
bill is the three percent cap on
residential properties per year
isn't been equally enforced
during down.
Here's right now the market is
booming there's no question
three percent increases part but
back in two thousand eight nine
ten when the market tanked we
were still having three percent
increases the other thing that's
concerning is the logistics of a
principal residence being
applied to multi family housing
units at the it doesn't work
that way the tax bills go to an
owner and owner can have one
principal residence or not
understanding how this will be
some of that has a rental home
will be able to claim wells it's
somebody's principal residence.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Read more.
More thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Roy Moore I am a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
association of realtors and the
association of realtors
respectfully opposes this bill
are they have always had
concerns about this proposal and
I would note that we have not
seen the amendment which
definition for principal place
of residence but the realtors
continue to have concerns about
this bill we look forward to
speaking with Representative
Harper and Representative
McQueen about the definitional
change in the state where the
bill has evolved to thank you
very much.
Thank you
Jason Barker.
Yes can you hear me madam chair
I can.
Good morning and thank you for
the time for my public comment I
am a renter that live in
Albuquerque and we've already
been told by our property
management company to expect a
rent increase if this bill goes
through.
I'm a person that's on food
stamps so.
You guys really need to realize
what you're doing to the low
income people here with this
bill.
And that's why I'm opposed to it
thank you.
Thank you Mr Barker
I don't see any other hands in
opposition let's go to the coast
other co sponsor Representative
Lujan.
I believe madam chair is frozen.
Yes it looks like she's.
vice chair Herndon I don't know
if you want to go ahead and just
continue with yes.
I'm and I might just vice chair
it seems like we just lost many
members on the zoom I wonder if
Something happened to the
network in the capitol
it looks like we've had a
catastrophic failure so we need
to put in that the.
Storage unit with the space to
make sure it gets back on track
this is sorry vice chair and and
we do not have a quorum just so
you know.
All right thank you something
has happened at the capitol.
And madam chair we madam vice
chair we typically if the
webcast goes down will just
cease our committee for a moment
and I wonder if we all check on
that right now to.
Okay.
So do we stay on the normally
excuse me so help me to
understand and wait to see if it
comes back up is that what you
mean when you say we cease okay
yeah that's correct so we just
we especially for the public we
just make sure that our webcast
is always live in and working so
that everyone can follow along
because dot on soon and for
archival purposes so it we all
check on the webcast right now
haven't been following that but
if it's still down we will will
deposit of course we don't have
a quorum currently so yeah and
yeah my doctor vice chair I just
heard from Representative
Hernandez Montoya Strickler and
Scott that the internet is down
at the capitol.
Okay well thank you very much we
need that storage unit.
And oddly enough madam vice
chair that webcast is live so
like it's just a wide by issue
that we're got getting through
right now just to make sure all
of our members are connected so
stay tuned well thank you very
much.
Getting a series of emails that
says there's no there's no
internet.
Okay.
That could come we had some on
things happening with our
internet money went down and
apparently a number of other
people's went down so let I
wanna take a look at who's here
in terms of substance.
I see I'm here vice chair
Herndon.
Andrea Representative Andrea
Romero is here is that right.
This is here yes madam chair I'm
here okay Representative Lente
chairman Lente is here earlier
okay great are Representative
Harper is here.
Is that all.
Yeah madam chair the internet
you're you're correct didn't go
down just for you I heard from
my other for members that they
were disconnected so.
Trying to get on back on okay
would you ask him to text you
what will wait a few minutes but
it looks like.
You know we're bumping up to
eleven thirty and
We may have to.
We lost quorum so we call in.
Okay.
Well we've been doing so well.
We lost in.
Thank.
Madam chair.
I don't know if you realize that
you're now frozen on the screen
I'm Judy wise this is
unfortunate but I guess things
are gonna happen like this it's
snowing
My still frozen yeah yes madam
chair you are.
That you're on frozen you you're
not coming through on a
consistent basis.
Okay
I think the internet is I'm in
the building so just keep that
in mind so and then there are
other people who are currently
having to trouble.
We'll give it a few minutes but
I just think we're gonna need to
maybe
Adjourn this meeting and and
start up on Friday given the
fact we've lost quorum.
And we're getting close to the
floor session.
Okay I see Representative
Hernandez now.
Representative Lujan with us.
Our members are coming back.
Okay.
Madam chair and says you have
low band with so something is
still happening at the capitol.
Yeah apparently so
Okay is the speaker back I see
Representative Martinez
Fernandez now we are quorum
would you like me to retail
Senator.
Yes please and we will continue
speaking on it's this is a
little disconcerting but will
try to move forward thank you.
Okay.
Representative.
Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez.
Here.
Representative Lente.
More.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Maestas.
I just this is in the attendees.
Okay.
Promoted to Panarin's
Representative Maestas.
Here.
Representative.
It looks like the speaker still
off but let's continue is do it
has Representative Lujan
appeared yet apparently not.
Thank you madam chair I have one
Toyota right here he's also
trying to get on but you can
hear.
Program.
Okay okay we've done this before
Thank you and thank you all for
your patience.
what's that start discussed we
Pat.
We passed the amendment I think
we have.
Us so we have an amended bill
and I correct about that
Kimberly okay great so we have
amended bill that we're
discussing and members of the
who wish to ask questions or
speak these raise your hand.
Representative Strickler.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you chairman acquainted
Representative Harper and I know
the goal is to.
Somehow get everything true
correct and and the yield
control is a very important
element
so this bill which is strictly
Tyler to
what kind of property so maybe
yet that it doesn't cover rental
properties to cover.
Parmenides doesn't cover primary
residence
Have that investors have about
just regular rental houses.
Representative Strickler to the
bill any residential property.
This has the this being occupied
as the primary residence by
anyone stays under the three
percent cap.
If it's not being used as a
primary residence which we we
think would be unoccupied second
homes and some of the short term
rentals that are big deal these
days
then it will not be under the
three percent cap.
A like a vacation rental.
Right okay that that's a pretty
narrow pocket of of I mean it's
a pretty madam chair and and
gentleman
You know.
What is it what is the.
The number houses that would fit
that category this this tree
it's kind of hard to to quantify
isn't.
Madam chair representative.
It is a fairly narrow slice
because we we have a.
Drop the owner occupied
requirement but it will have a
much bigger impact in some
communities.
The Santa Fe maybe Albuquerque
maybe a resort community hello
parts of the state where the
property values have been rising
so fast they may will be at
current and correct just using
the three percent cap.
So it's really some communities
are Argosy the a more
significant change that others.
Okay thank thank you for that
that answer
on on a global
Historical.
The point when this when this
bill this.
Three percent cap was
implemented was a twenty years
ago twenty twenty two.
Is that is that right.
Madam chair and gentleman.
Madam chair I believe it was in
the early two thousands so two
thousand one two thousand two
somewhere in there before my
time and that three percent cap
it is it has it struck the gap
You know at all to to raise the
current correct and and
community such as Santa Fe I
guess that was the main focus of
that that bill
Representative Strickler I made
that three percent cap is what
has created the difference right
because the property values have
gone up faster than three
percent year and that was sort
of the intent right so if you on
the property you weren't you're
you're working at price of your
home because property taxes so
that is the the source of the
difference in from the actual
value to to
assessed value but you were just
trying to take a piece of that
out of the three percent cap so
they can go back to current and
correct.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for thank you gentlemen so
in a in a to really correct to
really correct this properly and
and lift the three percent cap
and I know there's been some
bills in the past to raise that
to five or seven percent to to
to catch up.
The everything and the.
An account of a gentle landing
situation was was that the
number that was used in the past
I made to clean this up Charlie
to to lift the cap rather than
eliminate entirely
just increase the cat to let's
say seven percent to you know
over five ten year period time
everything should be Truman
correct is and I know that's
kind of a kind of a broad
question but I'm just trying to
understand.
What you guys know.
Representative Strickler I think
you could do that if you were
ready to abandon the policy goal
of protecting him.
And you know Representative
Parker of touch on that there's
certainly an equity argument
that.
Property taxes should be
equitable in terms that everyone
paying the same percent on value
that of their home or the value
of the properties they own
that's been changed of this bill
doesn't propose to take the cap
off.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you gentlemen that that
answers my questions appreciate
it.
Thank you Representative
Strickler I'm gonna go to
Representative Lujan next she's
a coast sponsor and we had some
technical difficulties and
gliding and I'd like to get
allow her to have her say you
all that money thank you.
You need to you yourself
Representative Lujan of the area
thank you.
Warning for sure.
In quite the morning I really
appreciate it and they are
having some technical problems I
just want to you so yes I have
sent out to but really and I
appreciate that the sponsorship
moving forward with this and you
it's my understanding that we
when the set was initially
brought forward by
Representative Madam speaker
lines and and Representative
looking about at that time this
is intended for you know
primary homeowners and that you
know the whole issue that we're
getting into the rental
ownership and and just really
that interesting that but I I
really do appreciate this is
something of an issue and even
Representative Harper brought up
that you this was initiated
because of what was going on in
Santa Fe and here to stay it's
still a hardship additional
problem here in Santa Fe for
Our property owners and I think
that this is a this is a await
how we address this is the way
this is a solution based and
equitable equitable way of
addressing this issue and I
really appreciate it the.
That it's come for that we you
know that we move upon that
opportunity to that point thank
you madam chair that's that's
really all I have thank you.
Thank you Representative Lujan
Representative Strickler would
you put your hand down in all of
Mexico to Representative
Maestas.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative McQueen.
I appreciate you bringing this
forward you Representative Lujan
because Upton's you know what
dealt with the that the
conversations of.
Of the property tax.
Scheme that that's currently in
place and and I don't like to
use this term but the as we know
it is tax lightning and.
Real unfairness over here
perceived unfairness over there
up and in the and and in the
meantime county governments get
further further squeezed.
By lowering the tax base and
then of course the increased
costs of of of the local jails
and stuff.
So I'm not one it just thank you
for doing this because.
If someone has a house they buy
a second house they live in that
second house.
Have the financial means not to
sell that their original house
and they use it as an Airbnb.
That is no longer a residents
it's a business.
and and good for them we want to
encourage that business would
want to dis incentivize that
business in your opinion of
Madam chair of them a quick does
this does this proposal
disincentive eyes that economic
activity
in your.
Or not.
Madam chair of the
Representative Maestas.
If paying property taxes on the
current and correct value of
your property is a disincentive
then yes.
But to me if you have an income
producing property if you have
the means to on that property if
you have a second that's nine
occupied.
I think you have the means to to
pay current and correct and
madam chairs of Estes I I see
Representative Harper has
unmuted itself I'd love for him
to be able to answer this as
well he might have a different
perspective Madam chair
representative Harper yeah madam
chair and and.
Chairman justice thank you for
for the question and and I think
if I just take one step back
maybe slightly higher view and
then answer your question.
so it's just a folks are aware
the very first FIR that came out
of this bill was incorrect
because it it did not it missed
the point that we took out the
aukey owner owner word in this
bill.
So if you read the very first F.
I. R. it's it's not gonna be
actually representative of this
bill does is been updated was
updated actually yesterday.
And makes it clear that what
this bill does.
Is for any residential that is a
primary residence.
they still fall within this
three percent.
protection.
So renters so one of the
gentleman who spoke in the
Taylors renters this is going to
affect them unless it's a short
term rental right like like I
have months to months if it's a
if it's your primary residence.
A long term rental.
This is one of life's.
So you're just making that clear
now now to answer your question
represent Maestas actually in
the last committee.
It might have been
Representative Romero brought up
the the point is this might
actually encourage and I thought
this fast and this might
encourage people to move from
short term vacation type rentals
too long term housing.
Rentals and we all know that
there's a housing crisis right
now in the state right I mean
we just look around in my
district there are no apartments
available and and any rental
home that shows up is gonna two
days.
So this has the potential of
someone really wants to keep
their value from going up slowly
over time.
To go from Airbnb to renting
their house to a family.
so I think there is a
possibility that there but I
don't think it would discourage
someone from doing.
An Airbnb or a vacation rental
and the reason is this
we're going from a three percent
cap to a ten percent increase so
it's a difference of seven
percent.
And we all know that the value
when you take when you do
property tax you take the value
and you multiply it by a third
and answer taxable value so take
that seven percent and a
multiplied by a third.
That that's this that's the
percent increase.
In your property tax year to
year and it's gonna take years
for these properties that are
really undervalued to reach
current and correct so so we're
not talking about you know some
crazy huge increase in their tax
bill here we're talking about
you know two point to two point
three percent increase over the
current situation so I I don't
see that as being at a big
disadvantage to someone using
their property in this way.
Thank you madam chair
representative McQueen
Representative Harper so so for
the record the FIR is this
current and correct so that
that's always a good thing we
appreciate the work health
analysts do
If if if you know the so madam
chair of them a queen
Representative hunt so if if.
If if the law changed it from a
residential.
From residential property to
commercial property how would
that affect the how would that
affect the the property tax.
Representative Maestas the the
current three percent cap only
applies to residential.
it's I think you can make the
argue that argument that using.
Your property as a short term
rental is a commercial use I
don't think it's currently
treated that way.
Thank you madam chair thank you
observe equipment us just
interesting because it's zoned
residential.
but yeah you're using it as
commercial it's not zoned mixed
use or commercial it's just
interesting phenomenon the
market that
supposed folks could always rent
there second homes but to read
I'm out you know because of the
internet and all communication
now you can read about.
To you know ten twenty people
throughout the year instead of
you know sort of one family so I
think that
I think that we are sooner or
later we have to just.
Educate folks as we do on G. R.
T..
exemptions we just got educated
folks that but there's other
ways to alleviate.
The stress of poverty the.
Keeping older folks in their
homes things of that nature
there's other ways we can do it
now that we have a robust.
Your state government coffers
than than just like.
They're just really really
really kind of messing up
fundamental princes of past
policy that that the that you're
the bills twenty years ago data
I think you have to consider
like a ten year phase in or
something just get everybody to
current and correct and then we
could deal with issues of
poverty and and not folks losing
their homes late in life we can
deal with that specific issue
with the financial resources
that we have so I appreciate
what you're doing I think it's
probably fair in and of itself I
don't know if it further
complicates things maybe.
Maybe it when someone moves from
their home they physically move
from their home that make that
should trigger current correct
at that moment.
but like I said that that center
is part and correct the entire
thing yes I Representative
McQueen.
Are there right but but you are
correct that's still the
property sensitive to current
and correct.
So the three percent cap only
applies while you own the
property if you sell it it is
merely because current and
correct.
Absolutely thank you but I mean
I I think if if someone were to
move.
For whatever reason.
As it their primary residence.
Want to consider that triggering
a current and correct this kind
of does that in a way.
But I just wanted to do up we
have some concerns my
constituents are are emailing me
about and I want to get chance
to respond thank you madam chair
thank you representative of the
want to quit thank you
Representative Maestas
Representative Scott.
Thank you madam chair just to
one question for.
Presenters how are the
circumstances of.
Duplex quadruplex.
Small apartment building
handled.
Or the owner may live in the
proportion of the structure.
And ran out to the rest of it
are those.
Pro rated.
So I'm.
Madam chair if I may
Representative Scott great great
question and and if that shows
there's a little confusion here
so what I want to do is I'm
going to right here in from the
amendment the definition.
Our principal place of
residence.
It means a residential property
that is used as a residence
principal dwelling whether the
property is owned or rented.
And includes a single dwelling
or multi drawing or multi
purpose property.
But does not include a drawing
that is rented in less than
thirty day increments.
Or where the resident has not
manifested an intent to make the
drawing a resident.
Or household.
And so what this means is in
your example let's say there's a
multi family.
Complex were the owner occupies
one space and then rents out.
Three other spaces.
As long as these are longer than
thirty day rentals.
That is considered a primary
place of residence and so all of
those spots.
Would be.
Protected by the three percent
cap still.
But let's say one of those spots
he wants to rid the here she
wants to make that a.
Vacation rental and it's less
than thirty days.
Then that particular.
Valuation that particular part
of the property would be subject
to a ten percent increase.
The madam chair resist got a
Representative Harper
Potentially I would say.
The my understanding having
talked to that Santa Fe county
assessor for example I brought
up the the example my neighbor
my neighbor has a residents and
they have an attached guesthouse
the use as Airbnb they would not
the two units aren't separately
assessed.
So if there is just one
assessment.
You would actually have to have
the owner living there as long
as it was someone's primary
residence as long as it was
someone primary residence then
the unit as it has assessed
would stay under the three
percent cap so if you have a
twenty unit building and you had
for your for their work rent
rented.
The second change the assessment
you know it it's the the whole
the billing is assessed as a
unit.
And it's someone's residents you
would stand with the cat.
Thank you for that the
correction here Representative
McQueen.
Okay so Madam chair
Representative Harper McQueen in
the circumstance that I was
describing that entire structure
as long as there was a portion
of it.
These are owned as a primary
residence or is a long term
rental that entire structure
would remain under the three
percent cap is that correct.
Madam chair representative Scott
yes.
Thank you very much Fletcher's
up.
That's all.
Thank you Representative Scott
on speaker Egolf.
Thank you madam chair
So I I am the state
representative that has in the
district I represent.
I I I can't see the majority but
certainly the highest
concentration of properties that
were intended to be benefited by
this legislation when the late
speaker though on introduced in
and shepherded it through the
legislature so you think of all
of the side Santa Fe ally hill
communis on Sunday are in the
areas in and around there upper
canyon roads to record we got
lots of the families that have
been a property for a long time
and our
you know dealing with a property
valuation issues you know New
Mexico state folks it may not
have large incomes that have
properties that are worth a
substantial amounts.
I I think it you hearing the
conversation I think we may.
Well I don't know if it meets
what was intended but I don't I
don't know the definition of
primary residence.
Is is correct
He has almost any.
Residential property in the
state is going to still be
capped at three percent unless
it is used.
Soleus air B. and B. for a.
short term rental.
I'm you know if you think of an
apartment building.
Is yours and we just said that
it's going to be someone's
primary residence.
The owner can live in yes
anywhere in the world the owners
when is the property tax.
But because that taxed property
is the prior primary residence
of one or more people it's still
gonna be capped at three percent
a year.
I don't know if that was the
intention madam chair so that we
have make me ask representatives
between Harper is is is that
the.
Is the intention to only have
the ten percent cap applied to
Airbnb a short term rentals.
Madam chair sent you off I went
With the phrase it differently
it to me Airbnb enter term
rentals are the same thing.
So this was applied to short
term rentals.
Which would include their babies
in an occupied second homes.
In there are a number of those I
don't.
If you own a second home do you
use is a short term rental I
don't know you would still it
would still fall outside the cap
or perhaps you have a second
home and you're the only one
that uses that.
And use it.
One month a year six months here
but it's not your primary
residence.
That would also fall outside
because so those are the two
broad categories the unoccupied
second homes in the short term
rentals you are correct the
intent was to leave the
apartment buildings under the
cap and that was out of concern
for the ranchers.
Okay.
Well
Yeah I'm not going to oppose the
legislation that I feel like we.
Are going to be.
Doing it this this is not going
to fix the tax lightning problem
for anybody.
And yeah I felt like if we're
going to tackle this we should
do that.
Right and we did we have my
preferred solution is what you
know what you and I discussed
madam chair representative green
in the past and that is.
we.
Keep that three percent cap in
place.
And then.
One more incidence of tax
lightning occur for everyone in
the state then after that then
there's no capital and we just
go back to the way the world was
before.
Before the legislation is in
place for we would allow one
more yeah we would allow one
transfer without a change in.
If you are a current correct and
then there be tax lightning
right so that if you got
families on upper canyon rotor
you know the the neighborhoods
that I was just describing Santa
Fe.
In the grandparents great
grandparents to transfer their
families property into the
member of the younger generation
or into a family trust into some
sort of family partnership.
The three percent cap would
continue.
In in then they're a bit like
tax ID so that at the next sale
my recollection we look to this
three four years ago was it
would take about ten years for
all of the R. for virtually all
of the properties in the state
to unwind from yes from the tax
lightning I see Representative
Harper nodding in agreement so
but I'm glad I memory sort of
close to maybe correct yeah that
would be my preferred approach
is just to rip off the bandaid
and yet you know give one more
transfer without a current
correct for all the families
that have been relying on the
promises made by the legislature
I think that's kind of a
fundamental principle to me is
no many many families of.
Madam chair made their decisions
based on this three percent cap.
You many folks that don't have a
four oh one K. eight were as you
know retirement pension you know
their families wealth is going
to be in some of these
properties right and I don't
think it's fair necessarily for
yeah huge amounts of that wealth
to be.
Taken.
it.
The sale when you we would be
doing the same thing in terms of
you know taking wealth way out
of our four oh one K. IRA or
pension.
So yeah I think it's fine to do
this you know if you preceding
we just need to know that this
is only for on occupied.
residences and Airbnb is which
is going to be a small number I
think that this is just my
thoughts madam chair I don't
know if.
if the Sanchez would want to be
a little more ambitious here or
if we if we just want to take
this is the first step madam
chair.
Roger Federer.
Reply to that and and Mr speaker
of thank you I I'm sure you
recall that I supported your
your proposal three or four
years ago to do just that I
think to me there are there are
really two big solutions to this
this problem the the first is
what you just mentioned that.
Thank cap remains on.
Until the property trained
changes hands and it's gone
forever.
The second option is you can
increase the three percent cap
to something like seven or eight
percent.
Because you look over the last
thirty years five percent has
been the average increase in
property value so if you just
increase a few percentage points
above that slowly over time
it'll on wine but that was.
If I remember right it was about
twenty five years to get to
current correct under that
proposal for just ten years for
the one you just mentioned so so
I'm I'm I think we we agree that
this is a problem and we want to
find a solution I'm here in a
short survey and then also maybe
getting a little wiser over the
years taking taking small bites
seems to be more effective than
then I tried to hold in one so
that's that's why I felt to
support this measure this time I
think it's a it's a good couple
steps in the right direction.
It will ensure it you know if we
are just yep clear that this is
you know one step
yeah I think it's fine and I
will return madam chair to
Representative Harper the same
compliment he directed me with
with my prior solution which is
that the.
Legislation that Representative
McQueen Harper have brought
before us are elegant in their
simplicity and simple in their
elegance so.
Thank you.
Mr speaker always a pleasure to
have you on the line.
Representative Romero thank you
madam chair thank you so the
sponsors for this I saw it in C.
pack and I do agree that this
could incentivize
possibly having you know second
homeowners who are now in the
business of short term rentals
thinking about their property
taxes and incentives moving
forward as we are you know
facing this housing crisis I
don't want to ask any questions
I'm really grateful to see the
changes made I do have a
question for the I think that I
don't know someone who
understands the tax structure
and how this to move forward
since this is a sort of possible
revenue bill do we move this out
of committee and on to the floor
as far as just you know
understanding of.
Water tax packages typically a
deduction where is this might be
a benefit to the state I'm just
curious how that works madam
chair and any expert who wants
to help me with that.
Well I I believe this can be
moved out of committee it
doesn't have a negative impact
on the general fund or on the
state budget so it's not one of
those bills that we need to very
table.
Thank you madam chair okay well
with that I will move the past.
The pass as amended is there a
second has as amended thank you.
Thank.
Thank you madam chair.
We have a motion by the passed
by a motion by Representative
Romero seconded by vice chair
current and
Really we call the roll please.
Yes.
Representative Cadena.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative.
Representative might be next.
Representative Montoya.
No no.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler no.
Going back to Representative.
However.
Need a new Representative.
Hernandez.
Sorry.
No.
Representative vice chairman it
yes.
Madam.
Yes.
We have a six three yes wrote.
Very good I'm you have a do pass
on your bill Representative we.
Thank you you're very welcome we
are going to roll over the the
last two bills to Friday and
we're about to start the floor
session I I would like to start
our meeting at eight thirty on
Friday we're starting to get a
collection of bills today is the
last filing the data file bills
will have a better sense of how
how we're how backed up we're
going to be but.
We're getting to the point the
session where I think we should
start meeting at eight thirty so
Friday at eight thirty we will
meet and take up the two bills
that we rolled over and then
we'll have another agenda which
I'll be consulting with the
Minority ranking member of thank
you very much thank you.
Madam one.
I'm just a bit of housekeeping I
I don't believe it's proper for
somebody to.
Debate until and have committee
and then moved to do pastor
making.
It's a.
That for it to pass motion
that's okay for tabling you're
correct if some of the basic
cannot then make a table in
motion but because it's a non
debatable motion
but someone can debate and and
over to pass my understanding
thank you Mr chair also madam
chair I think that And thank you
Mr wrong type for Representative
Montoya for that Representative
Strickler thank you madam chair
thank the vote count was
incorrect I thought I counted
four no votes and not three so I
think there there are things I
for but
I think the secretary needs
double check that there are okay
what was for that Representative
strictly we will we'll double
check yes yes.
Okay let me call barely squeaked
out a main Harper barely spring.
Let me call this again
Representative.
Up.
We can't really know we we we're
not going to redo the what will
just double check okay.
Thank you okay thank you.
Thank you.
Our meeting is now adjourned
thank you.
