morning, um, but
That being said, let's begin our
meeting with roll call.
Madeline, if you would please.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Gallego.
Representative Henry.
Representative Hernandez.
Repres
Representative Martinez.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Parejon.
Representative Para
I'm present.
Representative Silva.
Representative Trasas.
Vicarena.
Here.
Mr. Chan, I'm here.
Right, we have a quorum. Thank
you, Madeline, uh, for our notes
on today's agenda at the request
of the sponsors, we will be
rolling until Monday's meeting
HB 46 real property from
healthcare or health-related
equipment, excuse me, as well as
HB 51 as amended energy storage
system income tax credit. We'll
be rolling those once again
until Monday's meeting at the
request of those sponsors.
OK, folks, so with that being
said, we have an abbreviated
agenda today that includes HB 47
and 218.
Related to HB 47, recall we had
a thorough uh hearing.
On Wednesday, so I don't intend
to go through the entire hearing
again, other than to discuss the
amendments that were made that
were brought up by this
committee, uh in that meeting on
that day. So with that being
said, can we pass out the
amendments?
Uh, for discussion, please.
Amendments are being handed out.
And while we're waiting for
those amendments to be handed
out, we do once again have the
sponsors of the bill. We have uh
Representative Art de la Cruz as
well as the Republican whip Mr.
Martinez, good morning again,
gentlemen. Thank you for being
here as well as our secretary,
uh, for tax and revenue as well
as some of her staff. And so as
we get that bill handed out,
then we will begin.
Uh, and I will ask you to verify
that 202 number, gentlemen, as
we begin.
Maybe not yet, but here in a
minute, so when they get to
building.
OK, it looks like we have, oh,
can we get one more for Speaker
Martinez, please, gentlemen,
would you please read off the
202 number please for us.
Thank you and good morning, Mr.
Chairman, the 202 number is
230490.1. OK, that's what I
have. I think that's what we all
have. If you could explain uh
the amendment.
we'll go from there. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
vice chair before we start that,
I just first want to thank the
committee and particularly the
vice chair and ranking vice
chair Cardena and ranking member
Duncan for working with us on
this amendment, uh, we, we
hustle, we try to make it work
as quickly as possible and they
were accessible and available
and we really appreciate it. So
to walk through uh the sub the
committee substitute for HB 47,
the secretary will talk about
the amendments.
And I stand corrected. It's a
committee substitute
non-amendment
just for the record, this is a
tax and Rev committee substitute
for the House Government
Committee substitute
the committee sub for
discussion.
Thank you.
Please proceed. OK, thank you.
The substantive changes that
this committee substitute makes
versus the version that was
heard on Wednesday or on pages 3
and 7, so if we turn to page 3
and look at paragraph C, we've
addressed how the $10,000
exemption will be stacked with
the
Percentage deduction for
disabled veterans, and it says
that the amount of exemption,
uh, in the disabled, um,
veterans exemption shall be
adjusted for inflation and then
the depart.
The department shall make the
adjustment by, oh, I'm sorry, I
think I'm on the wrong.
No, no, no, sorry, I'm in the
wrong one.
It's too early.
Let's try. We are on page 6.
Apologies. OK, so after
basically it says that the
amount of the disabled veteran.
Um, exemption amount exempt is
an amount equal to the
percentage of the veteran's
disability is determined by
federal law, and you multiply
that percentage disability by
the value of the property after
the amount exempted percent to
737-5, that's the $10,000
exemption.
So there's the first concern is
that it's very clear in law that
the $10,000 comes off the top
and then the percentage. And
then the next, um, substantive
changes on page 7 in paragraph
F.
And we've basically stipulated
with a new sentence that the
disabled veteran exemption shall
be claimed in proportion to the
taxpayer's ownership interest in
the property, and so it's not
all spelled out here in detail,
but the law provides for joint
tenancy, tenants in common, just
depending on how the property is
held by the owners, that is how
their exemption will be applied.
Very good. Anything else from
the sponsors?
Nope. No the chair where they
ask questions. All right, again,
we had a robust hearing on this
on Wednesdays. We're going back
to the audience, but we'll ask
questions around our table.
We'll start off with
Representative Montoya.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Madam Secretary,
uh, on the, the last item that
you mentioned on 7 is the only
one I have a question on.
Uh, disability, um, veterans
exemption shall be claimed in
proportion to the taxpayer's
ownership interest in the
property.
Just wanting to make sure that
that doesn't
Uh, interfere with husband,
wife, 100% ownership of the
property, correct?
That's correct. OK, that is the
only question I have, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Montoya. Anyone else from the
committee? Questions or
comments? Representative
Chandler.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
How did you come to the
determination that it should be
10,000 off the top.
Go ahead.
Thank you Madam Chair Chandler.
Um
That number was part of the
original.
Constitutional amendment.
So sponsor of the late.
Representative Marcon.
we, we hadn't changed that first
time it was changed was in the
90s, uh.
2,004,000, so this would.
Just kind of reflect the rising
Mr. Chair, and representatives,
thank you for that answer. I'm
aware it was part of a
constitutional amendment, so
I'm, I apologize. Um, so maybe I
could phrase it this way. There
are other exemptions in law.
Are there not maybe the tax
secretary can help us with that
one, Mr. Chair and
Representative Chandler, are you
thinking of the maybe the head
of household, those kinds of
things, yeah.
And so,
That this one will be Madam
Chair and and Mr. Chair and
Madam Secretary. This one will
be first and then
had a household. How, how are we
talking? You see where I'm going
with this, Mr. Chair and.
Madam Secretary.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Chandler, the head of household
exemption also already an
existing law comes off first.
It'll be treated the same as the
10,000.
So it will be, I don't know what
that number is, so it's really
15,000. I'm making up a number
2000, so 12,000 off the top.
OK.
Thank you, Representative.
Any other questions or comments
from the committee.
See none what's the pleasure of
the committee?
I move a do pass on. OK.
Viceroman, uh.
Its do pass, seconded by uh
Representative Hernandez.
We will take the role on this,
on this bill, please.
47. Thank you.
Representative Chandler.
Yes
Representative Duncan.
Representative
Representative Henry, yes.
Representative Hernandez,
Representative Lundstrom,
Representative Martinez.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Parajon.
Representative Silva.
Representative Tarasas.
Vice chair Kadena.
Yes.
Mr. Chairlander. Yes, ma'am.
Unanimous decision, you have a
due pass on the committee
substitute for House Bill 47.
Thank you gentlemen for coming
back and for working with us.
Thank you, Vice Chair members.
We really appreciate it.
Thank you.
Thank you, sir. Uh, again,
reminder that we will be rolling
House Bill 46 and 51 as amended.
We will now go to House Bill
218.
And uh then we'll be done.
That
I want you to call us.
Yeah, that was quick.
Mr Char, are you ready on House
Bill 218?
Yes.
OK. Yes, go ahead, Mr. Chair in
hospital 218. Very good, thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you
committee members for allowing
us to present House Bill 218 tax
changes, which is the main tax
code cleanup bill.
That we or the tax and revenue
brings for the for the tax code
cleanup proposals identified by
staff, tax practitioners and
other stakeholders every 60 day
session. I was Bill 218 as a tax
and rev agency bills that
contains several housekeeping in
every in the tax code to
highlight just a few things of
House Bill 218. The bill will
shorten the tax code by
repealing 81 obsolete sections.
It will also fully
take control of your committee.
Fully reflect destination
sourcing language for the
grocery seats tax.
Remove inefficientness and
unnecessary attorney general
approval of certain refunds,
abatements, and closing
agreements. It also allows
electronic filing of tax liens
with the Secretary of State,
standardizes the pit and sit tax
credit language and finally
addresses several other areas of
minor cleanup.
Tax and revenue uh department
compile these changes over the
2024 interim by reviewing the
entirety of chapter 7, which is
the tax code. The proposals were
presented to the interim revenue
stabilization and Tax Policy
Committee in October of 2024.
Finally, the bills were adjusted
to incorporate feedback from the
LSC staff and others. The
department appreciates the
committee's consideration of
these changes to help them do
their job better.
That I'm sure we stand for any
questions that I.
Almost failed to introduce my,
my, uh.
Expert witness, which is the
secretary.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, uh, we
are so pleased to be at this
point of the first hearing on
this massive bill, um, I'm happy
to go in as much or as little
detail as the committee wants I
can go section by section
through the Excel document or I
can.
Basically stand for questions.
What is the will of the
committee?
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary. I think for now we'll
go to public comments and then
we'll um check in with the
committee to see how they'd like
you to proceed.
Do we have anyone here? We'll
start with people in the room
that's here to speak in support
of HB 218.
Do we have anyone here in
opposition of HB 218?
We'll go to the Zoom now. Please
raise your hand if you'd like to
speak in either direction on
House Bill 218.
Looks like we don't have public
comment today.
Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary,
we'll start with committee
questions and it looks like
we're comfortable going, going
with questions and not a
detailed presentation.
Committee
Questions, we have Speaker
Martinez.
thank you Madam Chair, and looks
like we're fixing uh is it the
prior chair's work that we're
now trying to fix through this
bill.
Madam Chair and Representative,
we're going a couple chairs
back.
So we're fixing a couple of
chairs back.
Work.
That's all I have.
Uh, representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
I have a couple questions for
you. Um, I just, uh, as we were
talking about this with oil and
gas, um,
The definition of uh of of
The 3
Skim
What there the this.
The flop and sediment.
Um
Let me ask you the question
here.
A lot of these, uh, Madam Chair,
a lot of these companies have 30
third-party contracts.
So can you explain how that's
going to be taxed to the right
individual on this and is it
one-time tax or is it taxed
twice?
Yes, thank you, um, vice chair
and Representative Duncan. So
the sections in question are um
114, 115, 121, 122, 125, 126,
133, and 134. And in the FIR,
they're colored dark green if
you're looking for what we're
talking about here. And so
basically over the interim in
working with the energy,
minerals and natural resources
department, we realized there
was some inconsistency in the
language across 4 different um
oil and gas related tax acts,
and basically what we're doing
is mirroring the language to
clarify.
That all the oil, uh including
that which is basically skim and
sediment and slop oil, which
comes up with produced water is
taxed once and only once, and so
in these third-party contracts,
a well producer, generally,
their oil that they produce goes
to market and is taxed under
these acts, but um they also
have produced water that comes
up and they dispose of that
produced water through a third
party water recycler, basically,
the water recycler.
separates out to treatable or
treated water, and then they end
up with a small amount of
hydrocarbons, oil or or other
things. And so what we're aware
of is that in the industry, many
taxpayers are already paying the
tax on this sediment and slop
and skim oil, but the language
isn't as clear as it could be,
and we want to make it clear to
all the taxpayers that that gets
taxed once and only once at the
sale.
And
We think there might be a small
positive fiscal impact to that,
but in general, the industry is
already.
Thank you, Vice Chair, Madam
Secretary on that. And then the
other question I have for you is
um the advance payment by the
25th of the month. Can you
explain why that?
Do you have a section numbers
representative, and Madam Chair.
Expenditure and secretary, I do
not. That's just uh a question
that somebody posed to me and I
said I
I think.
OK. I, I think that section that
you're referencing, um, Madam
Chair and Representative Duncan,
is it bringing the deadline for
the advance payments in line
with basically other sections,
um, and the workers' comp fee,
it might, it might be mirroring
that, um, in general, taxes are
due on the 25th of the following
month or the 25th of the 2nd
month, not on the final day of
the month. And so it's sort of
streamlining the deadlines for
both taxpayers and the
department.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, sir.
Any other questions, committee?
That's
Pleasure of the committee.
I'm sure I do pass.
Second,
You go to a roll call vote.
Actually.
No
Yeah, let's do a recall.
Representative Chandler.
Yes.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Henry.
Yes
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Montoya.
Yes
Representative Parajon.
Representative Taraas. Yes.
Vienna.
Yes.
Mr. Charlante
Yes
chair you
Unanimous vote.
Looking for the count, but I
can't even read without my
glasses, so unanimous vote
218.
Thank you, madam. Thank you
committee members, uh, again, we
are rolling those two bills.
They will be on our, on our
agenda for Monday, so let's come
through again on Monday and uh
expect those to see those back
again, but with that being said,
thank you for your work today
