Representative Hernandez.
Here your.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Lujan.
Representative.
Thank you Representative Maestas
here.
Representative.
Here.
Representative Romero.
Here and I can't turn my video
on.
So this is the hostess limiting
me to that so FY I.
See what I can do to fix that
Representative Scott.
Representative Stansbury here.
Representative Strickler here.
Here.
Chairman Martinez.
And I'm here.
We have a quorum Mr Chairman I'm
also getting the
message number try to truck
video.
It says quote you cannot start
unity of the as we will fix that
right now for everybody.
Just to let folks know that's
intentional.
And I'm gonna go back on the
floor we're just gonna Psy.D di.
This.
I third that.
We have a rowdy crowd this
morning or this afternoon
so we have one item on our
agenda House Bill to and I
believe all of our presenters
are here chairman Martinez
Representative Romero I believe
I saw representative Armstrong
in the audience are there any
experts that need to be elevated
Mr chair madam chair we should
have US secretary of taxation
and revenue seventy Schardin
Clarke the superintendent of
regulation licensing then that
the PO and that the executive
director of drug policy alliance
and we Kaltenbach.
Okay I see all of those names so
they're ready would you like to
start your presentation Mr
chair.
Yes thank you madam chair and
thank you members of the
committee I'm joined today by
my.
Two two of Michael Sanchez
Representative Andrea Romero and
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong unique off the
presentation and then I'm gonna
hand it off to them for for for
their comments and then we'll go
to our experts for anything they
would like to add.
Madam chairman of the committee
the cannabis regulation Act
which in some front of you as
house bill two.
Regulates the use production and
sale of cannabis and cannabis
products in the state of New
Mexico the act creates a
responsible in tightly regulated
system approve licenses with a
strict set of rules and
regulations right relations will
be developed by the state
regulation and licensing
department.
Madam chair members of the
committee we've all seen the
data with regard to how New
Mexicans feel about this issue
overall seventy four percent of
New Mexicans support a proposal
to legalize tax and regulate
cannabis to adults twenty one
and over.
the opposition over the years
has has struck you know what
that is as one of the most
recent polls only twenty five
percent of those polled show
opposition to up to the idea.
this is a forty point shift in
public opinion in less than a
generation.
If you go back to two thousand
seven only thirty four percent
of those polled at that time
supported legalization.
Thirty four percent to seventy
four percent.
Madam chair of the committee the
United States of America is in
the midst of the sea change when
it comes to this issue we're
seeing more and more states that
legalize regulate and tax adult
use cannabis Arizona being the
most recent example you know the
the leader of the liberal beacon
that is very zona legalized but
just a few months ago.
Colorado of course was the
trailblazer many many years ago
and the legalized
and New Mexico well hopefully
will be next.
Now there's something that I
should mention with regard to
how other states are legalized.
Most other states including
Arizona and Colorado have
legalized three ballot
initiative essentially the
question has been put to the
people.
We'll have overwhelmingly
supported legalizing regulating
and taxing cannabis but only a
handful of states have actually
done the hard work that we as a
legislature are doing right now
only a handful of states have
legalized adult use cannabis
through the legislative process
it is my deeply held believe
that legalizing adult use
cannabis is a task for a
legislature like ops.
There are so many nuts and bolts
to this there's so many
different things to deal with
that I do find it very very hard
to understand why states would
go to the ballot initiative
route other than maybe
politicians in those communities
are afraid to tackle the issue
and so they send it off to the
voters.
If New Mexico legalizes through
this process through the through
the legislative process we will
only be the third state to to
have done so although at this
point in time we are competing
with Virginia and we're
competing with New York state's
two other states that that are
at the cusp I believe Virginia
maybe already legalized other
legislative process New York
state I mean right now it's a
race between New York state and
New Mexico to see was gonna
legalize next.
The bill before you madam chair
members of the committee has
been written and re written and
amended and subbed out for many
many years.
this bill was to my knowledge
was first introduced in the
house in twenty fifteen by then
representative bill mccamley it
was then known as the cannabis
freedom act.
That bill in its first hearing
the first session it didn't get
a hearing.
Session later he got a hearing I
was about a four hour committee
hearing we got table
and slowly but surely the bill
has.
Rest every single year in twenty
nineteen this the this chamber
this house passed house bill
three fifty six which was a bill
that is very similar to what is
in front of you today.
a year later that bill was
introduced on the Senate side
where it passed one committee
but died in its second committee
referral in between the governor
set up a working group of people
from all over the state from a
number of different disciplines
including law enforcement public
health professionals behavioral
health professionals medical
cannabis industry
representatives and patient
groups to vet the old house bill
two fifty six and come up with
with the with an agreement with
a compromise that's the bill
that was introduced in twenty
and twenty twenty in the Senate
within that bill and refined it
further and that is house bill
twelve that is a bill that we
saw just a few weeks ago here in
this chamber that this house
passed you know four weeks ago
or so and now house bill two
taking all of the great
suggestions from members of both
sides of the aisle from members
of both chambers incorporating
many of those changes into the
bill that is here in front of
you
This bill takes I think another
affirmative step toward
you know toward toward hopefully
toward passage but most
importantly a little bit closer
to perfection now I'll be the
first one to tell you you know
this bill is not perfect you
know no legislation of this
magnitude will ever be perfect
but it's pretty darn close to it
madam chair and and members of
the committee.
The the bill
provides that a person must be
twenty one years or older to
process growing cultivate
cannabis for adult use adults
twenty one and older may
purchase up to two ounces of
cannabis flower in up to sixteen
grams of extracts in eight
hundred milligrams of edibles.
The bill allows for the growing
personal growth at your home of
no more than six mature cannabis
plants per person for a maximum
of twelve per household right so
assuming their two adults in the
house that would be the total
this is for personal consumption
only this is never for any type
of transaction or or sell
I want to make that very clear
from the get go for the bill
allows for some former local
control through the cannabis
control division within the
state department what what
within the state's regulation
licensing department
that local jurisdictions will be
able to control how these
industries operate for example
local communities will be able
to enact reasonable zoning and
land use a light in business
licensing requirements to ensure
you know you know a local
community can can determine
where these these these
enterprises will be will be set
up
and
you know.
Find for
you know for regulation in that
sense right so that you don't
have perhaps an overpopulation
of businesses and anyone
community I think of it as the
microphone you know micro
breweries for example you know
in my community microbreweries
are sort of place in specific
communities you usually
communities that have warehouse
space in communities that you
know many times have land that
is available for for folks to
come in and set up shop
but it is important to note that
under this bill local
communities cannot prohibit all
of these activities and really
you know that local control peas
in in house bill three fifty six
I actually had you know two or
three years ago I actually had
local control where Communities
perhaps would be able to opt out
completely but at the request of
law enforcement we decided to
remove a complete
sort of blackout if you will
where local communities my state
not not not in my County and the
problem for law enforcement is
that the they even have a
checkered board approach to to
enforcement and that presents a
huge headache that's what I
heard from law enforcement and
so we want to ensure that local
governments have enough control
over the industry but not to the
point where you can completely
X. the industry out of your
local community because it
presents a huge huge headache in
a huge problem headache is an
understatement it's a huge
problem for law enforcement.
In terms of the tax structure.
The bill in its in its current
form
what it sells cannabis will be
subject to gross receipts taxes
both the state and local
government
option.
Furthermore there is a twelve
percent excise tax that is
imposed on the product
Portion of the excise tax is
then distributed back to the
local community so say if you're
are in an unincorporated area of
the county and that's for the
sale takes place of that portion
of the excise tax we'll go to
the specific County now if the
Celtics please in in in in a in
a city within a county than it
is the city that we receive that
portion of the tax
medical cannabis
is exempt from these taxes this
was something that we did to
ensure that we protect the
medical cannabis program there
are many people out there in the
state that depend on that
program for their medicine for
their quality of life whether
it's people living with terminal
illness whether it's veterans
dealing with PTSD we want to
make sure that their medicine is
is less expensive and that it is
treated the same way we treat
other medications in the state
finally in also I also up here
and I've been talking Landel
handed off Michael Sanchez
finally the last thing I want to
talk about are the revenues one
hundred percent of of these of
these revenues go to the general
fund that's important to know
because in previous versions of
the bill you know we had a
number of different funds
established and we had earmarked
for the funds
in collaboration and
conversation with many of our
colleagues on both sides of the
aisle and in both chambers we
decided to pool those remarks
off and really to allow the
appropriators at a later time
whenever money is coming in to
determine whether spot what were
those where those dollars should
go where they should be invested
I myself remain committed of
course to ensuring that some of
these revenues are invested in
communities across the state
particularly rural communities
communities of color lowincome
communities are trying to get in
to this business but that's
going to be a discussion I think
that we had.
At some other point in time I'll
pass it on to Michael Sanchez to
to to add to this including the
licensing of the types of
licenses and what not and then
after that will be open for
questions madam chair and
members of the committee.
I'll just step in thank you Mr
madam chair thank you Mr
chairman so since this is the
tax committee all focus a little
bit more in on some of the
revenue potential and how we set
this up within the bill just to
touch on what chairman Martinez
already discussed but why were
here as an economic development
tool in this committee today so
first and foremost based on many
different economic reports we're
looking at within the first year
of legislation approximately
three hundred million dollars in
sales which translates to about
fifty to sixty million dollars
in tax revenue for the state and
that's based on the current
system that we're looking at now
with a maximum taxation of
twenty percent which is a sweet
spot for the state based on the
fact that we want to stamp out
the illicit market if the price
goes too high on any given
product unfortunately we will
not be able to take out the
illicit market based on a
competitive price so we want to
be careful about the tax and
that's what you'll see in the
bill today additionally the
state actually really saves a
lot of money we're talking about
decriminalizing drug that is
still being targeted so when you
look at programs like home grow
when you look at different
strategies for us to be able to
ensure that public safety isn't
focused on essentially these
types of what is now a crime we
will see we will be putting more
money into the coffers of the
state on ensuring that folks are
not being criminalized for what
will become legal.
Finally we will basically be
diversifying our economy so when
we look at the many
opportunities it's not just
about a single substance we're
looking across the board at many
many opportunities that will
come because this engine
industry becomes introduced so
the that the revenues that were
projecting are based on a on
cannabis substance but it's not
about all of the other
externalities that will come
with this being legalized as far
as the licensing structure which
also brings in revenue from the
state there are ten different
license types so we have the I.
cannabis testing laboratory a
cannabis producer licensed
cannabis manufacturer licensed
cannabis retailer license an
integrated cannabis micro
business license this is really
exciting from a micro business
perspective because this allows
for a very low cost entry into
the market place which is
exciting for those who are
seeking to get into this we want
a lot of home grown New Mexico
businesses coming into this and
this is a very low cost option
that will allow you to go from
cultivation all the way to
market with an integrated
cannabis microcassette slides
license at a low cost but that
is capped at a certain point and
New Hope in the hope that folks
do well
there's also a cannabis producer
micro business license a
cannabis career licensed
cannabis research laboratory
license and a vertically
integrated cannabis business
establishment so that's the
front and on the market side and
finally there's there's
different fees attached which we
can talk about today as far as
how each of that each of those
components work so all of these
are revenue generators for the
state based on this
this committee focused on taxed
the structure and the revenue
framework we're hoping to key in
on those but more than anything
what's important to.
To to me and said as a sponsor
of this bill is the harm
reduction that comes when we
save the state money from not
targeting folks for these types
of crimes that are now on the
books when it comes to
cultivation sale we want folks
to do this legally we want to
them to be calm part of the
business and the building you'll
see today allows us to do that
thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you Representative Romero
representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and and
I'll be brief and I know this is
the tax committee but I'm not a
co signing on because of an
economic development
focus I'm signed on with that
night towards public health and
safety and there are I want to
emphasize madam chair what a
chairman Martinez said about
other states during this through
ballot initiatives and so we
hear a lot about things going
wrong in other states but they
did not have the
the statutory or regulatory
framework that we do not just
one small example is Colorado
had no regulation around
packaging and marketing and so
the packaging of cannabis look
like candy bars and look like
things that that are attractive
to kids there wasn't regulation
around that and we're gonna
we're gonna regulate
of that there is a safety issues
built in here was independent
testing with attention to
secondhand smoke under the D.
Johnson clean indoor air act
with the public health advisory
committee
with
a regulation around
manufacturing and production of
edibles
and it it protects the access to
medical the medical cannabis
program but most importantly I
think is that if we don't think
set our cannabis is being
consumed.
Five people now by not just
adults but kids without any
ability I'm your crazy it is
going on in the only way we can
get it off the streets the only
way we can assure the quality
the only way we can make sure
that it's not laced with that
mall and with toxins is that we
regulate it we like we
legalize it so that we can
regulate it and so that we can
control it and that we can
appropriately educated on it
research it and
yeah and.
Do what we need to do to make
this a successful and safe it
our program so with that madam
chair all
that those are my introductory
comments I stand for questions
as well and madam chair what
real quickly if I may I want to
add a couple of more things to
to the presentation
there are there are some changes
from the last time this
committee saw house bill twelve
to this house bill two I don't
want to run by by the you know
bigger ones a lot of it is
stylistic and ensuring that the
regular should there the
regulation licensing department
can actually use the language to
do the things that we want them
to do so the kudos to
superintendent Rio who really
walk with us over the last few
weeks to tying up that language
but there are some broader
substantive changes the first
one this bill no longer deals
with the expungement mechanisms
that we have set forth in house
bill twelve.
It is our deeply held belief and
I think I can safely speak to
offer how Michael Sanchez that
we cannot legalize adult use
cannabis without ensuring that
we do right by the folks who
have made mistakes in the past
and ensure that their records
are are are wiped clean moving
forward of of fences that would
otherwise be legal under this
this framework that portion of
of the bill is now running in a
separate bill a bill that has
been introduced in the Senate I
don't know the Senate number off
off of my head but we can look
it up to what we but we debate
this bill but that bill is now
in the Senate and it's going to
run parallel to this one and it
is my expectation that that both
hopefully if if if if if this
bill passes
that the expungement bill will
be right there next with it
so that's number one number two
when you guys saw house bill
twelve a few weeks ago in this
committee we didn't have a plan
to kill it was it was a limited
he was open and
I am still of the belief that in
a free market we need to allow
the free market to operate you
know we don't limit the number
of chili plants that a farmer
can grow.
We don't limit how much you know
me tomatoes people can grow
having said that
you know there we we did hear
concerns from many folks
involved in this process and I
am grateful that superintendent
of licensing and and and
regulation licensing I think
really helped her hone in on
language that I think makes
sense for the first three years
of the industry there will be a
management system for plants
that will be done in
consultation with economist at
the university of New Mexico and
this is really to ensure that we
have proper supply of medical
cannabis and so for the first
three years we're going to have
that management system in place
after those three years that
system will sunset and then
we're gonna have sort of a more
open free market system in place
but to me you know politics is
the art of the compromise and
this was a place where you know
I believe we the sponsors of
house bill twelve really held
the line but after listening to
members of of the other chamber
and and and you know other
professionals including the the
regulators in this case we
decided that that was a good
compromise and so we went ahead
and adopted that into this bill
so with that madam chair members
of the committee we will open it
up for questions.
Very good chairman Martinez do
you want any of your experts to
weigh in at this point they hear
you simply answer questions I
think it would be fabulous madam
chair if anyone wants to say a
few words at the very least to
introduce themselves.
Very good superintendent also
good to see you.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you again
Representative for letting us be
at the table and be part of
creating these regulations it
really has been I know for you
it's been a labor of love for
many many years and we have
spent countless hours over the
last couple of weeks trying to
make sure that this is the best
bill that we could put forward
and we're really excited about
it I think the sponsors of
already said everything that I
think needs to be said about
this but I do stand for
questions thank you.
Very good thank you so much
superintendent of secretary
Schardin Clarke would you like
to add a few words thank you
madam chair members of the
committee it's good to be here
with you again today I am here
to answer questions about the
tax portions of the bill and I
just want to say that you know
in in another regard the tax
structure has been improved over
the course of the sixty day
session it's now simplified free
of technical issues for taxed
rather local governments and we
stand ready to implement this
thank you.
Very good ms call them up did
you want to weigh in.
Madam chair members of the
committee and we come up with
the drug policy alliance I'm
here to answer questions the
only thing I'd add is that
having worked on lots of
legalization efforts around the
country I think house bill two
in front of you is a really
strong bill it includes lots of
lessons learned from other
states and and I just want to
lift up that even though the
expungement peace has been
pulled out into Senate Bill to
that house bill two includes a
very lengthy list of provisions
that will ensure equity and
social justice so thank you very
much great thank you very much
no I'd like to go to the
audience for public comment at
this point I see we do have a
number of attendees and well
what I'd like to do as allocate
thirty minutes for those in
opposition and thirty minutes
for those in support of the bill
I'd like to go to opposition
first so those of you who oppose
the bill please raise your
hands.
And each one of you will be
given on a minute and a half
ninety seconds to present your
comments okay so I see a Mr one
Chavez.
You can unmute yourself Mr
Chavez.
Mr Chavez.
Let's move on to the next person
up Rosalee Florence.
Yes hello can you hear me yes
yes Flores.
Hello my name is Russell if
there is a bank to bank have yet
and Andrea for addressing a
number of our concerns this
renewable looks a heck of a lot
more New Mexican and I
appreciate it very much I would
like to still position myself as
The New Mexican as a small
farmer and as cannabis and
social justice advocate and and
so that I don't think Mexico is
ready for this that we don't we
haven't had an impact report
done to the degree in which the
medical industry existing
medical industry how they host
in production and in their
communities has improved our
economy and our just talk talk
about that specifically these
producers are leading the
recreational production and what
is going to keep them from doing
things the same these guys made
millions of dollars are for the
most impoverished state last
year and I just don't think that
there's been enough assessment
to see who at the benefit I do
work in the industry and know
the costs and processes in the
average Mexican will not be able
to ensure or benefit and so I'm
and I I really don't think that
more low or average wage jobs
are the way to diversify the
economy economic empowerment and
ownership and keeping the money
local and providing people who
actually have the land and water
the opportunity to grow and
develop their businesses would
be a heck of a lot more
beneficial to the to the state
of New Mexico as opposed to just
more minimum wage jobs from
extractive industries thank you
again have an entree a and now I
hope to work with US if.
This legislation does continue.
Thank you Mr for us Mr Mondrian
Gabriel Montr gone.
I just sent a message okay I get
I camera on I'm I'm not an
expert with the economics I
would just like to tell my
personal experience of quickly
General Hospital are going one
of one family has been tasked
New Mexico since sixteen oh
eight there's a lot of incest
within the committee's doors but
I hereditary predisposition like
diabetes if medical marijuana is
an appetite stimulant for chemo
patients that means going to
cause a risk weight gain obesity
and diabetes in people not going
through chemo.
it's PTSD is a legitimate
medical reason for medical
marijuana this means people
without PTSD should be taking it
because psychotropic that are
anti psychotic medication affect
dopamine receptors limbic system
neurochemical imbalance there's
a reason we don't let non
psychotic people take anti
psychotic medication and I say
that because I have a family
history of schizophrenic and
marijuana activates exacerbates
its or for any I have been a
doctor doesn't burn a Leo is
located just for gifted brother
forced more one hundred and
spending most my life forms on
trucks I think this is that we
see an increase in homelessness
welfare dependency setter this
was in nineteen eighty nine so
there is an argument that the
criminalization doesn't work I'm
not I recognize the multi
faceted and complex subject of
why pros and cons but I can't go
anywhere that secondhand smoke
causes involuntary exposure if
medical marijuana is a jet use
more knowledge and non
combustion method of chemical
extracts non carcinogenic.
Thank you.
Allen Sancious.
Mr Santos Alan Sanchez yes madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Alan Sanchez I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico conference of Catholic
bishops the bishops come with
the concern about the
legalization of marijuana
recreational marijuana unlike
the medical marijuana we have a
doctor who is observing the need
in monitoring the use in New
Mexico with so many social
elements that we have and mental
health and need for for
treatment we believe that a lot
of people the self medicating
with use of the marijuana and we
can also see the problem of more
of people driving under the
influence something that in New
Mexico we already have a huge
problem with.
And then a parenting under the
influence New Mexico with its
social problems this is not the
time that we believe that to
legalize marijuana when we
haven't addressed a so many of
our higher priority issues and
so with that the bishops asked
the
legislators ask you madam chair
and members of the committee to
reject this legislation of the
tax benefit there's really not a
discussion we're trying about
ethics or health of but rather
what is the common good
divisions also recognize that
their opposition to this may
seem counter cultural of but in
the same way as they supported
the driver's license for the
undocumented they were
countercultural but succeeded
thank you.
Thank you very much my he suits
up.
You madam chair yes thank you
yes well my name is my AC but
I'm with the American heart
association
madam chair members of the
committee thanks for the
opportunity our our biggest
concern is you know I think we
are weakening you know the clean
indoor air act no with this
legislation I think by creating
these so called cannabis
consumption areas and and and
this is not well defined and it
could be abused by you know the
industry.
And so I I hope up you know
we're not trying to create
another Amsterdam.
in New Mexico but you know this
is going to create you know you
I mean the industry claims this
is going to you know create
thousands of jobs you know we're
talking about employees and
workers who will be exposed to
secondhand you know marijuana
smokers and secondhand marijuana
smoke is as dangerous as you
know cigarette smoke it causes
heart disease stroke other
respiratory illnesses and so we
we we we are concerned you know
this part of the you know
Eight I mean the policy where we
are creating a new exemptions
you know through this regular I
mean for this action we we
strongly urge this body to
reconsider and abolish any
cannabis consumption areas in
the bill thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr speaker let me see
on NEC at Dana.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is David Beckham and I'm the
policy director pulled futures
formally known as young man
United we worked on issues of
criminal justice reform for many
years we don't stand in
opposition to the bill we are
currently neutral but do have
significant concerns our New
Mexican families particularly
families of color been did
deeply impacted by the failed
war on drugs generations of our
families criminalized including
those who participated in St
economies including the sale of
marijuana I'm we don't believe
cannabis legalization cannot and
should not be separated from the
equity issues and the needs
repair deep harm done to
communities of color
expansionism piece of that
puzzle but not the be all end
all and the need to prioritize
and support people of color and
formerly incarcerated people in
the licensing process is
significant in other states
cannabis legalization has
primarily made white wealthy
people who have not been
impacted by criminalization
wealthier we joined some of the
forums on equity related to that
and they were neither extensive
or inclusive of communities of
color we do thank the sponsors
and know that this bill has a
lot of potential to do a lot of
good and that legalization is
necessary but we still hold
concerns about the lack of focus
on most impacted communities
thank you.
The agency could not George
Lujan.
One.
Hello thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is George Lujan and the
executive director of southwest
organizing project and
I really want to pretty much
second everything that was said
by the need to see and by
Rosalie
I a the swap is not taking a
stance in opposition to this
bill but I had a just way in I
want to thank Representative
Martínez you've been super alter
responsive to member concerns
we've been talking about it with
our membership which is
primarily representing lowincome
communities of color in the
state
I do think that some of the most
of the concerns around financial
and economic concerns I think
some of the equity language is
almost like a distraction or
repairing or something like that
I don't think they can really be
removed but it might take our
eye off of the prize so I do
think that there's some maybe
false premises would be a
concern like the idea that folks
can get into the industry or
what we've seen in other areas
of that even with some equity
funds it it's not necessarily
feasible for people to do which
is going to exacerbate the
selling of land and water is
there going to be and a tax
expenditure kind of a a budget
or like a mechanism for us to
examine what the giveaways are
bringing back to us so the
question but I have long term
impacts on property values these
are things that affect lowincome
communities outside of actually
being within the industry so
there's a lot of questions our
members still have I don't know
that they'll all be answered
this week but at thank you for
the car thank you Mr Lujan
Joanne stronger.
So in a strong.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Joanna Strother and I
represent the American lung
association and we are not
opposed to the bill but we do
have significant concerns estate
consider legalizing cannabis our
organization has strongly urge
decision makers to ensure that
current smoke free laws are
protected the smoking lasing of
marijuana should be prohibited
anywhere that tobacco use is
currently prohibited
unfortunately this bill would
significantly roll back the D.
Johnson clean indoor air act in
a particular concern are the
sections that include the
wording for cannabis consumption
areas and exemptions to the
clean indoor air act I'm second
hand marijuana smoke contains
many of the same toxics and
carcinogens found in tobacco
spoke and these toxins can cause
lung irritations as my tax and
make respiratory infections more
likely also exposure to
secondhand marijuana smoke can
exacerbate health problems
especially for people with
respiratory conditions so people
who are patrons are people who
frequent these cannabis
consumption areas or the people
who work inside them I want to
make sure that their protected
against these toxins from second
hand marijuana admittance thank
you madam chair.
Thank you very much Linda
Siegel.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Linda Siegel
representing the American cancer
society.
Network and and we are very
concerned about amending the D.
Johnson clean indoor air act to
allow smoking in these undefined
cannabis consumption areas mean
smoking smoke the whole purpose
of the clean indoor air act
which I've worked on for many
years yes to protect employees
and other people in workplaces
because secondhand smoke of the
any time is dangerous and do we
really need to create a newly on
protected class of workers that
have to give up their health for
a paycheck you've heard that
secondhand smoke is is a health
hazard to both smokers and non
smokers there's scientific
evidence to affirm that
secondhand marijuana smoke
creates a serious health the
fact and that is a potent source
of particulate matter it's it's
hazardous regardless of the
source so second hand
marijuana smoke contains
thousands of chemicals and at
least thirty three personagens
so in short there is no safe
exposure of any type of smoke
like this so we really ask you
to consider not doing an
exemption to the D. Johnson
clean indoor air act for
marijuana consumption areas
thank you.
Thank you Mr Siegel one child
this.
Their one child as.
Apparently not I think.
Your sorry.
Good trouble out of UT myself
sorry about that that's okay how
many what my name is once this
thank you for listening to us
here is so I'm just a private
citizen of to support a few
times and other things but
I'm very concerned I am a father
of two sons of.
I experimented when I was young
and college with money one on
but.
And so you know I for me it was
not personally a good experience
got a little bit paranoid my son
on the other hand he is under
medical cannabis at this time
you got is in trouble we went to
colleges about almost thirty
years always twenty seven we're
gonna say his name but anyway he
does use medical marijuana and
it's I think that's a proper
context for it however to
continue to to open it up to
everybody and very strict
opposition to that because I
don't feel like that is the way
to go I think Colorado has bad
experiences you can check with
them
Also personally I have a kind of
a little beef with you guys I
know what's that would you guys
the governor hi this is Holy
Week much athletic very very
strong Catholic and I think that
there's better ways to come and
help the public rather than to
be bringing something like this
out at this time I can only we
can only we special time of the
year I think shame on Democrats
because I you have a democratic
governor that's all legislative
thank you.
Thank you Mr Chavez we can now
go to those and support with
people who are in support of the
bill please raise their hand.
Okay I'll start calling on
names Evelyn didn't guard of
David guard off.
Everyone.
I thank you for taking my
comment thank you at the center
Representative censure people.
The Democratic Party New Mexico
rural caucus is in favor of this
bill however it has some equity
concerns that we respectfully
ask you to consider regarding
this at adult use cannabis
legislation in the past eight
legislation is often favored
urban areas over rural liquor
licenses are an example this
year legislation was passed that
addresses the issue and has
finally provided equity but it
took decades and we don't want
that to happen with the campus
bill we ask that you consider
rural communities when crafting
this legislation I did hear
something about microbicides
haven't had time to compare.
This iteration of the bill
however that's a step in the
right direction we just don't
want to wait for ever to get you
know equity water is another
precious resource here and we
fear that once adult use
cannabis is approved there may
be unforeseen consequences to
the water supply we ask that
legislation to advocate for
sustainable practices including
energy and water efficient
cannabis farms be considered
show do PNM rural caucus is in
favor and does support so thank
you very much for the time to
speak.
Thank you very much Chad was no.
Hello can you hear me yes all
right cool thank you so much for
let me speak my name's channels
on I am for H. B. twelve or
there's a couple of things that
you find concerning as I said
equity I have filled moving up
the date of Legisla- of the bill
and everything and you know
cells of cannabis and all these
other producers should be moved
up I mean Arizona did in a
couple of months I don't see why
we can't do it either there at
the if there's a will there's a
way we can do it were falling
behind now Texas is about to
legalize it probably here soon
to of Texas legalize it we're
gonna be suffering so we need to
really get on this bandwagon as
fast as possible hundred twenty
five thousand dollars you know
is bad if you want to have
people to licenses that's not
gonna help out at all I do
however have to thank you guys
for adding back in the mature
plant count for the micro
businesses I don't know why we
left you know when it went up
but I'm glad that that's back I
still disagree with the fifty
dollar fee for the cannabis
plants I feel that's way too
high especially for how much
these fees are going to be if
you guys do this and people
can't afford it you just gonna
fuel black market you're gonna
be doing the opposite which you
guys trying to do so thank you
so much also want to see one
thing the consumption sites
think of the VFW is in the most
lodges they all allow smoking
inside of those steps equipment
and they already have things in
sight at their to help out
filters and everything so I do
feel that the consumption sites
will help out in our great thing
as well especially for Candace
patients or medical cannabis
patients so thank you so much
for your time thank you Mr
Lozano Marshall Martinez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Jim Marshall
Martinez the executive director
of equality New Mexico the
statewide LGBTQ civil rights
organization the legalization of
cannabis is a racial justice
issue is a gender justice issue
and is an L. G. B. T. Q. just
this issue the failed war on
drugs the failed ban on cannabis
has for decades because the over
criminalization of LGBTQ people
of color in fact trans women of
color are significantly more
likely to be stopped search
detained arrested and
incarcerated than their
cisgender peers and that is most
frequently because of the excuse
of possession or suspicion of
possession of cannabis I want to
say that we appreciate the
sponsors for their work to pass
this bill and she of the justice
that our communities deserve I
know a note on the bill itself
the sponsors of this bill
Representative Martinez Romero
Armstrong and etcetera do have
worked hard to include the
voices of New Mexicans across
the state we strongly support
this legislation but ask that
while it weaves through the
process the voice is a queer and
trans New Mexicans of color and
our perspectives that are in
this current bill I'm not a
racist by the voices of so
called experts in the legal
commercial or regulatory feels
lastly we believe the perfect
cannot be the enemy of god we
urge the legislature to fight
for the most racially and
socially just legalization
framework possible but to not
allow continued criminalization
as a result of disagreement
thank you.
Thank you Mr Martinez Ben
linger.
Madam chair committee members my
name is Ben Lewin Jr on the
executive director of the New
Mexico cannabis chamber of
commerce on behalf of our
members and on behalf of all the
different businesses that have
and haven't yet been created
that will grow and sustain
alongside the cannabis industry
I urge you to take action to
legalize cannabis now eight
eight true we don't mean to
sound alarmist but we have our
last real opportunity right now
to dictate our path forward as a
state as it relates to cannabis
HB two is a good bill as
Representative Martinez alluded
to earlier versions have
benefited from rigorous debate
through previous legislative
sessions of the current versions
been made better through each
committee assignment in both
chambers this past session
including the addition of
critical language creating that
mechanism for the state to
responsibly manage production
ensuring that we create pathways
for small and medium businesses
to enter and be successful in
this new industry and also
ensuring that we won't have
oversupply which pours into the
illicit market H. B. two is the
vehicle for doing what we have
to do is a state this is our
moment this is our opportunity
to legalize cannabis join the
sixteen other states as well as
Guam and Washington DC that have
legalized adult use cannabis
industry the created seventy
seven thousand new jobs across
the country last year Madam
chair committee members I urge
you to support HB to hire to
create new recurring revenue for
the state I rigid part of living
thousand New Mexicans to work in
a new industry I urge you to
commit to protecting and
enhancing our medical cannabis
program I urge you to take this
first critical step to move New
Mexico into the future of them
chair committee members thank
you very much thank you for
those comments I think we are
concluding our public comment
period I just like to go back to
the Sanchez and see if there if
you have any additional comments
before we move on to the
committee thank you madam chair
thank you as a committee and and
and I really appreciate all of
the of the all of the robust
public come.
For and against just as a
reminder to the committee for us
it it's always been in the bill
and it is in this version of the
bill as well it's been important
to create access points into the
industry that's why we have a
micro business license through
this bill well for production so
these are folks that are just
growing up but also for for
integrated license that means
you could do everything from
growth all the way to
manufacture and and retail
that's incredibly important
because some of the points race
but by folks in the audience
against is that you know we
don't want this industry to just
make the wealthy wealthier and
and I completely agree with
that.
secondly madam chair members the
committee you know one thing I
failed to mention at the
beginning is that as this bill
has progressed over the last
several years the voice of
community has always been at the
table that is of the utmost
importance to me because in my
professional life as a as a
social impact lawyer I work with
communities all the time
and so it is imperative that we
continue to do that that's why
we have robust public comment in
this committee all the time
including the use of
interpreters when it's requested
so that folks who speak other
languages can also participate
and should this bill pass and
should this bill become law we
know we're going to be coming
back and we're gonna be making
tweaks to it I don't want this
to be like the liquor law that
it took forty years for no
Representative Montoya and and
Maestas an item on this and
others to finally break you know
break through so you know I
suspect that we'll be back in in
the thirty day making some
tweaks and in the following
sixty day making some tweaks and
that entire time just as long as
I'm in this legislature
community will always always
have an open door to come in and
help us you know as we shape the
bill and as we shape the law
once it becomes the law also
that madam chair will we'll turn
it over to to you in the
committee members for questions
very very good thank you very
much chairman Martinez I have an
amendment to the bill that I'd
like to propose and I'd like to
propose a now before we go to
the committee so that we can
have an all encompassing kind of
a conversation
the amendment is in the Here
file so those of you.
Get to the share file.
I'm sorry Representative Maestas
I didn't quite hear you there.
Thank you madam chair I move the
amendment for discussion.
Thank you and the amendment
number is.
Two two one zero three nine
point one.
But I sure can we have just a
second so that I can open up our
sure I absolutely.
I mean when you're ready thank
you.
Madam chair what is sure filing
and I'm just getting.
The only been a week chairman
I'm sure you can remember.
Everything.
And madam chair you say you're
sharing a file this.
It's it's in our share file
speaker I hope you know that
you're you're pulling my leg
Grant.
I think madam chair is gonna fax
it to all of us
A lot of trouble from the game
today.
Before madam chair before you
fax it to me I need to put
another roll of fax paper in my
machine.
And what about your mimeograph
machine how about that.
Is on the Fritz today some
heavy use matrix printer.
Okay.
Everybody get it how we doing
their Representative Hernandez
you yeah we able to find it.
I just got it right now we're
looking at okay okay okay.
And I'm happy to give a brief
synopsis of what it does this
amendment amends the excise tax
provision which I believe is in
section forty five it begins on
page seventy one of the bill.
What it does is it's it's steps
up the excise tax you'll recall
that on the bill Original Bill
has a twelve percent excise tax
this bill starts with a twelve
percent excise taxed each year
it increases by one percent
until it gets to eighteen
percent
beginning July one twenty thirty
and and that's the amendment in
pretty much in total.
Madam chair on the amendment us
in this will increase the excise
tax so the expectation is that
we would see I believe a fifty
percent increase.
In general fund revenue as a
result of this okay help great
thank you for that helpful Madam
speaker all right so first I'll
go to the Sanchez is just a
friendly amendment.
madam chair members of the
committee
I think this is a friendly
amendment and and if I may
explain
why.
madam chair members of the
committee over the last couple
of interim sessions we've had
experts from
Tax policy think tanks across
the country that have sort of
taken stock of of cannabis adult
use cannabis tax across the
state across the country I'm
sorry.
and that twenty percent is sort
of.
Where they kind of recommend
that that IT lance now obviously
that is very limited.
You know research because you
know at this point only fourteen
states have legalized and and
most of them through ballot
initiatives so that's sort of a
different different animal.
I think that comparing our our
potential sure this ammendment
be adopted our potential tax
rate.
you know after the foot is it
five or six years that you're
proposing here it seems to me
that
we would be at a total of what
is it eight eighteen percent
excise is that correct madam
chair
Mr chair that's correct okay.
So if you add the applicables G.
R. T. to that excise then you're
looking at you know somewhere
between.
twenty depending on where you
live but you're looking at
anywhere between twenty five
twenty six.
Twenty seven percent
it is still lower it is still
lower alternately than places
like.
Places like Colorado potentially
definitely lower than California
it's a little bit higher than
Arizona by a little bit
but I think that if you if you
phase it in over a number of
years I think
And you're starting at the end
of a you're starting in twenty
twenty five so that kinda
coincides with that three year
plant management system that
that is going to be proposed
here.
I would feel comfortable with it
I think the final tax rate is
not prohibitive I don't think
it's non competitive
I think it's a little higher
than that what I would like but
you know I mean if that's the
will of the committee than than
I I would I would support it
madam chair and I love my screen
co sponsors want to add anything
to that.
Representative Romero
Representative Armstrong.
Apparently not okay is there any
discussion on the amendment.
Okay Representative Strickler.
Madam chair thank you
Mr chairman.
And I and I apologize I'm in my
house office and I don't have
just to act access to the
to the amendment so basically
you're raising the through the
tax from from twelve percent to
eighteen percent.
Mr Representative Strickler
that's right over a six year
period so it's stepped up one
percent every year starting
after twenty twenty five.
In in in hearing the earlier.
Well.
Presentation I.
I thought the twelve percent
which was a case of a striking
point from the other states so
I'm a little confused why would
why we doing this.
I think this this
Representative Strickler the the
sense is that twelve percent is
a little low in this given some
opportunity for the for the
industry to take hold and over
time it will it will be able to
sustain the excise tax at this
level I point out to by having
it us it stepped in it can be
need looked at and evaluated as
we move forward to ensure that
it's not having an adverse
impact in terms of you know
creating a black market I know
that's a concern in terms of how
one taxes of you know cannabis
and so on so I think it's kind
of a measured approach taking
into account you know what other
states do as well as you know
gives us the opportunity to see
the impact on an annual basis as
it stepped up by one percent a
year.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you a chairman I guess I'm I'm
concerned about the black market
to I know we had testimony
earlier
and a lot of our law enforcement
folks were able to get on
and and I'll and I'll discuss it
later I guess in the debate but
black market is a real concern
those of us in San Juan County
we we live right next door to to
Colorado they've they've had a
lot of a they've had a lot of
other serious adverse a communal
fax of of legalized marijuana
and and and I think this may
this might backfire up anyway
that's that's all I have madam
chair thank you I appreciate you
explaining the stair step.
thank you representative
Representative Maestas.
Thank you madam chair of the
gendered thanks for bringing
this forward the gonna have
opposite concern of
Representative Strickler.
couple points one is the.
This doesn't kick in until July
first of twenty twenty five so
here's my concern is that you're
essentially it's going to be if
if we have four legislature's
beef between now and then or or
two full legislature's for four
sessions.
and if there is an attempt to
increase the tax during those
four sessions the arguments
going to be made what we already
did that we already have a tax
structure in place till twenty
thirty.
So this kinda lock this in for
the next ten years somewhat.
R. I believe that the taxes is
too low
and and Washington a friend of
mine is a in the cannabis
Business.
They taxed the their tax rate is
thirty seven percent and the
guys making money hand over fist
any says mall you know.
Tax is not going to affect my
bottom line
so anyway I think I think it
should go to eighteen I'm glad
that you're taking it to
eighteen albeit in ten years but
keep in mind if we do our jobs
correctly G. R. T. is going to
go down you know we we have you
know as we would clue include
more things in the G. R. T. we
can bump G. R. T. hopefully the
seven hopefully this six and
then that would allow us to have
an excise tax does no you know.
Elasticity in the market so to
speak so anyway I up ice also
for the amendment but I just
when this conversation arises.
And and and and the black
market's eliminated and were
able to increase our revenue
because this does have a social
cost and I think the commodities
that have a social call should
be taxed more
hopefully we're not locked and
hopefully this is not a floor
two of the tax structure of this
new industry thank you thank you
madam chair representative John
thank you Representative Scott.
Thank you madam chair.
This will only result.
Yes.
Recreational marijuana being
some twenty four percent for.
One.
What is the cost to require.
Medical marijuana prescription.
Representative Scott I do not
know but maybe one of the
panelists this.
yeah madam chair I I would I
would request chairwoman
Armstrong who's who I think
wrote the the medical cannabis
statute can probably answer
that.
Thank you madam chair and
representative it's not a
prescription so a cost to get a
prescription you get a referral
from a medical provider
affirming that you have a
condition that qualifies you and
then you get a card that allows
you to purchase cannabis from a
licensed dispensary in limited
amounts.
Madam chair representative.
One case.
The person claiming.
For example.
Reduce the cost.
one of consumption by twenty
four percent.
It's pretty significant
reduction.
Is there any concern.
Would be.
Problem.
With.
Experts
believe it's been Representative
there's already.
Hundred thousand people.
In the state.
These prescription chords which
represents about five percent of
the population.
That's a very significant number
I don't know how many more
people will participate in this.
Creation of program.
Sure.
Early significant.
Financial advantage to grow.
Prescription.
One comment.
Madam chair and representative
they would still have to meet
the qualifications under a
Gallegos that was allowed under
the act and have a have a
provider of firm that and go
through that that paperwork so
it's
You can't just decide here.
on your own so you have to meet
the criteria.
It measures we had one thing on
this point after that for the
benefit conversation yes I I
think it's important to keep in
mind that right now medical
cannabis is not taxed in New
Mexico as the result of an
decision of the New Mexico court
of appeals which found that
medical cannabis is to be
treated as other prescriptions
and that's exempt from the gross
receipts tax so in terms of how
this might affect future revenue
there is there's no risk of what
we refer to as leakage madam
chair you know people taking and
at that activity that is
currently taxed in switching
that activity to where it is not
taxed there's only the
possibility for increased tax
revenue because all cannabis
sales right now in New Mexico or
are not taxed.
Thank you madam chair Mister
speaker concern.
So if.
Go to high.
so significantly more
convenient.
To court restriction car and.
Your.
Us from direction.
One hundred thousand people.
Currently.
Prescription cards would not.
Appeared
to require that's the only
question thank you.
Chair thank you Representative
any other discussion on the
amendment I see none
Representative discussion on the
okay very good thank you
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and
Sanchez I just a couple of quick
questions I appreciated the
extensive and iterative process
to get this legislation and the
staff of the games as it stands
today madam chair with the
moment just to clarify and
confirm what this additional
revenue this additional four
percent the targeted or focused
in any way or is this straight
out additional dollars would be
bringing into the general fund.
the the answer to that is it
it's just to do it would be
additional dollars to the
general fund it does not have
any year marks Representative.
Okay madam chair and sponsors I
appreciate that I would also
like to note I was very invested
in proposals and other years
that did target some of these
dollars to the communities that
have been harmed by eight by by
drug lords Bancorporation by
trauma and I I just in very
excited about proposals like
those brought my Sanchez in
previous years that would set
aside funds for low income
patients that may need
additional resources to get
medicinal marijuana or
potentially mon programs for our
New Mexicans especially are
indigenous and black in
communities of color that might
like to make their way in this
new and burgeoning industry
madam chair has there been any
thought if we do that personal
if we if we go to the higher
level of excise tax about
focusing those funds more
intentionally.
Representative nothing would
preclude us in the future to
look at additional programs that
could leverage some of these
monies but at this point in time
the amendment simply focused on
as I said the stepped up excise
tax.
Okay.
I appreciate that madam chair
and certainly the conversation
around what what it would mean
if we.
The twenty percent I'm I'm
sitting on the fence with in
this because I hear it on my
**** saying it's a little bit
higher than what I hear
expertise thank you chairman
thank you thanks making dollars
and and make the money anyway
but if we do do that I'd like to
see this focus of these dollars
go back into the communities and
I New Mexican families that
certainly deserve a real shot an
opportunity at that so I'm I'm
open to raising more money but I
especially like to see it more
targeted at at our families
having their shot at this
economic opportunity thank you
madam chair thank you very much
Representative.
Any additional comments on the
amendment.
speaker egolf thank you madam
thank you madam chair just a
quick comment and that is
the yes the advice that I
understand it has been received
by the folks working on this
bill that twenty percent of
certain sweet spot.
You know I think there are a lot
of consultants you know and and
I'll I'll get a mention I it is
a private lawyer litigated in
this area of medical cannabis
for quite a number of years I no
longer in representing clients
in litigation in this area but I
learned a lot over the years
being involved you know
litigating in this area
different consultants will give
different members and one thing
that I think is very important
is to look at Colorado.
Even if.
You know if we yes this bill MMS
adopted if the bill becomes law.
At the outset in the highest
rate G. R. T. right counties.
In the state the tax would be a
combined twenty six and a half
percent of right you're right
around that area I'm that still
has substantially lower and all
of our neighboring states with
the exception of Arizona the
very very close shares over.
And one of the areas I see is
having a big market potential
people from Texas and Oklahoma
that would be visiting New
Mexico or a course to get to
Colorado or Arizona you've got
to come through that New Mexico
and so I think this is a and
reasonable change it is likely
to thank you assume significant
additional resources and I think
that the sponsors of plans to
come in the thirty day session
to address.
If you the issues that
Representative Cadena just
mention in terms of leveraging
this revenue into our activities
and programs will support to
disadvantaged communities are
throughout the state and help
out open up opportunities for
entry in the industry and that
madam chair we got the time
because under the terms of the
bill.
Sales in our adult use
recreational cannabis would not
begin until April
of next year so the thirty day
session legislation will be in
effect by that time as well so I
I think this is
reasonable and and madam chair
all of I played support the mid
thank you thank you is there a
motion on the amendment.
I will move the amendment it
option can I speak egolf.
I'm sorry who representative
from over here.
By Representative repair all
right Ellen we do please call
the roll.
Representative.
No.
Speaker.
Yes.
Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez no.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Stansbury yes.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative Harper.
Representative Lujan.
Yes.
Representative vice chair
Chandler excuse me yeah yes our.
Chairman Martinez.
Yes.
We have seven in the affirmative
for in the negative.
Amendment is adopted you have
amended bill chairman.
Okay a discussion on the bill.
As amended.
Representative Strickler.
Dearman thank you Mr chairman.
I just want to express my
concerns over this bill I've
I've had a lot of the discussion
madam chairman the chairman of
with law enforcement and and
health care providers in in my
home county San Juan county and
they've got a lot of good
experience in this area of being
neighbors to.
Rangel Colorado and southwest
Colorado.
And the their their concern is
is the black market to the
increase of
Of
Of a impaired driving.
There there's also a lot of
first time use with the with
teenagers and that that has that
has a my screen
officials that concerned this
gonna be a real challenge for
them
I appreciate that these this tax
revenue will go general fund and
I and I hope the appropriators
will fund law enforcement and
the health care folks.
Inefficient widespread to offset
some of the the negative impacts
of of this and I know there's
you mentioned.
Madam chairman and chairman of
of some recent polls and I've
got some recent polls as well
and medical marijuana is is is
popular in our state forty two
percent are in very very much
approve of medical marijuana and
also decriminalizing marijuana
with they they like the status
quo and then twenty two percent
are just not favor this so
there's really a kind of a
different look at the proposed
spending on how you ask the
question and the majority New
Mexicans are not all that all
that fired up about recreational
marijuana they are very much in
favor of medical marijuana it's
been very successful a lot of
people are getting help in that
regard hundred thousand folks
and
so that's something that we need
to to May be aware of
and this affects all all with
the lines were were major
Spanish state forty six percent
nine percent native Americans of
the raster.
angle of and if this is gonna is
gonna affect the majority of our
state so I have a lot of
concerns about this and
appreciate to of the discussion
and all of let the next person
spate thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Strickler of Representative
Lujan.
For for now thank you I'll be
right back thank you for sure
Representative Maestas.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Martinez through
middle Armstrong
couple quick questions
If I were to thank you all for
your work would be here for a
long long time so thank you but
I have a a point three version
that I went over this morning I
realize the point five version
was introduced and for the folks
at home it's just the new draft
with a few amendments what what
is that is doing the point three
in the point five if you know
Madam chair representative
Martinez.
Yes thank you madam chair so
Maestas I can tell you what the
differences were here give me a
second.
One of the one of the
differences was related to.
an emergency clause so in in
conversations with with some of
the senators particularly on the
other side of the aisle
you know that that there is a
desire to to maybe incorporate
emerges class into the
legislation
so the point three version of
the bill has that
and the point five version we
decided to take it out I just
you know sort of a a call that I
made just given the fact that
you know we are unlikely to hit
the numbers needed for for an
emergency clause.
There were other there were a
couple of other changes that'll
have a superintendent to heal go
over if I may Mister madam chair
and and Representative.
Thank you.
Representative so it really was
a mistake on my part
as we I was working with the
drafter there was a paragraph H.
that we wanted to take out that
limited licenses and at the
things got moved around it was
paired up H. to me this program
eight hi to her and of the wrong
paragraph got taken out and so
that had to be put back in this
morning that was why we ended up
with a five the four was we
change the plant count language
to make something that was
measurable
and so those were just two.
Of the one one was substantive
in regards to how we measure it
instead of counting plants that
grow the other one was just a
miscommunication on between me
and the and the drafters.
Absolutely thank you thank you
madam chair with the Martinez
honorable Mr here thanks for
that so the I take it the that
you see paragraph II the same.
Let me just go through the bill
madam chair representative
Martinez just kind of give you
some feedback the
The definitions are key the
cannabis regulatory advisory
committee R. as a committee that
will be established by September
first of this year and we we
just have to get out of the mind
set of
of legal and illegal right like
we.
In
in my experience you know being
a prosecutor defense attorney
all those years people are
locked into the legal bad legal
good like I would Representative
I represent a guy who was high
on Xanax and it took me months
to commence and that it
committed a crime because he was
but CENIC's was prescribed to
him but as I'm just what was
okay to him we're of the mindset
that cannabis is backed it it's
that it's immoral it's bad
because it's illegal it should
have never ever been illegal in
the first place and so I
appreciate the social justice
advocates wanted to rewrite all
those wrongs I don't know if
we'll get there with this bill
but to me ending prohibition is
is the key but anyway with
regards to the cannabis
regulatory advisory committee we
have the chief public defender
we have a County share up we
have a a district attorney.
that's not necessary that's not
necessary to have folks involved
in the criminal justice system
on an advisory committee
regarding a at a cultural
product so just just kind of my
own personal opinion the
The on the next section section
four Department of Health duties
I think these are fantastic to
keep stats on on how it's
affecting public health I think
that the stats will we'll show
what many of us already know
there's a significantly less
social cost when it comes to
kind of just as it relates as
opposed to alcohol no question
about it I can already answer
these questions it's my twenty
one and on the point three
version is section four C. and
then of course they'd ask the
percentage of emergency room
visits and outcomes I cannot
answer that one is gonna be zero
the percentage of poison control
center calls for maybe a few
calls but there won't be any
legitimate calls because no
one's going to be poisoned by
cannabis are the impact of
cannabis use on rates of alcohol
put another substance use this
is going to be really key Madam
chair representative working
just because.
You can you can remedy opioid
addiction or narcotic addiction
or alcohol addiction with
cannabis and kinda we offer
those drugs on the kind of as we
offer cannabis or not but
certainly has it as the
medicinal program taught us.
About dear cousin who was in the
in the war in Iraq in two
thousand three that PTSD was off
the chart he now is on the kind
of S. program living a great
life had got his master's degree
prior to that he was taking all
kinds of.
Synthetic drugs prescribed drugs
that that we're doing them up as
much harm as good so so I think
that will be answered and then
and then of course the key is
the affordability and
accessibility of the medical
cannabis we need to keep an eye
on pricing and things of that
nature
the big the big kind of struggle
was dealing with Madam chair
representative did with the
current investors respecting
those current investments but
also allowing markets to
flourish people to enter the
market
How how did you find that I when
that balancing act of.
Madam chair of center Martinez
how can someone who currently is
is not in the medical market tap
into this recreation mark.
Madam chair and and
Representative let me let me
repeat the question yeah you
were breaking up a little bit
but how are the current medical
license.
producers gonna be able to
answer the new industry I know
thank you madam chair of this
the R. okay if someone is not
currently not in the business if
someone is currently not a
grower or retailer seller
whatever they're currently not
participating in the medical
cannabis business.
How could they get into the
recreational cannabis business
as a result of this bill got it
thank you madam chair and
Representative sold out the the
bill creates a number of
different licenses
Egolf the main license if you
will is a vertically integrated
license that would allow you to
do everything from payroll to
manufacturing all the way to
retail cell that is sort of the
big license that is the one that
was
alluded to in public comment
that would cost you know more
than it's it's a ceiling no more
than about a hundred and twenty
five thousand dollars a year I
believe is the actual dollar
figure but it's it's a it's a
ceiling right so essentially
what happens is the licenses you
know on a producers license a
manufacturer's license each of
those will cost you.
a different amount and I'll give
you them out here in a minute
that is assuming that that's
what you want you know you can
also just get a manufacturer's
license maybe you are really
good at the at the part of
extracting the the the THC from
the plant and making incredible
brownies or making incredible
oils and and and and creams and
what not you can get a license
just for that piece of it you
can get a license just for the
retail you know that's what if
that's what you're for Tate is
you can do that now out of out
of a deep sense of a knowledge
meant for the fact that in order
to get that license in order to
have the capital to start that
kind of.
Natural business it's going to
take quite a bit of money and is
it was alluded to in public
comment you know many in our
communities particularly those
most harmed by the war on drugs
may not have access to that kind
of capital but it may not have
access to that kind of money so
we create a micro this is
producers license and also a
fully integrated micro business
license that will allow you to
to do everything from growth.
Harvesting all the way to retail
cell as well in that licenses a
lot less expensive I believe
that full out licenses about I
believe it's twenty five hundred
dollars from not mistaken.
It is a very very affordable way
to get into the business.
The idea is that you know for
for some of us you know that
might be all we want is a micro
business license maybe you have
a plot of land somewhere maybe
you have the access to the water
already maybe you're growing out
south fund selling it on the
open market every year maybe you
want to transition into this
industry you would be able to do
everything from harvesting the
cannabis all the way to
producing the edibles and oils
and the creams all the way to
retail sales
and maybe that's all you want to
do now in the bill there are
provisions that would
that that the the the regulators
will we'll come up with rules
and regulations to ensure that
your your product you know from
Maestas farms up in up in Vegas
right will be labeled and me as
a consumer will go down you know
in downtown Albuquerque will go
down to you know the retailer
you know whatever whatever
cannabis retailers in downtown
Albuquerque and you know
my S. US claims that biggest is
the center of the universe so I
want to try that candidates
right it's all be able to
actually pull it off the shelf
and it'll say produced by a
micro business you know messed
those farms up in Vegas perhaps
it's organic perhaps you're
using of you know
environmentally friendly
measures to produce a cannabis
maybe you're you're capturing
rainwater and that's how your
irrigating maybe you're using
renewables as your source of
power for your manufacturing
operation with their all kinds
of things that would go into
into how you produce your
cannabis that you might just
find the perfect niche right you
might never want to grow beyond
that micro business model.
Yet you might still be one of
the best games in town now let's
assume you are completely just
blowing it out of the water
you're bursting at the seams you
have the ability to come and
enter the fully Bertie
vertically integrated macro
license we don't call it macro
license but you know essentially
it's it's the big business
license if you're that good at
it all of a sudden you find
yourself competing with the
biggest cannabis companies in
New Mexico right but again this
is about giving our communities
of choice right this is gonna be
your choice I don't want to
legalization framework that's
going to shut out people who
can't afford to come in because
a licensing is too expensive or
because of start up costs to
expensive right at the same time
I want to make sure that as
people come in they're able to
transition to the bigger losses
if they so wish because that's
going to be important right I
mean as as well as as it was
mentioned earlier.
If a lot of money is gonna be
made industry it is incumbent
upon us to ensure that our
communities can participate in
that industry well so that micro
business license really allows
you to do that so to go back to
your question right if you're
not in the industry right now
how do you get in as soon as
September one of of twenty
twenty one the the department
will begin issuing production
production licenses right to
grow and then starting January
one they'll start issuing all
other licenses manufacturing
retail and retail will begin no
later than April first right so
come that day on around that
date New Mexicans everywhere
should be able to open for
business to retail based on a
product that they've started
growing potentially sometime in
late September you know
throughout the course of that
period of time.
No thank you for that Madam
chair representative Martinez
for that explanation and then we
do something in in this bill
that I don't thinks I've seen
but it's actually very clever
you look at section forty which
is on page sixty seven on on on
my my bill.
Section forty is the plant
limit.
You know and it talks about you
know no later than September one
twenty twenty one and every
January there after the
division tell promulgate rules
with regards to.
Cannabis plants.
Then at the end
Then at the end of the bill the
end of the film of the last page
it says a repeal.
And on December thirty first
twenty twenty five.
we repeal section forty order
never seen in the bill a section
that's actually repealed in the
exact same the I think that's
incredibly smart and I think
that allows current producers
those investors that that is
similar to the alcohol argument
they made investments given
this.
Medical cannabis scheme.
You know and then here we go
with the with the recreational
cannabis statute and so how do
we as a government honor you
know prior commitments on those
investments would open up
markets for everybody so tell me
what does that mean that the
plank how.
That they'll be a plan count but
after new year's eve twenty
twenty five there will be no
plant count.
Thank you madam chair
representative that's a
fantastic question as I said at
the beginning this was part of
the you know that this may have
been the most
debated part of of the cannabis
legalization bill house bill
twelve and probably the one that
cost the most friction and and
sort of you know attention
really if you remember house
bill twelve
from the get go was was free
market rate you grow you can
sell and and
you know if if your former you
know growing green chili you're
not going to grow more than you
can sell because it's going to
be a loss for you.
and so I took the same approach
we took the same approach to the
to the to the cannabis
regulation Act house bill twelve
once made its way to the Senate
you know as is usually the case
with big bills you know senators
had had you know other ideas one
of the ideas circulating
was up a you know a hard plan
count for example sort of like
we have with the medical program
You know a a plant count that
would be perhaps artificially
created by the regulators you
know if you remember that
medical cannabis program I think
initially the plank hails like
four hundred plants or something
like that and then now it's up
to about seventeen hundred
plants.
That you can grow
so they're different sort of
ideas floating around
Lucky for us you know our former
colleague former representative
Linda to heal you know kind of
stepped into so wait a minute
you know I'm sure we can find a
way to ensure that some of the
concerns that were being raised
by having by not having a plan
County.
You know could be could be
addressed if nothing else at
least for as the industry kind
of matures in New Mexico that
the regulators have some tools
at their disposal to ensure that
there is a there there's an
equilibrium in the market as
these producers are producing
cannabis and so you know the
compromise in the other chamber
and and and all have us to
presented three you'll go in
more detail but that the
compromise was okay let's let's
manage the plants for those
first three years let's ensure
there's enough product for the
medical cannabis program is just
one of the things we heard from
the opponents of house bill
twelve initially was Oregon had
a crazy.
shortage of medical cannabis
because there is no plan account
right so through this through
this process you can ensure that
there's enough medical cannabis
products enough product for
medical rate cannabis patients
in at the same time ensure that
the market is relatively stable
as the industry kind of kicks
off understanding that we have
some big mega producers and
we've got some medium sized
producers and we're gonna have
some very small producers to the
micro business licenses but then
after a point after three years
of you know we would repeal that
section and then at that point
kind of let the open market do
its thing because I'm I'm I'm in
agreement with you madam chair
representative I remember there
was a question about water that
came up once upon a time and you
you madam chair representative
you answered a perfectly
reasonable people treated like
we treat any other crop right if
you've got the water and you've
got the land thank you make a
business and you make an
economic decision on what to
grow on that land based on the
water they have and that's kind
of how I feel about this
ultimately this has to be you
know you should be able to grow
you can sell but out of out of a
out of respect for those folks
were really you know
legitimately I think concerned
that there is no plank out that
this gives us a tool to ensure
that we're we know exactly how
much we're growing and and and
now we're going to and then
eventually it phases out and you
let the the you let the open
market make that that
determination so I live that's
not to to serenity to see if I
missed anything within that
piece but I'm I'm really proud
of that part of the bill I think
was one of the ones that was so
tricky and Representative he was
able to figure it out in a way
that I think most of us are are
you know if not happy with we're
okay with.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
madam chair Representative and
so it really was a balancing
between how do we make sure that
medical marijuana is still
available for the patients that
have or we need to make sure
that they have access to it but
on the other side of that is how
do we ensure that small farmers
small businesses have a little
bit of an opportunity to enter
into the market before the
market is flooded with
individuals who are we're
already prepared to increase
their growth in production and
so this gives us a little bit of
a time to work with those
smaller communities so smaller
industries that would like to
get started so they can kind of
get into the into the field into
the business at the same time
not harming those who are
already in the business and then
ultimately as as Mr Chairman
said let the market take place
we think that that will happen
by the December thirtieth you
know deadline of twenty twenty
five of the repeal but we do
think that the plant count
initially will help us kind of
manage that forward in and with
all due respect I've I've been
teasing everyone that if if we
open up one day and it sells out
and I I may have to move to
Jamaica and I just don't want to
have to move to Jamaica quite
yet.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative Austin
and some of us to have the no
great great point in great
policy.
Of.
Right policy decisions that you
made and dropped into this bill
because you're right it's
You know we just what the market
from one day to the next prices
drop or or supply dries up like
a lot of things happening in
Canada they ran out they wanted
to the next they legalized and
then they ran out of the
patients were left you know
holding the bag big time so
anyway I'll just a few more
things as I flip through the
bill
This was also a struggle madam
chair representative Martinez
the personal use section twenty
five percent use so person can
grow six plants.
Up to twelve and household you
know I mean so this I folks in
the house I think it's
reasonable to go from six to
twelve.
It's kind of funny that we have
to put this in statute but I
suppose we do that you know the
smell or the or the possession
of cannabis or a plant shall not
constitute reasonable
articulable suspicion of a crime
as not a basis to stop someone
detained someone or cert
someone.
but I guess.
Twenty three years and although
some crazy gives a look at that
and say how are they have to put
that in there but we all know
why the the prime the four
against drugs as he wrote the
Fourth Amendment of this country
and we need to we need to take
it back
that see couple other points
The employers Madam chair of the
Martinez a lot of a lot of
chatter amongst employers and I
try to tell employers like.
You can do then what you can do
now.
You can prohibit your employees
from drinking alcohol twenty
four seven seven is a week are
you can do that if you're an
employer in the state of New
Mexico you can restrict your
employees from you know using
cannabis on the job during
working hours I mean you're free
to do that I would just
encourage people to change the
the form their HR form where it
says no illegal drugs if they
want their workers to not smoke
cannabis say no illegal drugs
comma and cannabis comma because
hopefully we can we can legalize
this the
And then.
I think the most important
thing.
Madam chair is the
Representative Martínez is the
The definition of schedule one
case scheduled one of was
imposed by the.
By the numerous states through
the a uniform law commission
back in the early seventies were
all the state's adopted the
federal schedule one in which
the government lists all of the
horrible horrible narcotic drugs
that they don't want people
ingesting and included cannabis.
It included kind of just kind of
find that portion of the bill
which is.
Which is ninety percent of the
bill in my opinion madam chair
so that's page one fifty four
all right all right so folks
almost twenty pages away so here
we go managers about this thank
you so it's section sixty four
thirty dash thirty one dash six
schedule one the following
controlled substances are
included in schedule one half of
the economic and pronounce.
because they're highly technical
and toxic chemicals and then you
go down and it says money one
at.
you know THC Hershey's and the
and there's a line through that
there is a magic line through
those words on the schedule one
statute and that is why I
support this bill madam chair of
the Martinez is is we have to
remove the plant from schedule
one a plant that is proven to
have additional medicinal
purposes a plant that has no of
you know of.
Produces no violent tendencies
and its users
and has a significantly less
social cost I I think I in
previous debates of made the
point that I never read a police
report it literally my life at
that that that says you know
after ingesting cannabis comma
the defendant did this that or
the other it just it just
doesn't happen
so you go to schedule to it's
also removed from schedule to.
And then and then it's removed
from our criminal statutes as
well and so that is the key I
know that this is not a perfect
bill.
But as mentioned
The the perfect should not be
the enemy of the good.
Action sixty nine at risk of.
Removes it from not drug
paraphernalia from the criminal
code removes.
Cannabis from the criminal code.
and that's what we need to do so
appreciate this I appreciate
your leadership Mr real and the
work you have in funding for the
next six nine ten twelve months.
I wish this went into effect
July first or January one of it
will go into effect for for
recreational use up April first
and it's on the bottom of page
twenty nine on my bill Madam
chair representative of the
section seven.
Representative R. V. I follow
all commercial cannabis activity
retail sales no later than April
first so it's no later so
theoretically we can we can we
can go ahead of that deadline we
could try to sue for that new
year's eve deadline no pressure
under was to heal what
but let's be sure to celebrate
on April twentieth it'll be kind
of a Juneteenth thing it has all
but will celebrate later and in
years to come because they
should have never ever been the
legal in the first place thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative Martinez thank
you they're just present.
Okay Representative Scott.
Thank you for your profession is
just just a couple questions.
We.
Mr.
Four years.
To what purpose.
Recreational.
Madam chair sorry can we just
the representative will be
closer to his Mike I didn't
understand a word he said.
Sure.
Representative Scott could you
repeat your question.
Thank you Mike was maybe away
from your face.
Sure I'm sorry I'm still to
this.
Please accept our after sixty
to.
Do we.
The predictions on how many
customers will be created with.
Recreational program.
Madam chair representative Scott
thank you thanks for the
question we don't what we have
it or number of of different
studies and if you know the FIR
alludes to those and they've
taken into account you know not
only the you know the the legal
age of the number of people of
of legal age in New Mexico but
also a tourist traffic coming
from other places including the
state of Texas so it's kind of
hard to predict how many
customers but the dollar amount
has buried anywhere from
three hundred million upwards of
six hundred million.
the FIR is a lot more
conservative I think that it's
got is that about forty million
or so.
In revenues that's not total
sells us just revenues so eight
I think it's hard to predict how
many people it seems like it's
easier for them to predict how
many dollars would be coming in.
Martinez the.
Three hundred million dollars
Representative about three
hundred thousand.
Material leave us all.
Yeah a couple of.
In a couple of.
Places on the internet the.
One is worth about a thousand
dollars a profound ethical.
Is.
For your all members madam chair
Madam chair representative you
know I don't know that it is
ballpark I mean it really
depends because we don't have a
national cannabis Kanemi you
know every state kind of does
things a little bit differently
and then of course so long as
you still have a it is the
market out there I think that's
always gonna.
play a role in how this stuff is
is
Is priced.
If
we.
Your state is concerned.
This additional three hundred
million dollars is going to come
from.
Madam chair and and
Representative you know I think
I think people people make
choices all the time right and
that the example I use that in a
previous presentation of this
bill is that with with our
disposable income we used to go
to the movie theaters every
single weekend and you know if
you're familiar with an outfit
called flex in Albuquerque it's
it's really cool outfit up on
the on the west side and you can
get a full out dinner anywhere
from everywhere from pizza to a
very fancy salad and you can
enjoy some of the best
microbrews in town but every
time we go out there you know if
you could be it could be
anywhere between you know sixty
eighty a hundred dollars a pop
not including the movie tickets
and if you have little kids like
mine
who are getting older you know
they don't really share a meal
anymore you know I've got to get
them their own so but those are
decisions we make as parents and
as a family to to use or
disposable incomes for waste
this is no different right I
mean if you're an individual
that is twenty one years of age
or older and you have disposable
income you may choose to partake
in cannabis just the way you
might choose to partake in
tobacco or in alcohol be here
whatever whatever it might be
now I also want to remind us
that
you know one of the what are the
positives of being amongst the
first to legalize particularly
in this region is that there is
the potential for a great deal
of tourist traffic coming in you
know I think of Texas you know
as somebody mentioned earlier in
public comment that maybe Texas
legalized soon I I kind of hope
they don't because I want to get
their traffic I want to get
their traffic down into Los
crucis down into Hobbs down into
Clovis for for them to partake
in this industry and then at the
same time while they're they're
partaking all kinds of other
industries whether it's.
Of of bars and restaurants
whether it's skiing in the
winter time whether it's you
know camping in the summer time
whatever that might be so a
great deal of that revenue I
believe it will probably come
from from tourism as well.
Madam chair and.
Can you describe.
The use.
This bill that will be
associated with.
So we're giving this material
way to children.
Yes madam madam chair and and
Representative I I certainly
can.
the penalties are very from
so specifically you wanted to
know
for selling to a minor.
Work work we're giving it away.
madam madam chair and
representative I'm gonna have
Emily jump in to to answer the
specific question while I review
the the penalty try to that I
have here in front of me.
you madam chair and
representative there are a
couple of places that protect
minors of the bill so if a
licensee is giving or selling
to a minor the division shall
suspend or revoke the license
and make final licensee in
amount not to exceed ten
thousand dollars or both that is
language that is mirrored in our
local liquor control act it's
also if a.
someone who is actually
dispensing so that an employee
of a licensee if they
Saylor dispense a product to
someone who's under twenty one
the division may suspend a
permit for their their soon
permit for up to thirty days for
the first offense a year on the
second and permanently on their
defense and then also under our
delinquency of a minor
charge which is it currently in
statute that that's a fourth
degree felony if you give
giveaway I deliver or sell to a
minor.
What made
for three great so madam chair.
Expert.
Did you hear the question it was
you're still a little muffled
Representative.
That's great.
One last question.
There will.
For.
Once.
If you have previous
convictions.
For a drug related issue how
will work with sponge Bob.
you madam madam chair and and
Representative so in in the bill
we don't have an automatic bar
if you have a prior conviction
in fact we ask that the
regulators kind of look at the
totality of circumstances and
make a determination whether or
not to license somebody based on
that's a tally of the
circumstances
when we went when with regard to
expungement you know what we are
expanding our records that are
related to cannabis right
cannabis related offenses
and you know that that's for for
you know perhaps infractions
here in the state but you know
what if you have somebody who
moved here from Texas you know
twenty years ago and has a
cannabis offense in taxes we
don't want that person who is
otherwise a good person to be
automatically barred from
licensing that's why we were
very specific in the language
that a prior conviction would
not keep you from licensing but
that the regulators would look
at you as a whole and see where
you've been the last twenty
years and see what you've done
the last twenty years and then
make a determination at that
point as to whether or not you
you you should be able to get a
license.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thanks.
Thank you.
Representative Representative
Lujan you would you want to be
passed over you ready now.
Thank you
Yes.
Yes you are important state
thank you very much to the
sponsors and to our
superintendent and always
Representative register here for
all the work and the compromise
that she was able to to work
with everybody all of our sites
all parties on this and I just
want to say that this is a
really good piece of legislation
I do have some questions about
the consumption areas and I
received a lot of.
My constituents and others
coming forward and like we heard
with the
today with the concerns with the
consumption areas and I just I'm
happy to read in the bill that
there will be oversight and
there will be reporting from the
U. H.
and I just want to ask is going
to be something like no license
our area our license like we
have with the cigar bars or
cigar
places work with the smoke is it
can be related to how they
operate speaking after that.
Madam chair representative yes I
think that is the intent and and
let me let me kind of let me
explain why there's consumption
hernia because it it did seem a
little odd to me when it was
first the idea was our first
introduced a couple years ago
but there were some really good
points made by social justice
advocates there are people who
may not be able to consume
cannabis and you know housing or
or whatever and we don't want to
create a system where you know
if if you can not you know if
you cannot in ingest cannabis in
your private residence that all
of a sudden you are sort of you
know cut out of the activity for
no reason other than and then
having to live and and you know
of a place that says is not
allow it so you know the idea of
a consumption there at the
really is geared toward ensuring
that folks can have the ability
to do that now obviously there's
also a business opportunity read
if you are a retailer
or rather if you're a if you
have a consumption area for
cannabis I mean all of a sudden
there's the opportunity for you
to you know sell some food you
know and and you know maybe have
some more live music or whatever
and so you know that's the idea
behind it now some of the
concerns are raised by the you
know say that the folks who are
working on second and smoking
one out of there Sir this is a
gimmick concerns I'm in and I'll
turn it over to Representative
three oh to explain little bit
more about how how we look at
regulating those establishments
but you know the idea is really
to have a safe space for people
to consume responsibly and you
know not have folks consuming in
public or or otherwise in a
place where they're not supposed
to.
Thank you madam chair and
representative nice to see you
and thank you for being such a
good person and all the spot
that I used to used to maintain
it's good to see you I think one
of the things that we forget and
it's because you know go back to
my teenage years and young years
marijuana now we call cannabis
was smoked it's not necessarily
I mean I've learned that there's
all kinds of different ways of
consuming it everything from
cannabis butter and I think
that's not what it's called it
in the colder but better
we we all heard of brownies
we've all heard of of multitude
of different kinds of edibles
and so we have to remember that
consumption doesn't mean that
necessarily that they'll be
smoke in the air we we have been
listening to the concerns and
honestly we thought that we
addressed it with the removal
and something called a dram shop
the amendment that was you know
language that was in the other
bill but apparently that isn't
resolving the entire process but
I do think it's important to
remember that consumption of
cannabis does not necessarily
quite itself to smoke.
Thank you madam chair thank you
superintendent and
Representative so does that mean
that you know some when we have
these that these consumption
areas in place that they may not
necessarily allow the smoking
portion of of consuming
cannabis.
Madam chair representative the
department will have the
authority to draft rules
regarding where cannabis
establish consumption areas can
be what they can what can be
served a very similar to the
rules that you know our job to
around other industries but in
this bill we've been given
pretty open the forty to
determine the consumption areas
so long as we make sure that
this will be issuing licenses
for them so long as we make sure
that they're not within the
three hundred feet of the school
or daycare center.
Thank you madam chair thank you
superintendent so so I think
you're gonna be getting a lot of
information we're gonna be
getting a lot of information in
this regard working around this
issue
and like you said to the spot
yes ma'am that are madam chair
the Sanchez and I appreciate
that that they say that this is
that you know this is an
evolutionary type of
bill and we've seen it change so
much and I'm not I said much
respect to everybody that has
had the opportunity to add you
know
The important parts to make it
what it is as we're reading it
today and you know on the issue
of ethics and why this is
necessary it's because we need
to we need to have this
implemented to take out and to
get rid of the illicit market
and if we don't do it this way
we're missing a huge opportunity
so again thank you to the
governor as well for bringing us
here
today to have this important
conversation and to move this
important piece of legislation
with that thank you I yield back
thank you.
Thank you representative of
Representative Montoya.
Thank you.
Thank you
Madam chair.
So I have a couple of questions
on the concerning.
We can be confident.
That.
That the black market.
Increase
so we we just passed a measure
that takes the the tax from
twelve percent.
to eighteen percent but that
that does not include gross
receipts
are at the point of sale is that
correct to.
Representative or is that
incorrect that is correct Madam
chair representative.
So so.
We're talking
From.
Approximately eighteen percent
right now all across the state
to.
It was a twenty six percent.
tax on this product is that I'm
understanding that correct.
Representative.
Yes so it's it would go from you
know the the original bill was
twelve percent excise plus the
apple Google G. R. T. which you
know I think in Albuquerque it's
like eight and a half or
something like that and so now
it's going from from the twelve
to the eighteen percent with the
applicables G. R. T. over the
course of I think it was five or
six years Madam chair
representative.
So
As you know I I live in San Juan
county which borders Colorado.
And we've had law enforcement.
From Colorado and the joint
meetings with the
Those elected officials in in
San Juan County.
And awhile back there was a big
push for
how we were going to handle our
our our opioid problem and so we
have some joint meetings and I
asked the.
Different members from law
enforcement from the bordering
counties it's not just apply to
county that borders Esperanza
county as well.
And
We were asking about the.
The revenue that was coming in
The law enforcement
that was there
talked about the cost to first
responders the
the inability to to to
easily.
Detect.
when someone is impaired when
they're driving obviously there
can be a smell.
but that's not all special we're
talking now they're gummies
there are brownies there are all
kinds of things.
But there's not a quick yes.
And so that.
Was a problem for them but the
bigger problem they talked about
was since heavy cash business.
there were a lot of calls
at the dispensaries for.
What was eight eight.
Happy uptick in in.
Armed robbery.
But the the biggest problem they
pointed to was increased black
market.
And and what I'm concerned with
is we do border on the other
hand we border Mexico.
And
There's already a pretty
elicits.
black market trade in New Mexico
for for marijuana.
And.
My concern is we're we're going
to be taxed at this rate.
And it beginning on page.
Page fifty six of this bill.
And all pages or so.
Four five pages so what talks
about possession and use.
And we are dramatically.
Decreasing any penalties for
consumption and possession.
and even even distribution I was
very concerned to see that that
it could be a misdemeanor to
allow cannabis sales on school
grounds.
This was actually doing here is
decriminalizing possession and
use.
The cost on the black market is
going to be substantially less
especially then I a product that
is.
Looking to have a profit margin
and then tax base for the state
so I'm I'm concerned with what I
believe is going to be
increased black market.
availability and decreased
on penalties.
so I maybe can address that's
there's several things package
there but my my concern is the
availability on the black market
especially the schools.
yes thank you madam chair and
and Representative I mean I you
know to to address you know the
the the list of market I think.
Is is a goal that we are that we
all of us share in terms of of
of guiding out.
and you know as I've said before
you know one of the biggest cash
crops for for drug cartels for
many many many years has been
cannabis just because of how
how much easier it is to produce
as opposed to other synthetic
drugs.
And so you know I believe that
when this country which is the
world's biggest consumer of
illicit drugs finally sees the
light with regard to cannabis
specifically but also to many of
these other drugs will once we
had address these issues as
public health issues and not
just criminal justice issues I
believe that the
you know the the you know
insatiable desire for these
drugs will eventually dry out
those illicit markets you know
think about because all of you
know during prohibition we saw
the violence and we saw just how
difficult it was across this
country to to to attempt and
really sort of took to try to
control you know the the use of
or of or prohibit that the use
of that particular substance.
and and you know I didn't last
long after so so many years I
decided to open it back up and
you know now you would be hard
pressed to have to go get liquor
on the less than market I mean
just not something I I I I just
anyway how do you know where to
go to get it is about a guy you
know I mean I tell all will go
to Walgreens and you know if
it's close I'll just wait till
tomorrow kind of thing with
illicit drugs I mean you can
really go out in the street
corner and and get it you know
at the snap of a finger
unfortunately and so I believe
that by being a state that jumps
on board with the idea of
legalization we joined the other
fifteen states and and and we
legalize and eventually so many
of us will legalize of the
federal government we will be
hard pressed not to have a
federal standard of legalization
for this particular drug I
believe that was that happens we
will begin to really make a dent
into the less than market now
with regard to our specific
legalization framework with
point with regard to Colorado or
other states up that that have
legalized will there be people
who for one reason or another
are going to use the opportunity
to sell in the less than market
potentially yes I think the
answer is probably yes these for
the first few years.
But eventually I think even
those folks will be driven out
of business because at the end
of the day if there's not a
consumer for an illicit drugs.
The list of products kind of
goes away.
and I think that once we change
you know as Representative SO
stated so eloquently I mean it's
it's the fact that it's legal or
legal that kind of changes our
brain and our approach to it if
I prescribe opioids I kind of
think that's okay verses
cannabis that I'm out of you
know purchased in the less than
market so you know once we start
changing that dynamic in that
mindset you know I believe that
you know people will get their
cannabis of the previous weather
supposed to get the cannabis
which is at the regulated taxed
entity verses the dealer out on
the street corner so you know E.
you know we we can we can debate
I think reports from Colorado
you know I I I used to be very
personal Colorado a lot with my
good friend former percent read
over because as you remember
Madam chair representative he
was on the opposite side of this
issue with me and we would
always debate these these
studies of these reports and
whatever else was out there
whether it was illicit market or
you don't we are what not and
the reality is that you know I
think that there's enough data
to probably make the argument on
one side or the other now with
regard to
with regard to to how we treat
you know folks who who violate
you know the provisions in this
bill
you know in any cell that is
unlicensed is is going to be you
know.
They're gonna be subject to
criminal justice penalties right
including a fourth degree
felony.
you know that includes
You know schools and and
whatever else right like you
can't have that street dealer so
gonna get punished at the end of
the day
you know whether you know what
what whether whether or not.
Legalization framework would be
enough to get this through
dealer to come into the
regulated market you know
assuming their otherwise a good
person you know remains to be
seen but we do have that option
in our bill you know if you have
that conviction for many years
ago we want you to be able to
enter the market assuming you're
a good solid person now.
Well I I guess my concern is.
There's not gonna be a legal
market.
For.
For minors.
It's still going to all be in
illicit.
Market for minors yet we reduced
the penalties.
I mean even making it a
misdemeanor.
For it for it and for it to be
sold on a school school
property.
that's very concerning.
it's not like they're going to
choose the legal market.
On school grounds versus the
illicit market there's only the
illicit market.
And so
the idea that
All of the penalties have been
reduced on possession.
Even the number of plants that
can be held by an individual
madam chair.
Part for for jumping right back
into this without addressing you
madam chair
but
When I'm looking at.
Misdemeanors or fifty dollar
fines.
there's really and and that's a.
To some sort of a drug
Class.
Let.
Get I'm sorry can you point me
to the page numbers I can follow
along with you okay well
starting on page.
Here on fifty seven for use in
on line six a person violates
paragraph one which is use.
It's a it's a fifty dollar fine
but when you go to let me see
here.
A person who is.
Eighteen years or younger.
The penalty is.
Is.
That would be on page.
I think ribs in terms of think
that section is for smoking in
public I I I I believe in this
bill it remains a felony to sell
cannabis we child does not.
Let me see on
Because it's it's a it's only a
felony of over a certain amount
on school grounds it's only a
misdemeanor.
Welcome back to that here a
little bit after I find that for
you
But the penalties.
Surprisingly and also if I'll
find that before on the floor
with this
Representative because.
Where people coming into my
office on other issues so I'll
have to find that again but.
That's the concern the concern
is is.
The there should be at least a
tougher penalties for
distributing alcohol to a minor.
Just to be distributing.
hi.
To a minor.
It's just not there and that's
that's a huge concern but.
To me the greater the greater
discussion Madam chair
representative is.
Combined with the the the.
Really the removal of any real
penalties with teeth and then
within the increased to the
cost.
Price is going to drive the
illicit market.
If I were if I were a dealer I
would make sure only to have a
certain amount on me at any one
time and then any time that I
was approached I would just say
it's for personal use.
because once again we've made
possession would decriminalize
possession so.
There are some problems that
we're going to see and I'm I
guess what I'm what I'm looking
for from the from the Sanchez
is.
If we see this happening.
And a real increase in in drug
use in our our school children.
Is there going to be a a a
appetite or temperament on
behalf of the sponsors to come
back and put.
More teeth.
Into the language for
distribution to minors.
Madam chair representative I you
know again all all all say what
I said earlier I mean I think if
you distribute to a minor it is
a four three felony
and and that remains now if in
the future we find that we need
to put more teeth into this law
or that we need to mess with the
tax rates because the listed
market is for some reason
thriving one hundred percent
there's a lot of appetite to to
to to perfect this statute you
know potentially statute but you
know I I do I don't think yeah I
think with regard to to to a
minor it it remains a fourth
degree felony.
Chair on that on that point it's
page one sixty three sections
sixty six madam chair and
chairman Martinez it says the it
for first offense it is a second
degree felony you're fine that
are paid sick when sixty three
it's in section sixty six.
Which modifies distribution of a
controlled substance to a minor.
But the mist
madam chair this is no longer a
controlled substance for under
that under that description if
you look at page sixty.
Section twenty nine new material
cannabis within restricted area.
and it beginning on line
fourteen after.
The compassionate use act a
person shall not possess or
intentionally distribute any
amount of cannabis drugs on the
premises of the school.
Promises of school or daycare.
And if you skip down the bottom
it says a person who violates
this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor that's on page sixty
you madam chair if you look at
page forty three and forty four.
section fourteen where they for
get criminalized provided
cannabis products to minor.
And let the penalties.
I'm sorry I did not get that
section we divided this up
trying to trying to our.
Yes we got literally got.
This.
Hours before the session began.
So.
So.
Page forty three.
Mr.
So.
Madam chair I'll be reading this
before we get to the.
For you to the house floor but
that that is a major concern for
me is is that we're gonna
protect our our school children
so I'm madam chair I have that.
Kind of a different set of
questions from people that have
reached out to me who are
medical.
cannabis users.
One of the
One of the issues that that they
are concerned with is that the
quality.
The medical marijuana
potentially.
going down or.
the availability of medical
grade cannabis.
Not remaining high and
They said that's been that has
been an issue in other states
where cannabis has gone the
medical route first and then
recreational and the reason is
since as you read through here
there's not any real specifics
as to how we're going to
regulate quality and that being.
Or the percentage of THC or
that that because of that it's
likely going to be more
profitable.
To sell recreational.
And just because of the price
point and that the people who
are
needing medical.
Quality marijuana that is going
to be something that become
scarce or quality
is not at that same level so I
don't know which sponsor would
like to address that.
It if we is there some way that
we're going to try and.
Regulate.
Or put in place quality controls
to make sure and and maybe and
encourage your force my button I
might not be the right term but
but.
Medical marijuana providers and
to make sure they don't just a
Allow that to deplete
and that the recreational just
replace it on their on their
shelves.
As it were.
Yes so let let me thank you
madam chair and and present that
question and alternative were to
superintendent Rio to give you
the nuts and bolts of the of the
regulations that that through
this bill her per shop will be
able to to to implement but you
know first and foremost you know
I I do believe that there are
some mechanism especially at the
front and to ensure that there's
enough medical supply
now.
And this is me speaking for
myself and you know my own
conversations I've had.
With with operators and others
but you know
of cannabis is is cannabis right
and there's not really a big
huge difference if if you if
you're legitimate producer and
you're doing a good job you know
the cannabis will will will be
just fine for for either the
medical or or the or the adult
use slash recreational having
said that there are protections
in the bill there there
regulatory frameworks in the
bill that allows regulators to
implement regulations to ensure
access to that medicine also
keep in mind that because we are
treating medical cannabis as a
as a medicine now and and we're
not taxing it either would you
are to your exercise that you
know in a way that's a built in
incentive both for people to
stay on the medical program
and and not you know not leave
that was one of the concerns I
heard a couple years ago is that
you know people might just say
well it's easier to just go get
your adult use cannabis you
don't have to go through the
process of getting your card
renewed every couple years but I
think the fact that it's less
expensive.
Should keep people on the on the
program I'm and then also you
know with the licensing
framework you know you could
decide to be just a medical
producer I mean that that would
be image that I think has gone
unexplored here in this
discussion but you could
potentially get a license in
only sell medical grade cannabis
if if you chose to write then
assuming that a lot of these
operations are going to be both
adult use and medical you know I
I would believe that you know
there would be a need for some
of these operations to to stick
to to medical but I'll turn it
over superintendent Rio and then
Michael sponsor Armstrong to she
she's very knowledgeable on
these things as well.
Thank thank you madam chair
Representative the department of
the regulation licensing
department under section three
on page fifteen will be working
with the
With the department of
agriculture I think I'm sorry I
was just there a minute ago to
develop rules for quality and so
those that is going to be part
of our responsibility when we're
developing the rules.
And madam chair I can add also
Representative in the medical
cannabis field there are a lot
of variations and different
Strains of of cannabis that are
cultivated to treat different
symptoms and so someone in the
medical program and I think by
by demand of the what medical
patients want and the kind of
symptoms that they have I would
expect that your medical supply
is not going to be just the same
run of the mill of that the
adult use is necessarily there
that might be available also but
there's a great deal of of
skill if you will and
development of strains that to
that and the amount of THC.
Moderating the amount of THC and
something to address different
symptoms so you may take a
different strain for nausea than
you would for sleep for pain for
instance.
Thank you madam chair.
So.
Once again there are there are
folks now who I think this there
are are Canada's medical
cannabis program.
It is fairly easy to.
For people who don't necessarily
need it for medical purposes can
get it now it's not anyway
difficult.
That being said I I would hope
those who are.
The who who are.
Using the medical program for
recreational purposes that they
they would just go to
recreational route then there
would be
There are plenty of them medical
grade which is what.
Once again the the folks who
told me that they're using us
for very specific medical
purposes they say there is a
difference between great.
And that that has harmed the.
Availability and quality in
other states so.
I mean obviously we're not gonna
want to talk about that too much
today
with since we're talking about
recreational specifically that
is a concern for those folks and
I've I've had at least four
people who reached out to me for
that reason that they're serious
pain.
that is being dealt with and
just concerned that that stories
they've heard in other states
now once again I don't know that
that they have any empirical
data themselves but
obviously I would imagine those
folks know other people who.
Who are making that claim so.
But
I have one last question as to
the penalties for possession
and so madam chair if I could
one second of make this a.
Actress towards the the main
Billsponsored
What is the difference between
the.
But we're gonna have now in law
and then committees under
federal law for the positions
are going to be a dramatic
difference
it is there even any real
concern I know that to.
That
Representative Lente did bring
that up in the.
During the sixty day session
that.
Tribal lands are under federal
law not state law.
So
so the differences between the
two standards.
and the.
Implementation.
Prosecution under those two
standards since we do have so
many native lands in federal
lands in New Mexico.
What what is the difference if
you were caught with possession
or distribution.
On in the city or county in New
Mexico verses on federal lands
in New Mexico.
Madam chair and and
representative you know I think
that under this bill you're
allowed to carry a specific
amount on you.
And anything any amount over
that has to be stored in your in
your residence your private
residence away from public view
if you enter into a federal
jurisdiction I mean I think it
depends I mean I think it
depends on the tribe and then it
also depends on that federal
jurisdiction I cannot speak for
federal penalties for possession
of you know to.
you know two ounces of cannabis
for example I'm not sure what
that penalty would be but yeah
you're absolutely right I mean I
think tribal communities which
fall within federal jurisdiction
you know you're gonna treat.
Of this this product you know
differently than the state
would.
Thank you for that answer and I
I do believe that's going to be
a
The problem for for native
peoples in New Mexico and we've
been going to this I went back
to page forty three to look at
protections under right under
right persons
for distribution and right
persons this is really as we're
dealing more with a license
holder of.
Hi Candice.
See is what would happen if
someone who is a distributor of
cannabis cannabis.
Our work to sell to an underage
person and there's a ten
thousand dollar fine.
yes listed there but if I'm
looking at the specific
penalties of criminal penalties.
That are are in effect the only
thing that I find is on page
sixty which is.
It's.
Misdemeanor as long as it's
under a certain percentage.
It's only a misdemeanor for
distribution to a minor I I
think that's a huge hole in the
summer to look through this more
of only literally at this for
the last several hours to look
through it but I'm and dive into
this more but all I'm seeing
madam chair and and
Representative Martinez is it's
a misdemeanor to distribute to a
minor.
Currently in this bill so I'll
be looking into that and if and
if that is what I find in the
bill.
We'll be looking to try to mend
this bill on the floor and I
would hope that Sanchez would.
Want to put in some more
protections for minors so thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative thank you before
we go to Representative
Hernandez I think the speaker
need to wanted to clarify a
point yeah thank you madam chair
earlier I was referencing a
quarter of yield decision about
the after the lady of the gross
receipts tax to medical cannabis
I was correct about the effect
of that opinion that I was
unaware that the effect of the
opinion had been stayed pending
potential review by the state.
The Supreme Court and that while
that batteries under a possible
review gross receipts tax is
being collected on medical
cannabis so that is I wanted to
correct that before we went any
further this is my mistake thank
you thank you Mr speaker
Representative Fernandes.
Thank you madam chairman and
Representative madam chair I
guess chairman.
Chair and representative I just
have a couple of questions a
generalized question and then a
couple of things on the bill
Madam chair representative one
of the things that's been
brought to my attention mostly
just speaking with
some of the law enforcement in
my community
is that they're worried about
not having an accurate test
available to test for THC
intoxication levels
And so so I just I want to know
if I mean it's probably not in
the bill actually I'm pretty
sure it's not in the bill but do
you have any idea of how our
first responders are supposed to
be able to.
to be able to test for the
intoxication level from THC.
of a driver or or someone you
know somebody else or situation
where somebody would need to be
tested.
Madam chair and representative
the the way law enforcement
addresses this issue now is by
using drug recognition experts
that are brought usually
roadside to figure out of
somebody is is intoxicated now
you know beyond that you know
once a person is arrested or if
the person taken to hospital I
I'm not sure what law
enforcement can do I'm not a
criminal law lawyers so I don't
know what the different
specifics are but you know what
we've heard from law enforcement
over and over again is that this
is how they deal with you know
we I you know it's it's a but by
legalizing this industry as you
know we're not all of a sudden
creating no what we're not what
people will not be using this
for the first time
Representative people have been
using cannabis for ever and and
and some a responsible people
are you know have been driving
in using cannabis and the way
law enforcement would address
that now is the way they would
address that tomorrow and so we
are drug recognition experts is
my understanding the the the
best tool that they have.
Understanding that this is the
beginning of the presentation
you know the the there's an
entrepreneur out there hopefully
hopefully here she is in New
Mexico and they're gonna come up
with that breathalyzer if you
will for this particular
substance and they're gonna
become millionaires because
that's gonna become the standard
across the state across the
country.
Representative madam chair and
Representative yes all of that
in someone in Colorado
designed a products that can.
Detect the smell of cannabis in
the air for public gatherings
but you know because they were
getting complaints from the
neighbours and downtown areas
residential and you know there
now we funded fully production
where the company companies out
for police departments at all hi
I would love to see that I would
love to see that on that point
So I mean with that.
and.
Might be more up your alley
Madam chair representative
Do you believe that by not
having a reliable test let's say
someone is arrested
and it is come to find out that
they were not under the
influence does this it is I mean
it may happen now but it could
be a bigger problem of is is
going to open our police
departments are municipality is
and ultimately maybe even the
state up to lawsuits
for impeding people's rights
because there isn't a scientific
or medical test behind it
determining that they are under
the influence.
Madam chair and representative I
mean again I would say you know
thinks thanks the where the way
law enforcement is addressing
these issues now is not going to
change and I can't think of the
the lost the last big lawsuit
where law enforcement was was
sued on a D. W. I. stop for them
violating somebody's rights
based on the you know but based
on the D. W. I read I mean
otherwise obviously there are
other factors involved but I I
don't think this changes as I
said as I've said before
impaired driving is illegal
today and impaired driving be
legal tomorrow there there are a
hundred thousand people with
medical cannabis cards these are
folks from are all using
cannabis and I don't believe
that there is there has been an
uptick in DWI based on those one
hundred thousand medical
cannabis patients anywhere in
the state at least not that is
measurable I believe that
ensuring that law enforcement
has the proper tools
understanding that the tools
right now are probably limited
to drug recognition experts and
maybe some emerging technology
that's out there I forgot to
mention a couple years ago we
had a company out of Colorado
who came in and and it was a
breathalyzer that the model here
they they had a whole thing up
in the in the third floor of the
building where they were
modeling this this this tool I
don't know what came of it I
don't know if it was proven or
not but it seems like they were
pretty far advanced in its
development.
But other than those those
emerging tools I think that law
enforcement will continue to
rely on those wreck recognition
experts now if this industry is
to be legalized and if this
funding pie to the general fund
is is realized and and it's
grown my expectation is that we
as legislators would double down
on those investments Ford law
enforcement particularly the
department of public safety to
ensure that eight they can train
more officers as drug
recognition experts but also to
to you know invests in the tools
that might be needed for the for
for these law enforcement
professionals to to enforce or
the W. I lost but perhaps most
importantly I think that if you
legalize this industry in your
taxes in your regulated and you
treated the way say we treat all
the same way we treat alcohol
and tobacco is that we can
reinvest some of those funds
into our communities to ensure
that people understand the
impact not only of the
responsible use period right but
also of driving while the while
under the influence and I think
all of those things are are
important to note here because
you know I I've got a lot of
emails myself to over the last
few days saying we have a lot of
you know we I know we're going
to have more well it's not like
people have not been smoking or
ingesting cannabis this whole
time right it's not like we're
bringing in a new product that
has never been here before it's
always been here the question is
how do we how do we tax related
so that people who do use that
are using it safely and
responsibly and we're generating
revenue to reinvest in those and
community so that people have
the you know the understanding
that driving under the influence
is not okay aber right I don't
care if you're rich or poor
black or white it's never OK to
drive under the influence and
quite frankly I'm of the opinion
no matter if you only had one
beer you shouldn't be.
Getting behind the wheel I mean
that's just that's just how I
think right and if you ingest
one got me or half ago Mira
quarter got me
I don't believe you should use a
vehicle and I don't believe you
should jump on the tractor and I
don't believe you should be
using any type of tool that
otherwise would be dangerous for
you to use because you're under
the influence so you know I I I
get the I get the discussion I
get the argument but we're not
bringing in a new product to to
market it's already here all
we're doing is taxing and
regulating regulating it to make
sure it's safe and we're not
legalizing DWI it's illegal now
it's illegal to more.
Madam chair representative thank
you so.
All of that it actually brought
up a couple different ones that
I wasn't thinking about and I
and I agree with you on the the
funding and the tools and you
know.
If something comes of all of
that you know and and there's
something that's actually
reliable I've I think that we
should absolutely double down on
making sure that law enforcement
does have the tools that are
that are needed
so just a couple of questions on
the bill
on page number seventeen.
We talk about the members that
are going to be designated to
the regulatory advisory
committee.
Appreciate that the public
defender the district attorney
in the county sheriff which we
talked about during the sixty
day for at least a the the law
enforcement aspect of that and
it is so I appreciate that that
those were added
the My one question with this is
that
you know counties now have
doesn't me through the county
share of but the this the
municipalities are completely
served in this long list of
people
we would I mean it was that done
intentionally or oversight or
you know would you be opposed to
someone let's say Representative
from like the municipal league
or another another group or
someone that is appointed by the
municipal lead or another
they're the only ones that are
coming to mind at the moment but
I'm you know there is a bunch of
those mayors kids in and all the
rest
to be even a non voting member
just someone that can can have
their their views from any of
municipality heard on this
advisory committee.
Thank you madam chair
representative yeah and I can
tell you you know the reason we
have a a sheriff here is really
as a as a recognition that we
want to make sure that our rural
communities specifically are are
or do we Representative and
obviously we all have sheriff's
right but you know even in my
hometown the sheriff's
jurisdiction tends to be the
more rural parts of Albuquerque
and I know the same with with
your community you know I I
would be a post I don't think I
don't think there's any reason
not to quite frankly I think
that the the advisory committee
it is you can tell has been
growing by the day.
Because everybody was be part
advisory committee and and I'm
looking at superintendent Rio
because the these are the the
cat she's going to have to hurt
eventually should this past but
you know I I don't think there's
there's opposition necessarily I
think it's a matter of keeping
this number manageable and and
keeping it to a in a place where
you know where the regulators
can actually get things done
through this address you this
advisor actually you know can
can have quite a bit of
influence over the process but
that you know I don't think
there would be opposition I
think it's more a matter of of
of practicality.
Madam chair representative I I
appreciate that let's let me let
me look at what that would
actually take in amendments and
all
I'll come find you and see if
it's still
something that we can get up so
I appreciate that
Let's see so the next question I
believe is on page forty.
section this section I've been.
subsection just.
this is about the penalty was
provided for dispensing cannabis
to a person under twenty one.
Okay so my my question you know
we talked about this a little
bit earlier after researching
the the liquor laws a little bit
more
you know so so the.
What why is it that the cannabis
servers only have their licenses
suspended
but alkyl servers are subject to
for the first offense a
misdemeanor and the subsequent.
the subsequent occurrences after
that a fourth degree felony and
there.
the place where it was sold is
find I believe for the first
offense is ten thousand and then
it severely goes up from there
and they're not allowed to sell
for one to several days alcohol
after that so it looks like.
In the in the relations of both
of these are somewhat a
controlled substance which to me
it means that they should be
that that things like this
should be equal through both of
them
So you know for cannabis there
will be and the criminal
any criminal charges but for the
liquor control act there is.
And so that's really my question
is it looks like everything in
the cannabis is the same as the
liquor except for the criminal
aspect.
Thank you madam chair and and
Representative and and yet they
thank you for for raising this
earlier I think we had a pretty
good discussion about this you
know as I explained earlier you
know I think I think we want to
put the onus of of of this on on
the licensee I'm and we want to
make sure that the licensees are
in fact.
Training their employees are and
I just initially but really
throughout and when we sure that
the licensees are employing you
know reputable people you know
we want to make sure that these
are not just folks for coming
out you know in off the street
or whatever just you know it's
another minimum wage jobs like
that's not what we want these
these should be professionals in
you know with with rights and
responsibilities and so
even though I would agree with
you that there's some of that
there's something to be said
about keeping those sort of
penalties for those servers sort
of parallel right sort of
similar in a way I you know I
would argue that that's one of
the problems we have with the
cruise control act is that we
put a lot of the onus on the
server I would in reality I
think it should be the person
holding the license so you know
as we build this new industry
from scratch this was a place
where we went back and forth you
know even between the Sanchez we
went back and forth on this one
but we felt that we needed to
put the the the you know the the
bulk of the responsibility on
the on the licensee and not
criminalize the person up front
who is trying to do their job
and quite frankly you know you
know.
I I I I would agree with you in
some sense right like if if the
if that person is acting
responsibly they shouldn't be
working there but that's sort of
on the licensee right like
Maybe if if if I one of these
folks and I have a license and
it cost me a hundred thousand
dollars.
you know even though even though
the law says that that person is
not gonna be charged criminally
and it takes two or three times
for them to those devices they
would lose their job with me
immediately I would have zero
tolerance and you know if that
person goes to the next cannabis
dispensary I would hope that we
create a system where we are
again employing good reputable
people and I would you know if
if they go to your dispensary I
would expect you to call me for
reference checks and I will tell
you you know what that person
did this.
The route and I would hope that
you don't hire that person
because you know it is it is a
potential problem but we do want
to start criminalizing people
and leading the licensees off
the hook.
Madam chair representative I I
appreciate that you know I would
love to to pick your brain more
and and potentially working
through in the next session set
to figure out how to get the
liquor control and the cannabis
control at about the same level
going forward it would be okay
with that
So my next question is actually
right on the next page on I
believe it's still forty one on
in section twelve the local
control it can you I mean that
so.
My by the.
The county and city have both
expressed their concern on what
they can and cannot do mostly
just you know we want to do this
is it is it doable stuff like
that so can you quickly because
I know that there's more than a
couple of
A little bit in here can you
tell me what really they can and
cannot do
Here in section twelve.
The the rules that they can.
Impose and and you know going
going forward from that yes yes
certainly thank you madam chair
representative you know what
local communities cannot do is
completely completely ban or or
prohibit these activities but
they can regulate the time place
of of of the activity are they
can regulate where they go they
can regulate hours of operation
they can regulate through zoning
board to the business licensing
mechanism that's in place in the
local community and they can do
all that you know we want local
communities to be able to
to to have purview over how
these activities are conducted
we just don't allow them in
state law to completely opt out
in response to local law
enforcement law enforcement was
very clear a checkerboard
approach to legalization would
be a tremendous tremendous
headache for them.
Madam chair representative I I
agree with you the checkerboard
that that is not the way to go
that creates a whole bunch
problem but we don't want so I I
appreciate that you know might.
My.
My municipality it was really
just worried about can we tell
them you know and they be with
and so far school so far of a
church you know we have.
Probably fifty charges of our
community it's a it's a very
very big thing in our community
and you know they were they were
really worried about you know
can we have them close at eight
or nine years you know just
things that are residents have
brought up to more so to the
municipality more so than myself
but you know we just wanted to
see what we could and could not
do one at
I think I only have one more
question.
misconceptions of section
fourteen it should be around I'm
going off of the point three
version because that's where all
of my notes were made.
but I believe it's on page forty
five.
which is section fourteen
subsection do and it's two and
three.
which are talking about the
purchasers appearances and the
sales being made in good faith.
Okay.
Madam chair kicking repeats
beach number gonna I believe
it's page forty five let me make
sure.
Teachers are.
Yeah page forty five number two
and three.
In the point five version
got.
Office my question on this is
So.
It says the the purchasers
appearance was such that an
ordinary prudent person person
would believe that the purchaser
was twenty one years of age or
older
I know I don't know that that
goes far enough
and I know that we could put
this on the industry to make it.
To make it be that anyone who
looks under thirty five or forty
or fifty gets you know Aidid to
make sure that they are old
enough but.
I I would but I would be much
happier if it said something in
here that you know that the ID
requirements were for someone
that looked even thirty.
because there's there's a you
know there's.
People who are fifteen sixteen
that look older than I am at
thirty five and then there's
people that or thirty and forty
that look like they're fifteen
in so just being on someone's
visual.
with such an exact amount right
at where it is going from legal
to illegal to legal to sell to
them.
I I think that I would be much
happier if we work with we put
that up to you know that the
purchaser was you know thirty
years are of age or older or
something to that effect just
give give it a little bit of of
Lee way
and not just will you know he
could have you know he looks
twenty one but he was really
nineteen.
I think if we raise that a
little bit it could help with
the amount of of
The amount of cannabis that
could be sold to someone who is
under twenty one.
Got it I think Representative
Trujillo was was waving her hand
there so let's let's have her
address that absolutely thank
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and I would just
point out on page forty four
under subparagraph do that you
have to have you actually have
to establish all of the
following in order for it to be
a defense and so it's not just
that they look over
in the to kind of look at them
and said Hey they look like
they're thirty you would have to
establish all of the following
and so they would first have to
be presenting you with a
driver's license no you know my
fourteen year old granddaughter
might present somebody with that
hopefully she wouldn't but let's
say she got a you know a license
or something that said she was
twenty one somebody could look
at her and say yeah you don't
look twenty one and so you know
just because they had a up some
I do that said that they were
they still would have to
overcome that Hey this doesn't
even look like a twenty one year
old.
Madam chair and.
This is true I appreciate that
answer I did I didn't read it
that way so I I appreciate the
clarification
and then I think I only have one
more question which is on page
fifty seven section.
Twenty six
So.
No there was a section taken out
in here somewhere.
Fifty cent.
It's.
Which
now it starts on sorry on page
fifty set the bottom of page
fifty six twenty six limits on
personal use.
So subsection do and I just need
clarification on this more than
anything from madam chair from
either Mrs trio over
Representative Martínez is it
says a person less than eighteen
years of age the family of a
person less than eighteen years
of age or a person legally
obligated to care for and
support a person less than
eighteen years of age who is
subject to the fines pursuant to
subsection B. shall not be
required to pay any fines or
finds pursuant to the cannabis
regulation act why is it that
just because a person is
eighteen or is the family member
of a person under the age of
eighteen do they not have to pay
those fines.
In math madam chair
representative if you look at
the bottom of page fifty eight
you said.
Sorry page fifty so it starts on
page fifty six but the
subsection D. is in the middle
of page fifty seven.
I'll get to get to get to.
Line fourteen.
Okay all all all have them we
respond to that one chia the she
knows why that language reads
that way.
Madam chair and representative
that language is that is I think
what's been what was passed in
house bill I believe it's house
bill one eighty three
Representative Montoya that
unlimited fines and fees for
juveniles and so that bill
passed both chambers on is on
the governor's desk and so we
wanted to make sure that this
bill tracked with that so there
wasn't a conflict and would
import to take away fines and
fees for for two months thank
you.
Thank you so much Madam chair on
that point the governor did in
fact sign the bill earlier
today.
So the bills so madam chair that
the bill was drafted here
correctly to compare to comport
with the bill to remove fines
for juveniles.
Thank you madam chair
representative and speaker I
didn't I didn't get the
correlation between those two
bills so I do appreciate that
and then actually just one more
question on page I believe it's
one seventeen.
which.
Right down this section numbers.
Section fifty seven.
subsection K..
Which is talking about indoor
and outdoor cannabis consumption
areas.
I'm so okay so the the D.
Johnson clean indoor air act
makes it illegal to.
To smoke indoors in most places
besides the one that it doesn't
which are stated here in in this
bill
can you tell me if by by
allowing these or is there gonna
be any repeal from that act to
allow for the cannabis
consumption air areas in the
cannabis regulation Act.
miss madam chair representative
is there going to be a repeal to
allow.
It's gonna be a repeal of any
section to allow for indoor
consumption in the cannabis
consumption areas.
So I I guess I'm trying to wrap
my head around what a cannabis
consumption area is going to be
because it sounds like it's you
know like in Amsterdam where you
have the cafes where you can
consume cannabis indoors and
outdoors.
I just I can't wrap my head
around what what a cannabis
consumption area is going to
look like.
Yeah when you know and then my
question really stemmed from the
you know what to do Johnson and
Act it.
It outlawed smoking tobacco
products in most places I mean
it it's not everywhere but in
most places and I want to know
if there's going to be any
portion of that act that gets
repealed to allow for these
cannabis consumption areas yes
so I I the way the way I
understand it madam chair
representative is you know some
of subsection Kate yeah I
includes
what is defined as a cannabis
consumption area in this bill as
as one of the several listed
entities where you can where you
can smoke right so like a
private club for example which
I'm assuming is like an Elks
lodge
we're gaming facility now it's
going to add an indoor outdoor
cannabis consumption area
pursuant to the cannabis
regulation acts so it's it's
it's being added I don't know
that anything else is being
repealed in order look at
Michael sponsored Armstrong or
metal for for some guidance here
go ahead
I'm thank you madam chair and
representative I'm actually have
we've been talking about this
has for having the hearing so I
have an amendment drafted for
judiciary but I can tell you
what it is now which would be on
that particular line would and
let me read it to you exactly.
It would be online seventeen
having page seven one seventeen
line ten after Act insert comma
which shall be a standalone
building or designated outdoor
smoking area.
And then outdoor smoking area is
further defined in the in the D.
Johnson act.
All right that includes my
question I appreciate it madam
chair and both representatives
and I think that that is all of
my questions I I appreciate all
of your time thank you.
Representative up I don't see
any other hands I'd I'd like to
make a few comments in support
of this bill
Prohibition didn't work we know
that from history and
It's not gonna work with
cannabis and icing the the
future for the country is that
cannabis is going to be
legalized
nationally eventually and this
will give our state the
opportunity to be ahead of the
curve and position itself for
that eventuality in my opinion
and I believe it's important.
That we have all these controls
on cannabis cannabis is being
used now and we have no idea
what people are are smoking or
eating or whatever if they are
buying it on the or is somehow
obtaining it from the illicit
market so I think this as a huge
improvement to what is currently
going on and it provides an
excellent framework for the
regulation and sale of what I
think is going to be a product
that will be widely available in
this country and the not too
distant future and I want to
commend the sponsors on this
bill I know it's been a long
time coming it but I think it's
and it's very very well thought
out bill I anticipate there are
going to be some tweaks to the
so legislation of this size and
complexity but I think it really
has been very well thought out
and carefully thought out and I
want to commend them as sponsors
also for taking input I I had
issues about water a couple of
years ago and brought those
issues up to Representative
Martinez and he immediately
thought through and came up with
was what I thought was a very
reasonable solution or approach
to some of the concerns are
raised by use of water and
licensure what have without
water rights and so on so that
was one example and I. E. and I
suspect that is a something that
he did throughout he and his co
sponsors did throughout that's
certainly what I've been hearing
and I think that is really the
optimal way for all of us to be
working listening modifying
adjusting and coming up with a
product that I think's gonna
serve the state well and with
that I'll ask going to call the
roll what do we have a motion we
need a motion.
Also as amended.
Yeah I do passed as amended up
move by Representative in my us
to second by believe speaker
egolf.
What would you call the roll.
I think Representative Lujan at
the second I okay thank you.
Representative.
Yes.
Speaker.
Yes.
Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative Maestas yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Excuse me miss Representative.
Thank you.
Representative Stansbury yes.
Representative Strickler
Representative Harper.
Madam chair chairman yes.
Chairman Martinez yes.
We have eight in the affirmative
for the negative.
Do pass as amended thank you
very much Sanchez for your time
excellent conversation I don't
believe we have anything else on
our agenda does any Chairman do
you have anything you need to
bring up no thank you madam
chair thank you members for the
thoughtful discussion I I
believe that's all of our
business for today I believe
there's a bill making its way to
the Senate that we will probably
have to hear tomorrow so stand
by for communications from us as
to when we will be meeting of to
to handle that other bill thank
you.
Thank you.
We're just.
