the discussion.
We have a house to house bill
that.
It was.
You right thank you very to the
fact that we've.
Forty conversations outside
created
thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you for accommodating our
request that we put be put
towards the end our experts
having Caroline problems and she
has swooped in very early this
morning and so thank you very
much for that accommodation
we are hearing this morning
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill sixty
seven.
It is a bill that extends the
current industrial revenue bond
incentives available to electric
generation facilities
transmission facilities and
other industries to energy
storage facilities
current budget for these
industries include exemptions
for property taxes replaced by
payments in lieu of taxes and
specifically for wind and solar
generation quit quit meant a
mechanism to exempt it from
gross receipts tax neither of
these ascent incentives
currently extend to energy
storage facilities and energy
storage equipment.
HB sixty seven will generate
economic development benefits in
the form of capital investments
payments to local landowners and
property and taxes or payments
in lieu of taxes to local
jurisdictions.
The States goals with regard to
carbon reduction.
Are established in the renewable
energy portfolio standards goals
for this state of New Mexico.
And those standards are for
investor owned utilities forty
percent renewable energy by
twenty twenty five fifty percent
by twenty twenty twenty thirty
eighty percent by twenty forty
and a hundred percent zero
carbon twenty fifty rural
electric cooperatives have such
standards as well forty percent
renewable by twenty twenty five
fifty percent by twenty thirty
and eighty percent by twenty
fifty.
This bill will help achieve
those goals we know that we have
been working very hard to expand
our renewable energy portfolio
through we installed and we've
been doing well with that but to
really take it to the next level
Mr chair and committee we need
large scale storage to be able
to stabilize the receipt of
those energies Act because I do
not when there's no wind.
We have a problem when there's
no sun we have a problem and
this will allow us to
incentivize companies to bring
large scale storage to the state
there boy advancing our goal to
expand to achieve these very
important renewable energy goals
I'll leave it at that for now
I'd like to introduce our expert
her name is Angela the Tolly and
she is the senior tax policy
adviser to multistate associates
they are working on behalf of
NextEra energy so that all echo
if I may Mister chair after you
take the floor yeah.
Thank you Representative Mr
chair members of the committee
for leading the.
In support of HB sixty seven
today my name is Angela to tally
as mentioned on a tax consultant
untested associates and I was
I'm a former employee of NextEra
energy which is the world's
largest wind and solar company
and leader in energy storage in
the United States.
Energy storage is needed to get
the most out of renewable energy
resources and for that the
state's energy targets as
outlined by German chancellor
I'd like to expound on the
benefits mentioned by
Representative I chairwoman
Chandler that are currently
available to the industry.
Counties and municipalities may
enter into industrial revenue
bond agreements with certain
project owners to exempt
facility property tax and
legislative G. R. T. deduction
instead enter into payment in
lieu of tax agreements to make
direct payments to counties and
local jurisdictions this
incentives available to among
others so much information and
transmission facilities and H.
B. sixty seven would simply
extend those.
Budget
two and pilot payments under the
Iraqis to standalone energy
storage facilities and energy
storage equipment.
This tax incentives played a
significant role in the
development of the renewable
energy industry in New Mexico
and similar support is needed to
encourage the development of
energy storage facilities that
are needed to modernize New
Mexico's.
Transmission grid.
Quoting from the energy minerals
and natural resources department
white paper that it's stated
strategically deployed energy
storage contributes to all the
objectives and the grid
modernization vision
affordability distributed energy
resource integration reliability
resilience customer choice
markets and asset optimization
a commitment to deploying
storage also empowers Economic
Development in New Mexico can
attract batteries companies to
locate in New Mexico and make
New Mexico attractive to other
industries as well much of the
economic development cited by
this report results in property
taxes are pilots jobs and
landowners payments in rural
underdeveloped areas.
States are competing for capital
investment dollars in New
Mexico's neighboring states have
enacted incentives to benefit
energy storage as noted in the
in the energy minerals and
natural resources department
white paper.
Sell your house HB sixty seven
will result in New Mexico
continuing to be at a
competitive disadvantage with
regard to these investment
dollars for these reasons we ask
the committee to support H. B.
sixty seven to encourage the
development of energy storage a
critical component of New
Mexico's future energy
infrastructure to assist in
meeting the state's very
aggressive carbon reduction
targets and to further economic
development in the state and
with that happy to take
questions Mr chair thank you Mr
meddling the legislative Senator
for.
I did want to is that if it was
one item that I was supposed to
be here at eight o'clock
classes.
Those are private.
I noticed some construction
equipment sitting around there
that is because we got.
Welcome.
Mr chair I reiterate chairman
chambers thanks for resale read
also regional.
Thank you Mr chair I want to
acknowledge my co sponsor
Representative Ortez and also
appreciate your indulgence if I
have to hop up and run over to
government but she will be here
of course to assist in
presenting.
That does anything else that Mr
chairman members I am just here
as big cheerleader pensioner.
Okay very good without the any
further do you in the room here
to support house bill sixty
seven K. started about.
Mr chair that ever registered
of this very well Ryan your
resume trade association that
represents membership that
represents maintenance solar
transmission and storage we work
six western states yes
Representative.
Thank you yes Mr good morning Mr
chairman and members the
committee my name is Margaret
Dawson other certain this for
plus power plus power is a
storage of large storage company
that has projects in the works
from between fifty to two
hundred fifty megawatts of
storage is here it could be
useful it can be helpful to
create it's a necessary
component of grid modernization
you're very thankful to the
Sanchez read this bill four we
supported and we just a
committee for thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
thank you this.
Good morning Mr chair members
committee my name is Anil and
whether I am the policy adviser
for the energy minerals and
resources natural resources
department of the state of New
many of the things that I was
going to say but it.
but department and the the HSD
really do support the deployment
of energy storage as part of our
pre modernization efforts
and we.
You.
Mr chairman and committee
Charles been marker at natural
resources defense council and we
strongly support this bill as
you've heard and Energy storages
and wanted to help make solar
and wind excess for twenty four
hours seven days a week it's
also really critical winter's
decreases and there's no reason
why New Mexico should think that
we're gonna be.
isolated from.
Extreme weather that's happening
a lot of the southeast region
this year so
but the settlement with the
energy source to have more
energy storage thank you thank
you next.
What
more than.
The university of
here are we do support the.
All right well thank you need to
practice.
Anyone else on the side this I
support yes Sir yeah good
morning Mr chairman of the
committee was gonna go with the
circle of you're going to
chapters Senator thirty five
thousand members and supporters
in New Mexico the staff report
of eighteen sixty seven that's a
our account is a value city
those need industry revenue
brought in the storage adding to
their existing.
Awesome so that information this
data structure but also agree
with Alex's.
there's they were the best thing
is to make storage activities is
happening and receive the
effects on
increasing yes you will.
Yes Sir.
They will ask you thank you very
good thank you and I'm like to
support.
I do though good morning you're
with us.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee can you
hear me.
Yes.
All righty I am the political
and policy associate with
conservation voters New Mexico
and for all the reasons that
have been stated before we ask
that you support HB sixty seven
thank you for the opportunity to
speak.
Thank you.
J. good morning.
State.
I'm sorry.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Allison
Smith on the register lobbyist
for NextEra energy resources I
want to thank the sponsor for
bringing this forward NextEra
stands in full support I just
want to reiterate that the long
term economic benefits of
enacting this legislation why in
the businesses that we can
attract in New Mexico who
require long duration energy
storage to achieve their
renewable energy goals we feel
this is a very worthy.
This piece of legislation and
ask this committee to support
thank you so much thank you.
At in opposition of house bill
sixty seven in the room.
Okay well let.
Okay very well that's what a
committee at first on the list
Harper.
Thank you chairman and madam
chair.
Representative it's good to see
you all so I want to just spend
just a moment talking about what
in higher be is
because I think there is an
interesting tool
So RT stands for industrial
revenue bond.
And and how it works is we have
a statute that says in our in
our books that for certain big
projects.
yeah I guess smallest to to some
extent.
A business can approach
government entity like county.
And it's make a deal with them
where the county will actually
bond you take a loan and bond
and purchase.
The equipment to the building
the structure whatever for the
business.
And then they will release it.
To the business first actually
the cost of that bonded payment.
There's a will why would you do
that that seems like a lot of
the businesses going it alone
well the reason is if the
government makes the purchase
they are not subject to the
gross receipts tax.
And they're not subject to
property tax so they save a lot
of money and tax by doing this
yeah that not to say that at one
point Intel is general county
was the largest IRB in the
nation.
That brought seven thousand jobs
right hi in jobs and stayed
there for a long time I think
they're down to two thousand
jobs now but to.
That's kind of really the
purpose of an I. R. B..
Now
Allstate coming back to this
bill
We passed the bill was a two or
four years ago I can't remember.
That allow.
Energy generation facilities to
also qualify now for higher B.
projects.
I.
I tried very hard to make the
argument that that was a bad
idea that policy sadly I didn't
get a majority of the folks on
the house floor to agree with me
but I just want to point to page
three of the FIR because
where'd raise your Dick great
job putting this FIR together.
And she makes the point that I
was trying to make with numbers.
And what he does here is he
takes a hypothetical utility
scale project two hundred
megawatt hours of generation and
plus it into Sandoval County I'm
sorry Santa Fe County Santa Fe
County.
And if you look at.
Kind of the middle table here
This shows with out and I are be
how much property tax this
project would have paid.
And the bottom line is.
The state the county the school
districts.
Out of all of that revenue.
It's about three point six
million dollars in revenue
that's a would get over
the first six years of the
project.
Now if you go to the table below
that with higher be.
It shows how much money they
would have gone and and it's the
middle column.
What what they do is the state
staff about health that's a
payment in lieu of tax so this
is a deal with the maintenance
okay because you're doing are
before us.
We're going to give the school
districts some money we're gonna
give the county some money it's
gonna go she does in the statute
but you see.
After six years with bills.
They get point four million
dollars.
So my argument was these
projects are captive projects.
They're here because of the wind
and solar you're not going
anywhere.
What's happening is these
unsophisticated counties and
Yunis are being sold look at all
this money we're gonna give you.
And they say what a great idea I
wasn't in as many different in
this money the fact we are
losing way more money than
they're getting that's why the
businesses like adults because
they're saving money.
And so my my argument remains.
I believe.
This industry should pay some
form of tax.
And.
By adding energy storage.
It's a standalone energy storage
it's kind of a small part of the
bigger envelope here but I'm
just going to continue to make
that argument.
We're giving away money for
school districts for state for
and and and that I I'm sure the
industry makes the argument that
we will need won't come here if
we because these things are not
as profitable
I get it but I just really think
this is on why so
madam chair and chair woman I'd
love to hear your response madam
chair and representative first
of all we've already extended I.
R. B.
availability to the other
questions of renewable energy
transmission and like
generation.
So madam chair I think that
policy question has been in a
sense resolved it not to be
disrespectful to my madam chair
or
Representative from Santa so
this is actually makes those
other provisions more viable in
terms of expanding and ensuring
we have access to renewable
energy in the state with regard
to this idea about creating jobs
it's not as direct as the Intel
some called to give away but
it's not as directing creating
jobs but we know that modern
companies today have their own
renewable energy goals and I
look to locate and states that
have
the availability of renewable
energy in a significant way
meta formally Facebook has such
a cool Amazon I believe in
others and my cut my expert can
address this further but to your
point it has the potential for
bringing jobs here as well good
jobs as well Madam chair
representative and I don't know
if Mr Tolley wants to supplement
money.
Madam chair representative her
for I have a whole page of notes
that I was top for taking
various questions I could go
through the whole thing just to
answer your question
fund or to address your points
on the jobs
NextEra energy housing projects
guy returns a hundred ninety
megawatts of solar and fifty
megawatts of storage which is
complicated storage which
already qualifies by the way.
The contract through P. and to
do what that costs leave the
power from that facility to to
power the equipment is still a
need that's in Los Lunas
Valencia County about twenty
five nonstop that wiki.
It enhancement on their websites
Mehta stated the following each
we selected this location
because of its access to robust
infrastructure a strong local
talent pool and new renewable
energy resources.
Once completed the center will
represent more than a billion
dollars of investment and today
the location supports more than
one hundred and fifty jobs in
keeping with our commitment to
efficiency and to supporting our
global operations with one
hundred percent renewable energy
we have worked with the utility
and leading developers to poster
New Mexico's renewable energy
market Senator will be one of
our first to be certified gold
under version for the lead
rating system so there is for
economic development and your
job creation.
New Mexico renewable energy is
an economic development tool
just like an educated workforce
is an economic development tool
just like infrastructure and
roads and good transportation
availability is an economic
development tool so while an
educated workforce doesn't
necessarily create jobs it
creates incentives for
businesses to come here to hire
that workforce well renewable
energy and storage may not
create hundreds of jobs
themselves they are a tool to
attract those businesses to the
state that will create jobs.
May I continue madam chair.
Appreciate that the written
statement thank you up to the
summary of that go ahead and
wrap up for the vote will be
refunded what that's on the jobs
but I did want to address FY are
comments on anti are.
Well this may be one example and
I don't honestly know if this is
an actual example or and or just
start hypothetical but I will
point out that that
total amount is negotiated and
this bill was amended to include
a portion that states that
schools have to share in that
pilot payment and so I I think
it is negotiated as counties I
think it's more educated you
know they'll get a little bit
more sophisticated and and maybe
the pilot payments will go up
but by necessity I mean I R. V.
as an incentive so of course an
incentive means that businesses
pay lower taxes and
So the projects actually use
very little resources you know
they they don't create a need
for more schools and more
teachers and a lot more
infrastructure and when there
are roads needs to support the
appointment of the companies
typically pay for that so you
know I think we feel that that
you know
foregone revenue is justified by
the benefits of this project
bring.
You madam chair thank you very
much for that and I I I will
continue to beat this dead horse
I I do believe it's bad policy
and we talk about that but if
for argument earlier on right as
an incentive or incentivizing
something that comes you're
already is my question and was
in revenue that would go to
schools and other places I just
want to finish by saying I just
love on page six of the FY are.
So minerals and natural resource
department just had a beautiful
COVID you know this which speaks
to the very to me says it's not
technically impossible to limit
grid tied energy storage two
electrons produced only by zero
carbon generation as electrodes
on the grid really without any
limitations or any
identification of where they
came from.
I just love that.
And I will argue that opioid of
any money because every election
they sent to me I sent back.
Thank you.
Representative Townsend.
Thank you madam chair.
I will go.
All of our lives but that's my
health issues is and your last
statement of.
Madam chair.
Representative.
Right with this is that the.
These projects don't create the
need for more schools I.
That's my problem.
They don't bring any jobs.
They don't bring any children.
But they.
Yes top of page.
if you talk to.
The New Mexico.
They use the IRP process there
yeah.
Very little benefit to the
state.
Now there are construction jobs
madam chair.
There are.
on one project.
In New Mexico that we.
One point three billion dollar
project.
Representative eight Graham
projects like this.
We have some history.
About fifty percent of that
project.
The subject to the G. R. T. of
materials and labor contract.
And about half of.
And on a one point three million
dollar project.
The company say thirty nine
million dollars G. R. T..
Yes the R. T..
Not counting about.
But they save on property taxes.
They say thirty nine million
dollars.
If you look at their website.
They have very very few jobs
Mexico.
All of that.
Every bit of that our fixer
generate.
There's only count.
Other coming in New Mexico of.
Thank you thirty nine million
dollars out of this.
And they're taking their product
the wonders on the.
Hello.
That is the issue that I think
is yes desperately wrong user I.
R. D.
create jobs.
As my.
Colleagues mentioned caps what I
are the service out of that job
to there are some wonderful.
About creating jobs
the
full support.
But you have the low.
Create new jobs.
Fine.
We just talked about regressive
tax issues.
And madam chair Representative.
What this process.
On.
Is it.
Increases possible.
The people in New Mexico.
Madam chair representative
immediately.
Tell me what the cost of hello a
lot of information which is
that.
Madam chair I don't know if you
have that data I do not have
that data madam chair
representative so.
At.
Search and madam chair of
Representative.
A lot of number of times about
three hundred dollars.
Out
eleven California today is
thirteen hundred and thirty nine
dollars.
Very expensive because our cost
in New Mexico today our average
cost of New Mexico residential
customers thirteen point eight
six.
Technology.
madam chair.
And I think.
Many of you know I've kind of
the highlight of the
I do I like to make things go
faster less expensive part of
higher all the others.
And there will come a time.
This should occur.
But I don't believe when you're
talking about the committee
shares our fifty percent of the
people Mexico.
Our.
Medicaid.
I.
Today.
Increasing the cost of
electricity.
This.
It's the biggest bills that they
have a mean average bill of New
Mexico
homeowners is right at all this
will increase.
If you look that meant chair
representative.
Our cost in New Mexico since we.
She started the transition with
the you know what our budget and
New Mexico has
Madam chair Representative no.
And
you know I.
I'm glad we're talking about our
bill Madam chair representative.
Your
So madam chair.
But I'm telling you is.
Yes processes like this increase
the cost of living.
Processes like this because.
Standard of living of the
multi challenge people in New
Mexico.
Our.
I am.
I think we just have to look at
process it said this is going to
create jobs for New Mexico.
And I'm a big supporter of our
jobs and if you tell me that
your company is going to do that
the.
In the shop in New Mexico where
were they millions of dollars of
taxpayer money that you're
wanting.
The pockets stockholders.
That.
That right now I don't.
That.
It is not right to the rest.
Madam chair thank you madam
chair may I respond I think
we're ready to move on but if
you Phillips compelling go ahead
otherwise we can move on and get
to the next part of the
questions okay well I just would
like to reiterate we have
already extended I. R. B.
availability to other parts of
the renewable energy stream and
so I appreciate the
Representative comments but the
the process is already been and
engaged that clarification and
reminder Representative
political.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Chandler and
Representative or TS
you're speaking my language
right now in terms of higher
fees because I've been involved
in the number of Iraqis in my
lifetime and usually there
She project.
We extend higher payments to but
I also agree with Representative
Townsend madam chair but I want
to take it one step further
I was involved with you to help
and one of the things that we
did in the development agreement
was we'd short that New Mexicans
there was a percentage of jobs
that were offered to New
Mexicans and Representative
Townsend is talking about jobs.
To that I want to say that we
need to.
If this goes forward and you may
want to consider this as maybe
an amendment that there be some
sort of and and and Intel's
agreement basically at.
A development agreement that set
jobs to New Mexicans
maybe in this in this actual
legislation there could be
something that talks about the
percentage of jobs to New
Mexicans because I think it's I
think
You know energy and especially
solar and wind they are being
abandoned in New Mexico and so I
think that our population should
definitely
benefit from any higher these
that are created out of this
the other question that I have
and and I don't know if you want
to consider that as a as an
amendment somewhere but we could
do that rather than in the
development because not every
governmental agency will do
that.
but if it's in the actual
legislation it could it could be
a requirement the other thing
that concerns me a little bit.
In reading the legislation
there's a discussion about
you know storage facilities and
so on there's where where is the
standard is there something that
I'm missing I think.
Yes you know you have every
everybody coming in is there
actually a standard for storage
facilities and that's something
that I'm I'm not familiar with.
I have to meet certain
requirements to be an energy
facility and apply for these
type of this type of funding
what is that standard and I'm
not an engineer and planner but
what is the standard for that.
Madam chair I'll defer to my
experts thank you.
Madam chair representative
there is a definition.
Given in the statute.
Are in the bill rather there's
not a specific sciences course
work dollar requirement if
that's what you mean by that is.
And with the current statutes
asking about I remember just to
go through the cherry share.
Sorry
What I'm talking about Madam
chair representative is is there
like a standard for the storage
facility itself.
Like in the United States excuse
me Representative I can
engineering standard or.
Certain sizes certain.
Wait to certain
You know material.
Madam chair representative are
you referring to like an
industry standard no for the
actual storage facility itself
which is standard.
How much is madam chair
representative I'm not sure I
understand how to answer that
I'm not an engineer either on
the tax.
Thanks professional but I'm not
sure.
Want to madam chair thank you
yes this was the further but
thank you and for the audience
they would like to get some
clarification on the since we
have folks so eager to answer
and just reminded the only way
we go through the chair today's
already been an emotional.
In this committee about the
committee's maybe it's just the
Monday I but the reason we go
through the chair is always just
to remember and pop up reminder
that our discourse is here about
public engagement and debate and
we're not getting into it with
each other so I I don't mean to
harp on that
we I will go here to
Representative Scott if you'd
like to offer a concise
understanding of his perception
of this and then is this one of
your experts I wasn't here
earlier in the room.
awesome I apologize for not
knowing that I stepped in after
we started so we're gonna go
quickly to Representative Scott
and then I'm gonna turn it back
to our representative here from
the state agency for quick
response on this to provide
clarity and make sure we
understand we're getting into
Representative daughter to the
representatives question.
Most of these battery systems
are if you are on or some.
Of that technology they are
sized in mega walk.
And.
Typically.
The scale would be designed for
four hours of storage.
Four hundred megawatt system.
I.
For what I.
Four hours of storage at one
hundred.
Thank you Representative just
got and if you please introduce
yourself from.
Yes please.
Hi my name is Anna Linden Weller
I'm the policy adviser for the
energy minerals and natural
resources department and
Representative Scott's
definition is pretty close to
what I would have given
the only thing that I would
specify that we are talking
about utility scale storage here
this isn't the kind is battery
storage you might put on your
house
I have never heard of an
industrial revenue bond being
used in that fashion I'm not
sure that we go through the
county
so they can come in different
sizes but the industry does have
a pretty solid history of
building them to four hours of
however many megawatts they can
store they'll find that amount
of energy for four hours at
least less than four hours isn't
really being installed anywhere
in the United States at utility
scale.
Thank you to a representative
from EMNRD I really appreciate
your expertise and it seems like
we're all learning all sorts of
things today Representative but
I know you still have.
you madam chair I think that
that was the answer that I was
looking for
with regard to my second
question with regard to
possible amendment to this bill
to ensure that New Mexicans are
being hired I guess that would
be the only in the past thank
you for.
Representative out did you all
have a response to that
something you would consider
need to discuss Madam chair
representative we will be
discussing connect you.
Thank you we have our chair back
of representative Duncan for now
your last on the list.
Thank you Mr chair
as a former county commissioner
I look at two things every time
somebody's company came in and
said we'd like to do on our
bond.
One.
We made sure that our schools
and colleges.
There's no don't go chasing
their own.
The second thing we did was we
made sure they were jobs
job as the build out you didn't
get.
And you wouldn't get this from
me today as well because there's
no.
There's no putting New Mexicans
to work.
So thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Mr of Representative any
response to that comment.
And madam chair yep.
Chairman and chair Senator we
are happy to.
Mr chair madam chair and
representative
The the funds are discretionary
on the part of the county
they're not mandatory so county
commissioners and and.
And those in charge of
municipalities can decide
whether they want this and they
can negotiate in good faith if
they do so I appreciate your
comments that it is not
mandatory just discretionary on
the part of the county office
of.
Thank you and I and I knew that.
Any further questions or
comments from the committee.
In line with the pressure of the
committee of Madam by Truman I
move up to three people in this
house bill reasons of hospice
because that.
And.
Position for that motion.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you and I hope you like
the airport.
Yeah finally for our committees
the references Wednesday our
agenda will take over and look
at house bill one nineteen one
twenty one twenty four one
seventy six.
At a committee at us and we'll
send that out to everybody to
get one nineteen one twenty.
Four and one seventy six and
those of you that requested a
roll over if you want to get
back to me but that you're
looking at your way just let me
know we'll get you back on the
job.
That means that we're general
see on Wednesday thank you.
I just wanted to mention that
the operating budget for
Albuquerque international
Sunport sixty nine point nine
