Representative Gaydos.
Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative Ortez.
Representative Scott.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Townsend.
At vice chair convenient.
Here
and share it then take it.
I think we have a quorum good
morning ladies in once again
thank you all for making get out
the store and we are also
streaming live and also live on
zoom so hello out there thank
you for joining us in in
cyberspace or what is going to
college thank you for for being
here and and and taking part in
the process so without further
ado I do want to bring up house
bill thirty two.
energy storage system income tax
credit Representative Sarinana
is in the store service I up the
floor is yours thank you Mr
chairman
I have two expert witnesses for
Representative at the best of
kids and impact.
the executive director of the.
R. A. I. N..
This is the storage bill and
when we need it energy storage
systems provide benefits to be
elected in utility customers
I'll play in Italy the
transition to a clean grid in
with diversified renewable
resources by creating system
efficiency that could produce
costs and save utilities in
taxpayers money we also need to
buy books in the posters
bowstring grid reliability and
resilience improving system
capability to withstand shocks
and stressors and by promoting
economic development and job
creation in New Mexico
communities.
As far as job creation right
here in Santa Fe and Santa Fe
community college they have a
smart and microgrid training
center it has it has a PPE array
in energy storage system that
students can learn technician
level jobs
committees technicians as energy
contractors solar and energy
storage is dollars and of
utilities market technicians.
it is going digital cookie in
August in bill that in twenty to
August of twenty twenty two and
bill the Peavey and battery
storage project that was eight
million dollars a utility cost
our state's largest high school
so the storage is being used in
New Mexico overall energy
storage supports rural New
Mexico perhaps even more than
urban New Mexico especially in
times of emergencies it helps
build a workforce in many
different areas not just that
residential application but
large scale like transportation
and others.
The New Mexico grid
modernization roadmap active
twenty twenty result in the
creation of the grid
modernization advisory group and
the creation of the grid
modernization roadmap is roadmap
includes a primary a primary
recommendation to strategically
deploying energy storage on the
New Mexico grid among the
recommendations includes the
result resulting energy storage
my paper the advisory group
devised that New Mexico at eight
hundred megawatt hours of energy
storage to each year to achieve
adequate capacity to decarbonise
by twenty fifty.
in this beauty specifics on the
bill the bill about forty
percent of the total cost to
purchase and install energy
storage system within up to a
maximum credit of five thousand
dollars in residential New
Mexico credit of a hundred fifty
thousand four systems installed
on commercial or agricultural
property the bill that's four
million dollars in it million
dollars in energy storage system
income tax credit per fiscal
year over five year period with
no separation between
residential commercial or
agricultural the system must be
four kilowatts have at least two
hours of past year eight
kilowatt hours or greater and
taxpayers must play the system
could certification tax credit
from EMNRD
thanked and four in report the
tax to TRD.
And one big change in this I've
been hearing this for five years
so when the change is section.
For the portion of the energy
storage system income tax credit
that exceeds the taxpayer's
liability in the tax year in
which the credit is claimed the
tax may pay your may elect to
have the balance of the credit
we funded to the taxpayer
carried forward for the maximum
of five consecutive years so the
fact that it is refunded allows
Laurie Committee Mexicans to
utilize its credit even I could
use that utilizes present credit
and I'm retired teacher Gwen
limited income and I would use
it as a standalone systems so
that I could get those peak
times and as our grad grade is
modernized and we have metering
in time a day's use this is
going to help our consumers to
crawl control the their
energies.
Especially during peak times and
with that we stand for questions
Representative.
That you Representative pre
sheet that it just for the
reminder of the committee that
this is why one of the bills
that does have fiscal impacts
eighty that is is done here this
morning it will be temporary
table and they will come back to
visit tents begin packed the tax
base so just so that we're under
the same age so that makes at
thank you again Representative
would be presentation that's go
to the audience although the
favor of house bill thirty two I
actually so before I continue
you have an amendment to this
bill.
No matter what time it was a no
it was amended excuse me okay
got you okay all the data on my
left hand side in favor of this
bill the set up.
Yes Sir part of.
Part of.
Well
as it gives
Those are.
Uses.
Part is is where you.
The
also to weigh options were.
On
our part of.
Is
I.
Hi dollars this is an option
that.
Follow us for.
So we're always options.
Thank you next the back.
News of the coalition's.
Right.
Okay.
This message yes.
Also.
we're very much in support of
this bill.
The new technologies that are
coming to our distribution that
is something that we need to
grab a hold of as a society and
as for our customers and so to
that end up as we look at new
policies these are the kinds of
policies that we need to embrace
so with that we wholeheartedly
support.
Thank you Sir let's go again to
those of in in in the audience
on zoom that are those who have
help on.
It was then support what this
bill.
For people who have forty was
the first.
Three out so what's the first
person.
Amy Miller.
Good morning.
Can you hear us.
Yes good morning Mister chair
and members of the committee my
name is Amy Miller I'm speaking
on behalf of the renewable
energy industry association of
New Mexico and we're pleased to
support this bill as
Representative Sarinana
mentioned earlier energy storage
is a critical part of us moving
to a clean energy economy and to
helping add more renewables to
the grid and it improves the
resiliency of our grit what's
important with the tax credit
like this is the energy storage
systems have yet to reach the
cost threshold that creates
widespread implementation
especially in residential and
commercial settings and so this
kind of with this kind of tax
credit implementation can occur
on a scale that will provide
meaningful adoption and
eventually will we will see
those costs decrease with this
adoption thank you very much
thank you maximalist tops.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and the
members of the committee my name
is Tom Solomon.
coordinator of the climate
focused environmental groups
three fifty New Mexico and on
behalf of our seven thousand
members of the fully support
this bill
and agree with the previous
statements that this is an
important element to accelerate
the clean energy transition it
provides you know some back up
and firms the otherwise
intermittent resources from
solar and wind energy and the
four million dollar cap.
On this tax credit is we feel a
modest but important step to
improve the adoption of the
storage systems and also
provides good jobs for New
Mexicans as we transition away
from our dependence on fossil
fuels so for all those reasons
of the other stated we are fully
support this bill thank you
thank you top.
Thanks.
Log in good morning can you
just.
Hello can you hear me Hey that.
Thank you very much
good morning the Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Jean Loxton and I represent
the league of women voters of
New Mexico.
Of the league has a position to
support policies and incentives
that reduce greenhouse gas
emissions.
By promoting greater energy
efficiency and developing clean
renewable energy sources and
also to offer incentives so that
people can participate in these
programs this energy storage
system bill
is very much in line with the
goals that we are trying to
achieve and we enthusiastically
supported thank you thank you.
The waste can you just good
morning.
Yes good morning Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is Ruth Garratt on the
legislative and political
organizer with the Sierra Club
Rio Grande the chapter
representing our thirty five
thousand members and supporters
throughout the state of New
Mexico and a tiny sliver of West
Texas but mostly New Mexico
energy storage would enable the
onsite capture solar energy so
that it can be used at a time it
is more beneficial the ability
to store energy offers a
tremendous potential and New
Mexico can be a leader in solar
energy and storage we strongly
support this bill and to vote
yes on this bill thank you very
much thank you.
All Solomon.
Tom good morning did.
How do we are.
Okay yes thank you Mr chairman I
already spoke all I forgot to
lower my okay that it.
Very good thank you
okay that's go to those in
opposition here in the real in
opposition to house bill thirty
two yes that.
Members of the committee.
I am the director of the energy
conservation management division
we.
But we do.
What we are doing.
Using advanced energy
technologies in order to clean
energy economy and.
We met with the.
We cannot absorb find other tax
credit program without
additional staff resources for
that reason I have to stand in
opposition.
Thank thank you and it also says
the room.
If not those in this either in
opposition to this bill.
Okay anyone on the left.
Okay very well that's going to
the committee that questions or
comments at this point at first
on my list Representative Ortez.
Thank you Mr chair thank you so
much for that presentation a
couple of questions about the
systems how how much does a
residential system cost and I
know imagine it ranges to defer
to the expertise of the can
Representative right those the
cost is about eight to eleven
possible visit after each.
And that provides and Mr chair
that provides how many hours of
storage if you.
She said that if we could drop
to it yet Mexico right.
This.
Should this be passive would
eighty after that would
residential.
Purchasers of one of the systems
be able to tap into the existing
tax credit programs like the
sustainable buildings tax
credit.
That is currently assisting.
Representative Mr Representative
I'm not sure but I think I was
so we could but I'm too much.
I'd love for us to maybe chat
with eight or someone else that
I think is probably the right
person if they're if they're
able to use that which is all
that's refundable transferable
program right to help that's
covered in the program yes I
very interesting it doesn't
provide.
my last question is look like to
tie into the utility like.
Forms are needed maybe that
maybe need to reach out to a
member of the audience but how
does that look like.
Any time you're doing we talked
with.
For better storage system is
process which involved so
basically two things going on
simultaneously what is we have a
live report.
Your local.
That.
Division or the faces of.
Popular connection.
We have issues that you're going
to connect to.
Thank
you.
Thank you for that
Representative docket.
The.
for the Mr Chairman installation
installation.
Okay Representative which should
wrote about that because of this
so the forty percent or fifty
five thousand dollars that's
what that is my question is and
I guess my concern is if if we
are trying to help to.
Those are state that most
desperately needed.
Make under thirty thousand for
of about twelve miles this is.
My fear is this is Richard
calling for people have money
and so what we do and for those
who don't.
The funds so that's
Thank you for that question so
and let me just kind of at.
When it's on I guess so let me
just add on to what a former
representative of the table set
up he quoted you the cost for
residential systems so for
commercial systems it could be
significantly more and and and
that would be a more a case by
case scenario but you make a
good point there and that
initially I think the people
that would be taking advantage
of this tax credit with the
people of higher income but the
one of the reasons why you have
a tax credit is to promote the
adoption of the new technology
and have it go through the
adoption curve quicker so that
people of all income levels can
take advantage of that and so
all reference technologies that
we're all probably using right
now cell phones laptop computers
the internet all of those had
some form of subsidization that
are now being used by people of
all you don't different economic
situations.
Thank you thank you Mr thank you
Mr that's good representative
about the.
Thank you Mr chair the keep that
for the presenters for this
morning I do know that in the
higher the inflation reduction
act there is also some textured
thirty percent would users be
able to staff.
It's on top of each other so
that the fact he could get up to
seventy percent.
The.
Mr Chairman representative I
believe they can't staff to two
budget it's long as they have to
tax liability to claim it yes
thank you Mr chair thank you
Thanks for that and and one
other question it's the power
ratings they're different for
the federal government was that
on purpose or just curious why
that that was the case
Mr Chairman representative a
plus sort of deliberate because
the two programs are not created
a to do chores to go with the
smaller about rating however
since as we just stated this is
most likely going into our at a
larger so what they would need
to know are treating which is
what the IAD specifies is not
sufficient so we chose to go
with the minimum of four and
ready likely might be even more
than that.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative
Representative Harper.
Thank you chairman.
Good morning.
This you representative the
pandemic for Representative I
have miss having you up here.
Thank you Sir so sure if it's
that appropriate this mention a
few.
Maybe just kind of procedural
things that this committee is
typically done especially for
the folks who are new on this
committee I understand.
And then I'll have a couple
questions and comments.
So so it's a gentleman you
mentioned early in the committee
here that you know we table
every built the fiscal impact
temporarily I see that there's
just not a because we understand
this process but just hope folks
might be new understand why
that's appropriate
chairman so.
If we.
Passed out every tax credit that
we saw that we liked
typically will have on the order
of about a billion dollars of
tax credits a year the coming
from this committee
and obviously there's no room in
the budget for that I mean maybe
this year but usually there's
not
and so would end up happening is
these bills with and have to go
to appropriations and they have
to figure out how to fit the
budget.
And they would have to end up
table in order to make it work
and so notice actually turn this
committee into a subcommittee of
appropriations and so for for at
least a couple decades going
back the policy was committee's
been to temporarily table
anything with the fiscal impact
and then towards the end of the
session we get together.
Federal the tax package and we
kind of.
Look at the less than prioritize
and will say okay this is what
we can do with the money we have
we come together we make that
tax package so that's that's why
and and if you look at our house
rules actually every committee
is required to record tabling
motions on the website except
for our committee appropriations
and that's the reason why is
because when we table a bill
that doesn't mean we don't like
it that means as a fiscal impact
we have to make sure that
there's room in the budget
otherwise the past everything
out here you know teachers are
not gonna get paid because money
is going to tax credits instead
of to pay their salaries right
so that's that's why we do that.
and then the other thing the
other couple things we do for
bills like this
is we had a reporting
requirement.
And a sunset.
And and chair and representative
you nodding do you have a
reporting requirement a sunset
in this bill you can just
waiting yeah which is great
because when you have that bill
that is trying to incentivize
something or.
We get something going right we
want to be able to noted
actually work.
So we need report to come back
to us if you're saying how how
many people use it how's it
going and then a sunset built
into it so that we actually come
back and say.
Is it working did it work is it
done.
And so I just want to thank you
the sponsors for making sure
that those two things are are in
there it's a five year sunset
this yeah so that's that's great
so so thank you any any kind of
credit.
Deduction bill will be making
sure it's for that purpose has a
sunset reporting requirements.
All right okay so thank you for
that
And I guess just going to
a couple comments and and and
perhaps a question so.
you know I I I honest with
honestly believe they'll be a
day when we all Tyler houses
with solar panels and and and
that we have storage systems
and that'll be great that worked
great for residential
I'm not so sure about
commercial.
yeah I think we need kind of a
Eureka moment and energy storage
for
For it to really work at the
industrial you know kind of
level but to.
Chairman and and
representatives.
Is it right that the purpose of
this
Is that help.
Photo ops this new technology is
that the purpose of this credit.
In Representative it's to jump
start it just so people get to
know what it is but I want to.
So Mister chairman
Representative that's a really
good question what you're trying
to do is Representative is to
chop not to jump start the
the technology and and and make
it useful and accessible to
residential applications because
we are using storage at the
large scale thank you what that
did be large energy storage
facilities but San Juan in but
I've done in the southeast so
that is at the higher level what
you're trying to do is address
this problem and today's station
and make it available to
residential users because most
of the system issues that arise
from that level and but it up to
the top so making it accessible
to residential that allow us to
control that she was right there
and as you heard what the fight
of I owe you your committee
supported the reason they're
doing that is it gives them a
dispatchable resource at the
time and the need to most and
it's distributed so that is days
a resiliency and the strategic.
That other than building one
centralized facility this would
be dispersed throughout so
coming back to your question yes
this is what you're trying to do
is make it more accessible to
the residential users.
So so thank you chairman
representatives at and I
actually I think I can
understand and agree with that
approach Register scientifically
you know from an engineering
perspective that makes sense the
distributed play out and and
residential I mean I just
checked it usually goes for
about twenty to twenty one
percent of the total energy used
as residential power.
It's so yeah I think I think
this framework makes sense I I
just.
My question chairman and
Representative is is in light of
the three percent federal credit
that we already have this would
be.
Another
what do forty percent yes this
would be another ten percent to
forty total
Do we believe that will make a
big difference in folks adopting
at the thirty versus forty
percent.
Mr chair and representative
that's debatable but respected
at forty because generally in
the state of Qatar to forty
percent credit so we decided to
that you know thirty or forty
the whole idea is what is the
tax liability of the people
claiming this credit.
and that that.
Price point eight to ten percent
could make a big difference to.
I thank you I thank you all
right so so they just so I think
just to comments Matt chairman
and all of you my my time the
first is I think it's
interesting because we've seen
this bill for two or three four
years maybe.
This is the first time we're
seeing it as a refundable
credit.
which is interesting and and
all.
At some other point talk about
why we have credits versus
deductions first conceptions of
the pros and cons of those right
why do we have them all you know
when I first came here is like
shopping credits but I was
educated
At the end of.
But a refundable credit is
interesting because what it
means most credits it's a dollar
for dollar off the tax you owe.
But if you want to the point
where you run out of taxes you
know credits not going to give
you money right you just nothing
a refundable credit is different
in that if you run out of taxes
to pay you will actually get
money back.
and we very rarely do that
that's actually not good tax
policy in general because we're
we're we have that is we're
we're like to low income
conference of tax rebate right
we have the low income people
you're trying to give the money
back yeah actually have a
negative tax rate because were
work with helping them out
right.
I would argue here that's
probably not right because we're
looking at not helping the poor
with this we're looking at
adopting new technology and so I
don't think if we move for with
this I would argue that it
should be refundable it should
state.
Right so it is a dollar for
dollar off but I don't think we
the state needs to be paying
people to adopt it we just want
to incentivize them to adopt so
it looks like you like to
respond to that.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Harper
so one of the reasons why this
refundable is to allow more
people to take advantage of that
and also to make it more
equitable
for people in the state of New
Mexico and and for that reason
that's what we have a half an
inch of Representative and I I
apologize your name was Jim the
danger to.
Mr bisherigen I appreciate that
I understand I understand the
reason behind that I'm just I
think it goes in conflict with
why we would do a refundable
credit
just personally and I think
those who could afford this
probably do have a big liability
anyway and I don't have many
people that would be getting a
refund through a refundable
credit so I would just say if we
do for with this act we have
very few federal credits I would
I was just we don't make a
refundable.
I understand you're coming from
And then the second let my last
comment.
it's five to really really hard
to tell all.
Whether these kinds of credits
that incentivize something
actually work we call it the but
if for.
Arguments right you know someone
comes in here and says Hey we
have we need a tax exemption
venture credit and if we do it
Sen Dennis industries will
thrive and and the question as
well.
With the if thrive without the
credit or do they really need it
and it's just really hard I mean
you talk with the conversations
really hard to tell the budget
for argument I will say though
first solar.
For solar panels I think
it's it's clear that the credits
early on helped that industry
because they made them
affordable
and and is the demand went up.
you had more production and as a
production increase the cost for
production went down.
And so now
I even without the solar credits
the industry can actually stand
on its own because of the cost
of solar coming down so much so
I think that's actually a good
example of the credit working
actually argue that solar
doesn't need credits anymore you
can stand on its own feet.
so in that light I would also
say
maybe you could help here.
Maybe but I honestly think the
fact that this is piggy backs to
solar.
I think that's what you're gonna
get your biggest bang for the
Buck is that people who are
buying solar many of them are
gonna say Hey I'd like to.
You know but you know a backup
battery storage system.
so
I'm I'm not I'm not sure we
really need this I think it's
gonna happen actually no because
we felt solar so much but I I
appreciate your
You're at your your diligence
your persistence Representative
until at and it's always great
to see you here my friend HM.
Thank you Representative this
will do Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr kids use our through the mass
in our energy committee.
I think those numbers to shed
some more light point.
Representative to help.
That is.
Given the cost of the system all
calls to the systems and
expected lifecycle.
Will be available out of the the
cost per kilowatt hours on the
order of about thirty cents
this.
After we we established that
already.
Representative Mr chair
representative it is somewhat
accurate four percent rebate.
Reducing the cost of the system.
Six one forty percent burns a
faster rate of H. down to
eighteen cents from thirty cents
which.
Wind power for the stage.
Can you tell me that Mr
Chairman.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative it should be in
the range of thirty to forty
cents per kilowatt hour so even
with this up to the.
Installed cost of that power is
higher than the.
Coming off utilities.
What we do for our and Mr
Chairman many people.
Of purchasing the systems
contrary to their economic best
interest unless you're
particularly interested in
issues like climate change and
Mr chairman the.
Sure is going to me.
About all of the power providers
in support of this.
Is that.
If it passes the page that all
less electricity.
But I believe there are looking
at is.
In the context of the Energy
transitioned Act no.
There are going to be power
supply problems as a consequence
of that legislation and yes
could.
Although.
Not in the scope of this piece
of legislation but distributed
behind the meter storage could
serve.
To mitigate some of those
problems which have acted on
perhaps industry.
Secretary.
Mr chair and representative in
fact the two statements you made
support that so when you said
that eighteen cents a kilowatt
hour is greater than the
fourteen or thirteen developing
to duplicate Aiko.
Does the fact that those same
budget that you mention.
the value added costs that
justifies this investment and
which is why you saw that the
utility spoke in favor of it
because the C. value beyond that
I sent differential that could
talk about.
So when the greatest stressed
it's very valuable for them to
have to support of dispatchable
energy that they can count on
seeing the you know the four
million dollars if you're asking
what would likely point you can
start to articles that's a drop
in the bucket and I agree with
you and our but Mr chair
representative the fact is that
as we said earlier this is just
the beginning ciation ought to
jump starting of this technology
right now all of you brought
over a hundred eighty thousand
wholistic approach sort of
buttons in in our state no if
you imagine that all of those
are at least a greater
percentage of those have got two
hours of storage sticking that
that that is dispatchable that
becomes a hugely valuable
resource to the utilities when
they need it so the five cent
difference in that you're
talking about here becomes
almost ignore it will.
So that is the value that
shooting for is initially just
if you do the math today it
looks like why am I being
eighteen cents when I can but
for thirteen of fourteen.
But the value comes in when you
deployed additional larger to
greater population.
That's where we are talking
about so this is really just a
big.
Of a transition that created
that the need in fact price to a
broader point by the New Mexico
renewable energy transmission
transmission party have
indicated that we need as much
as eight hundred to two thousand
megawatts of storage so these
are the targets you're shooting
for and indeed as I said this is
a very small start and you had
this discussion before but it's
starting to open up this
industry thank you Mr chair
representative Mr Chairman one
last comment so.
We serve to hear.
This piece of legislation called
a.
In a tiny fraction of what's
required.
We serve to do here is to solve
a reliability for.
That we create.
With the energy transition.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative that's
where a Representative but.
Yes I think Mr chair what I
think
My colleague Mister Parker
because he's always so
insightful and I do appreciate
it it gives me
Actually is the sort of
Related feeling to know that
we're part of were we've been
promoted to a step above our
guests right below
appropriations so that's kind of
a good thing
What what thank.
Yeah.
I don't know maybe Mr.
Think about that.
so
I have some pause I I really
like this and I have been
thinking about putting solar in
my home and this is just another
incentive to to move in that
direction
so I guess not knowing a lot
about solar and and that's part
of the reason I haven't done it
yet because we need to keep
myself on it
so can I use these incentives
together like if I decide like
as the could see we're I decided
to put a solar solar panels on
the home and I want to put the
system in can I use all of these
credits together or or is there
that's my first question Mr
chair.
Mr Chairman representative I
believe you can yes you can
thank you representatives here
Sariñana Representative thank
you for that
What gives me a little bit of
positives that we
approved programs and I heard
the lady in the back who is the
department and doesn't have the
staff to be implemented and
having been a former government
employee and a division manager
I know what that is like and so
I you know I I really want to
ensure that as we move forward
that programs that come to us.
Have some funding attached for
an FTP Mr chair that helps to
implement because otherwise many
of these programs that get
approved are just shelves and
that's a real problem so I
really do want to raise that
issue and I didn't know if you
wanted to come into thank you Mr
chairman and Representative yes
we have been in discussions with
Representative our our chairman
small about this particular
about EMNRD and and there
funding so we are looking at
that and appropriations the
other really good committee and
we we know about it and working
on it and hopefully we'll have
something this year to help
them.
Representative Sariñana and Mr
chair with that come in for
president the men into this bill
because I think that the funding
should be attached the bills so
I would just encourage that.
Mr Chairman representative this
is a larger issue than just this
bill it's it's happening to a
lot of bills because EMNRD is
overwhelmed and underfunded so
we are working on that again in
appropriations.
Thank you representative
Representative Jennifer.
Thank you Mr chair at I would
just like to echo with the Mr
chair a couple comments my
colleague Representative Harper
pointed out I I think we should
be very judicious when we
applied for Fund ability in
terms of tax credits it's of an
unusual approach and truthfully
in this circumstance I am a
little skeptical that it's the
appropriate place to be making
them I.
Given the fact that most I would
suggest to you of the people who
choose to pursue this activity.
Probably pretty well off I can
see a lot of money your friends
in my community pursuing it and
partly because it's neat it's a
neat thing to do they're always
working on these they're always
want to be the up and coming
technology eyes in women in the.
So
I'm speaking a little counter to
my own interests but maybe
that's what I think sometimes we
have to do here in terms of
public policy so that I'm
concerned about and forty
percent seems like a really big
piece of that change so I would
suggest maybe look at the size
of the read that forty percent
is significant so when we are
talking about it Mr chair in
terms of the package I I would
like to focus on those two
issues if we may thank you very
much Mr chair.
Do you have it what else
Representative Townsend.
If they come in and of thank
the.
You guys no I love the
technology
But.
Hello.
That I think I'm also troubled
that.
The responsibility yeah.
Tax dollars of all those
items.
At the.
Although issued at the point now
where about two thousand eight
sure.
Of the past the.
Lives in or something.
That at least at least fifty
percent more with with the tax
rate without it.
Message.
Is not a best interest.
We need to stop this.
At the.
The the the the stop this
problem.
Being able to.
I our industry yeah.
Reliable power.
Four million dollars scheme of
things there's a drop in the
bucket.
Right yes the drops in the
bucket for long
run
I appreciate the idea of the day
of the I love it.
But the utilization at the.
This manner I.
What we're.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative anyone
else questions comments.
Okay Mister W. second time but
normally the process on the
committee I'd like to follow
that we go once and then it will
go back if you want to if you
feel compelled just say
something but but normally I
don't want to miss go back and
forth again okay they get okay
at this point in time I don't
have any questions or comments
go to the case last this when
we're coming okay you know last
committee Representative small
came up said that the tax
expenditure for environment
cumbersome conservation
renewable energy is between two
and five percent of the tax
expenditure you're over here in
the state of New Mexico it is my
new when it comes to the
environment conservation and
renewable energy this tax
expenditures not overly
supported by the state thank you
very good thank you the
discussed the options to make a
motion yes to the questions
temporary table house bill
thirty two which the motion made
this second any opposition to
the table in motion to play
tabling motion if not represents
a roughly your your house bill
thirty two is temporary table
and again
rural.
But you.
yes I'm sorry again not the
intent that that we seek to
seven thousand so that we can
see how it fits into a tax form
at thank you thank you to.
If I can also make the
clarification that tax committee
is in fact just as good if not
better yeah appropriation.
Better.
Okay let's move on then to House
Bill.
Thirty eight.
Representative Garcia.
Yes Representative thank you.
Representative I see the floor
is yours there thank you on this
project.
Mr chair a.
And one of the other the the US
members of the committee Mr
chair before I proceed with the
presentation I do have an
amendment and I'd like to kind
of follow your protocol in terms
of the light
That amendment in the committee
act on that amendment okay
Representative if you want to go
ahead and and that's that's go
through your bill first okay
that is that and then you can
come through and then.
That they're after super duper
Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman
Also thirty eight our rural
health care practitioner tax
credit.
bills
Is a tax bill.
in years past
Mr chair I've had done Dr
Richard Larson.
I hear my side as of one of my
key experts.
some of you on this committee
know him personally.
he's vice chancellor of
The universe in New Mexico are.
Health sciences center and the
medical school.
And
unfortunately.
Dr Larson retired.
The length and a half ago and
the
and and that kind of a burst the
bubble and presentation.
You know because they really
have the this this is this
getting on the data really down
packed but the Mr chair
I do have some insurers all.
As that's kinda experts on this
legislation.
Mr chair opera house bill thirty
five is a tax bill that adds
five new categories to our
existing rural health care
practitioner tax credit act.
And these I
you categories that we're adding
our pharmacist.
Registered nurses.
Social workers.
Behavior health counselors
therapists and physical
therapists.
Mr chair.
Pharmacists are really kind of
going through all these
professions are going through
hell so to speak.
in terms of
Recruitment and retaining them
in the rural communities.
pharmacists.
In our rural communities are
just not.
A neighborhood drugstore.
Any time Mr chair they're the
only.
Pharmacists in that community.
And then being such
there are pillar.
Of that community.
A main pillar.
Of that particular community.
Our acting Mr chair last year
Los that's only pharmacists.
In the.
The business outlook for the
Albuquerque journal comes out
once a week.
Thank them for thank land
pharmacy in the land to close
its doors.
After a hundred eighteen year
history.
Mr chair.
Fortunately there's still has a
couple more pharmacists.
And
But this is the trend in this
particular profession.
Registered nurses the other.
Category that we're adding to
the.
practitioner act.
this is only the second year
that we've been caring the
registered nurses.
And what brought us to that
point Mr chair of adding in
line.
Comment.
The disaster with COVID in terms
of front line health
practitioners.
And registered nurses and nurses
in general were at the front
line they were in the trenches.
Mr chair they were the only
person.
In the room.
About dying COVID patient.
Because.
Comment rules a rex prohibit
them the members I'm going into
the intensive care unit.
In the last seconds of bread of
these COVID patients.
But yet the registered nurses
registered nurses in general or
they're the only ones present.
And Mr chair
Social workers we hear health
constant this physical
therapist.
Mr chair this is the eighth year
that I've been hearing this
piece of legislation.
It's only gotten out of this
committee one time.
And that was three years ago.
I came on to the floor in the
past fifty four zero.
At night and Senate finance.
You know
What what's the essence Mr chair
of on the perseverance.
Of the sponsor.
Is I kind of.
In a look at our.
The spinal G. Kernan elders.
That basically taught us lessons
through same's.
You know
Luce estimate the the.
Mr chair which mainly means.
To struggle for a worthy cause.
Is a worthy endeavor.
My dad on the other hand who
died at the age of forty eight.
I was.
Two months after my high school
graduation.
What always consult those and
say he thought.
If at first you don't succeed.
Pray the rosary and try again.
Mr chair if this bill doesn't
make it out of the Senate.
I'll be bringing.
I ain't rosary facilities.
Mr chair this is a two tiered
Act.
We have categories that started
off with a five thousand dollar
grant it mainly high level
positions and professionals and
the second here is a three
thousand dollar credit.
So we have to to check credit.
And the practitioner
Thanks that was established in
two thousand and seven to.
Reduce work shortages in the
rural areas to retain current
practitioners in the rural areas
and enhance economic development
how do we do that because of the
antenna canonic Development what
we get a practitioner go into
aspect.
And what do they do.
The firehouse.
They invest.
You know in the local economy.
Shopping to retail to you name
it.
And the.
Mr chair
Our in our all right our our
legislature two thousand seven
also as part of that
legislation.
And it created the New Mexico
health care workforce committee.
And this last eight annual
reports it recommended.
For the professions.
Because the the registered
nurses we've added that only as
of last year.
My legislation has always kind
of been based on the
recommendations by the New
Mexico health care workforce
committee because this
legislature kind of entrusted
that committee to look at these
issues of shortages and
repayment.
And and and and the also to look
at where these practitioners are
the numbers the areas the
counties that etcetera etcetera.
So those The New Mexico health
care workforce committee has use
science to determine where the
best address.
Health care health practitioner
shortages and repayment in rural
New Mexico.
And the science eight them and
us to believe that the biggest
bank projects private dollar
lies in expanding the rolling
out there but district tax
credit.
To include pharmacists
registered nurses social workers
behavior health counseling
therapists and physical
therapists.
And Mr chair.
The last one in my presentation.
Before I turn it over to the
pensioners is
That the on the history of the
affect the fiscal impact.
What we've done and and and this
just kind of also taken Mr chair
kind of collaboration with the
the economist out of legislative
finance Legislative Council.
And and we're fortunate Mr chair
that we have a our own economist
that's our serve us.
In our efforts so I put that
economist to work.
To kind of put to rest the
fiscal impact that the
legislative finance committee.
And the tax department.
We're
this addressing in this
legislation.
So the first couple years this
bill went nowhere Mr chair
mainly because of these
exaggerated impacts.
And why was that what was the
import where the impacts
exaggerated because the LFC and
the tax department for writing
that fiscal impact based.
On total licensees.
In these professions that we
were adding to the credit.
So then we show them that that
the impact.
Is it is basically is faulty.
That we basically simply have to
look at practicing.
Professionals.
So then.
We took it a step further Mr
chair and that is not enough
just to look at practicing
professionals in these areas
that we're adding we have to
look at.
Eligible.
Professionals eligible men
professionals Mr chair in the
sense of eligible for the tax
credit.
And that's where we're at and
that's where the FY are.
I mean they modified the FIR was
modified for this committee.
You know after I raised with
them there are there are there
their numbers on the original
FIR which put the impact between
sixteen and twenty five million.
And these are the numbers that
we were having to deal with when
we first started this eight
years ago.
And the and even though the
impact Mr chair regarding the
tax department.
Is still a little high.
And I didn't have.
The time to be able to kind of
have the tax department sit down
with our economist and little
that nine million dollar impact
further down because within that
this Mr chair of eligible.
We still have some loopholes.
To where.
The impact is less.
And with that Mr chair I'd like
to you'll to my experts start up
with the built in peer with the
pharmacist.
If you can make your comments
brief please so we can do a lot
of the bill in the amendments
to.
Mr Chairman.
I'm all about I got the wrong
way.
Mr chairman Dale Tinker with New
Mexico pharmacists Association
and I will make it brief but I I
want to point out we're talking
about the impact on New Mexico
and Utah state in the migration
of
people away from rural New
Mexico into Albuquerque Santa Fe
that has definitely happened
with pharmacists
that was disappointed to hear
that that Richard Bowers going
out of business implant after a
hundred plus years at it but
that follows the trend of
independent pharmacy in New
Mexico we are down to about
seventy five independence and
they're almost all rural I think
we have about three that might
be urban
the rest of a rural pharmacies
and they're struggling
but it but I wanted to tell you
some of the demographics and
and.
that the national transfer
pharmacists is that there should
be nine point one pharmacist for
ten thousand population so if
you're communities forty
thousand and there should be
about.
Twenty eight.
Pharmacists.
Roughly in your community you
can New Mexico is nowhere near
that we're probably less than
half of that national
demographic for our communities
except for Albuquerque
Albuquerque has a positive a
surplus of over four hundred
pharmacists and the rest of the
state has a negative of about
four hundred and eighty some
pharmacists I believe
Lea County I think the number
is.
I need a forty two pharmacists
the worst is down and at sixty
eight pharmacists shortage San
Juan county is about forty two
pharmacists so Mr and and that's
statewide there are four
counties that about break even
to Baca County is absolutely
breaking even because they have
a husband wife said on a
pharmacy there and they show a
demographic and needed to and
they're both pharmacists so they
they zero out but most of the
state does not once the state is
in shortage condition so Mr
Chairman
at.
We're very concerned about
getting pharmacists to rural New
Mexico on being able to take
care of patients as you know we
have done some expansions on
scope of practice for
pharmacists to allow them to
take care of patients in
community pharmacies and that's
been a.
Strong push of our association
for many years and so I just
accessible push we have
pretty broad scope of practice
for pharmacists and but if
they're not there they can't
they can't help to patients in
those communities so we would
like to see this tax credit
approved and and I recognize you
will take what I I know how that
works but and as representative
Garcia said eight years I've
been right here has high
tomorrow eight years so I thank
you Mr chairman I appreciate the
attention of the committee I can
tell you some we have a Karen
candidate with the the social
workers I'm chairman members of
the committee here in Canada
with the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter.
Excuse me and I just briefly
when you give you some
statistics here in New Mexico to
talk about the dearth of the as
social workers in rural areas we
have four thousand nine hundred
and thirty nine licensed social
workers in the state of New
Mexico.
And yet less than twenty percent
of them are in rural areas we we
have three three counties that
have no social workers at all
and the.
And in many cases
this is you know this is one of
those things that we we want to
use a sort of an all of the
above approach to.
I hate to use the word reward
but reward people reward social
workers and other professionals
here for staying in rural areas
and it specifically that does
not apply to telehealth which is
very important because so much
of this so so much of this is so
important the face to face
contact and we need to encourage
our rural social workers to stay
in the rural areas and it's it's
it's one of many tools that we
want to use in order to
encourage them to go and to stay
in those areas
with that.
Just because I know that you
are.
The and and lastly we have one
in the C. go at the nurses okay
quickly folks at we want to get
to this we get to the amendment
yeah.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee with a single
representing Mexico nurses
association.
And what services
Representative.
Issues.
Right now there are about
sixteen thousand five hundred
registered nurse actually living
and practicing in New Mexico
even though we have twenty nine
thousand five hundred better
actually license.
one of those there's probably
for more around the range of
three thousand thirty five
hundred in rural areas when you
look at benchmarks for nurses
and New Mexico currently hero
County is the from the county
the that is an apple above the
benchmark.
And you have about half of the
counties that are only.
That are below the benchmark for
hundred and then you have.
Counties half of the committees
that have been wait.
So.
Anything we can do to help
during nurses to areas is going
to be a project thank now the
other issue is we are six
thousand usually short at least
in the state.
And we got a lot of money.
Legislatively speaking.
Schools of nursing in this last
session and they will generate
about four hundred new rack
that's not even gonna turn so we
have a lot.
Thank you thank you
Representative for your
presentation you do have an
amendment of which we think will
be amendments.
That second all right
Representative can you please
read the to to number so we have
a reference.
Mr chair two two four five nine
one point one yes Sir.
Boston Mason move so please
discuss your amendment Mr chair
I won't read the amendment beta.
I'll give you the essence of the
amendment the amendment.
basically came out of a.
feedback.
From one of our Rikki retired
nurses in the health committee.
And she brought to light the
fact that the way that the bill
was structured basically this
allowed.
Registered nurses to get the
full credit.
Mainly because Mr chair the the
the the bill is structured in
terms of the full credit of up
of practitioners.
Working.
At least two thousand eighty
hours in a taxable year.
The fact of the matter is Mr
chair that registered nurses are
on the thirty six hour week.
While our shares three days on
four days off.
They would be qualified for the
half credit but they would not
qualify for the full credit so
in the amendment we're making
that adjustment the where we
come in under the three thousand
dollar credit we don't even
touch the five thousand dollar
credit they still remain the
same but in the three thousand
dollar credit where we have the
registered nurses we do the fix
of at least a thousand eight
hundred seventy two hours for
the full credit and at least an
hour thirty six hours for the
happen that's what the amendment
does Mr chair.
That they qualified registered
nurses for the full credit thank
you Representative any questions
comments from committee on the
amendment.
That is the case with Senator
yes thank you Mr chair
representative is that
Representative Michael.
Turn it on.
I thank you Mr chair
representative is this it's it's
amendment only applies to
registered nurses or is that for
any of the health care
professionals that it is the Mr
chair representative there's it
only applies to those
professions in the three
thousand dollar credit.
And that's listed in the bill
includes health care
professionals I'm in mental
health professionals behavioral
health right all the point of
the point professions that we're
bringing in fall under that that
doesn't or credit thank you Mr
chair thank you you have a
question or comment on the
amendment.
That is our motion.
There's a.
Second any opposition to the
amendment if not Representative
and amended.
So then at this point.
Concluded your presentation
let's go to the audience for a.
To see like that.
Let's go to this side of the
room on my left hand side all
those in favor of house bill
thirty eight now is amended
please raise your hand will move
front to the back will start the
vote Matt Vespa.
What.
Thank you next on the same
Representative.
Thank you.
If you stand up so we can see a
I appreciate that well I wanted
to have.
Investors as.
Sure support is the.
Next.
Good morning Mr.
Jennifer L. get the executive
director for the position of
that is
I wanted to just point out to
you all that over the last two
years in the role of that we
have been around New Mexico into
listening to our we have are the
number one issue for women in
New Mexico access to have
medical care for the two
thousand and children it is
critical that we employ anything
we can to increase medical
professionals in the state thank
you very much we support is that
but but this move that further
That has been.
Raymond James members of the
committee my name's Amy Dixon
executive director of different
states physical therapy network
chapter for these are located
throughout the yeah for the.
Thank you for coming forty next
yes ma'am family members.
The rest of this.
Right
right.
I think that I could issues.
So I have.
Yes.
Well.
Information.
Actually that you love the
person.
One the.
Workers are spreading.
Our social worker had over a
hundred thousand nation this
year possible for the hearing
test which is not maternity
leave there wasn't.
I would encourage you to build.
Thank you for your comments as
well yes.
Director for the next
percentages off of their
generation.
And I but what about thank you
next the the road you spent.
Related yeah.
Thank you welcome.
Yes Representative.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is that
she would not say I am at the
volunteer advocate for a a RP
and retired nurse registered
nurse are married to a
pharmacist is also retiring.
You where have the.
Act of health care providers in
our state
we as of the a a RP recognize
that easy and affordable access
to health care is paramount.
From the health care for New
Mexicans many of whom are older
as very targeted.
Thirty eight will encourage
additional health care
professionals and providers to
help ensure that medical and
healthcare needs propped rural
New Mexicans are being served
A. R. P. supports HB thirty
eight estimated.
That we respectively I do thank
you thank you okay folks are
like mine yeah I online was the
first year was there Karen good
morning to you with this.
Good morning thank you good
morning thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Karen lose Cerro and I
am with the American physical
therapy association New Mexico
chapter and we stand in support
of this bill in order to attract
more providers to rural areas we
also have in sufficient numbers
in every rural area Albuquerque
and Santa Fe are the only one to
have sufficient numbers of
physical therapists according to
the New Mexico workforce
benchmark thank you thank you
Karen next David right David
good morning.
Good morning thanks on the Dr
David lay eggs it.
They must be in rural New Mexico
that wifi.
There is David.
Okay sorry about that I'm
David Lee executive director New
Mexico solutions and president
of the New Mexico behavior
health providers association we
stand in support of the bill
All of our providers statewide
frankly even in urban areas are
having tremendous difficulty
recruiting prone staffing
providers this bill and roll tax
credits help I will say that
historically and I have been
able to access the roll tax
credits in the past as
psychologist however this state
keeps changing definitions of
what counts as rural to be
honest and and I've seen
providers living in a rural area
and then all of a sudden be
unable to access the bill are
access to tax credit because the
state is changed the definition
I certainly hope that that those
issues might be given some
consideration in this bill
because yeah these are these are
issues statewide.
Thank you doctor.
The town hello Maggie.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee committee I
Maggie McAllen the executive
director of the New Mexico
behavior health providers
association also speaking along
with my colleague Dr lay not
simply say workforce in
behavioral health is an issue
excuse me is a big issue and we
can only begin to address that
if we begin putting together the
infrastructure that supports
hiring and retention and and
The hiring and retention of
qualified for behavioral health
professionals I will say that
this bill has more opportunity
and I hope that Representative
Garcia will speak to that maybe
in the future but there's more
to the behavioral health
workforce then the professionals
identified in this bill and I'm
speaking about peer support
workers community support
workers community health workers
not to take a look at maybe
right now but in the future
really looking at what is the
team of health and behavior
health professionals needed to
serve the rural communities
thank you so much for your
attention and your support of
this bill.
Thank you Maggie.
That's a good morning.
Good morning good morning Mr
chair members of the committee
what does the US representative
Garcia would just crosses for
bringing this forward the
National Alliance on mental
illness who I represent this
morning is in strong support of
house bill thirty eight for the
same reasons that people have
shared with you today Mister
chair and members of the
committee we do feel that it
will help to incentivise New
Mexico in recruiting and
retaining professionals to work
in our rural communities I do
believe we have a crisis on our
hands and anything that we can
do to help professionals and
incentivize them to care for our
New Mexicans it would be helpful
so thank you very much for the
opportunity to speak on behalf
of house bill thirty eight and
again we just got us yes to
representative Garcia for not
giving up on this important
issue thank you Mr chair yes
thank you for joining us.
Director.
We have the executive director
on the line.
Sorry that's me my name is Terry
on the executive director for
the national association of
social workers The New Mexico
chapter
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity to speak I want to
say that we are of course in
support of the bill and as we
know there's been a strong push
to quote unquote grow your own
and retain
New Mexicans to stay in New
Mexico and practice in the areas
that they live in and this bill
will help them do that as well
as actually draw revenue to the
area because they get to build
federal
the table federal.
Agencies for Medicare Medicaid
and and such so I just wanted to
for the members of the committee
to consider that thank you very
much executive director we get
off of which the first less
than.
My first name is Micah M. I. K.
A. my last name's Tory T. A. R.
I. thank you that's just
priorities appreciate you coming
I actually.
Hello good morning.
Good morning thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I'm just here to
support house bill thirty eight
to recruit and retain mental
health professionals and the
other medical professionals
inclusion this bill
I am the CEO of the idea therapy
and wellness center and I just
appreciate the chance to speak
in support of this bill and I
just want to encourage support
for all of the mental health
professionals that are striving
to provide access to rural areas
and just mental health in
general because they know it's a
challenging time and I
appreciate you allowing me to
speak to that
thank you for joining us.
That's it okay let's come back
to the room than those in
opposition of house bill thirty
eight is amended please raise
your hat.
What is anyone online that's in
opposition.
Okay.
All right thank you again for
everyone participating in
today's hearing that's going out
to the committee for questions
and comments that start
Representative object
Representative or this first on
my list.
Thank you Mr chair I'm I'm so
glad that we've addressed the
hours issue that was my biggest
question how do we expect to be
able to recruit people retain
folks who are not allowed to
take a vacation they want to get
this tax for deal with their
sick children sick parents so
thank you for that
I have a question about how the
department of health determines
what is that what a health care
underserved area is and also
have what they let's let's do
that one first.
How does the O. H. determined.
What are underserved area is.
You.
We just.
Mr chair representative what
this they look at the federal
criteria I think they look at
the rectory of the CDC.
In making that determination.
What is Ralph and
and underserved and if we were
to apply that Mr chair this bill
I think Los Alamos county would
be the only one left out.
But I'm not sure on that.
But it would include most of our
most of the counties.
Even the Bernalillo county
That we have underserved areas
Mr chair with environmental
County.
so again.
The legislation is based on
rural or underserved.
Thank you Mr chair.
So
I think a lot of questions Mr
chair.
on on what rule means and if
that changes year to year all.
Any light you can shed on the Mr
chair we're using federal
criteria and that criteria the
fluctuate from year to do it in
a but I I I I I don't know the
the department of health is in
here but but that's a pretty
stable barometer in terms of the
determination of rural and
underserved.
Thanks you have that the
pandemic through their
So we used to use our own
determination the O. H. what is
a rural area.
Couple of years ago we started
using the federal and a lot of
people go through that are still
serving in rural areas of the
federal those.
The federal one is.
It's not really meant for this
purpose it has other.
Or did she is that is not
looking at the true needs of New
Mexico where especially with the
nurses we don't meet that
benchmark in any County.
So we need to go back to the
other
wait to assess when a person is
practicing in a rural area the
nurse or any other provider
doesn't have to live in the
rural areas if they want to use
this service.
The tax.
Which is.
Thank you for that is that Miss
Mister chair representative New
Mexico so does this bill go back
to the the O. H. determination
the in house determination of
rural.
Does not okay thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative that's
going to Representative Harper.
Thank you chairman very much and
that chairman it's a good to see
you here again you are a
champion.
Years running
and I just want to first thank
all the nurses nurse
practitioners midwives were here
at our online
I potentially a.
All four of my kids were
delivered with the practitioner
midwives we love them and
I had the privilege of few years
ago
During a bill to allow our
respect issue midwives actually
procure the lifesaving equipment
that they're supposed to carry
when they are helping was
delivered actually worked with
the vice chair today in on that
before she was a Representative
and that was wonderful so we
love we love our partners
healthcare providers and
appreciate all you do and go
through
So I I just have a couple quick
comments with the first one is.
Our health care tax policies in
the state of New Mexico is a
complete disaster is a Hodge
podge I think we're actually
breaking federal constitution
Actions and I'll just give one
example
and that is the equity you know
this was a good tax policy of
equity.
If you are a.
but I interest.
And you have your your own shop
your yes your own nurses that
you're employing.
You are taxed very differently
than if you align yourself with
a nonprofit hospital.
Doing the same work.
And that is not.
Right so the equity principle is
the last five or six good
principles of tax policy says
that if you should not taxed
differently the same work.
And so if we are able to get
gross receipts tax figure out
the next things we should really
focus on our health care
taxation and our our.
hello for budget taxation is to
drastically affects those are
really when you tackle next.
But that being said
I just want to
Point out I think a couple
things I think we kind of talked
around here.
The first is.
This three thousand dollar or
five thousand dollar credit.
It was referred to as a reward
and I think that's I think
that's right actually I think
that's the right way to
characterize it.
Because I'm pretty sure an extra
three thousand dollars would not
have caps that pharmacy from
closing.
And I'm pretty sure that if we
passed this an extra three or
five thousand dollars is not
going to suddenly solve our
rural health care issue.
Right I mean that would be a
great order be nice thank you
but it's not going to solve the
issue.
The issue that we're seeing is
that.
This body and other external
factors have been continually
increasing the cost of doing
business.
for example recently the the the
caps for the malpractice
lawsuits were were significantly
increased that raises the price
of insurance for our pharmacists
and our nurses and our doctors.
par Medicaid reimbursement rates
are very low we need to increase
those.
I I I talk to my friends to say
that I lose money when I take
Medicaid patients
And then I also hear great
things like we have fifty
percent of New Mexicans on
Medicaid that's great.
All state.
Better is a no insurance right
I'm glad they have insurance.
But our state should have a
thriving economies of people
connected jobs making so much
money that they don't qualify
for Medicaid and they're paying
private insurance premiums so
that doctors and nurses and
pharmacists.
Can make up for this extra cost
of business so I just want us to
be cognizant of that that on one
hand we're drastically
increasing the cost of business
and on the other hand we're
trying to.
Help with.
Some reward right when what we
really need is to make sure
these to answer talking together
So
With that chairman and chairman
I I again thank you for bringing
this forward and I'm sure that
this will get some healthy
discussion when we talk about
the tax package.
Thank you our bird that's what
our representative Duncan thank
you Mr
Representative Garcia I
appreciate this information they
need.
My wife serves on that all
nations.
I didn't know better I'd say my
wife is a teacher.
The status of your what teachers
not everyday of their lives
having to take that will.
I that's what my wife does
that's what probably everyone in
this room does take out of our
pockets provided to the patients
they care for we if our goal is
to enroll life and to take
people away from their homes and
to take Albuquerque then we can
do nothing.
And that's what will happen well
in a private two hours or three
hours to get a dog
that's has a specialty and our
rural way of life will.
We need to do something thank
you thank you Mr thank you
Representative Representative
Castellano.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr
Garcia for bringing this bill
forward I think it's eighty four
bill bill for rural community as
well
Representative you're up Duncan
that you know it will I see it
in my community all of the
hospital though there's no
doctors needs really taking an
impact on districts Mexico what
I just want to commend you for
bringing this board and I do
three thousand five thousand is
minimal we should be given more
because we need that health care
New Mexico so I thank you for
reading four thank you Richard
thank you Garcia thank you
representative will do question
one cut in.
Thank you Mr chair I thank the
chairman Garcia
Hopson additional comments I
just want to ask verification I
thought I heard you state that
the FIR been adjusted or up.
Act the FIR I'm still looking at
it's a range between sixteen and
twenty four million is that is
that what you're.
Mr chair and chair by check and
I'd like to be able to
the C. person the room that can
answer that thank you.
Hi Mr chairman members.
I also see in our office Mexico
for other things here in our
office which is a lot more
information on actual take a
right on this but partial.
Okay that was a project.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
for.
Representative Garcia for
bringing up that
in there.
So as as we have this different
starting point
we also have information here on
the FIR said so far we're in FY
twenty two at least they claim
the cost of that claim credit
was approximately seven point
one million dollars so this is
not a big ticket amount
seven million on an average
fiscal year is something
noteworthy but again it's it's
not gonna break the bank it's
it's not going to be something
missing see Mexico in this kind
of fiscal climate but I it is
important to say out loud that
the changes you've suggested
here would potentially double
that bring that about to fifteen
sixteen million every year.
When you've heard me up make
these comments representative
Garcia in also to committees and
for several of the eight years
that you've been here with such
diligence.
I continue to have concerns that
this policy while I appreciate
the philosophy and approach here
that it's not doing enough like
some of my colleagues is that
actually **** what's happening
as providers and health care
parts of health care teams are
making decisions about where to
set up practice and where to
show up and serve New Mexico
families I stayed in passing but
some of this has become
anecdotal
I don't know what the annual
salaries are physicians in New
Mexico but I would assume and
understand that there are
upwards of three fifty four
hundred behalf of million
dollars a year depending on the
specialty practices I understand
that those folks accumulated
great day and spent a lot of
time to build that skill set and
deserve to be adequately
compensated for what they do but
my like my colleague said we
need to show that in Medicaid
reimbursement rates we need to
show that in matching Medicare
numbers to what Medicaid
providers currently see.
Eager and costlier.
Investments we could make to
actually compensate
appropriately for those kind of
things so I've said it before
and I'll say it again I'm not
sure if someone's deciding where
they're going to practice this
five thousand dollar credit on
top of the four hundred and some
thousand salary is actually
going to alter or affect their
decision making and pulled up to
a rural area so again I
appreciate the attention and
this is way before you were
right to is you know
representative Garcia for two
thousand seventeen
when I look at the three
thousand dollar list I know like
folks having today there's
providers as much as you've been
here and and I'm fighting the
good fight there's also the
folks that are still not on this
list
Representative partners that I
happen to have my little ones at
home with the care community
based licensed midwives and that
was incredible trauma informed
care responsive care the care
that I needed and those midwives
currently receive global feed on
Medicaid and This Is that fifty
percent of our population half
of generally have for population
in New Mexico the Medicaid
making us the state in the
country with the highest number
of our people Medicaid eligible
we look at pregnancy of course
it's even higher.
Usually about eighty percent of
pregnant people New Mexico
Medicaid eligible for these
midwives that are.
Very rural basin in integrating
communities there reimbursement
fee for full on prenatal care
labor and delivery and six weeks
postpartum for mom and baby can
range somewhere between fourteen
hundred and eighteen hundred
dollars.
So that care extended to me for
seven months including labor and
delivery and clean everything up
chair for six weeks after the
full weight of prenatal care
they would be bringing home
fourteen hundred dollars.
It licensed midwives run a list
like this than it was three
thousand dollars that could
change some of the financial
stability of their family.
All right since the state I
believe in this I think over the
interim and and with our chair
here we can have a much more
pointed conversation about way
the actual impact is it might be
shifting much more than three
thousand dollars something that
twelve thousand dollars fifty
thousand dollars a real tangible
dollars that could potentially
support providers and health
care specialist in rural New
Mexico to stay home be home move
to these communities that are
special and deserve to thrive
and have access to health care I
do have a couple more weeks and
just summon and it's here
I'm not sure Mr Representative
fix it we will to see that taxed
revenue analysis directly.
The last
the kind of run through the city
state did suggest because they
appreciate their reporting
requirements but they have
offered on page three of their
now says some potential
additions so that they can do
more on that recording piece and
help us understand where the tax
policies are going into effect
so they've they've added that on
page three line sixteen after
practitioner the certification
must include the taxpayer
identification number first
eligible tax year and shall be
numbered by dedication and
declared state issue is and the
amount of tax credit allow and
then they follow and I'm I'm not
offering amendment yet in part
because as we know the practice
of this committee is not
actually to move this bill but
to consider as part of the tax
policy but I did want to check
you out if this bill is it's
it's given merit and becomes
part of a larger conversation
about capacity with that
clarification on their ease of
reporting be something that you
would support
Representative chairman in the.
New Mexico then
you know I'm a local deal on
that.
You know after this hearing I'd
like to kind of.
Given the tax and Representative
call.
Have them elaborate.
you know on on those
recommendations that they're
addressing in their in their
analysis so yes I'd be open to
the thank you and I follow up to
that and thanks to
Representative Ortez and others
for raising the really important
question about real definitions
I think what we've learned today
is that in the administrative
decisions I'm I'm sure they're
doing their best and have their
own justifications for switching
to the federal definition but it
doesn't seem that in not moved
they continue to meet the
legislative intent of this
original piece of policy for the
two thousand seven are now so I
I would offer and ask you
Representative Garcia that again
if we move this whether it's in
this bill or part of a different
capacity tax package
conversation would you also be
open to us
focusing in on that definition
and and urging and and
potentially directing the
department of health to come
back to definitions that we have
the kind of conversations we
want to have about rural New
Mexico Mr chair vice chair of
the line give me with.
Thank you Representative Garcia
so I will Representative with
less out up to deal here in the
front of the room besides all
the other incredible providers
and folks we have here it's
meant the world to see to me to
see the independent pharmacists
and others to lead the way and
making sure New Mexico as a
model in the ways that
pharmacist part of serving real
New Mexicans what I've been able
to learn over the last couple of
years and including that in our
state pharmacists should be
elected you still have room to
be part of different kinds of
prescriptions whether it's
vaccines it also includes
contraception in New Mexico and
in a year like the one we're
having we talk about provider
shortages and networking Act was
enacted inadequacy it means a
lot that pharmacists are trusted
friends and neighbors and
sources of care in their
communities and it and it's it's
remarkable to know that New
Mexico has led the way in the
kind of scope of practice are
pharmacists of Kerry so that we
can shop for real family so all
you all deserve to be honest
this pharmacist included thank
you Mr chair.
Well Webster but thank you so
much this will wanted to
represent us about the.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the sponsoring for the bill
I'm just curious I mean that
this act has been around since
two thousand seven and so I'm
curious how that has impacted
over four.
The the sponsor feels that has
impacted healthcare providers
that have access to this tax
credit already.
Has it from your standpoint is
you see that as incentivizing
healthcare practitioners to stay
or has it been nominal impact.
Almost Mr chair and woods and so
forth on.
You know the conversations that
I've had with the rural
practitioners is that they're
very appreciative.
Of the credit especially those
that qualify.
Legislation and
and they kind of Mr chair kind
of a due to the fact that
That that's been one factor why
there still Cadena practice
whether practicing.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for that Sanchez I I asked that
because we were looking for
evidence based efforts to
encourage people to remain in
rural areas to find a service
that is not always compensated
well because of the region that
it's serving I'm curious as to
we have an answer.
Nearly two decades of evidence
of how that's impacted higher
earning individuals individuals
you're adding to this list are
necessarily as higher earning
and that three thousand dollars
what in many times in many
situations go up further the
five thousand those are local
offers so curious about how that
is and and I find it really
interesting that it's two
thousand individuals who taking
advantage of that tax credit
because that grown since two
thousand seven do we have any
information about that Mr
Chairman.
I don't have a specific
information Mr chair
I just have a.
You know information on in terms
of the practicing.
Sessions.
how many our rural areas and I
like to reflect on that you know
the kind of the back of your
question.
But we you know we do have
sixteen apartment sixteen
thousand practicing in our is in
the state.
approximately
thirty two hundred.
Thirty four hundred thirty three
to thirty four hundred are are
is would be eligible for the
credit.
Of these that
of the of the practicing RN's.
Only twenty three percent our
rural areas keep in mind that
New Mexico is sixty five percent
rural so there's a big divide in
terms of the total practicing
nurses verses where they're
located the same thing with
behavioral health providers and
practitioners we have
approximately five hundred.
sixteen hundred will pop would
be eligible for the credit but
yet.
Only twenty percent behavioural
health counselors and therapists
are in rural areas again six
five percent New Mexico as a
role same thing with the
pharmacist seventeen hundred.
Four thousand four hundred forty
are are in the rural area which
is twenty six percent.
And then lastly the physical
therapist approximately sixteen
hundred.
practicing
At the end of ninety seven on
the rural areas which is.
Twenty five percent of total
eighties are the rulers again.
This is the big divide in terms
of New Mexico being sixty five
percent rural.
Thank you thank you sponsor
thank you chairman and I just on
that point you know I I
appreciate this conversation I
also appreciate the temporarily
table because I'm I think that
as we do this I really am
interested in in the TRD numbers
of how those numbers having
increased of the HCP's and take
advantage of what's already in
existence and indeed utilizing
that to understand how this
might affect other professions
we need to expand as we know
next with the health care
shortage my daughters nine month
I Mr nine month but five minutes
and we can reschedule it for
until she let muscle these early
days a very critical because we
don't have the health care in
Santa Fe so we don't have it in
Santa Fe I you know that how
much more that affects early
stage growth for a lot of these
health care things you can
address it's it's very
concerning to me I just want to
say is we as we continue you
know there is so much more we
can do to incentivize more
doctors and more healthy over
nurses and pharmacists and
behavioral at their pace in
these areas and I'm I'm just as
as an individual wearing storing
out of the good for the great on
to ensuring that as we look at
this and what's possible in
these these moments I'm looking
for that conversation how we can
we can expand that over time but
I'm hopeful that we can get
information to do and how those
those credit seven utilized time
thank you.
and then another fact is that I
don't like to entertain very
often but on that point the from
the committee but we'll go we'll
go to yeah I never promised
never to abuse the chairman.
Representative Serrato that was
really a question and I just
want to share the tax
expenditure reports that comes
up every year the tax form does
is amazing at for this product.
There's a low valuation section
at this point out I think this
give us some import information
they have a table here the fact
that says how many claims have
occurred over the last forty
five years and I'll just point
out that in two thousand
seventeen there were twenty two
hundred claims.
That steadily declined until
last year there were sixteen
hundred thirty four claims so I
think that that speaks a lot to
not only have affected this is
but how many practitioners were.
Thank you let's move on that too
Representative Townsend.
Thank hello and thank you
Representative thank or
I agree with last year and this.
That the impact when you look at
the impact of the Mexican.
Of the cost
the Los.
Of health care and.
It is
Critical.
And and it's affecting
everything in spending
education.
Yeah.
The the role community.
I had a different losses last
year.
A.
Champion or Robert okay.
And.
Coming from the energy industry
not on a lot about healthcare
and tell my daughter Bridget
nurses medical educator thank
It is imperative that we address
the if we are going to stay in
rural New Mexico.
And
Schmale Committee Jallow in the
cloud may feel like the I mean
there's maybe and in the
northern part of the state that
are are dying.
You're done and there
Their ability to serve those
communities and maybe.
It's just not there so
especially.
Thank sixty five percent of New
Mexico in rural.
And and and you look at the
action.
It is a telling story.
That.
You
you know we have issues that
HB seventy five that we here's
what we have to address
not at the same time.
I think this is moving in the
right direction the.
I would hope that.
Thank you thank you
Representative this movie
Representative Borrego.
Thank you Mr chairman.
so as many of you know
Last year actually I served as
the city council president for
Albuquerque and
You receive money for your
comment from the American rescue
fund any other sources to
continue it was a really tough
time and I saw first hand but
the hospitals what was happening
in our schools
you know that need for social
workers etcetera even our own
pharmacies that the reduction of
ours in early County
but I also have a mom who's
ninety five and she lives in
Espanol.
And dealing with her health care
over time you know she has heart
issues and up how to take care
several times to the Espanola
hospital to Santa Fe hospitals
and see the lack of health care
workers and setting up her
appointments because I then I
manage a lot of that for her as
well in the background
You know getting just done
appointment with that with that
physician assisted not
necessarily a doctor god forbid
if I could at least get a doctor
there
I mean it would be up you know
those are challenges and those
are things that I you know as as
the president the council one of
the things that I did was I was
trying to set up a stipend for
public safety and for health
care workers I was able to
obtain the public safety state
and has.
Health care workers were not
under the government brelo's or
so to speak I wasn't really able
to do that
and I really felt very regretful
the whole time that I was
serving because I really really
wanted to find a way to to get
that stipe and set up of for
health care workers but I see
this as an opportunity because I
don't think any amount is ever
going to be no.
I mean I think that we show our
health care workers.
A huge debt of gratitude for
what they need to work during
the time of COVID and.
Like I just don't even know how
they were able to manage that
without.
Having some mental issues of
their own because I saw first
hand what was going on and we
all did it was something that
none of us would ever have
dreamed that we were going to
experience in our lifetimes
so Representative and and Mr
chair I I appreciate what you're
doing because I think every step
is an incremental step to giving
some sort of gratitude for.
What we had to work and what.
These people these professions
really into art
So I I don't know that you know
maybe we shouldn't amend this
somewhat in places because I
don't know that we've captured
everyone that we should be
giving that debt of gratitude
and I appreciate representative
that you are kind of us Johnson
advocate of this I'm sure in two
thousand seven you didn't think
it two thousand twenty two very
dear responding to some of the
COVID
you know experience that we've
all had but I just want to say
thank you of for whatever.
However we can get there and
whatever direction we can agree
upon here on this podium and
eventually you know it in the in
the round house
We end up with but I do think
that every increments makes a
difference so thank you for that
Mr chair thank you
Representative finally I just
wanna make a comment and say
thank you for being the champion
the past eight years I think it
takes a lot of time from you and
commitment from you and and at
times you know you go back to
pre that rosary and hopefully.
That will be better and
hopefully this year with the
discussion and the honest
discussion thing we've had this
committee that that we can see
these are maybe go back and talk
to tax revenue department and
and fix that FIR and if if you
can help us to provide to better
state New Mexico that role
definition that's going to be a
huge win and I think that this
could be a really huge win if we
can get right up for rural New
Mexico for health providers in
New Mexico so that we can fill
out about our direction in terms
of protecting a rural New Mexico
and this is access to healthcare
so Representative thank you for
your presentation and so if you
can get the care that they group
that happy to have you back at a
certain point with that
question.
Thank you Mr chair I move that
we take very temporarily table
house bill thirty as amended
motion may second the opposition
giving that Representative thank
you once again members of the
committee appreciate the genuine
thing thank you and with that
folks we will see you again on
Friday we have to bills
scheduled you should have those
notifications in your email
