Representative Harper.
This.
Representative I'm sorry speaker
Mike Keenan's.
Representative Ortez.
Representative I.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Townsend.
Vice chair David M..
Chairman and.
Begin with house bill eighty one
is amended next modified gross
income amounts Representative
Chandler thank you Mr chair and
good to see you all your
colleagues this bill is I think
issue my characterizes a little
bit of a cleanup bill a couple
years ago we
we changed the low income
comprehensive tax rebate to
index the amounts of the rebates
that were paid to individuals
who qualified based on their
income brackets and what we fail
to do is also index the income
brackets so essentially what
this bill does it corrects that
oversight and now both with this
bill both the rebate amounts in
the income brackets to which
they attach themselves would be
will be indexed and that's the
sum total of the change I think
I I think that's about it Mr
Chairman happy to stand for
questions very good thank you
very much those in the audience
in support of house bill eighty
one as amended please raise your
hat let's go to the right side
bill please good morning.
Mr chair representative Jordan
with New Mexico for.
first I want to thank you all
for a couple years ago where you
increase letter for the first
time in twenty years because it
didn't so long our attention at
that time and I think your tend
to that time which the indexes
so we wouldn't have to come back
to it again and
that part of that and this is
the the fix for that and we will
do to
clean up the intent from a
couple of years ago.
Pass through thank you thank you
next.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
majority of the market speaking
for.
Sorry voices for children action
fund and that is reasons
reduces.
Thank you Sir next.
This site yes ma'am.
I'm gonna Mart√≠nez.
Representative H. and nine years
of age being one.
so far but I do know is
but if you want if you're here
for house bill one twenty when
we bring that bill up then you
can have a chance is that one
our thank you for coming the.
It'll be shortly up give us
about an hour.
It I.
Anybody out of this is that want
to speak in favor anybody
online.
Okay anybody not position the
house bill eighty one of the men
in the room online.
Okay let's go to the committee.
Representative Harper.
The German Department here.
so.
Yeah it's I think it was
mentioned earlier it's been
aside from last year but about
twenty years since we adopted
this credit and and if you're
looking for folks to if you're
not familiar we're for two is
elector hello comprehensive
lowincome conference of tax
rebate and it really was
initially designed to make up
for the regressivity the gross
receipts tax so it was designed
that the gross receipts tax the
people with low incomes rate
over the years that this would
reimburse them essentially for
that that payment which we.
chairman Rogers we we talked
about just a couple different
ways to do this you know to
maybe do it like a monthly
payments to them
I think we ended up deciding to
keep its the the yearly and and
the feedback we got from people
in the situation was that you
know we get this back through
tax time and and then we could
pay for a big car repair or
replace a washer and dryer right
and actually kind of made more
sense to get us a lot payment
instead of just monthly payments
so I was supportive of updating
it
To think I just want to mention
chairman and madam chair it
looks like from the tax
expenditure report after we made
this change.
The cost of this program will
two thousand.
seventeen eighteen million to
about fifty to fifty two.
so it was more than a doubling
so so pretty a pretty big
change.
and then my I guess my question
is that the FY are.
Why.
I was surprised by how much.
This change increase the cost
further up chairman madam chair
looks like we're.
With this changes to go up
another eighteen million this my
reading this correctly chair I'm
I don't think Mr chair and
representative I I don't know
where you got the fifty million
dollar numbers so I apologize
for that if you want to point me
that's fine okay well I'm
reading from the FIR and the F.
I. R. Mr chair and
representative it does show an
increase for FY twenty four of
about eighteen million and
eighteen yeah and I imagine Mr
chair and representative because
people will not be dropping out
of.
The bracket you know the incomes
because the we follow the CP I
will be following it forward so
people won't be falling out of
being eligible to that degree
you might expect if we did not
index the income brackets.
Yeah so to generate your thank
you for that so so yeah the just
to be clear that the fifty
million dollars the current cost
I see I do I didn't look at the.
So are you surprised to see
that.
This change will add another
eighteen million it's almost not
not quite another fifty percent
so it's quite a lot I'm not sure
if I could ask LFC Jennifer
could you just maybe speak to
that.
Why that's such a big jump I'm
gonna come right here so I have
my.
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee there's a couple
mechanisms at play here the cost
not impact to go up the first is
the actual rebate amount is
expanded in the base table
just a bit the average in the
fire's States average rebate
increases from one forty to one
sixty four
TRD also made an assumption that
everybody that fits the income
eligibility would claim that
elector credit or rebate even
though they might not make that
assumption and then as
Representative Chandler said
There's a bit of an expansion of
the income range of the base
table and as well as indexing
the income over time nobody is
going to fall out.
Okay so.
chairman madam chair Jennifer
thank you that that actually
really helps so if we were we
were just index.
Right table do you have an idea
of how much that would cost I do
not Mr chair.
But certainly less less okay.
Mr chair and representative when
you say index the current table
what are you referring to I may
absolutely yeah yeah chairman
and madam chair yes thank you so
so right now my understanding is
we we didn't decks.
see payments correct but we
don't index the incomes it's my
question was if we just index
incomes only instead of making
the other chamber.
How much would that cost would
be.
US.
By other changes Representative
which are you referring to the
fact that we bumped up slightly
you think why I believe Mr chair
and representative that was done
in consultation with when I was
working with the staff to
account for this fact we are
starting in a different year so
we applied a phone up
representing the fact that we
are starting in a different year
so I'm not sure I completely
agree Mr chair representative
that we have increased it we did
what naturally would have
happened had the inducting
applied originally if that makes
sense Mr Chairman representative
yes the gentleman mentioned
that's helpful that were
standard standard that bonding
you're you're you're right
you're saying.
We're we're adding essentially
what would have happened if we
indexed it for one year Mr chair
representative yes okay
Okay.
Chairman thank you for that I'm
still just.
So I'm I'm looking at the FY Mr
we go from eighteen million.
To.
Nineteen it is basically a one
million dollar increase over
four years.
I still discretion and how we
want to eighteen billion just
for.
If you're looking at roughly a
million dollars every four
years.
I just actually generally around
eighteen it just seems really
high.
Mr chair representative I wish I
could explain to the wonders of
the FIR process.
You know I wonder Kate up quite
a bit Mr chair representative of
how we get to certain certain
calculations and I'm happy to
work with you on trying to
understand that better we when
we I'm imagining this will be
temporary table we can sort that
out a little bit more Mr
Chairman representative yeah
chair chair.
I appreciate that very much I
think we'll we'll do that okay
you for sure to enrollment but I
think yeah I'd like to
understand a little better maybe
you know if we into this in the
tax package I would hope that
we.
Decrease that cost and get it
to.
Really reflect actuation.
It should be so thank you.
suggestion thank you thank you
thank you Representative harbor
it would also question the
comments from the committee.
Representative duck and the
representative got.
Thank you Mr
And I don't all the this is the
right of return to ask questions
Jennifer if you made a statement
that said no one falls off of
our.
On this is what I was just
curious
Before.
Low income.
Personal family how much before
they do this fall how much is
that knowledge.
This.
Mr chair and representative if I
understand your question
correctly I think you're asking
at one point people not eligible
to receive the rebate and Mr
chair and representative if you
look at page five line for
you'll see the top range of one
people are eligible for the
rebates and you'll note I would
point out that it's.
inversely related to the income
so the rebates amount grow
smaller as your income rises so
the top number is thirty nine
thousand dollars at this point
which I would point out Mr
Chairman representative of
course that's indexed so that
would that would change annually
but that would be the top
starting base when the indexing
starts Mr chair representative.
Sure this that includes all help
to long contamination yeah.
Mister chair if it does not I
don't think I've
I don't think so Mister chair so
there are other tax benefits
that individuals are eligible
the often based on what their
status is low income
individuals.
I think that's what I was trying
to figure out what is that.
I don't know what
sure sorry about that thank you
representative Representative
got.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative.
This is
an increase it's it's called.
Tax credit the fact.
Transfer.
That.
I've been to lower income
people.
Mr chair and representative more
correct terms of rebate and it
is a refundable rebates so there
will be occasions Mr chair
representative we're if there is
not taxable income that there
could be a check sent to some of
the individuals who are eligible
under this program Mr Chairman
representative.
Mr Chairman representative it
would be accurate to state of
the most of the people
participating in these programs
would be petty and very few
income tax
Mr chair and representative I
think because their incomes are
so low it's likely that some of
them will be paying very little
income tax.
Mr Chairman representative this.
We have
discussed.
The support available to.
The
and our call was she report
said.
That
Eight four person family.
Participating in all of the
programs.
To them with one family member
holding in minimum wage jobs.
Have.
One.
Revenue string.
Five hundred and four thousand
dollars.
Total labor force participation
rate.
And has contributed to.
Folks not wanting to elevate
themselves.
Following the support programs.
This would change and.
Needless to the income levels
school for life star following
what staff.
Certainly would accomplish that
goal but hello.
How.
Mr Chairman representative yes.
What this impact problem of
those benefits Khalil's and
gentleman.
Mr chairman and representative
of I can't answer that question
I am very appreciative of your
concern about the so called
cliff effect and definitely Mr
chair and representative agreed
that this legislature should
review that but taking it up on
a item by item review of this
particular tax benefit isn't
going to get us Mr chairman and
Representative to a place where
we understand it there's no
doubt with something that we
should be looking at.
And and mom on page them kind of
in the state of Iowa.
It is automatic increases with
no.
Additional input from the
legislature in fact this is
pastor we would be looking at
this been in place ten percent.
Increases in.
Posted brackets in so
substantial.
These increases he could be.
Very substantial with no input
from the legislature what.
Mr Chairman representative this
past year has been a very
unusual here as we know for
example social security
beneficiaries have received
almost a nine percent increase
but in past years are the
increases have been not very
minimal one two three percent
type increases so relying on
this year Mr chair I think is is
off norm and in fact in general
inflationary the inflation has
been very low over the past
twenty years fifteen years quite
a long time this is an unusual
here so I think Mr Chairman
representative it's an extreme
example of what might happen.
Mr Chairman representative less
out of the direct control.
That we act Mr chair and
representative I disagree with
that the legislature always has
the opportunity to review
legislation Mr Chairman
representative and we do so on a
regular basis.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative Scott
we have three other members
wanted to speak we have next
question over to.
Morning Mr chair representative
and senator.
Is better than talk through a
piece of that.
Awesome Committee coming up and
I are.
It continues to name to there
are potentially or there are
known to be
tax I potential taxpayers in New
Mexico that are currently
eligible but has not made
this benefit can you speak to
what they're referring to
Madam chair in Mr chairman and
madam vice chair
I imagine what they're referring
to is there are people who
because their incomes at or a
certain level do not are not
required to file and it I know
Mister chair and madam vice
chair that the tax department
has been working very hard to
try to encourage and enlighten
inform to try to get more and
more people filing even though
they do not have a tax liability
because it helps them Mr chair
through programs like this and
it helps us better understand
kind of the scope of the income
you know universe in the state
Madam chair representative chair
and representative also my
sections yeah thank you for that
confirmation.
I do.
Average of that from the
analysis that would say some
help this indexing to inflation
that may increase on a gigantic
here like this the total amount
upwards of thirty two dollars is
somehow going to pull those
potential I as an if there were
period in time with the one that
some of us have survived with
this little pandemic in the kind
of refunds and credits that were
pointed at hopefully offering
some stability and safety nets
to New Mexicans of the lowest
income we've been through that
time and
so while I appreciate those
assumption that we'll get more
people in an increase the
eventual cost of this I can't
imagine that would be too if
folks haven't filed yet what
we're talking about budget
numbers of thousands and
thousands of dollars over the
last couple of years I don't.
I agree that this additional
thirty two dollars and in other
years potentially much less
would would for people and so
just what I appreciate and need
their New Mexicans that are so
far below these income
categories and mostly trying to
subsist subsist but it's really
really.
Of that you know I appreciate
the impact of this I support the
concept of this and I don't
think that would change our
numbers much and I just wanted
to name one last piece Mr
Chairman representative but I
think about
What we hear about like the
automatic people can cruise and
get more money mentality that
might be real for someone like
me but I've seen this this guy's
coming out this last year.
With the salaried employment
that pays me quite fairly it is
real that I just can't keep
doing my job and upwards and and
for me that would mean this year
it's you pay increase of several
thousand dollars to just keep
doing what I'm doing what I
think about what we're
considering is tax policy at
survival mechanisms for the
families that have the least in
New Mexico I get poverty is
expensive.
Whether they are finding gainful
employment or struggling to
raise some kids for moving
through and navigating addiction
I don't see that this piece of
index that you're reading in
front of us it's about I'm
creating an opportunity for New
Mexicans to keep cruising
because somebody's trying to
survive on this income will
never decreasing anywhere so
Preciado intention and look
forward to the conversations
when we get into talking about
our capacity thank you Mr chair
thank you madam vice chair when
we have Representative but.
Thank you Mr chair thank you.
Senate Chandler for bringing
this forward.
I would like to see that we if
we passed legislation that then
we're following through and I
appreciate that you're doing
this as a cleaner.
And I just wanted to say that I
think people that are making
and I think.
You know at this level of what
is it eighteen thousand four
hundred and a family of four
thirty thousand
probably of the repaid with
between fifteen at seven hundred
and thirty dollars is not going
to
Yes it's a very very minute
increments and it probably isn't
going to determine whether or
not they go to work or not so I
think that it's good that we
follow through legislation that
we are ensuring that people at
the lowest levels have something
to look forward even though it's
very minute
and I I just want to say you
know I I hope that as we passed
future legislation that we are
doing our due diligence in
making sure that things are
cleaned up if they are to
complete so thank you for that
thank you Mr chair
representative of next I have
Representative set up though I
think she left the room for a
bit anyone else wishing to
comment for this piece of
legislation.
Yes but yeah thank you chairman
apologies for jumping on twice
just wanted folks understand
this is modified gross income.
So this is after your standard
deduction that's right which is
roughly.
Thirteen thousand per individual
twenty six thousand per per
couple
that's what it is for for twenty
twenty two so when you look at
this that's we need to add notes
thirteen or twenty six thousand
dollars.
Just to clarify.
You see no other comments yes.
Okay you know I I I first wanted
just recognize and thank
Representative Harper engine if
you guys do do it that we're
looking at in the in the in the
notion of transparency
collaboration that be great if
we bring it back that we we can
get answers your questions
answered and stuff like that so
with the absence of of
Representative out though I
think at this point question
one.
I move that we temporarily
table.
House bill eighty one as amended
thank you very second thank you
okay it opposition saying not
thank you Representative you can
see where you're at because
you're up for that toppled up
more times so let's move that to
house bill one nineteen income
tax bracket changes.
And and leader you know what
you're welcome to join her there
at the table thank you for
joining us this morning.
Your.
The floor is yours thank you so
much Mr chair and again good to
see you all.
Very interested to have this
conversation
house bill one nineteen is of
Bill that I view as a Reform Act
part of our reform package and I
want to talk a little bit about
that
over the course of the summer we
rest up of courses meeting and I
as the chair at that time was
working on ideas for reform
measures and was consulting with
our house leadership as well as
Senate leadership working
collaboratively with chairman
Chandio Majority Leader worth
and then Majority Leader
Martinez to think about what we
could be doing to change the
structure of our tax code.
And during the course of that I
got a lot of suggestions you as
you might imagine Mr chair and
many of them focused on tax cuts
I would get a call and say we
need to exempt thus and such are
we need to do exempt us in such
a we need a credit for the S.
and such and I would say that is
not tax reform that is just
another tax credit or another
tax deduction what we need to be
doing Mr chair and
representative is looking
actually at the structure and
what we know about the structure
of our tax code we know Mr chair
we rely very heavily on G. R. T.
and also other kinds of revenues
from the oil and gas industry
that accounts for a very large
percentage of our tax base and I
submit to you Mr Chairman
representative that is not
really a good position to be and
and we need to be looking at
other staple sources of revenue
in our you know moderate in
you know it's awful way.
So what what we know about the
income tax well we know our
current income tax structure is
almost a flat tax nearly
everyone falls within the four
point nine income bracket the
program civility to the extent
existed in the past was severely
limited in about two thousand
three two thousand four when the
great governor Richards and did
all sorts of things to our tax
code that we are all now trying
to recover from and this is part
of it this is bringing back into
play a progressive tax system
where through this proposal the
large majority of New Mexicans
get a tax cut.
I want to reiterate that get a
tax cut middle income and low
income individuals and the state
will benefit from a tax cut in
to achieve that
I think very important goal is.
Adding a couple of new brackets
six point four and six point
nine on higher income
individuals who can afford to
pay a little bit more it extends
the goal of improving the
programs that we do have our
income tax coal code which I
know there could be some
disagreement about amongst us
here is I believe an important
policy in terms of tax reform
for the state of New Mexico we
are going to be hearing
proposals later on I think in
this committee in in the
upcoming days about cutting our
G. R. T. which I think is a
great idea there are other two
proposals that some of my
colleagues will be proposing
about peer emitting which
benefits the business community
we know that and so I'll be very
disappointed if the business
community will stand up and and
propose this very minor tax
increase on the highest earners
the highest income people in the
state and what it does is allows
us to support middle income and
lower income individuals and I'm
wondering if my Senate
colleagues has anything he
wishes to add but I think that
summarizes what's going on here
thank you Representative the
what thank you Mr chair and vice
chair members of the committee
good to see you all and I am
certainly happy to be here as
part of this work that was done
really the revenue stabilization
interim committee is just them
chair of that committee chairman
has indicated.
I look at this bill is a
continuation really of the work
that started in this committee
in twenty nineteen chairman Jim
Trujillo house bill six and
putting together a.
Tax reform package that looked
at a variety of different issues
and sought to find a balance
moving something for what we've
learned I've I've been here for
nineteen.
And I've seen some very
interesting things during that
time and kind of riding the oil
and gas roller coaster
and I think we have to be
extremely careful about.
As the test as Representative
Chandler said just equating tax
reform with tax cuts recurring
tax cuts are easy to vote for on
the front end it is
extraordinarily difficult.
When we run out of revenues when
you're choosing between schools
and increasing revenues and so I
think that the the formula of
house bill nine back in twenty
nineteen was to find that right
balance up and quite frankly it
and have to have things in the
bill that that all sides are a
little uncomfortable with and
raising some revenues to pay for
other cuts that are there I
would note that the FIR on this
bill is has an eighteen million
dollar price tag and I think we
all need to think about that
that's eighteen million dollars
of recurring reductions to our
general fund if we pass this
bill
having said that I do think we
are in a situation now where we
can do something like that and
this is the time to take that
kind of of effort but putting in
additional brackets into the
income tax makes a lot of sense
we had a very interesting
conversation with senator share
yesterday in our Senate tax
committee he was proposing a two
four and six percent income tax
with twenty eight percent of New
Mexicans in New Mexico small
businesses going into the six
percent bracket and so.
Again what we can get a whole
bunch of other things in in a in
a incredibly comprehensive bill
but I give them a lot of credit
for being willing to look at
these issues and really propose
a complete Reese at which I
think politically is is
unrealistic but it's an
important piece to understand
and see what happens when you
step back so again I'm here to
support this I just would echo
that chairman Chen though
is is the prime Senate sponsor
on this and as work with this
and I really give up.
Revenue stabilisation chair
Chandler Hughes credit for the
work done in the interim and I
would just confirm this is
something that house and Senate
work together on it that's the
way it should be we should all
be working together to try and
change something so here in
support and happy to answer any
questions thank you Mr chair
right thank you senator thank
you Representative everything
else at
the audits no Mr chair thank you
thank you of those in the
audience and also online I I
tend to forget about the folks
online to remind them that to to
raise your hand if you want to
speak in either support
opposition will go to support
first so those in support of the
house bill one nineteen both
online and in the room please
raise your hand it will go to
the folks in the room first
start again I'm I I'm a right
hand side then please.
Right now.
Where what we're doing.
The hiring.
That was so.
The tax based on your ability.
Equities.
For
the rest of.
This bill is also important
because while it provides
immediate relief.
I also dress warm.
Structural deficit state.
As one.
I.
These are about that but there
is a special guys.
This is all this time need to be
done on that present situation.
C. H. R..
I
you next yes ma'am.
Chairman members of the
committee can't candidate with
the national association.
and we standing in front of
because of the balance.
And because it looks that other
issues than ability and helping
to helping us to get up we're
not so dependent on the next.
Thank you next save several
those support if not those on
this side of those for you Sir.
Mr Chairman is ours we have.
Reasons for me to be the.
Taxes.
Reliable sources.
Issue one nineteen we cut taxes
for most Mexicans of.
All of those of us like a little
yes Representative.
It would help also help generate
the funding we need for our
state budget spending tax
dollars are going to.
Programs these are revenues will
be available.
The word.
Now as.
There's no better time than the
present to make connections
taxes of work where this.
So so that we can tackle this is
to wipe off you basically
property to our economic
opportunities for.
yes we're.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sir and what else was there.
Every night I see some hands
raised online correct.
It Kathy good morning Europe
this.
Thank you I'm I'm Kathy Burke
here Representative on behalf of
the league of women voters of
New Mexico we support a more
progressive tax system for New
Mexico and this is an important
step in accomplishing that so
thank you for the opportunity to
speak.
Thank you get next.
What.
Last support good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Secora nefesh and I am the
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico thrives representing
nonprofits all across the state
and we stand in strong support
of H. B. one one nine we have
been talking for years that we
need more stable income for New
Mexico and this is a good step
toward that so please support H.
B. one one nine thank you thank
you.
Rich good morning.
Good morning Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is rich Weiner I was here in two
thousand three when governor
bill Richardson in almost
exactly twenty years ago a push
through a flat tax the the tax
on the highest levels of income
was eight point two percent at
that time and when that
legislation was done every hello
everybody over sixteen thousand
dollars in taxable income we're
paying four point nine percent.
And this is me since then I
wanted to move things back this
does move things back in the in
the in that direction doesn't go
quite so far as it was before
I'd still like to see that but
one of the things I want to
point out that the reason why I
graduated or progressive tax is
so important is that six
somebody with a hundred thousand
dollars we're talking five
percent that's five thousand
dollars that person with a
hundred thousand dollars being
come in well more for to pay
five thousand dollars that a
person was twenty thousand
dollars can afford to pay one
thousand five percent of twenty
thousand so you know they just
most of their money is not
disposable so a progressive or
graduated taxes extremely
important
and.
We haven't gone nearly far
enough I really want to applaud
Representative Chandler and
senator Wirth and members of
rice that for the hard work they
did over the summer and what the
conclusion that they are drew
and I I really think it's going
to be
Pourtant to get applicability
back into the structure at this
this is a great time to be able
to spend eighteen million
dollars and social important
piece of legislation anybody
under sixty six thousand dollars
is going to see a tax cut
anybody over we'll see us the
tax increase and the people at
the hiring we'll see much higher
increases and that's the way it
should be it should be within
the more progressive than that
but very happy very happy if
this legislation passes this
year and I I appreciate the work
hard work of everybody on this
committee thank you thank you
rich.
By Carl good morning.
Good morning chairman.
Members of the committee I'm
Carl Kaiser on the fifty year
resident of New Mexico and I
strongly support H. B. one
nineteen and the companion H. B.
one twenty the bills provide for
stable equitable state revenue
which supports education
infrastructure and health care
twenty years ago New Mexico
significantly reduced personal
income and capital gains taxes
for high income households
pursuant to inaccurate economic
theory the result is an annual
on going five hundred million
dollar reduction in state
revenue this revenue reduction
prevented the state from
addressing the needs of New
Mexico and families.
Temporary new oil and gas
revenue does not still the ten
billion dollar gap.
H. B. one nineteen can help
rectify the situation and
provide for a better future I
urge a do pass thank you for
your time thank you Carl.
That often enrollment very well
those in opposition of house
bill one nineteen in the room
and online please raise your
hand will go to the room first
of my left hand side yes Sir.
Chairman members of the
committee discussed as a as the
director of national federation
business and we do have concerns
of the all of the others in the
Sanchez intent to lower taxes
for low and lower middle income
individuals but we always do use
these personal income tax bills
really educate legislators and
the public on our back most
small businesses tax deal with
well actually set up as pass
through the rest of our limited
liabilities are partnerships or
sole proprietorships small
businesses pay their income on
their personal.
Not.
So we just want to remind
committee very aware that with
the addition of the two
additional references one I.
Those who have the potential to
increase taxes on our small
businesses Mexico given what
we've seen through the pandemic
a large number of small
businesses did have used
personal cash business reserves
really do those down as
businesses are looking to build
us back up this will
adaptation accessible businesses
we are concerned.
Thank you.
Next yes Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Judy
willing to and I'm speaking to
you this morning on behalf of
the great rocker to chamber of
commerce I just want to want to
echo exactly what.
The end of findings
Small business of the state or
not structuresÔøΩ corporation.
Yes they are structured as
single entity passed through.
That's the way most of the more
so there's a lot of hidden costs
granted taxable incomes after
after the business deductions
but you're putting the small
businesses that are at a higher
rate and the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce believes
right now during the time of a
press surpluses
we should be raising taxes on
anybody right now out we do
appreciate what bill sponsors
are trying to do by lowering the
rates for just about everyone
else but in the interest of
small business this bill is a
little bit on chairman thank you
members of the committee thank
you it was the real.
It's not just a couple hands up
online.
Hello good morning.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee on Carlos Suntech
with the New Mexico business
coalition.
And we respectfully oppose this
bill.
I know that the bill's sponsors
have good intentions and they're
attempting to help certain New
Mexicans.
But what we're not realizing is
that it's going to hurt other
people there was discussion
about how it affects business
and that's very important to
understand but you've also got
to realize that these people
these business owners these more
wealthy people they have a
choice of where they can live.
We've already lost many New
Mexicans who have gone to states
where there are lower or no
income taxes and when you
consider what's going on in
other states.
If you look just north to
Colorado.
This state is also controlled by
Democrats this is not a party
issue.
That state is just booming
they've got great economic
policy and the governor there
has said that he wants to cut
income taxes entirely.
He knows that's going to be a
drop from other states and so
you don't have to take more for
people who think you have more
and give to those who have less
in order to cover this what you
need to do if you want our state
to exceed is to create a policy
that allows everyone to succeed
allow the people that are the
money makers and the job
creators to do what they do best
as they risk their capital to
create jobs for others.
You can look at risk states for
states to look where New Mexico
is right now.
Just a couple years ago we were
right twenty ninth and nation
now we're thirty eight and a lot
of that goes to policy that we
are considering right now so I
urge you to say no to this bill
and look at better policy that
will attract job creators to our
state thank you thank you for
the next.
All yes all good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Paul
guessing a presence of the Rio
Grande foundation.
Public policy think tank dealing
with New Mexico economic policy
issues I rise in opposition to
this proposal.
What
bill Richardson's tax cuts works
they were supported of course by
many Democrats New Mexico did
see a rapid increase in economic
growth windows tax cuts took
place it into years after the
that was impacted dramatically
by the.
Global economic crisis of two
thousand eight but it is
incorrect to say that Richard
since tax cuts were failure New
Mexico's tax rates as this
Sonntag said do exceed our
neighbors especially in the
region our rates are already
higher at five point nine
percent that our neighboring
states this bill would only
exacerbate that situation a big
topic of conversation is medical
providers well doctors in
particular are high earners they
can choose where they want to
practice and move to this is
this would be another attack on
medical providers in the state
of New Mexico who aren't at high
income levels especially the six
point five percent rate kicking
it two hundred thousand dollars
in income which is not indexed
to inflation and that's another
problem by with that
by all means I urge the
committee to.
Cut the lower tax rates as in
this bill I think that is
worthwhile part of a tax reform
but lastly diversification means
making New Mexico border
tractive to business and doing
things outside of the oil and
gas industry this only takes in
more money for government of
ultimately it would be because
of the lack of indexing to
inflation but it does it does
not make New Mexico more
competitive with our state other
neighboring states thank you for
your time thank you Paul.
Well so much.
Being done is the move to the
committee for question the
comments.
Anybody.
I.
The department of thank you.
Internet.
The chairman.
Madam chair for leisure.
I would just like to have a
little conversation
and I think we'll probably
disagree on like politics policy
but I think there's a lot that
we can agree on and just
understand tax policy warnings
here I would just talk a little
bit about that chairman church
first what is what's important.
Right we we used to talk early
on about how someone calls us up
secretary we would like a little
card out here that's an option.
And and I agree right we've been
working on
In a sense really the two
thousand thirteen two thousand
fourteen.
Really these serious about
looking at our tax how to move
forward.
And in a bipartisan bicameral
way right.
And address for me
You know I I like to consider
for miss something that changes
the structure in a way that
benefits New Mexico fans New
Mexico business at.
And and kind of how we decide it
was routed to it and I have
revenue neutral way where we
work L. turned down this block
of Swiss cheese and removing a
lot of the tax cuts right.
Running the bases and using that
revenue to to lower the rate
will all right that's that's
great actually.
And I'm not looking like an el
wire in weird ways a lot of
government pick winners and
losers right that.
I mean.
Honestly we're not very good at
picking winners.
It's so so I I agree with you
that you know I I would consider
this and some of the other
things were looking at elements
of reform.
That said you know for the past
few years ago house bill six.
You know
Was.
I would say about half of that
bill I love to was actually
not provide advocated for stuff
was written my.
Does that we all worked on
together right.
but we combine that with some.
It might be some some things
that were actually very
consul to New Mexico's actually
the largest tax increase in
state history so I would drop
several tears as I voted against
the bill that contained half of
the stuff in there that I'd
worked on
So so I think this is where we
we started disagree a little bit
on policy.
But
I guess let's just talk a little
bit about.
Income tax and and and how do I
just.
The the facts of the income tax
rate in the right way we fall
and we want to go through this
it's it's just fine but.
So it affects there are a
handful of states that don't tax
income but they usually have to
make up for it was really high
property tax by Texas great
right so.
So could we limited our income
tax that have a bunch of folks
flock to Mexico or other
businesses here I I don't know
right
But we have any contacts so how
do we structure.
Right and right now we have I
think you'd agree with me
chairman madam chair we kind of
have a flat tax right now the
brackets are really close
together.
and and the data we've seen
from another school to pastor of
your tax policy is that it's
very progressive early on until
you reach about four forty
thousand dollars of income
because of all of our transfer
payments elector was great
example right we have working
families tax credit right
actually the negative income tax
tell you that about forty
thousand dollars all of the
many of the state is giving to
these three stocks.
But then once you hit about
forty fifty thousand dollars
that's a flat.
Your your your
that bracken's flat.
So
I guess couple slots and all all
time yes comments so I heard
many people say that this will
provide a stable Representative
Strickler.
the truth is.
A flat tax is more stable than a
progressive income tax.
And the reason is as you spread
those brackets alright.
And as you have more of your
money coming from the higher
income earners these are folks
that are very subjected to the
economic cycle right your small
business right when things are
going well.
State.
Right drop in their income.
So this is just this is like a
tax policy one or one it's not
Republican or Democrat as you go
to a more progressive income tax
you lose stability it becomes
more fault.
And if we decide that we want to
do that's that's fine but that's
I'm just making sure going into
this with our our eyes wide open
right
and
also
probably always oppose their
first just kind of talk about.
Kind of the pros and cons of
flat tax flat tax in little
more.
stable but you can addressed
through this city with transfer
payments like we're doing now.
Versus a progressive income tax
which because
your.
Thank can provides thirty two.
Questions.
Representative Harper the total.
Total impact.
This legislation.
It was minus
two hundred million dollars.
Constructs.
Representative Mr chair and
representative of I have no
information that would confirm
that's accurate information.
Statement.
Up in FY twenty five.
File.
FY twenty five the event that we
are receiving negative Revenue
of eighteen million dollars so
I'm not sure I understand okay.
Mr madam chair and senator we
look at a table to in the FIR.
Add up all the negatives.
That's about a hundred and ten
thousand dollars.
If you add up all the positives
that's about ninety thousand
dollars which gives us to the
negative eighteen million.
Thank you for that clarification
Mr Chairman representative yeah
and what you're saying is that
we are giving tax cuts to the
large majority of the taxpayers
in the state who are middle
income and low income and the
top brackets that are I think
for individuals two hundred and
fifty thousand and for married
five hundred thousand there is a
small increase of ninety
thousand spread over those
taxpayers.
That's correct thank you Mr
chair Mister chairman madam
chair and senator ninety million
ninety million.
Dollars.
Spread over.
Five point four percent.
Of our taxpaying population.
That actor.
Spread over.
Let's see what the FIR said on
that point.
In the six point five percent
that's five percent of tax okay
Right there but apparently the
webcast is down.
And the.
The station.
This you want to make sure that
folks online that if judges can.
it is the entire web passes
them.
Of the others that we need to
look at.
Okay.
Let's for a second.
To.
We need to get somebody is.
It's not yet ready to tackle
that's saying that to.
All school side.
Dr.
Six
is.
Fortunately there's about
election.
The collection point is one to
one yeah exactly.
You you could agree to.
You did great.
Yeah.
Good appreciate letting you
know.
I was gonna bring up because
they've been doing.
Ourselves once.
It is not a.
Caption so we're gonna ask.
Hi there Representative.
Yes I.
One
this
happens and what to do that.
But.
My wife always.
A little bit.
Hello for the first.
So it's not all right.
Bills.
Because of the finished seven
years Majority Leader bills
which I got a lot of.
Yes.
Yeah yes.
You wanted a long time ago.
Or maybe a lot of people say
that's a budget design allows.
Yeah.
Yeah we're just gonna move
forward is what it is.
The Indians are to survive.
Past the next building seventy
five million to cover this
little piece.
What was gonna come.
No I just.
He said the next day after me
and Carol.
HM.
We only hear from leaders.
Or Google because Carol came to
testify on that little muffler
Bill this is the council set to
return are doing it together if
you just let us know anything
about the it's freezing.
Percent of the I thought about
sitting that I because.
That is what it is yes.
Yeah I get it.
Hello.
Again it was okay.
Take a look at.
The only.
The Syrians maybe maybe we.
So.
You don't want to.
Okay.
So please continue.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you.
Thank you Representative this
got Representative Townsend.
Right.
The.
The more.
Right.
Bill the.
At the.
You.
and.
The names of.
Time to go on and.
Was.
Up or down that are the laws and
finalizing the.
The second half through.
at the wall.
That are impacted negative
Session.
Right.
The.
All
of our these hi.
Our.
Really.
I mean the is.
The.
At the level.
And
the result.
Down.
Our.
The morning.
Jennifer if you look at that
question.
Mr chair thank you
Representative we don't do those
type of the call that kind of
more dynamic scoring so looking
back or doing more kind of
robust analysis for this we're
really just looking at the
impact of the state to state
revenues for the forecast period
something like that would have
to be done probably over the
interim.
The.
Okay things.
So that
thing that is on the.
Around the.
That we are.
Tax policy is.
At.
That.
It.
Or.
Thank you Representative anyone
else question the comments from
committee.
There's not much of.
I move that we tend to.
Thank you their second thank.
Second by Representative US
eight ghosts any opposition.
Seeing none of.
Looking at the clock intended to
plan things out I don't see us
being able to get through house
bill one twenty fifteen minutes
I I really don't and and knowing
that well why don't we do this
is especially because of the
glitch in the system in all
fairness to the folks online
that's that's a that's a role
these two to Friday and will
have a larger agenda on Friday
but I think it's important that
we can do this is special so
that being said we will adjourn
for the day please take note
that there are some limitations
in front of all your desks for
you to take back and so thank
