Representative Borrego.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Duncan your.
Representative Davis.
Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative Ortez here.
Representative Scott.
Representative Serrato yes.
Representative Townsend Here.
Sure enough.
Sure.
Question we have a quorum
welcome a couple of housekeeping
items on the agenda at the
Sanchez request we will roll
over house bill four eighty six
given this divine mission and
fees and so FY where they want
to bring it back to the the
welcome to but at this point out
here that today and.
At this point we will begin with
house bill three eighty nine
this of the rollover from
Monday's meeting Representative
Lara.
Warning.
Forty.
I understand that you worked
with
I can remember Harper on that
and then that was talking about
Mr chair members of the
committee is yes correct after
some up discussion with the with
the drafter and Representative
Harper
We thought it would be best to
align the definition of that we
had in.
Our bill here with the current
law the public health twenty
four dash fourteen dash twenty
nine so the definition of
homeless is exactly the same.
In my bill as it is already in
statute Mr chair up there was
also a question about
an affidavit of Representative
Harper at aspects looking to get
an affidavit to just to verify
the the I. two for person to get
off of IT so when I checked with
the doctor we did some research
and Mr chair members of the
committee it turns out that the
affidavit is actually the person
to get the up to percent when
you go forty get a state ID.
That that thank you
Representative and and it would
would somebody please I would
would you recognize the two to
five number on that amendment
please press Mr chair the the
two to five numbers two two five
eight zero eight point one thank
you very much we should all have
in our committee folders at this
point I think you would somebody
will the amendment.
You know that the one with the
real.
Thank you.
I guess they get okay that any
further discussion after a lot
of already mentioned on his
amendment.
Yes questions or comments
of any opposition in but not in
the amended.
Okay.
Second second that any
opposition to that seeing that
okay you have an amended bill
any other questions on the bill
itself we've already got the
process and so what is the
pleasure of the committee.
Yes in the past and they will do
a second here Representative
Dawkins
any opposition that you passed
motion.
Saying that Representative a lot
of thank you so much you have a
do passed as amended on house
bill three eighty nine thank you
Sir thank you Mr.
You want to.
This up
the sixty six.
Representative Ferrary answering
I'm not.
Local cable in rural or that one
let's go to a hospital to sixty
seven.
Restricted driver's license
experts Representative Harper
and Representative Jerry Garcia.
Right.
I will concur with that.
should raise.
Chairman if you're ready ready
for your social at two sixty
eight
Mr to sixty seven I'm happy to
be helping the department with
this is a legislation at their
request and the background is
right now under current law.
And we do you can employment ago
experts to review driver medical
records right of someone perhaps
has a vision issue taken for a
medical expert to review the
information from the doctor to
see if this person really should
be issued a driver's license or
not.
But current law I don't know how
old this is a must be like Dick
exit decades old it says that
they can only be paid fifty
dollars an hour.
And they can only work up to
twenty hours a week.
And and that just doesn't work.
They're actually having a hard
time finding doctors who are
willing to help in this way and
so this bill simply removes
those provisions allows them to
use medical experts to review
records and to contract out with
that but removes these.
Asians with that I'll turn it
over to this.
Thank you Mr chair members and
Representative Harper and also
with me today is the interim
director of N. B. D. this is ten
dollars to the extent MB do is
doing an awesome job.
It's a lot to do with her and
her staff I want to thank her
for being here
so like Representative Harper
says this does away with this
outdated obsolete language
limiting you know fifty dollars
per hour to hire medical expert
because frankly we we can't
contract with anyone for that
amount we've we've tried to
medical school residents we've
tried every everything it also
does away with an obsolete board
that is not been affected public
health standards advisory board
and I can guess is that that was
established in statute decades
ago at a time where there was
still debate over what kind of
medical condition issues would
restrict your license but that
is now well established in rules
and there's really no need for
this board and there's currently
no one serving on it so what
will happen will be much more
streamlined if this bill passes
we will simply receive the
medical records from the the
drivers doctor and the doctor
will have signed off on them so
it's it's the that the patient's
own drive that will make that
assessment you will check it
against our rules make sure
sufficient.
Directive any also.
Questions very good thank you so
much we'll go to the audience
for all those in support of
house bill two sixty seven.
And on line please raise your
head anybody anyone online is
looking at okay in opposition of
health bill to sixty seven in
the room or online.
And then we get to the right
okay that's going back to the
the committee questions
comments.
Anybody yes that represents
about the thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative I just
for my clarification this is to
consult with experts on
individual and PED or generally
the policies surrounding issues.
General.
So Madam chair representative
for that so this will be
basically individual drivers
coming in who have a medical
record that needs to be ready
for example depending on their
vision assessment they may have
a restricted license such as
they can only drive in daylight
or something like that or I
could be that they had like a
seizure disorder and
neurological something rather
that that time restricts their
license for a period of time
thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative and so we're not
concerned about any concerns
because they're bringing for the
medical record themselves
correct thank you.
And the question comes from the
committee.
Seeing what what the pleasure
the committee to pass that
second by Representative Duncan
any opposition that you passed
motion saying that
Representative you thank you
thank you secretary thank you to
address your for being.
Then we'll
Stills you Representative
Ferrary it up larger co sponsors
of it down then.
For it to Senator Wirth
Representative Chandler Senate
bill forty seven as amended
driver's license suspension
penalties.
Every year it thank you Mr chair
good morning members we're here
to present Senate bill forty
seven and Senator Diamond is
also a sponsor on this bill but
she's in the Senate rules
committee this morning so I
don't think we'll make it over
but I'm happy to have
Representative Chandler here
who's going to present this on
the bill presenters on the floor
Mr chair and members this bill
is a repeat of the bill that we
had in twenty twenty one that
made it through the Senate made
it through all the house
committees and just with one of
those that got.
Start end up at the end of the
session on the house floor what
the bill does is say that the
move it basically takes away
from motor vehicles the ability
to suspend driver's licenses for
failure to pay fines for failure
to appear.
in the FIR.
it states that there are.
Currently are over three hundred
eight thousand.
Licenses that have been
suspended.
And the gist of the bill is.
The fine shouldn't go away but
the remedy not having motor
vehicles take away your driver's
license sure and the reason for
that is pretty simple.
If our goal is to allow
individuals to recoup and be
able to get back into a place
where they can pay the fines
taking where the license
certainly doesn't help in
accomplishing that they can't
get to work on it just doesn't
make sense I want to be real
clear that the bill does not in
the bill Justin courage everyone
to look at the list in section
two of all the areas where
driver's license is still can be
taken away
basically accidents resulting in
death multiple traffic loss of
visually reckless incompetent to
drive fraudulent use of a
license are convicted of a not
in another state or tribal
jurisdiction which would be
grounds for suspension so really
this is just targeted to fines
and failure to appear
finance Mr chair and members I
yield to my co sponsor
Representative Chandler and then
we also want to go all who is
the director of fines and fees
here in New Mexico as an expert
witness thank you welcome to
Janet thank you very much I'll
be very brief Mr chair you know
I think it's just important to
know that probably almost every
one of us are are almost
everyone of us has had the
potential to be driving on a
suspended license and not know
what I've heard that from
friends and others when they
didn't pay a parking ticket or
you know some sort of find that
is was relatively minor they
didn't get a notice and then
suddenly the your your license
is suspended that's what this
will help us with in addition
obviously to support people who
have difficulty paying fines and
really want them working and
being able to support their
family and they have their car
in their license taken away
really is not supportive of that
end goal.
So I want to emphasize that also
you this would not apply for D.
W. eyes so you know that's a
very important thing to keep in
mind Mr thank you thank you that
Senator what Senator Diamond yep
I could we've got Senator
Diamond did make it which I
appreciate your to her thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm happy to join
these efforts I think the most
important thing realizes that of
course still have the option to
suspend someone's driver's
license this is not Harding do
you live Senator Woods drivers
really it's it's up to my next
step in the bigger picture.
Many decriminalized traffic
offenders I think we can all
agree that we have a crime
problem New Mexico that we need
to collectively address going
after thank you know trucking
figures minor traffic figures is
not part of the population and
so I'm I'm not sure senator
Wirth is mentioned are ready
with their over three hundred
thousand suspended driver's
licenses in New Mexico so I
wanted I is a good chance that a
couple of you.
We we may be doing favors.
We stand for questions
during the reinstatement fee is
also with there will be no
reinstatement fee to put that
licenses that were suspended in
this way thank you just to be
clear on that the Senate
Judiciary Committee two years
ago basically added language
that requires all existing
licenses suspended for this for
reason to be reinstated so
that's the point Representative
Chandler is making and so this
will get everyone including the
moving forward and then also
retroactively will address those
right thank you Mr chair which
would like at any also very good
UP Mr chair members of the
committee I have nothing request
very good thank you for joining
us that's been moved to the
audience and to those online on
house bill I'm sorry Senate bill
forty seven as amended all those
in favor signify raise your hand
please we'll start in the room
and it is available I will get
to you but we'll start here on
the left hand side yes ma'am.
Yeah stand.
Thank you.
I'm here.
Perfect thank you for being with
us yes that's what it is that.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee.
The New Mexico lawyers
Association
we ask for your support Senate
bill forty seven and in CTLA
advocates on behalf
the legal reform the
intergenerational naked.
This bipartisan measure seeks to
eliminate the cycle of poverty
recidivism thank you for reading
New Mexicans in this rural state
transportation is essential to a
qualitative like and this reform
effort recognizes that reality
the passage of Senate bill forty
seven conveys the legislature's
balanced effort to get dangerous
drivers off the road.
You sure that that bass license
suspended for non just returning
the most right now to the local.
Considerations.
Thank you anybody else in the
room.
But we have to people online
personal.
Emily good morning to you with
this.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee and like
Kaltenbach the drug policy
alliance you stand in strong
support of Senate bill forty
seven we are very concerned
about the individuals in our
state working really hard to
address their health including
accessing addiction health
services so losing what for many
is their only transportation
option to treatment and
addiction health services can
mean life or death our overdose
rates are ready at crisis levels
and placing restrictions on
people's driver's license may
lead to increased overdose
deaths last treatment adherence
and public safety concerns so we
stand again as from support
thank you Mr chair thank you for
joining us next.
Local yeah.
Forty.
Right good morning.
Your muted if you want to.
Participate.
That.
Okay let's let's move for that
all those in opposition then to
Senate bill forty seven as
amended in the room or online.
Nobody in the room anyone online
doesn't look like it's it's come
back to the up all up there here
is this this your back.
Morning.
Good morning sorry about that
from the chairman and members of
the committee thank you for
allowing me to speak in support
of this bill I'm repeating
policy analyst with New Mexico
voices for children one of my
areas of expertise is tax and
budget policy I have also been
studying the issue of fines and
fees for the last three years
and for me to the fiscal
perspective when it comes to
fees not criminal justice system
like the ones reference in this
bill did use isn't worth the
squeeze for example a study from
the center for justice for every
dollar Bernalillo county
collects from fines and fees it
lose a dollar seventy even
though the shape isn't worth the
squeeze from the government's
perspective some communities in
New Mexico are feeling the
squeeze the ray of uncollected
debt in counties throughout New
Mexico correlates with the
poverty rate within each county
this relationship underscores
how fines and fees tend to be a
serious problem for communities
that can least afford them one
study found that forty two
percent of people whose lives
licenses were suspended lost
jobs as a result of the
suspension another study
estimates that a driver's
license suspension in taxes led
to a twelve thousand twelve
thousand dollar reduction in
income on average in conclusion
fines and fees on only a
precarious for rational
mechanism to fund our government
but they also function as a
regressive tax rich icon lifting
The Simpsons suspensions
improves employment increases
consumer spending and tax
revenue and further post they
conduct thank you.
Thank you for joining us
and anyone else.
The.
Good okay let's come back to the
committee then posed questions
confident thousand.
Thank thank you all.
Right.
Three hundred thousand people
out there that is the.
The the the we reinstate the.
Yes I mean I think the deadline
again September one twenty
twenty three.
So as of September one twenty
twenty three they need to be
reinstated.
And that we.
Representative with.
Other at all.
Of I.
So what I can address that Mr
Chairman representative
absolutely so basically it's
going to be just like all the
other requirements that are
there will still be there so
they'll have to have insurance
the other thing I want to stress
is the underlying fine is going
to be there as well so basically
they're still gonna all what the
court has other remedies to
attempt to collect that provide
those all still exist the only
thing we're dealing in this bill
is that taking away the driver's
license.
Chair and senator how did they
do that the I.
It yeah I don't.
mines expired.
And I will.
Years.
The insight needed here.
I.
Does he cite me for not having.
this Mister chair if you're
driving without a driver's
license or expired right
driver's license yes you're
going to get side just like you
would you would now in part of
the problem is and I think
that's the thing that and center
diamond mentioned and I have
talked about this to over three
hundred thousand suspended
licenses out there are how many
of those folks are you know
driving gone that suspended
license in the end and then the
cycle that occurs in your
highlighting it so you so
they're driving because they're
trying to go to work to be able
to pay the fees and then they
get stopped again we get another
citation in another automatic
suspension it's just test the
system on here it's an ongoing
cycle and this just takes away
that one piece.
And I appreciate that and that
but.
Chairman and senator is that
just not getting.
The responsibility that we all
have to work as we have been for
some graphics.
I can't let happen here that Mr
chairman and and Representative
Townsend Here example is exactly
that I I reached out to my local
sheriffs when this bill was
first brought to me the interim
a conservative group down down
south with limited resources
limited offices on the street
and and they gave that examines
Act ample if I pull someone over
they have a driver's.
Has been a driver's license more
than often they didn't realize
that they had a suspended
driver's license let's say you
run a red light now he's
bringing to your attention not
only to to run the light from
the site for you but I can't let
you leave from here because you
have a suspended driver's
license there's an arrest is
made often or or they're taking
the man there's a telling
company it's a process that
afternoon he says not only does
it take their time for someone
who has a minor traffic
citations but it takes it's
Sierra County we have to on duty
chair sitting time it takes one
of his officers off the street
all morning long because we're
dealing with a suspended license
by having them go you do in the
courts so so what this is doing
is we're removing the DMV
process out of this because a
lot of it too is communications
between perhaps you didn't
perhaps you didn't ever really
know so your driver's license
would be reinstated but you
still have an obligation to the
court to pay your original
ticket any finds it came from
that but your original ticket
you're still obligated to pay
your driver's license just
wasn't suspended from the in the
who suspend your license not the
court the N. B. didn't suspend
your license the judge still
sees that perhaps you're
dangerous driver your point to
recruit the courts could still
suspend your license and we're
still allowing that pool to
remain in the toolbox it's not
an automatic suspension from in
V. D..
That is not in the waters are
clear.
Of gentleman gently acting I'm
trying to figure out what
mechanism that we're in now that
will let any of this the
commission yeah there's no
penalty I mean other than
taking.
The cell phone.
Your.
I mean the private license is
probably the most critical
pieces what.
But keep me from participate
through it.
So the low level.
Mr chair I'd like Vigil to
address that Mr chair
Representative Townsend that's a
really good question the courts
have numerous tools at their
disposal in order to come to
help or to attempt to compel
payment including issuing a
bench warrant so we conducted
some research we found in a
study of over a thousand cases
here in New Mexico across the
state that point one hundred
percent of the time we make
issued the notice to motor
vehicle division they also issue
a bench warrant for your arrest
they can also issue additional
notices I know that the courts
are not working on text
reminders in a lot of different
counties and they're trying to
implement new tools in order to
assist people in getting to
court and also reminding them of
making this payment.
Hi.
The R. should be part of to
shares.
Four year.
This Mr chairman and
Representative Townsend I don't
believe so.
And I think let me just that Mr
chair representative Thompson I
think that the two scenarios
basically the court is going to
be involved in both it's just
the difference now is.
You're not gonna have a whole
stack of kind of administrative
penalties including license
suspension and I think that the
simple center diamond again is
spot on but the court is still
gonna be dealing with that
individual and their their
underlying issues don't go away
they're still going to have to
step up in this collection
process to they can put in place
it's just.
The spiral of heading this
straight towards a license
suspension I think is what is
created that the real challenge
that doesn't kind of get to the
ultimate issue which I agree
with you you want you want that
person to deal with their
underlying problem you want to
be able to go to work to be able
to have the money to be able to
pay these fines and and get get
back on their feet.
At Representative.
Chairman.
Issue to me is.
If there is to.
But it is the.
Like.
that yeah.
Kind of like a father figure I
love my dad yeah I was scared to
death of the majority of the
time
we need Tommy right with right
and wrong is wrong you get it
and it seems like you just take
that away from the workers they
don't have it it's.
Thanks one Avenue but maybe
there are other issues.
Madam chair representative just
to be just to clarify the pool
still remains with the courts
what what is happening now is it
triggers an automatic suspension
within motor vehicle departments
of the Courts one suspending
your license anyway they still
they can choose to and they will
still be able to right now what
it's doing is it's stopping that
automatic triggering of the in
detest the suspend your license
to the point even after this
bill passes still has the option
to suspend your license the tall
remind remains with the courts
not within the D..
Thank you you get all right
thank you that's going
Representative Harper.
Thank you chairman
Senators Representative
expertise to this morning so
I'll just this there is a little
story and then and I think.
There's a little more
clarification so
I think everyone knows you know
I've I've been involved with the
the scouts for for a long it
there's a great merit badge the
the water damage that requires
the scouts actually go to to
require rooms and sit and watch.
It was interesting we took our
scouts and to the right place to
the
district county courthouse there
in San Juan County and sat and
watched for a while.
And then
and I took them to our local
magistrate
certain educators municipal
Court room and and you know we.
You know I try very much not to
color our our kids opinions was
interesting to to just ask them
what they thought and a.
When they're at the county slash
District Court Senator no
strange that to you know the
police officer was there and was
you know sure what happened in
the individual you know set
something else and the the judge
just always get case dismissed
cases dismissed Public.
What's going on in our local you
know municipal judge not a bunch
of teenagers in the home you
know with minor traffic
violations and.
You sure they're stories in you
know if they were like.
In all honesty I I did this to
be like okay.
Don't do that again community
service you know you this is
serious to get yourself in
trouble.
And and that in the my kids
response was you know that was a
good judge you know those kids
are going to learn from that and
I learned from that and I
actually have one of my kids in
front of that that judgment.
Really grateful for how he
taught my son
know that it's important to obey
the law
and and I mention this because
that judge called me after we
had chatted called me and said
you know this is really one of
the most important tools that I
get to be able to get these kids
to come in front of me.
and and I I was interested in
the FIR AOC had some similar
comments and I just wanna get
your thoughts on this you know
it's it's on page three the end
of the first paragraph here
that.
No given the effectiveness of
this compliance tools from AOC.
to dispute a decrease in
compliance with a court order
if this bill passes written.
and they mention you know maybe
a thousand dollars we lost so I
I really.
That's nothing right and I'm
really not concerned about the
fiscal impact but then you go to
the first paragraph under
significant issues to the AOC
again says that.
New Mexico license suspension is
one of the most effective
enforcement mechanisms for the
payment of driving citations and
four mandated court appearances
and argues eliminating this
enforcement mechanism would have
repercussions on the entire
judicial system.
So I'd love to hear your
thoughts on that Mr chair and
representative Harper all the
quick clearly it's not one of
the most effective tools because
there's three hundred thousand
drivers out there that are not
compliant so it doesn't seem to
be in my opinion an effective
way of getting people to comply
what senator Wirth solemn Mr
Chairman representative Harper I
appreciate your stories about
the effectiveness of judges and
certainly I've spent a lot of
time in court and actually
leader laying on the last
hearing talked about his
experiences dealing with these
cases I'll say this we've not
had a single person from AOC or
a judge stand up in opposition
to this bill all the way through
the process it also went through
the Senate finance committee and
so the fiscal issues
your changes you well now
any time you changed the toolbox
there's going to be.
Resistance to that I think
there's some push back to that
but.
The fact that that as as senator
Diamond says over three hundred
thousand people.
Are out there was suspended
license and my guess is that she
said one I my guess by more that
are actually driving around we
would just.
That really mitigates and
counters this argument that this
is an effective tool I think
it's a tool quite frankly that's
that's not accomplishing what I
mean the court may think it's a
way to get the money but if you
think about it.
Iraq is I think the exact
opposite is happening quite
frankly you're taking away the
feet and especially the state
like New Mexico rural state
where you need your car I'm
gonna let you go at the folks
get to the to a job to be able
to earn the money to get out of
this system and this is a
perfect example of kind of the
cycle Senator diamonds story
about per share us just nails it
goes you just you get a traffic
violation all of a sudden this
thing is spiraling out of
control and then you got a real
issue and then an automatic
driver's license suspension I
mean I think that's really the
gist of the bill online we had
again such a.
Bipartisan support moving moving
through this time.
That gentleman and the
representatives and senators for
percent chance at Senators
representation expert thank you
for that I and I and I
understand your argument rates
it I think you're viruses
there's about.
Fifty thousand people without so
perhaps that's that's wrong but
yeah probably not that
effective.
If
The numbers and decreasing.
Yep there is three hundred
thousand.
So then I I guess my last
question is then just try to
understand the the response to
Representative Townsend
questions so this is no longer
automatically happen if this
bill passes and assign order it
automatically happen via and we
do.
but I heard something to the
effect that the courts still
have this discretion.
Mr chair and.
So the court feel happy and
bility so for example the W. Y.
so the to send notice for the
for the anti to about the family
is always the point the point
will have the ability to Senate
orders that notice depending on
the circumstances I just wanted
to be responsible for rather
questions about your.
Or
I'm a former public defender and
I used to go to the we're
representing folks on suspended
like.
And it the the the court still
has the ability to border
community service have a variety
of stations and in a sentence in
these cases.
Further also to the point of.
Senator Townsend and to be back
up with Senator Diamond spoke
with sheriff about not only do
share of have to deal with a
suspended license right and.
All echo traffic set track the
that have to show up in court to
prosecute that case so it's time
that at one point an officer is
not on the street and they're
waiting to fight with the trade
attorney.
Somebody else contact us.
I'm very as other things and
often the struggle with
providing that evidence because
there's two sheriff's and one
County I can't even imagine what
it's like to.
Produce the record all for
various other things when you're
traveling so much so what this
bill will also do this actually
were to support pockets and
allow for law enforcement
officers to focus on one.
Chairman of the thank you very
much I that you're making a
great argument so but the
question is.
Failure for non payment of a
traffic.
Citation.
Will no longer be if this passes
an automatic
special driver's license by and
PED.
But it also sounds like a judge
if that was the only failure for
non payment for a traffic
citation a judge would also no
longer.
The the suspended driver's
license based solely on that is
that correct.
Mr chair and representative of
the for.
Thank you very Representative
Harper for their Buck it.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Senators expert.
I a little bit like
Representative Townsend and
whatever this bill of look at it
a.
The first question came to mind
as we're need accountability in
this.
And I know we're I know that
mercy is needed again as and the
and I think that's what this is
trying to do.
Right my question is for the
three hundred thousand or
driving without licenses.
How many of those do you
actually think care.
The reason I ask the question Mr
Chairman.
Is there is a certain.
Group of people out there don't
care whether they have a license
whether they have insurance
so the question is we know we
have some people that are
driving without one that just
don't know all their birthdate
chamber renewal they came in and
they just all the driving
without a for those who don't
have a license in my County for
example there are many many many
many people I've been hit and
the offending party never even
had a license they don't have
insurance and nothing they
didn't care.
So my question is of that three
hundred eighty thousand do you
have any idea of how many of
those are the people who just
got their license
through registration need to be
done you have that number by
chance.
I did get.
Representative have Mr chair
representative right I have no
idea how we would conduct that
research so we do not know what
the answer is but what I can
tell you is for the people that
I know that we've spoken to it
and in my career that their
licenses been suspended.
It's the end of the lives of the
years your of going to jail fear
of getting arrested you're being
in the system I'm all for
anything related to attract and
and and that traffic offense
with it was still a bench
warrant issued for their arrest
we still have to pay he still
have to do community service if
they were ordered to do so so
there's still so many things
that have to be done we're just
gonna and our license so that
they can take care of their
families working their jobs you
know that forty percent of their
job.
So right I would say that it
would be interesting to see what
that number what's the.
Thank you Mr thank you for that
can I get the mercy part and
that's that's were the judges
you know extend that and I think
it's important that they have
the opportunity to go to work Mr
Chairman on a another note
the fines of the reinstatement
There is a twenty five point
three five percent a split
between two counties and
municipalities of that.
one point six million I think is
that the number.
That
Counties and municipalities
split so it's not a real big
number that's throughout the
entire state
are they have they been involved
in the discussion all the for
this against the.
Mr chair and and Representative
began up we've not had any.
And put them in a committees to
express opposition I actually in
the Senate tax committee and I
think you all as well as an
pretty focus this session on the
impact of some of the bills we
pass on local governments and
it's been interesting to hear
for some of the smaller numbers
I said where are they and
they're just not there and I and
I was told they made a policy
decision that certain things and
I'll stop Representative Harper
is going to build on the Senate
floor that definitely have some
double taxation in the local
governments are being impacted
and I raise the question where
are they well they were there
because they said you now they
made a policy decision to look
at that state that needs to be
fixed I think that's exactly
what this bill is it's a policy
decision to needs to be fixed I
can't speak for them but I think
there's a good good chance that
it's a similar analysis I and I
assure you we we've heard him
when they're when they've got
issues.
Sure that's that's all thank you
Representative that anybody else
question the contracts that were
able.
Thank you Mr chair I'm just
wondering what the motor vehicle
division.
Division manager or or director
of things of this.
So Mister chair and.
Senator again.
I would not have.
Them in in committee this bill
was around two years ago sounds
pretty overwhelmingly in the
Senate maybe all the way to the
floor it was in Senate finance
we're all those you know the
fiscal issues would've been
flagged and they've not been
here in opposition so I think
it's one of those and this is an
interesting I actually we had a
a bill and Senator Diamond I
voted differently on this bill
on the floor of the Senate about
fees for that for that game and
fish department and I just think
we have for a very long time
been funding things with fees
and so part of this is we got a
we in ourselves and it's in
combat that when we take away if
you like this that's being used
to fund the agency that we look
at that and from a budget
standpoint and make sure that
the agency has the resources
they need to do that I think
that's what's happening
certainly.
In this environment of resources
likely not seen before I just
personally think that you know
I've really been convinced that
we need to transition away
especially in our courts
committee your ticket you get
all the staff to be used for all
these different little programs
that we feathered into the
system over the years we need to
be doing that out of general
fund and not out of the pockets
of folks that really have a hard
time paying those those fees.
It.
Thank you any questions comments
from committee.
Saying that what's better the
committee.
I would just their second second
by Representative Hernandez it's
up culpable please.
Representative Greco yes.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Gaydos.
Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Townsend.
I did not.
Yes.
Chairman I think yes.
Eight eight to do you have a do
pass on Senate bill forty seven
as a thank you thank you.
As part of yes we have read
those here.
Thank you up.
That then move to
committees of stupor house bill
three fifty oil and gas
emission reduction tax credit
Representative Townsend
Representative Scott.
And I've I've made a call ups to
do both Representative Ferrary
and represents sort of setting
up a public three sixty six and
they've not either responded to
me so
you have the wrong number but I
think so.
Of a family Texas.
Thank you.
That will keep dropping a new
man.
Have you ready Sir thank you Mr
chairman
House Bill three fifty is a long
gas emission reduction tax
credit.
It is Committee substitute.
Came out of the house the Energy
the the.
Purpose of this bill.
Just trying to address.
Small operators.
Small.
Stripper wells giving them a tax
credit.
Of up to twelve thousand dollars
to address emissions coming from
stripper wells across New
Mexico.
The the are used like recovery
units are allowed
to address the missions are
typically from thirty eight to.
Fifty thousand dollars and this
would cause the operator to put.
have a significant investment at
the same time he would capture
tax credit
trying to address those
submissions.
This Mr chair real briefly was
a.
Idea that we came up with.
And I think.
For a investment of this size.
I can't think of another one
that would do more.
To address emissions in New
Mexico in the US so with that.
Mr chairman.
Question thank you Sir let's go
to the audience committees of
two thousand three fifty eight
one of the items in favor of
hospital three fifty.
Anyone online they were.
Okay it would opposition House
Bill three fifty you have a
couple in the room and anyone
want online these major had the
study here gentleman yes Sir.
Make up yeah.
Thank you.
Talk about that good morning
Mister chair members of the
committee who's gonna with the
Sierra Club Rio Grande chapter
representing our thirty five
thousand members and supporters
in New Mexico V. three fifty is
a tax break for early gas
producers list all the per
recovery units of properties
that are low producing high
polluting Wells sometimes called
stripper wells this credit we
believe is unnecessary NMED
founder ozone precursor rule to
be cost effective and the EA be
agree when in an active role so
we're asking the you will not
support this bill thank you your
next.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee Charles skinwalker
speaking for the natural
resources defense council and
urge you to oppose this bill New
Mexico business in as many New
Mexico businesses.
At create hazardous waste and
when they do so they have to
comply with various rules of the
state
and those rules impose costs on
their businesses as well
they have to invest in
technology and logistics that
increase their costs but they
absorb those costs as part of
the cost of doing business they
don't receive a tax break to
cover the cost of complying with
regulations that protect the
public health.
This bill smells worse than
hazardous waste disposal site
that suggests taxpayers should
pay for the compliance of of an
industry that has that has and
continues to create hazardous
waste has health health impacts
most simple one are asthma for
children living nearby
in the exist you know the
regulations exist because of
those health consequences to our
people
it's simply not fair to other
industries it's not fair to the
taxpayers of New Mexico there's
a hundred million dollar price
tag put on this body FY are
just or.
She was shifting the cost of
compliance to the tax paying
public is is not good tax policy
it's not good public policy
thank you thank you.
the ticket someone online.
Hello good morning with this.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Camilla
I women and I serve as the
coordinator and our New Mexico
methane table which convenes
dozens of local environmental
community and impacted community
groups I did want to flag for
the committee that as of March
twenty twenty twenty twenty one
over fifty percent of all New
Mexico stripper wells are owned
by very large oil and gas
companies mostly based out of
state we're talking about twenty
nine thousand eight hundred and
thirty eight stripper wells
representing fifty two two
percent of all active wells in
the state five thousand five
hundred forty eight of these
alone are operated by health
where the country's worst
methane polluter.
Companies like kill court Exxon
chevron and Kanako are not mom
and pop operations and should
pay their own costs to implement
basic good neighbor rules and
regulations especially given
that the large majority majority
of New Mexico oil and gas is
extracted on public lands for
private profit for private
profit thank you and we advocate
for this not included in the tax
package thank you thank you
next.
Seven yes good morning.
Good morning thank you chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Sammy County climate
energy advocate with
conservation voters New Mexico
and I supported all the comments
made the right online today and
we ask that you oppose this bill
thank you thank you anyone else
online.
Okay let's go back to the
committee first on my list I
have Representative Harper.
Thank you chairman and
Representative
I guess I want to first say
You know by way of structure of
the credit you know it has all
the right things of that we look
for well as a five year sunset
this reporting requirement.
It that has a capped.
and.
And so structured well thank you
look at the FIR.
just reading something that was
mentioned in testimony
yep are says this might have.
A.
Seven million dollar negative
impact if I'm really FY are
right.
The.
Chairman representative is that
is that what.
You see as a potential fiscal
impact.
Chairman is is it trying to us
or I haven't looked at it this
is the trying to support the new
FIR dynamically.
No no chairman my and
Representative my.
My understanding is that we
just.
There are only so many stripper
wells in New Mexico every single
one of them
What purchased this Commission
remediated what.
And and what about a twelve
thousand dollar credit.
I guess and you would not get
anywhere near your cat and
that's the F. I. R..
reflects that that that is
correct.
So Chairman representative thank
you for that I think my last
comment is
I.
I think was very telling.
Organizations that came out and
oppose this legislation.
To all I mean the stripper wells
are operated so they are
currently meeting federal and
state law when it comes to
emissions.
So if we were to have access and
folks were to add at this.
The mission remediating of COVID
on top of it W. going above and
beyond in helping with the
emissions issue which these
groups.
claim is.
Their mission and it is of
utmost importance to them.
But they all came out and
opposed it.
Calling it a tax credit for the
one gas industry when they come
out in the.
And support tax credits for
renewable.
And to me that the this just
speaks clearly that.
Their number one mission is not
the environment is to destroy
the oil and gas industry.
Well Mr Chairman representative.
That's a slippery slope for a.
Opponents of the bill to take
on.
But I eagerly do that and let me
tell you this each one of the
stripper wells at seventy five
dollars a barrel tradition ten
barrels a day still are
significantly income producers
for the state of New Mexico if
you take ten but also all the
date seventy five dollars at
nine percent on gross revenue
these wells putting significant
dollars fifteen about fifteen
percent of our state revenue
comes in from the small
producing oil.
Now.
On top of that.
Some of us attended a meeting
the other day from
Representative Dixon.
Who tried to address what we
must do in the future and
capturing carbon dioxide.
And these borders these wells
have values someplace down the
road as we try to clean up our
CO two emissions.
So.
My point.
Clearly in this bill.
It was nothing more as if you're
gonna spend a hundred million
dollars and try to claim that
New Mexico very quickly.
What could you do to make it a
demonstrative get up that
I'm on the missions that some of
my.
Opponents.
Are we talk about frequently
this will do that.
And
It causes every one of those
operators.
Whether they are owned by a
large company or a small company
it causes them to put skin in
the game greater than.
The tax credit.
It causes them to encourage all
of the operating expenses.
Going forward.
And it causes them to be
compliant.
So.
It is so it was an effort I
thought to try to address an
issue that's facing New
Mexicans.
Through the process of bringing
a hundred million dollar
exposure to the committee we
passed energy after we formed a
committee substitute and I bring
up this committee for the same
consideration I understand the
politics of fossil fuels and all
of that but those wells are
going to be here and
I I think it would be reasonable
expense for the committee to
consider although significant
and I understand them.
Our number so that Chairman
representative thank you for
that I think I'll just finish by
saying you know I've.
Scoutmaster a scout leader for
you know.
Up more than a decade and I've
heard more trees than any tree
hugger the and I'll tell you my
my very first term and that was
the lobbyist for the Sierra
Club.
And I asked him if he knew how a
ponderosa pine tree snobs.
It goes.
Like I said.
If you put your nose in the part
of of ponderosa pine tree and
smell.
It is a sharp no.
It's beautiful and and so I just
want to make the point that if
we really care about the
environment.
When we also be interested in
perhaps a Care Act.
To help clean up the year.
Thank you chairman.
Probably right is.
Representative Ortez.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative I too have a few
trees in my lifetime my career
as an environmentalist.
I have some questions.
As you might.
I think I have
do you oil and gas companies use
this technology right now that
the human.
absolutely the are used are used
not only in the oil and gas
industry but they're used on the
dry cleaning interest industry
there there used in the a number
of industries absolutely.
Mr chair representative.
Do they.
Companies that have stripper
wells.
already we are use so that they
can.
Make their companies more
profitable is there a financial
interest in and putting the are
you on your street program.
that's been a a common question.
And I would tell you that the
answer to that is categorically
no.
Small levels.
Typically for a fifty thousand
dollar investment round numbers.
Is B. R. U. is not one that is
required and not one that many
operators will make the cause of
it to enroll today the amount of
the missions that you're going
to capture or not generate
enough income to pay for.
So they won't do.
Now if you are on a large
battery.
Where you have tons of offer
guests a lot of the missions
they can be they can be.
A significant amount on a I
should say significant they can
be a positive.
Financially but on small
stripper wells they are not they
will not and they won't do it
until they're required to unless
we do as Representative Harper
is it less we offer a care.
And say let's bring these into
What is commonly referred to
there is B. X. C. T. best of.
Best achievable control
technologies are L. E. A. R.
which is the lowest achievable
emissions required into a
technology that requires and
captured off gases off the top
of stopped X..
Mr chair representative so if
that larger well as it said that
they will be making some money
that they will be capturing
gases methane likely and are
able to.
Use that.
And.
How much in your estimation with
a.
But they make.
What's the financial but I just
really want to understand you
know if you're putting a if
you're getting a tax credit.
To put something to put at this
V. are you on your stripper
wells to help you stay in
compliance can you also
financially benefit from the gas
that you're capturing.
If if you have.
Large quantities of the missions
BOC's typically.
Thank you can capture act I
could give you an example in my
previous life managing.
pipeline and terminal operations
for a large company we had a
terminal in the oil patch of
Texas.
In that terminal loaded up out
of.
it was permitted to low fifty
five thousand barrels a day
across the track grand a lot of
trucks.
B. purchased a vapor recovery
units to capture all of the
papers that came off of those
trucks when we we're pushing
gasoline into a.
That recovery unit was about a
million dollars.
It was an activated charcoal it
was too big seventy five point
compression on the and yet had
probably a.
Five or six year pay
But not not a bad pay opt for
for that I mean there's many
regulatory requirements that
have no pay out at all but that
one did have a pale on.
On well locations.
They're not gonna be anywhere
near that much of the missions
because that truck loading is
really high emissions.
But I would not I mean a large
bill we had lots of emissions
the R. east can be.
profitable but on the slopes
small will say are not but they
are profitable to the state.
Because what you do is you get
that well.
And because of that the state is
going to continue.
To have about twenty two hundred
dollars a month of the income.
Twenty five thousand dollars
here from these thirty thousand
wells
Today if you're forced to make
that decision as a small
operator.
It costs less to plug it will in
many cases then it cost you to
add a vapor recovery.
To pay up for this project is to
the state not to the operator on
a small with.
Well I will I will grant you
that.
We have been able one of the.
Issue.
But.
This
is.
Ten barrels a day or less.
Okay thank you Mr chair
chairman and I'll be I'll be
quick I just how many stripper
wells are we talking about again
I'm sorry.
I think that's mode this morning
was twenty eight thousand and I
would argue with that I think
there's about.
Thirteen or fourteen thousand
that are are classified as oil
wells and about the same amount
their gas wells.
My last question Mr chair
representative and thank you for
that and do you know of any
other industry seconded tax
break for.
Limiting their
Yep they're they're in the shins
or pollution.
Well I think the Mr chairman and
gentle lady
Mining companies of.
It if you want to if you want to
go through.
Financial benefits I'm sure
there are absolutely.
For example thanks for the
renewable industry today.
We're sending millions of tax
credits to the renewable
industry on wind solar I R. peas
and they're not paying one dime
in the state regulations so I
know that's not the answer that
you wanted and I hear you I see
use question that I had the
answer to that question like
that.
Chair representative just
stretching.
I I just going to close by
saying you know I we have
methane rules we I understand
how are for it is better in the
state or how are meet this
cooked
But I really I'm concerned as we
all should be about climate
change emissions and good actors
doing the right thing and that
actors the need to pay for
continue to and I'm concerned
about the tax credit like this
sure producers doing the things
that they should be doing.
That's observed Mr chair Mr
chair and gentle lady I I
understand that this is this is
the opportunity to claim that
New Mexico and that's all.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative to to the to the
point you just made we have lots
of tax credits and I'm looking
at a tax credit for electric
bikes coming up while working.
I have no problem doing that.
But if we're gonna use all the
tools in our toolbox and we're
going to say renewables are here
oil and gas is here hydro here
this morning and I like to.
The clothes I wear are because
of what the extraction industry
and almost everything we have
has added so I just.
You know when you when you talk
about the.
Four percent return twenty four
percent
has been and how large it is and
the money that's there instead
of ever been in business we
understand that that return has
to give us something and if it
doesn't then there's no reason
I'm going to do it and no reason
these guys going to do it either
so with that I just say you know
if we're going to all those in
our tool box that lets you use
all of us don't go after one
anymore than we go after the
other thank you Mr
Representative documents
Representative by from Canada.
Thank you Mr chair good morning
Representative Townsend.
I really appreciate that we've
had room to have this
conversation out loud today and
I think it's an important
conversation that we continue to
have as policy makers in New
Mexico.
I do have a couple of questions
to better understand your bill
and then I'll just have some
comments as well
One little catch a had been
reading this bill is that we
talked about someone being
eligible for the credit when
they quantify for the the they
qualify by having a reduction in
emissions how would that be
quantified like what does the
reduction have to be of a
certain size is there an
assumption that if you have the
are you you have reduced
emissions we speak to that place
Mr chairman.
Representative Mr chair that's a
really good question.
And and it is very difficult I
tried to craft this to where I
could.
It's that lowest hanging fruit
with the smallest amount of
dollars the issue is.
That.
The emissions.
There is so much because of the
type of facility and the
gravity.
The specific gravity of the
product that that will is
producing.
I know this is getting a little
technical but on a guests will
for example.
This is what we call condensate
hi gravity of liquids.
That material.
Is much like gasoline.
Sixteen fifty two dash sixty API
gravity.
has a paper pressure of
six to eight pounds three paper
pressure and and it and that's a
lot as as the at.
Comes from deep well bore
contained by much pressure to
atmospheric in the stocktake
it's like it starts falling off
the slight vapors.
And it's considerable.
Eight oil oil.
That is a.
Thirty gravity kind of like
diesel.
heavier fluid it doesn't produce
very much so.
It's this I mean you have to go
through the calculation of what
all percent of what products you
had within that.
Product to try to quantify the
amount of papers.
But if you have a later time to
capture that I'm all yours
because I tried to do that and I
wasn't able to figure it out but
that's exactly what we should do
issues the dollars that we spend
to capture those that have the
highest emissions so that we can
use our dollars wisely yes Mr
Chairman representative and I'm
not certainly was my point and I
always expect that I learn
something every day and thank
you I appreciate that the
technical explanation I have
admittedly set up on again and
again I I don't know hardly
anything oil and gas are
expected industry when I began
my service in this body I was
grateful at the end of my first
term maybe beginning of my
second term to be invited and
encouraged to join the Energy
council which is an association
of energy producing states in
which New Mexico the members and
guests to send legislative
delegates to that council.
and I appreciated that.
Having a pretty significant
overlap with them leader
Townsend in his capacity
and just want to really
appreciate that well it's mostly
Republicans that have been sent
to that council I was just
treated with a lot of respect
and given room to ask simple
questions and and learn up and
for me it really felt like it
important application
understanding where budget comes
from that I not operate of
assumptions are talking points
about what oil and gas is it or
what it is but that I again over
time to learn some of the the
practical and technical
basically for which the industry
works
Hey Google my question then a
few more comments that we've
heard some feedback about.
Well will you speak to them and
in definition practice we
understand that small office
stripper wells are low pretty
seeing
parts of the industry pulling up
pretty minimal amounts of are
pretty minimal barrels every day
but collectively still having
this impact on their fiscal
revenue stream can you give us a
better sense of who owns these
small stripper wells.
Representative Mr chair and
representative.
So the Mr chair Representative
there they are owned by a wide
variety of corporations and
small individuals predominantly.
But I started this my my focus
was to help small independent
oil and gas operators that.
Don't have the capacity for
won't.
Won't do it without putting a
care forward
But it definitely.
There are large companies in
particular there was one company
that was mentioned
that operates in an area in the
four corners area where they
typically have.
Smaller shallow wells that meet
this definition that was not
million tier my intent was to
address those that need help not
I was trying to get X. on a tax
break that was not my point Mr
Chairman representative that's
the assumption and understand
that and just wanted to make
sure you have the opportunity to
speak that out loud that on the
record and for me when I think
about the industry generally and
of course I'm in south central
New Mexico
so Texas is my big city I know
very well what it means to live
in the shadow.
And when we talk about the
Permian what I've always said is
that little bucket of gold in
that basin is a basin that we
share Texas.
And when I think about our
responsibilities and obligations
as policy makers I have to ask
myself who I trust more
responsibly extract text.
Mexico for me in my political
values and identities I hoped
and expected especially with
this governor as a champion in
the incredible people we have it
EMNRD and other places that we
will move forward reasonable
policies like the methane rules
so that we can do right by the
folks that are impacted by
environmental justice every day
US I'm grateful that we've moved
in those directions and I also
know that there is a cost and
when I think about whether or
not we should invest and use our
revenues or credits or tax
policies to make sure that we
and in a cleaner place I think
it's a conversation worth
having.
I appreciate that you were not
trying to give excellent credit
we're not going for the majors
were not trying to we we know
that they're publicly traded
companies and their obligations
to their profits and their
shareholders.
And.
That doesn't mean to me we
should close down conversations
about what it would take to get
different parts of the industry
towards an outcome we want I do
think having a conversation
about smaller producers about
some of the independence is
something that I'd be willing to
consider in the future again I
think we say sometimes that
people should do the right thing
we live in a global economy our
resources that we expect in New
Mexico are a big part of that
global economy sometimes it's a
question like should we wait for
somebody to do the right thing
one that is not their corporate
structure or their investment or
their model or should we use
things like tax policy to make
sure that we get a reduction in
emissions so I think it's worth
a conversation with having
whether or not it would make it
into this year's tax package is
a different question but I
appreciate that you can came out
loud and saying we're eventually
I have your attention and focus
was designed or meant to be
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative says about the
thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for being for
this bill it's really
interesting conversation I'm not
coming at it from the
environmental for say a
perspective I'm going to route
surely economic development
perspective on and with that
said I look on page three of
your FIR.
I believe it's with explained
that while very topics as well
of your use require additional
up front costs and so Senator
producer hundreds of thousand
dollars a year pay back in as
little as two months into my
question for this is again the
I'm presuming those that are
that are the owners of stripper
wells have been in business for
longer than a few months and
plan to be in business for a
long way to month to month I see
that is being a smart investment
into the long term
growth of your business is that
I'm just curious what from your
perspective.
Mr Chairman the lady that we F.
I. R. in that statement list
before we reduce this committee
substitute to to stripper wells
it was for large producing oil
that I talked about them having
that capacity and that never
that was not my idea of my
intense it's been to.
Address the smaller wells and
address the mission issues.
It.
Ereli if you have large
commissions.
A large will there are driving
economics but one on in most
prudent operators are any doing
that.
What we are missing in New
Mexico are those small well
small operators who don't have
the who don't have the.
Signatory of.
Requirement for the
the driving economics to do it.
Remember that this at twelve
thousand dollars requires them
to put in.
One and half times as much as
the state does in the state is
the only one with driving
economics
They're the ones who can make
money thank you for money the Mr
thank Representative so it
wouldn't come as you of your
unit and I've made a set of
items how much do they cost
about between thirty eight and
fifty thousand dollars thank you
Mr speaker thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative
That's also you so your
consideration is that you think
that they will adopt these to be
our use if it's reduced in price
by a third even though they do
not stand to profit off of that
investment.
That is correct because what it
does is it gives that well
board longevity and it kills the
economics to plug that will.
Prematurely.
Restricting the income of the
state in Mr chair representative
how to help what is the cost of
a vengeance not as much but how
much is the cost of plugging
wells Strickler I think if you
go on it it's from forty to
sixty thousand dollars.
Mr chair representative that
sounds compatible to the full
cost of the are you.
And that is my point.
Chair and gentle lady is if you
take those economics and the
risk associated with keeping
that will alive and producing to
the benefit of the state.
The operator most definitely is
going to continue to make a
little money I'm not I'm not
taking away that but what I am
saying is that.
They will not be forced with the
with the decision to do I want
to continue the risk of
operating a marginal will or do
I just want to take that plug
the thing to be done with that
and when I do that the state has
no more income in fifteen to
twenty percent of our state
income comes from small stripper
wells and fifteen to twenty
percent of what we're.
We're calling there's a lot of
money so.
The economics for this project
to the state are.
Are far superior to that of the
individual thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative I
appreciate that perspective I
from my perspective what I'm
seeing is that I see a large
producers.
Really investing in renewables
they have made significant
movements I think you could even
argue that they have.
They're kind of leaders and some
rules of but I would I would
make that argument times
my concern with this is that as
we're looking to diversify our
economy as we're looking to
bring in new sources and
encouraging new ways of of new
businesses to grow this well
always and argue with my my
friend on the other side about
refundable because I do think
there times refundable can
encourage different businesses
to thrive here
hi my concern in that sense is
that you would continue they
would it would allow for for
industries that we hope to no
longer rely on to be longer
relying on it with that Mr chair
representative this does have a
sunset right that you added was
a twenty eight is that correct.
Five years correct thank you Mr
thank you Representative.
Thank you anyone else question
the comments.
Did not have a couple of my own
I think this is been investing
this fascinating discussion that
that.
The subject of the at the gate
at least for me in this point
regards to to those that that
spoke in opposition is that they
have that there's no offense
data comes and we.
to to anyone both for other
opposition but you know when you
look at at.
The influence I guess that I've
seen in this body this committee
regards to renewables I mean
that the people are are are
they're they're they're here
drug hopes to adopt to talk
about you know that how great
would levels are and and then we
talk about oil and gas and I see
the perspectives from people
around this around this table
today and and advice showed that
a reserve a lot of good points
in regards to being able to see
the perspective and and be
objective about things so I but
I I guess I have a question
regards to the strip well
because I don't see it also
ignores is I I don't know much
about the oil and gas and and
it's a in a workings but how
much does propose a stripper
wells cost we start with that
question well.
Every well.
It's ever drilled in New Mexico
will become a stripper wells.
It's part of the life cycle of
the well.
And so today if you drill a
horizontal.
You know ten thousand that will
which are ten thousand foot
kickoff in this provision the
thousand miles a day sometime in
its life cycle it's going to
become a stripper wells and what
I'm trying to do is address that
because.
And I and I hope.
Everybody on this committee goes
energy council it that it's a
great place to learn I hope if
you want to come to southeast
New Mexico I'll set up a tour
for you to go look at what's
what's there but this is the way
to address an issue.
In the four corners and in the
southeast that is an issue I
mean I'm I'm not saying that's
not an issue I understand five
hundred million dollars.
You can do more for emissions in
New Mexico than you'll ever be
with trying to support electric
cars.
Then if you want to put our
money where our mouth is and
address the issues.
I would send this to New Mexico
tech into element I'm not
telling you the truth this is
the way to address the issue.
So so that that back to my
question that if it's a life
cycle that this trip was a
lifecycle I mean you could could
you put a cost on of what it
would be at a point where it's a
stripper wells that the by the
stripper wells.
And it's life.
One or two drill one two eight
two the whole thing to do to I
want to drill and and set it up
so its operational.
For the individual.
That's a really good I don't I'm
not apply to you it's it's it's
a really difficult question
because what you're buying also
our mineral rights and in a rich
associated with that and
sometimes what you're by and is
not the will your plan because
you have speculative ideas of
what's around so okay but it's
not it's a heck of a lot more
than twelve thousand dollars I
imagine it would be yeah it
wasn't that then what's the
purpose of doing so I I and and
and you had mentioned that the
will extend the life of that
well if you're able to put this
BC you are you are on it right
that is correct due to a point
of extending it decades or other
maybe few years.
That's probably a few years it
will be decades but what it
might do and what.
Representative Dixon brought
forward with New Mexico tech the
other day was these well borders
are absolutely perfect for
carbon sequestration and so it
might be that you wouldn't have
to drill a carbon sequestration
will some point in the future
that you could take and convert
one of these well bores to the
carbons restoration well and
that would give it value and
would have purpose in our
economy okay okay
I I appreciate you you you
bring this bill Ford and
answered all questions I mean
I've I've tried to keep it tax
related but I have so many more
technical questions that I do
ideas again are big news on the
issue but at this point
Representative a question on
that thank you Mr chair that we
temporarily table.
At the house energy.
House Bill three hundred fifty
thank you motion made by
question with that a second by
Representative Harper any
opposition to that motion saying
that thank you have the thanks
for good hearing thank you thank
you let's move that up to our
last bill that the house bill
three sixty six additional
disabled veteran license plate
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you Mr chair committee on.
House Bill three sixty six just
provides for the issuance of
special plates in addition to
the two existing disabled
veteran plates for veterans
qualifying for fifty percent
disabled or more during their
terms of service and to be
additional plate can be any
combination of the veterans
choice free of charge not
withstanding any do that would
otherwise be charge for special
registration plates and veterans
will only be charged regular
plate and registration fees for
the additional special plates
and this came at a request of
one of my constituents in Los
crucis who you know qualified
for the two special plates free
of charge but did want to have
additional plates for as other
vehicles.
Okay let's go to the audience
follow those in support of house
bill three sixty six and online
these region had.
No one in the room no one on the
line eighty one opposition House
Bill three six six in the room
or online.
See what all I.
Right have a good morning.
Hello.
Thank.
Committee members my name is
Tammy brown.
The veterans and military family
caucus and I and we report the
builder I'm not.
We appreciate the opportunity to
have the two three one and we
have the option to simply have
an additional of the plate right
and our argument for like a
motorcycle I think we were the
point you would have to thank
you thank you was it somebody
else.
Okay very good see no one else
that it's come back to the
question about.
Senate.
I think the Mr Chairman the
Sure thank you Representative
ready to the lady that spoke
answer my question I just wanted
to know we have four vehicles.
And and I am all for this by the
way I think if you want to by
all means do it.
Costs that
In this matter and so.
Now I know it's motorcycle thank
you Mr thank you did someone
else was speaking as chair of
the sort of the.
Representative your question.
It's part of the state and
municipal places be at our
expense.
There I
have.
That is.
Hi.
Session Mr so I I just think.
Yeah.
And
The first to plates that they
get are free of charge and then
they would pay for.
Then it would work.
They would pay for the extra
ones at regular you know costs.
Thank you for.
Our.
The.
And that.
Thank you.
The cops.
That was that it would.
